Institutio Mathematica. OR, A MATHEMATICAL Institution. Showing the
Construction and Use of the Natural and Artificial Sines, Tangents, and
Secants, in Decimal Numbers, and also of the Table of Logarithms. In the
general solution of any Triangle whether Plain or Spherical. WITH Their more
particular application in ASTRONOMY, DIALLING, and NAVIGATION. By JOHN NEWTON.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for George Hurlock, at Magnus Church
corner, and Robert Boydel in the Bulwark near the Tower: MDCLIV.

TO THE COURTEOUS Reader.
ALthough Mathematical studies have for these many years been much neglected,
if not contemned, yet have there been so many rare inventions found, even by
men of our own Nation, that nothing now seems almost possible to be added more:
as in other studies so may we say in these, nil dictum quod non dictum prius.
We at the least must needs acknowledge that in this we have presented thee with
nothing new, nothing that is our own. Ex integra Graeca integram Comoediam,
hodie sum acturus, Heautonti morum enon, says Terence, that famous Comoedian:
translation was his apology, transcription and collection ours: this only we
have endeavored, that the first principles and foundations of these studies
(which until now were not to be known, but by being acquainted with many Books)
might in a due method and a perspicuous manner, be as it were at once,
presented to thy view, and serve as a perfect INSTITUTION MATHEMATICAL, unto
such as have as yet learned nothing but Arithmetic.

To that purpose we have first laid down such propositions Geometrical, out of
Euclide, Pitiscus, and others, as must be known to such as would understand the
nature and mensuration of all Triangles. Next we have proceeded to the
affections of Triangles in the general, and thence to the composition of the
Sines, Tangents, and Secants Natural, in which we have for the most part
followed the Rules prescribed by Pitiscus, in some things we have taken the
direction of Snellius, and in the trisection and quinquisection of an angle we
have proceeded Algebraically, with those two famous Mathematicians of our age
and Nation, Brigges, and Oughtred; and because the Algebraicall work is of it
self abstruse and intricate, to those that are not acquainted with it, we have
insisted the more upon it, and by our explanation we have endeavored to make
it plain and easy; and that nothing may be wanting, which either former ages
or our own (by Gods blessing and their industry) have afforded to us, we have
to the composition of the Natural Canon, added out of Briggs and Wintage the
construction of the Logarithms of any numbers, and consequently how to make the
Logarithms of the Natural Sines, Tangents, and Secants. This done, the
proportions in the usual Cases of all Triangles both Plain and Sphericall, we
have first cleared by Demonstration out of Pitiscus, Gelibrand, Norwood, and
others; and then explained the manner of the work in Natural and Artificial
Numbers both, and so conclude the first Part of our Institution.

And in the second Part we have made our application of all the former unto
Astronomy first, and then to Dialling and Navigation. In our application to
Astronomy, we have furnished you with a Table of the Suns Motion, whereby to
calculate his place in the Zodiac in Decimal numbers, and without which most of
the other Problemes would be found (if not useless) yet very intricate and
obscure, that being, for the most part, one of the three terms supposed to be
given in Astronomical computations.

In the Chapter of Dialling, you have the Spears projection, according to the
directions of Wels, in his Art of Shadows, and how to draw the houre-lines of
all the several Dials which he has contrived from thence, we have briefly
showed; and in the finding of all the arches in these Cases necessary, we have
kept our selves to our own CANON, which does exhibit the degrees of the
Quadrant in Centecimal parts or minutes.

In the Chapter of Navigation, you have first the division of the Sea-mans
Compass, next the description and making of the Sea-Chart, as Edward Wright
our worthy Countryman has given us the Demonstration thereof in his Book
entitled, The correction of Errors in Navigation: to these we have added such
other Problemes as are now amongst our Seamen of most frequent use; annexing
thereunto a Table of meridionall parts, and other Tables useful as well in
Dialling as in Navigation, and all these in Decimall numbers, it being indeed
our aim (as much as in us lies) not only to promote these studies by this our
Compendium of the first rudiments of Mathematical learning, as in relation to
the matter therein to be considered, but by such expeditious and advantageous
ways of working also, as have been lately found, or former ages have commended
to us; amongst which there is none more excellent then that which is performed
by Decimal numbers; fully to explicate the manner and worth whereof were matter
enough for a whole Treatise, and therefore not to be expected in a short
Epistle: It would indeed be very impertinent to intermeddle any further with it
here, then in our Institution it self is already explained, in which thou
may perceive Addition and Subtraction of Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds, to be
performed as in Vulgar numbers, without any Reduction to their several
Denominations, Multiplication is performed by the addition of Ciphers, and
Division by the cutting off of Figures. Others that have either spent more
time, or made a farther progress in these ravishing Studies, might (if they
would have taken the Pains) have happily presented thee with more, and in a
lesser room: The most of this was at the first collected for our private use,
and now published for the good of others.

John Newton.

ERRATA.
Page Line 6 25 Read, or terms. 17 For B. 9 A, r. B. 9 C. 16 20 read, 3 times
6 is 18. 22 12 r. one third 22 25 r. one third 30 9 r. triangles in the
following figure. 32 21 r. by the 18 th. 34 21 r. are equiangled. 38 24 r. the
arch CGK. 44 13 r. 21 of the first. 47 5 r. of 120 degrees. 49 4 r. by the 18.
55 10 r. 18 of the first. 60 9 r. by 18. 69 20 r. ^ 77 16 r. 147. 77 21 r.
3913. 77 22 r. 206087. 91 3 r. 24986. 108 1 r. KP. 112 26 r. BD 156 6 r. BD. 7
r. DF. 8 r. BF

A MATHEMATICAL Institution.
CHAP. I.
Geometrical Definitions.
OF things Mathematical there are two principal kinds, Number and Magnitude;
and each of these has his proper Science. The Science of Number is
Arithmetic, and the Science of Magnitude is commonly called Geometry, but may
more properly be termed Megethelogia, as comprehending all Magnitudes
whatsoever, whereas Geometry, by the very Etymology of the word, does seem to
confine this Science to Land-measuring only.

Of this Megethelogia Geometry, or Science of Magnitudes, we will set down such
grounds and principles as are necessary to be known, for the better
understanding of that which follows, presuming that the reader hereof has
already gotten some competent knowledge in Arithmetic.

Concerning then this Science of Magnitude, two things are to be considered:
First, the several heads to which all Magnitudes may be referred: And then
secondly, the terms and limits of those Magnitudes.

All Magnitudes are either Lines, Plains, or Solids, and do participate of
Length, Breadth, or Thickness.

1. A Line is a supposed length, or a thing extending it self in length,
without breadth or thickness, whether it be a right line or a crooked; and may
be divided into parts in respect of his length, but admits no other
division: as the line AB.



2. The ends or limits of a line are points, as having his beginning from a
point, and ending in a point, and therefore a Point has neither part nor
quantity, it is only the term or end of quantity, as the points A and B are the
ends of the aforesaid line AB, and no parts thereof.

3. A Plain or Superficies is the second kind of magnitude, to which belongs
two dimensions, length, and breadth, but not thickness.

4. As the ends, limits or bounds of a line are points confining the line, so
are lines the limits, bounds and ends enclosing a Superficies; as in the figure
you may see the plain or Superficies here enclosed with four lines, which are
the extremes or limits thereof.



5. A Body or Solid is the third kind of magnitude, and has three dimensions
belonging to it, length, breadth, and thickness. And as a point is the limit or
term of a line, and a line the limit or term of a Superficies, so likewise a
Superficies is the end or limit of a Body or Solid, and represents to the eye
the shape or figure thereof.

6. A Figure is that which is contained under one or many limits, Under one
bound or limit is comprehended a Circle, and all other figures under many.

7. A Circle is a plain figure contained under one round line, which is called
a circumference, as in the Figure following, the Ring CBDE is called the
circumference of that Circle.

8. The Center of a Circle is that point which is in the midst thereof, from
which point, all right lines drawn to the circumference are equal the one to
the other; as in the following figure, the lines AB, AC, AD, and AE, are equal.

9. The Diameter of a Circle, is a right line drawn through the center thereof,
and ending at the circumference on either side, dividing the Circle into two
equal parts, as the lines CAD and BAE, are either of them the diameter of the
Circle BCDE, because that either of them does pass through the center A, and
divides the whole Circle into two equal parts.

10. The Semidiameter of a Circle is half the Diameter, and is contained
betwixt the center and one side of the Circle; as the lines AB, AC, AD, and AE,
are either of them the Semidiameters of the Circle CBDE.

11. A Semicircle is the one half of a Circle drawn upon his Diameter, and is
contained by the half circumference and the Diameter; as the Semicircle CBD is
half the Circle CBDE, and contained above the Diameter CAD.



12. A Quadrant is the fourth part of a Circle, and is contained betwixt the
Semidiameter of the Circle, and a line drawn perpendicular unto the Diameter of
the same Circle, from the center thereof, dividing the Semicircle into two
equal parts, of the which parts the one is the Quadrant or fourth part of the
same Circle. Thus, the Diameter of the Circle BDEC is the line CAD, dividing
the Circle into two equal parts, then from the center A raise the perpendicular
AB, dividing the Semicircle likewise into two equal parts, so is ABD, or ABC,
the Quadrant or fourth part of the Circle.

13. A Segment or portion of a Circle is a figure contained under a right line
and a part of the circumference of a Circle, either greater or lesser than the
Semicircle; as in the former figure, FBGH is a segment or part of the Circle
CBDE, contained under the right line FHG less than the Diameter CAD.

14. By the application of several lines ^terms of a Superficies one to
another, are made Parallels, Angles, and many sided Figures.

15. A Parallel line is a line drawn by the side of another line, in such sort
that they may be equidistant in all places, and of such there are two sorts,
the right lined parallel, and the circular parallel.

Right lined Parallels are two right lines equidistant in all places one from
the other, which being drawn to an infinite length would never meet or concur;
as may be seen by these two lines, AB and CD.



A Circular Parallel is a Circle drawn within or without another Circle, upon
the same center, as you may plainly see by the two Circles BCDE, and FGHI,
these Circles are both of them drawn upon the same center A, and therefore are
parallel one to the other.



16. An Angle is the meeting of two lines in any sort, so as they both make not
one line; as the two lines AB and AC incline the one to the other, and touch
one another in the point A, in which point is made the angle BAC. And if the
lines which contain the angle be right lines, then it is called a right lined
angle; as the angle BAC. A crooked lined angle is that which is contained of
crooked lines; as the angle DEF: and a mixed angle is that which is contained
both of a right and crooked line; as the angle GHI: where note that an angle is
(for the most part) described by three letters, of which the second or middle
letter represents the angular point; as in the angle BAC, A represents the
angular point.



17. All Angles are either Right, Acute, or Obtuse.

18. When a right line stands upon a right line, making the angles on either
side equal, either of those angles is a right angle, and the right line which
stands erected, is a perpendicular line to that upon which it stands. As
the line AB (in the following figure) falling upon the line CBD
perpendicularly, does make the angles on both sides equal, that is, the angle
ABC is equal to the angle ABD, and either of those angles is therefore a right
angle.



19. An acute angle is that which is less than a right angle; as the angle ABE
is an acute angle, because it is less than the right angle ABD, in the former
figure.

20. An Obtuse Angle is that which is greater than a right angle; CBE in the
former figure is greater than the angle ABC by the angle ABE, and therefore it
is an obtuse angle.

21. The measure of every angle is the arch of a Circle described on the
angular point, as in the following figure, the arch CD is the measure of the
right angle CED. The arch BC is the measure of the acute angle BEC. And the
arch BCD is the measure of the obtuse angle BED. But of their measure there can
be no certain knowledge, unless the quantity of those arches be expressed in
numbers.



22. Every Circle therefore is supposed to be divided into 360 equal parts,
called Degrees, and every Degree into 60 Minutes, every Minute into 60 Seconds,
and so forward. This division of the Circle into 360 parts we shall retain, but
every Degree we will suppose to be divided into 100 parts or Minutes, and every
Minute into 100 Seconds: and thus all Calculations will be much easier, and no
less certain.

23. A Semicircle is the half of a whole circle containing 180 degrees. A
Quadrant or fourth part of a circle is 90 degrees. And thus the measure of the
right angle CED is the arch CD 90 degrees. The measure of the acute angle BEC
is the arch BC 30 degrees. And the measure of the obtuse angle BED is the arch
BD 120 degrees.

24. The complement of an angle to a Quadrant is so much as the angle wants
of 90 degrees, as the complement of the angle AEB 60 degrees is the angle BEC
30 degrees; for 30 and 60 do make a Quadrant or 90 degrees.

25. The complement of an angle to a Semicircle is so much as the said angle
wants of 180 degrees, as the complement of the angle BED 120 degrees, is the
angle AEB, 60 degrees; for 60 and 120 do make 180 degrees.

26. Many sided figures are such as are made of three, four, or more lines,
though for distinction sake, those only are so called which are contained under
five lines or terms at the least.

27. Four sided figures are such as are contained under four lines or terms,
and are of diverse sorts. 1. There is the Quadrat or Square whose sides are
equal and his angles right. 2. The Long Square whose angles are right, but the
sides unequal. 3. The Rhombus or Diamond, having equal sides but not equal
angles. 4. The Rhomboides, having neither equal sides nor equal angles, and yet
the opposite sides and angles equal.


All other figures of four sides are called Trapezia or Tables. The dimension
whereof as also of all figures whatsoever, depends upon the knowledge of
three sided figures, or Triangles, of which in the Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
Of the nature and quality of Triangles.
1. A Triangle is a figure consisting of three sides and three angles.

2. Every of the two sides of any Triangle are the sides of the angle
comprehended by them, the third side is the Base, as in the figure following,
the sides AC and BC and sides of the angle BCA, and AB is the Base of the said
angle.

3. Every side is said to subtend the angle that is opposite to that side; as
the side AB subtendeth the angle ACB, the side AC subtendeth the angle ABC, and
the side BC subtendeth the angle BAC: the greater sides subtend the greater
angles, the lesser sides lesser angles, and equal sides equal angles.



4. Of Triangles there are diverse sorts; as,

1. There are Equilateral Triangles, having three equal sides.

2. There is an Isoscheles, which is a Triangle that has two equal sides.

3. Scalenum, which is a Triangle whose sides are all unequal.

4. An Orthigonium, or a right angled Triangle, having one right angle.

5. An Ambligonium, or an obtuse angled Triangle, having in it one obtuse angle.

6. An Oxigonium, or an acute angled Triangle, having all his angles acute.

7. All these Triangles are either Plain or Spherical.

8. The sides of Plain Triangles in Trigonometria are right lines only,
concerning which we have added these Theorems following.

9. Theorem. If one right line cut through two parallel right lines, then are
the angles opposite one against another equal.

In the following Scheme the two lines WX and YZ are parallel, and therefore
the angles XIC, and ICY are equal.



Demonstration.

The two angles XIC and WIC are equal to two right angles, as also ICY and ICZ,
because on the parallel lines at the points I and C there may be drawn two
Semicircles, each of which are the measures of two right angles. If then the
angle XIC be less than ICY, the angle WIC must as much exceed the angle ICZ,
and the angles XIC and ZCI would be less than two right angles, and
consequently the lines WX and YZ may be extended on the side X and Z til at
length they shall concur together, and then the lines WX and YZ are not
parallels, as is supposed here, and therefore the angles XIC and ICY are equal.

10. Theor, If four right lines be proportional, the right angled figure made
of the two means, is equal to the right angled figure made of the two extremes.

Let the four proportional lines be AB two foot, OF three foot, FG six foot,
and BC nine foot: I say then that the right angled figure made of the two means
OF and FG, that is, the right angled figure OF GH, is equal to the right angled
figure made of the extremes AB and BC, that is, to the right angled figure
ABCD; for as twice 9 is 18, so likewise three times is 18.



11. Theor. If three right lines be proportional, the Square made of the mean
is equal to the rightangled figure made of the extremes.

Demonstration.

The Demonstration of this proposition is all one in effect with the former,
the difference is, that here is spoken of three lines, there of four, and
therefore if we take the mean twice, of which the square is made, the work will
be the same with that in the former proposition. As if the length of the first
line were two foot, the second four, and the third eight; it is evident, that
as four times four is 16, so two times eight is 16, and therefore what has
been said of four proportionals, is to be understood of three proportionals
also.

12. Theor. If a right line being divided into two equal parts, shall be
continued at pleasure, then is the right angled figure made of the line
continued, and the line of continuation, with the square of one of the
bi-segments, equal to a square made of one of the bi-segments and the line of
continuation.

The line PQ is divided into two equal parts, the midst is C, to the same is
added a right line, as QN; and of the whole line PQ, and the added line QN is
made PN as one line, and of this line PN, and the added line QN is enclosed the
right angled figure ^M, and upon the half line CQ and the line of continuation
QN is made the square CF. Now if you draw the line QG parallel to NF, and equal
to the same, then is the right angled figure ^M with the square of CQ that is,
the square IG, equal to the square of CN, that is, the square CF.



Demonstration.

Forasmuch as CQ is equal unto MF, the which is also equal unto IO or IL, it
follows that IG is a Square, which with the right angled figure PM is equal
to the square CF, because the right angled figure GM is equal to CO, which is
also equal to PI.

13. Theor. To divide a right line in two parts, so that the right, angled
figure made of the whole line and one part shall be equal to the square of the
other part.

The right line given is AB, upon the same line AB, make a square, as ABCD; and
divide the side AD in two equal parts, the midst is M, from M draw a line to B,
and produce AD to H, so that MH be equal to MB; and upon AH make a square, as
AHGF. Then extend GF to E, and then is the right angled figure FC, being made
of the whole line FE (which is equal to AB) and the part BF, equal to the
square of the other part AF, that is, to the square AHGF.



Forasmuch as by the last aforegoing, the right angled figure comprehended of
HD and HA, or the right angled figure of HD and HG, as the figure GHED, with
the square of AM, are together equal to the square of HM, being equal to BM:
it follows, that if we take away the square ^f AM, common to both, that the
square ^f AB, that is, the square ABCD is equal ^o the right angled figure
HGED, and the ^ommon right angled figure AE being taken from them both, there
shall remain the right angled figure FC, equal to the square ^HFG, which was to
be proved.

14 Theor. To divide a right line given by extreme and mean proportion.

A right line is said to be divided by an extreme and mean proportion, when the
whole is to the greater part, as the greater is to the less. And thus a right
line being divided, as the right line AB is divided in the preceding Diagram in
the point F, it is divided in extreme and mean proportion; that is, As AB, is
to AF: so is AF, to BF.

Demonstration.

Forasmuch as the right lined figure included with AB and FB, as the figure
FBCE is equal to the square of AF, that is, to the square AFGH; it follows,
by the eleventh Theorem of this Chapter, that the line AB is divided in extreme
and mean proportion; that is, As AB, is to AF: So is AF, to FB.

15 Theor. In all plain Triangles, a line drawn parallel to any of the sides,
cutteth the other two sides proportionally.

As in the plain Triangle ABC, KL being parallel to the base BC, it cutteth off
from the side AC one fourth, and also it cutteth off from the side AB one third
part: the reason is, because the right line EH cutteth off one third part from
the whole space DGFB, and therefore it cutteth off one third part from all the
lines that are drawn quite through that space.

And hereupon parallel lines bounded with parallels are equal; as the parallels
ED and GH being bounded with the parallels DG and HE are equal, for since the
whole lines DB and GF are equal, DE and GH being one fourth part thereof, must
needs be equal also.



16 Theor. Equiangled Triangles have their sides about the equal angles
proportional, and contrarily.

Let ABC and ADE be two plain equiangled Triangles, so as the angles at B and
D, at A and A, and also at C and E be equal one to the other; I say, their
sides about the equal angles are proportional; that is, 1 As AB, is to BC: So
is AD, to ED. 2 As AB, is to AC: So is AD, to AE. 3 As AC, is to CB: So is AE,
to ED.


Demonstration.

Because the angles BAC and DAE are equal by the Proposition; therefore if A +
B be applied to AD, AC shall fall in AE; and by such application is this figure
made. In which, because that AB and AD do meet together, and also that the
angles at B and D are equal, by the Proposition; therefore the other sides BC
and DE are parallel; and, by the last aforegoing, BC cutteth the sides AD and
AE proportionally: and therefore,

As AB, to AD: So is AC, to AE.



Moreover, by the point B, let there be drawn the right line BF parallel to the
base AE, and it shall cut the other two sides proportionally in the points B
and F, and therefore,

1. As AB to AD: so is OF to ED,

Or thus.

As AB to AD: so is CB to ED: because that FE and BC are equal, by the last
aforegoing.

1. Theor. In all right angled plain Triangles, the sides including the right
angle are equal to the the third side.

In the right angled plain triangle ABC, right angled at B, the sides AB and BC
are equal in power to the third side AC; that is the squares of the sides AB
and BC, to wit, the squares ALMB and BEDC added together, are equal to the
square of the side AC, that is to the square ACKI.

Demonstration.

Let ABC be a triangle, right angled at B, and let the side BC be 3 foot, the
side AB 4 foot, and the side AC 5 foot. Let every side be squared severally, so
shall you find the square of the side AC to contein as much as the squares of
the sides AB and BC added together. For, the square of the side AB is 16, the
square of BC is 9, which added together make 25, which is equal to the square
of the side AC, which was to be demonstrated.

18. Theor. The three angles of a right lined Triangle are equal to two right
angles.

As in the following plain Triangle ABC the three angles ABC, ACB, and CAB are
equal to two right angles. Let the side AB be extended to D, and let there be a
semicircle drawn upon the point B, and let there be also dawn a line parallel
unto AC, from B unto G.



Demonstration.

I say that the angle GBD is equal to the angle BAC, by the 9 th hereof, and
the angle CBG is equal to the angle ACB by the same reason, and the angles CBG
and GBD, are together equal to the angle CBD, which is also equal to the angle
ABC, by the 18 th. of the first: and therefore; the three angles of a right
lined Triangle are equal to two right angles, which was to be proved.

19. Theor. If a plain Triangle be inscribed in a Circle, the angles opposite
to the circumference are half as much as that part of the Circumference which
is opposite to the angles.

As if in the circle ABC the circumference BC be 120 degrees, then the angle
BAC which is opposite to that circumference shall be 60 degrees. The reason is,
because the whole circle ABC is 360 degrees, and the three angles of a plain
triangle cannot exceed 180 degrees, or two right angles, by the last
aforegoing, therefore, as every arch is the one third of 360, so every angle
opposite to that arch is the one third of 180, that is 60 degrees.

Or thus, From the angle ABC, let there be drawn the diameter BED, and from the
center E to the circumference, let there be drawn the two Radii or
semidiameters AE and AC, I say then that the divided angles ABD and DBC are the
one half of the angles AED and DEC: for the angles ABE and BAE are equal,
because their Radii AE and EB are equal, and also the angle AED is equal to
the angles ABE and BAE added together, for if you draw the line OF parallel to
AB, the angle FED shall be equal to the angle ABE by the 9 th. hereof; and by
the like reason the angle AEF is also equal to the angle BAE. and therefore the
angle AED is equal to the angles ABE, and BAE: or, which is all one, the angle
AED is double to the angle ABD.



In like manner, the angles EBC and ECB are equal, and the angle DEC is equal
to them both: therefore the angle DEC is double to the angle DBC. Then because
the parts of the angle AEC are double to the parts of the angle ABC; therefore
also the whole angle AEC is double to the whose angle ABC; and thereupon the
angle ABC is half the angle AEC; and consequently, half the arch ADC; is the
measure of the angle ABC, as was to be proved. Hence it follows,

1. If the side of a plain Triangele inscribed in a circle be the diameter, the
angle opposite to that side is a right angle, that is, 90 degrees; for that it
is opposite to a semicircle, which is 180 degrees.

2. If diverse right lined triangles be inscribed in the same segment of a
circle upon one base; the angles, in the circumference are equal. As the two
triangles ABD and ACD being inscribed in the same segmeut of the circle ABCD,
upon the same base AD are equiangled in the points B and C, falling in the
circumference. For the same arch AD is opposite to both those angles; that is,
to the angle ACD, and also to the angle ABD.

20 Theor. If two plain Triangles inscribed in the same segment of a circle,
upon the same base, be so joined together in the top, (or in the angles falling
in the circumference) that thereof is made a four-sided figure, intersected
with Diagonals, the right angled figure made of the Diagonals, is equal to the
right angled figures made of the opposite sides added together.

Let ABD and ACD be two triangles, inscribed in the same segment of the circle
ABCD upon the same base AD so joined in the top by the right line BC, that
thereupon is made the four sided figure ABCD. I say, that the right angled
figures made of the opposite sides AB and DC, and also of the sides BC and AD
added together are equal to the right angled figure made of the Diagonals AC
and BD.



Demonstration.

If at the point B you make the angle ABE equal to the angle DBC, and so cut
the Diagonall AC into two parts by the right line EB at the point E, then shall
the angles ABD and EBC be equal, because the angles ABE and DBC are equal by
the proposition, and the angle EBD common to both, and the angles ADB and ECB
are equal, because the arch AB is the double measure of them both by the last
aforegoing, and therefore the triangles ABD and EBC are equiangled and there
sides proportional by the 18 th and 16 th Theoremes of this chapter, that is,
as BD to DA, so is BC to CE, and therefore also the rectangles of BD in CE is
equal to the rectangle of DA in BC by the 10 th hereof.

And because the angles DBC and ABE are equal by the proposition, and the
angles BDC and EAB equal because the arch BC is the double measure of them
both by the last aforegoing, the triangles BDC, and EAB are equiangled and
there sides proportional by the 18 th and 16 Theoremes of this chapter, that is
as BD to DC so is AB to AE; and therefore also the rectangle of BD in AE is
equal to the rectangle of DC in AB.



And because the rectangled figure (...) of AD and DF is equal to the two
rectangled figures of AD in DC and BC in CF, therefore also the rectangled
figure of BD in AC is equal to the rectangled figures of BD in AE and BD in EC.
From hen^^ and the two former proportions the proposition is thus Demonstrated.

1. BD in CE is equal to DA in BC 2. BD in AE DC in AB

And by Composition.

BD in CE more by BD in AE is equal to DA in BC more by DC in AB, now then
because BD in AC is equal to BD in (...) EC more by BD in EA, therefore also BD
in AC is equal to DA in BC more by DC in AB which was to be demonstrated.

21. Theor. If two right lines inscribed in a circle cut each other within the
circle, the rectangle under the segments of the one, is equal to the rectangle
under the segment of the other.

Let the two lines be FD and BC, intersecting each other in the point A; I say,
the triangles ABF and ADC are like, because of their equal angles AFB and ACD,
which are equal, because the arch BD is the double measure of them both, and
because of their equal angles BAF and DAC, which are equal by the ninth hereof,
and where two are equal, the third is eqaul by the 18 aforegoing; therefore AD
in AF is equal to AC in AB, which was to be proved.



Theor. 22. In a plain right angled Triangle, a perpendicular let fall from the
right angle upon the Hypothenuse, divides the triangle into two triangles, both
like to the whole, and to one another.

The triangle ABC is right angled at B, the hypotenuse or side subtending the
right angle is AC, upon which from the point B is drawn the perpendicular BD
which divides the triangle ABC into two triangles, ADB and BDC, each of them
like to the whole triangle ABC, and each like to one another also, that is
equiangled one to another.



Demonstration.

In the triangle ABD, the angles ABD and ADB are equal to the angles ACB and
ABC, because of their common angle at A, and their right angles at B and D, and
in the triangle CDB, the angle. CBD and BDC are equal to the angles ABC and
CAB, because of their common angle at C, and their right angles at B and D;
these triangles are therefore each of them like to the whole triangle ABC, and
by consequence like to one another.

23. Theor. If two sides of one triangle be equal to two sides of another, and
the angle comprehended by the equal sides equal, the third side or base of the
one, shall be equal to the base of the other, and the remaining angles of the
one equal to the remaining angles of the other.

Of these two triangles CBH and DEF, the sides CB and BH in the one are equal,
to DE and OF in the other and the angle CBH equal to the angle DEF, therefore
CH in one is equal to DF in the other, for if the base CH be greater then the
base CF from CH let be taken.



CG equal to DF and let there be drawn the right line BG, now if BC and BG be
equal to DE and OF, yet the angle CBG cannot be equal to the angle DEF by the
angle GBH which is contrary to the Proposition, and therefore CH must be equal
to DF, and consequently the angle BCH equal to EDF, and CHB equal to DFE which
was to be proved.

24. Theor. An Isocles or triangle of two equal sides, has his angles at the
base equal the one to the other, and contrarily.

Let the sides AB and AC in the triangle ABC be equal and produced at pleasure,
so that AD may be equal to AE then draw the lines CD and BE, forasmuch as the
two sides AD and AC in the triangle DAC are equal to the two sides AE and AB in
the triangle ABE, and the angle at A common to both, the base BE shall be equal
to the base CD, and the angle at D to the angle at E, and the angle ABE to the
angle ACD by the last aforegoing, therefore also the angles DCB and EBC are
equal, now if you take these equal angles from the equal angles ABE and ACD the
angles remaining ABC and ACB must needs be equal, which was to be proved.

25. Theor. If the Radius of a circle be divided, in extreme and mean
proportion, the greater segment shall be the side of a Decangle, in the same
circle.

In the semicircle AGC let AG be the side of a Decangle DG or DA the Radius,
then because the arch AG is the tenth part of a circle it is also the fifth part
of a semicircle, and the arch CG, which is four times as much as the arch AG is
the double measure of the angle DAG, and because the sides AD and DG are equal,
therefore the angles AGD and DAG are equal by the last aforegoing, therefore
either of the angles AGD or GAD is double to the angle ADG, now then if you
divide the angle AGD into two equal parts by the right line EG the angles EGD
or EGA shall either of them be equal to the angle ADG and therefore ED and EG
are equal by the last aforegoing, and the triangles AGD and AEG are equiangled
because of their common angle DAG and there equal angles AGE and ADG, as
before, and EG which is equal to DE is equal to AG, therefore as AD to AG (or
ED) so is AG to AE, and the Radius AD is divided in extreme and mean
proportion by the 14 th hereof, and ED the greater segment is the side of a
decangle.

These foundations being laid we will proceed to the making of the tables,
whereby any triangle may be measured.

Chap. III
of Trigonometria, or the measuring of all Triangles.
THe dimension of triangles, is performed by the Golden Rule of Arithmetic,
which teaches of four numbers proportional one to another, any three of them
being given, to find out a fourth.

Therefore for the measuring of all triangles there must be certain proportions
of all the parts of a triangle one to another, and these proportions must be
explained in numbers.

2. And the proportions of all the parts of a triangle one to another cannot be
certain unless the arches of circles (by which the angles of all triangles,
and of Spherical triangles, also the sides are measured) be first reduced into
right lines, because the proportions of arches one to another, or of an arch to
a right line, is not as yet found out.

3. The arches of every circle are after a sort reduced to right lines, by
defining the quantity, which the right lines to them applied have, in respect
of Radius, or the Semidiameter of the circle.

4. The arches of a circle thus reduced to right lines are either Chords,
Sines, Tangents, or Secants,

5. A Chord or Subtense is a right line inscribed in a circle, dividing the
whole circle into two segments, and in like manner subtending both the segments.

6. A chord or subtense is either the greatest or not the greatest.

7. The greatest Subtense is that which divides the whole circle into two
equal segments, as the right line GD, and is also commonly called a diameter.

8. A subtense not the greatest, is that which divides the whole circle into
two unequal segments: and so on the one side subtendeth an arch less then a
semicircle; and on the other side subtendeth an arch more then a semicircle, as
the right line CK on the one side subtendeth the arch CDK, less then a
semicircle; and on the other side subtendeth the arch CGK more then a
semicircle.

9. A sine is either right or versed.

10. A right sine is the one half of the subtense of the double arch, as the
right sine of the arches CD and CG is the right line AC, be^^^ half the chord
or subtense of the double arches of CD and CG, that is, half of the right line
CAK, which subtendeth the arches CDK and CGK; whence it is manifest, that the
right sine of an arch less then a Quadrant, is also the right sine of an arch
greater th^n a Quadrant. For as the arch CD is less then a Quadrant by the
arch CE; so the arch CG does as much exceed a Quadrant, the right line AC being
the right sine unto them both. And hence instead of the obtuse angle GBC, which
exceeds 90 degrees, we take the acute angle CBA, the complement thereof to 180:
and so our Canon of sines does never exceed a quadrant or 90 d.



11. Again, a right (...) is either Sinus totus, that is the Radius or whole
sine, as in the triangle ABC, AC is the Radius, semidiameter, or whole sine, Or
else the right sine is the Sinus simpliciter, that is, the first sine, as CA or
BA, the one whereof is always the complement of the other to 90 degrees; we
usualy call them sine and cosine.

12. The versed sine of an arch is that part of the diameter, which lies
between the right sine of that arch and the circumference. Thus AD is the
versed sine of the arch CD, and AG the versed Sine of the arch CEG; therefore
of versed Sines some are greater, and some are less.

13. A greater versed Sine is the versed Sine of an arch greater then a
Quadrant, as AG is the versed Sine of the arch CEG greater then a Quadrant.

14. A lesser versed sine is the versed Sine of an arch less then a Quadrant,
as AD is the versed sine of the arch CD less then a Quadrant.

15. A tangent of an arch or angle is a right line drawn perpendicular to the
Radius or semidiameter of the circle of the triangle, so as that it touches
the outside of the circumference, And thus the right line FD is the tangent of
the arch DC.

16. A secant is a right line proceeding from the center of the circle, and
extended through the circumference to the end of the tangent; and thus BF is
the Secant of the arch DC.

17. The definition of the quantity which right lines applied to a circle have,
is the making of the Tables of Sines, tangents and secants; that is to say, of
right Sines and not of versed; for the versed Sines are found by the right
without any labor.

18. The lesser versed sine with the sine of the complement is equal to the
Rad^^^ as the lesser versed sine AD with the right sine of the complement AB is
equal to the Radius BD; therefore if you substract the right sine of the
complement AB from the Radius BD, the remainder is the versed sine AD.

19. The greater versed sine is equal to the Radius added to the right sine of
the excess of an arch more then a Quadrant, as the greater versed sine AG is
equal to the Radius BG with the sine of the excess AC: therefore if you add
the right sine of the excess AB to the Radins BG, you shall have the versed sine
of the arch CEG, and so there is no need of the table of versed sines, the
right sines may thus be made.

20. The Tables of Sines, Tangents, and Secants may be made to minutes, but
may, by the like reason, be made to seconds, thirds, fourths, or more, if any
please to take that pains: for the making whereof the Radius must first be
taken of a certain number of parts, and of what-parts soever the Radius be
taken, the Sines, Tangents, and Secants are for the most part irrational^^ i^,
that is, they are inexplicable in any true whole numbers or fractions
precisely, because there are but few proportional parts to any Radius, (...),
whose square root multiplied in it self will produce the number from whence it
was taken, without some fraction still remaining to it, and therefore the
Tables of Sines, Tangents, and Secants cannot be exactly made by any means;
and yet such may and ought to be made, wherein no number is different from the
truth by an integer of those parts, whereof the Radius is taken, as if the
Radius be taken of ten Millions, no number of these Tables ought to be
different from the truth by one of ten Millions.

That you may attain to this exactness, either you must use the fractions, or
else take the Radius for the making of the Tables much greater then the true
Radius, but to work with whole numbers and fractions is in the calculation very
tedious; besides here no fractions almost are exquisitely true: therefore the
Radius for the making of rhese Tables is to be taken so much the more, that
there may be no error, in so many of the figures toward the left hand as you
would have placed in the Tables; and as for the numbers superfluous, they are
to be cut off from the right hand toward the left after the ending of the
supputation, Thus, to find the numbers answering to each degree and minute of
the Quadrant to the Radius of 10000000 or ten millions, I add eight ciphers
more, and then my Radius does consist of sixteen places.

This done, you must next find out the right Sines of all the arches less
then a Quadant, in the same parts as the Radius is taken of, whatsoever
bigness it be, and from those right Sines the Tangents and secants must be
found out.

21. The right Sines in making of the Tables are either primary or secondary.
The primarie Sines are those, by which the rest are found, And thus the Radius
or whole Sine is the first primary Sine, the which how great or little soever
is equal to the side of a six-angled figure inscribed in a circle, that is, to
the subtense of 60 degrees, the which is thus demonstrated.

Let BC be the side of a six angled figure inscribed in a circle, then because
the arch BC is the sixth part of a circle, and that every circle is suppoosed to
be divided into 360 parts the side BC must needs be 60 parts, because six times
60 makes 360, and the angle BAC is 60 parts also, by the (...) of the first.
And the angles ABC and ACB are 120, by the 18 of the second, and are also
equal, because the sides AC and AB which are opposite unto them are equal, for
they are two Radii, by the work, and therefore either of the angles are 60
parts, and consequently the whole triangle is equiangled, and the whole
triangle being equiangled, and the sides AB and BC being Radii, the side ^C
must be Radius also. Therefore the Radius or whole Sine is equal to the side of
a six angled figure inscribed in a circle, as was to be proved.

Out of the Radius or subtense of 60 degrees the sine of 30 degrees is easily
found, the half of the subtense being the measure of an angle at the
circumference opposite thereunto by the 19 of the second; if therefore your
Radius consists of 16 places being 1000.0000.0000.0000. The sine of 30 degrees
will be the one half thereof, to wit, 500.0000.0000.0000.

22. The other primary sines are the sines of 60, 45, 36, and of 18 degrees,
being the half of the subtenses of 120, 90, 72, and of 36 degrees.

23. The subtense of 120 degrees is the side of an equilateral triangle
inscribed in a circle, and may thus be found.

The Rule.

Substract the Square of the subtense of 60 degrees, from the Square of the
diameter, the Square root of what remains is the side of an equilateral
triangle inscribed in a circle^ or the subtense of 120 degrees.

The reason of the Rule.

The subtense of an arch with the subtense of the complement thereof to 180
with the diameter, make in the meeting of the two subtenses a right angled
triangle. As the subtense AB 60 degrees, with the subtense AC 120 degrees, and
the diameter CB, make the right angled triangle ABC, right angled at A, by the
19 of the second. And therefore the sides including the right angle are equal in
power to the third side, by the (...) of the second. Therefore the square of AB
being taken from the square of CB, there remains the square of AC, whose
squar root is the subtense of (...) degrees or the side of an equilateral
triangle inscribed in a circle,



Example.

Let the diameter CB be 2000.0000. 0000.0000. the square thereof is 400000.
00000.00000.00000.00000.00000. The subtense of AB is 100000.00000.00000. The
square thereof is 100000.00000.00000. 00000.00000.00000, which being
subtracted from the square of CB, the remainder is
300000.00000.00000.00000.00000.00000, whose square root 173205.08075.68877. the
subtense of 120 degrees.

CONSECTARY.

Hence it follows, that the subtense of an arch less then a Semicircle being
given, the subtense of the complement of that arch to a Semicirc^e is also
given.

24. The Subtense of 90 degrees is the side of a square inscribed in a circle,
and may thus be found.



The Rule.

Multiply the diameter in it self, and the square root of half the product is
the subtense of 90 degrees, or the side of a square inscribed in a circle.

The reason of this Rule.

The diagonal lines of a square inscribed in a circle are two diameters, and
the right angled figure made of the diagonals is equal to the right angled
figures made of the opposite sides, by the 20 th. of the second, now because
the diagonal lines AB and CD are equal, it is all one, whether I multiply AC by
it self, or by the other diagonal CD, the p^oduct will be still the same, then
because the sides AB, AC, and BC do make a right angled triangle, right angled
at C, by the (...) of the second, and that the (...) AC and ^B are equal by the
work, the half of the square of AB must needs be the square of AC or CB, by the
17 th. of the second, whose square roots the subtense of CB, the side of a
square or 90 degree.

Example.

Let the diameter AB be 200000.00000. 00000, the square thereof is
400000.00000. 00000.00000.00000.00000, the half whereof is
200000.00000.00000.00000.00000. 00000. whose square root 14142^.356^3. 73095.
is the subtense of 90 degrees, or the side of a square inscribed in a Circle.

25. The subtense of 36 degrees is the side of a decangle, and may thus be
found.

The Rule.

Divide the Radius by two, then multiply the Radius by it self, and the half
thereof by it self, and from the square root of the sum of these two products
substract the half of Radius, what remains is the side of a decangle, or the
subtense of 36 degrees.

The reason of the rule.

In the following Diagram, let EB represent the Radius of a circle on which
draw the square EG, then is GB equal to EB, which being bisected in the point H
draw the line HE, then continue the segment HB to K, making HK equal to HE and
upon the line KB make the square BD, then the Radius EB is divided into
extreme and mean proportion by the 14 th of the second, and the greater
segment MB is the side of a decangle by the 25 of the second, and KB is equal
thereunto; now then because the Radius EB and the half Radius HB with the right
line HE, do make the right angled triangle EBH right angled at B, by the 21 th.
of the first, and therefore the squares of EB and BH are together equal to the
square of HE or HK, by the 17 th. of the second, now if from the square root of
the square of HE, that is from the side HE or HK you deduct the side HB, the
remainer is KB the side of a decangle.

For example.

Let the Radius EB be 100000.00000.00000. then is BH, or the half thereof
500000. 00000.00000. the square of EB is 100000 00000.00000.00000.00000.00000.
and the square of BH 250000.00000.00000.00000. 00000.00000.00000. The sum of
these two squares, viz 125000.00000.00000. 00000, 00000. 00000, is the square
of HE or HK, whose square root is 1118033^ 887^9895, from which deduct the
half Radius BH 500000000000000, and there remains 618033988749895, the right
line KB, which is the side of a decangle, or the subtense of 36 degrees.

26 The subtense of 72 degrees is the side of a Pentagon inscribed in a circle,
and may thus be sound.

The Rule.

Substract the side of a decangle from the diameter, the remainer multiplied by
the Radius, shall be the square of one side of a Pentagon, whose square root
shall be the side it self, or subtense of 72 degrees.

The Reason of the Rule.

In the following Diagram let AC be the side of a decangle, equal to CX in the
diameter, and let the rest of the semicircle be bisected in the point E, then
shall either of the right lines AE or EB represent the side of an equilateral
pentagon, for AC the side of a decangle subtends an arch of 36 degrees the
tenth part of a circle, and therefore AEB the remaining arch of a semicircle is
144 degrees, the half whereof AE or EB is 72 degrees, the fifth part of a
circle, or side of an equilateral pentagon, the square whereof is equal to the
oblong made of DB and BX.



Demonstration.

Draw the right lines EX, ED, and EC, then will the sides of the angles ACE and
ECX be equal, because CX is made equal to AC, and EC common to both; and the
angles themselves are equal, because they are in equal segments of the same
circle by the 19 of the second; and their bases AE and EX are equal by the 23
of the second; and because EX is equal to AE, it is also equal to EB, and so
the triangle EXB is equicrural, and so is the triangle EDB, because the sides
ED and DB are Radii, and the angles at their bases X and B, E and B, by the
24th. of the second, and because the angles at B is common to both, therefore
the two triangles, EXB and EDB are equiangled, and their sides proportional, by
the 18 th. and 16 th. Theoremes of the second Chapter, that is as DB to EB; so
is EB to BX, and the rectangle of DB in BX is equal to the square of EB, whose
square root is the side EB, or subtense of 72 degrees,



Example.

Let AC, the side of a decangle or the subtense of 36 degrees, be as before:
618033988749895, which being subtracted from the diameter BC 200000.00000,
00000. the remainer is XB, 1381966011151105, which being multiplied by the
Radius DB, the product 1381966011251105 00000.00000.0000, shall be the square
of EB whose square root 1175570504584946 is the right line EB, the side of a
Pentagon or subtense of 72 degrees.

CONSECTARY.

Hence it follows, that the subtense of an arch less then a semicircle being
given, the subtense of half the complement to a semicircle is given also,

Thus much of the primarie Sines, the secondary Sines or all the Sines
remaining may be found by these and the Propositions following

27. The subtenses of any two arches together less then a semicircle being
given, to find the subtense of both those arches.

The Rule.

Find the subtense of their complements to a semicircle, by the 23 hereof;
then multiply each subtense given by the subtense of the complement of the
other subtense given, the sum of both the products being divided by the
diameter, shall be the subtense of both the arches given.

The reason of the Rule.

Let the subtenses of the given arches be the right lines AE and AI, and let
the subtense of both those arches be the right line EI, let the diameter AO be
drawn to the very point in which the subtenses of the given arches do concur,
to wit, in the point A. Then draw the right lines EO and IO, which with the
diameter and the subtenses given, do make the two right angled Triangles AEO
and AIO, right angled at E and I (by the 19 th. of the second.) And therefore
the sides EO and IO are given by the 23 hereof, and consequently the right
angled figures made of AE and IO, AI and EO, to which the right angled figure
made of the diagonals EI and AO is equal by the 20 th. of the second, and
therefore the sum of the right angled figures made of AE and IO, and also of
AI and EO, being divided by the diameter AO, the quotient is EI, the subtense
of both the arches given.

Example.

Let AI, the side of a square or subtense of 90 degrees be 141421.35623.73059.
And EO, the side of a triangle, or subtense of 120 degrees, 173205.08075.68877,
the product of these two will be 2449489742783* 77659465844164315. Let AE, the
side of a sixangled figure, or the subtense of 60 degrees be 100000
00000.00000. And IO, the side of a square, or subtense of 90 degrees
141421.35623.73059 the product of these two will be 141421.35623.73059.
00000.00000.00000. the sum of these two products
3863703305156272659465844164315. And this sum divided by the diameter AO,
200000.00000.00000. leaves in the quotient for the side EI, or subtense of 150
degrees, 1931851652578136. the half whereof 965925826289068, is the Sine of 75
degrees.

28 The subtenses of any two arches less then a Semicircle being given, to
find the subtense of the difference of those arches,

The Rule.

Find the subtenses of their complements to a semicircle, by the 23 hereof, as
before, then multiply each subtense given, by the subtense of the complement of
the other subtense given; the lesser product being subtracted from the
greater, and their difference divided by the diameter, shall be the subtense of
the difference of the arches given.

The Reason of the Rule.

Let the subtenses of the given arches be AE and EI, and let the subtense
sought be the right line EI; then because the right angled figure made of the
diagonals. AI and EO is equal to the right angled figures made of their
opposite sides, by the 20 of the second; therefore if I subtract the right
angled figure made of AE and IO, from the right angled figure made of AI and EO
the remainer will be the right angled figure of AO and EI, which being divided
by the diameter AO, leaves in the quotient EI.

Example,

Let the right angled figure AI and EO be the same with the former, viz,
2449489742783177659465844164315. And the right angled figure of AE and IO
1414213562373059. 00000.00000.00000. Their difference shall be
1035276180410082659465844164315, which divided by the diameter AO, leaves in
the quotient 517638090205041, for the subtense of the difference of the arches
of 60 and 90, that is, for the subtense of 30 degrees. The half whereof, viz.
258819045102520, is the sine of 15 degrees

29. The sine of an arch less then a Quadrant being given, together with the
sine of half his complement, to find the sine of an arch equal to the
commplement of the arch given, and the half complement added together.

The Rule.

Multiply the double of the sine given, by the sine of half his complement, the
product divided by the Radius, will leave in the quotient, a number, which
being added to the sine of the half complement shall be the sine of the arch
sought.

The reason of the Rule.

Let EAI be a quadrant, and in that let the arches IS, SV, VE be equal, then
let the last arch VE be bisected in Y, and let the Quadrant be made into a
Semicircle, and the arches OC, CL, LE, equal to the former: then shall the
right lines LV and CS be parallels to the diameter OAI, and bisected by the
Radius AE, and because YV is half of the arch EV, it is also the half of the
arch US or SI, and equal to the arches IB, CG, or GO, Then let there be drawn
the right lines EV, LS, CI, and GB, perpendicular to the Radius AY, and
bisected by it. I say, then that the right angled triangles IAM, CPM, and SPN
are equiangled, for the arches CO, CL, and SI are equal, by the work, and, the
double measures of the angles AIM, PCM, and PSN, and the angles AMI CMP, and
PNS are equal, that is, right angles, because the right line AY does fall
perpendicularly upon the parallel right lines LS and CI, and now where two
angles are equal, there the third is equal, by the 18 th. of the second; and
consequently the sides of the triangles IAM, CPM, and SPN are proportional.



That is, as AI, is to AM: so is CP, to PM; and so is PS, to PN, and then by
composition, as AI, AM: so is CS, to MN. Now then let ES be the arch given, and
SI the complement thereof to a Quadrant, then is CG or IB, being equal to EY,
the half of the said complement SI, and AM is the Sine thereof, and the Sine of
ES is the right line HS, and the double CS, MN is the difference between AM,
the Sine of CG or IB, and AN the Sine of SB, and AI is the Radius, and it is
already proved, that AI is in proportion to AM, as CS, is to MN, therefore if
you multiply AM by SC, and divide the product by AI, the quotient will be NM,
which being added to AM, does make AN, the Sine or the arch sought.

Example.

Let ES, the arch given, be 84 degrees, and the Sine thereof 9945219, which
doubled is 19890438, the Sine of 3 degrees, the half complement is 523360, by
which the double Sine of 84 degrees being multiplied, the product will be
104098^9.631680, which divided by the Radius, the quotient will be 10409859,
from which also cutting off the last figure, because the Sine of 3 degrees was
at first taken too little, and adding the remainer to the Sine of 3 degrees,
the aggregate 1564345 is the Sine of 6 degrees, the complement of 84, and of 3
degrees, the half complement added together, that is, it is the sine of 9
degrees.

30. The subtense of an arch being given, to find the subtense of the triple
arch.

The Rule.

Multiply the subtense given by thrice Radius square, and from the product
substract the cube of the subtense given, what remains shall be the subtense
of the triple arch.

The reason of the Rule.

If in a circumference you distinguish three equal parts from O the end of the
Diameter, with the letters ABC and draw the subtenses as in the scheame, making
MX equal to MB^^, drawing also AX and AB and the diameter NRA, then shall the
triangles BMX and ARO be equicrurall all because RA and TO are two Radii, and
MB and MX are equal by the work, and the angles BMX and ARO are equal by the
19 th of the second; and therefore the triangles BMX and ARO are equiangled by
the 23 of the second, and because the sides MB and MX are equal and AM common
to both the triangles AMB and AMX, therefore AX is equal to AB by the 24 th of
the second, and AB is equal to AO by the work, and therefore AX is also equal
to A^* and the angles AXO and AOX are equal by the 24 th of the second, and the
riangles AOX and ARO are like, because the angle AOR is common to both and
ther^o^e as AR to AO, so is AO to OX, that is ^ O square divided by Radius, is
equal to OX and OS is equal to AO and OX to AS, because the tr^angles AOX and
AOS are equiangled, the angles SAO and AOX are equal because they are the same
with two of the angles in the equiangled triangle ARO; and the angles AOS and
XAO are equal, because they are measured by equal arches, for AC the double of
AO, is the double measure of the angle AOS, by the nineteenth of the second,
and AO is the measure of ARO equal to XAO, because the triangles ARO and AOX
are like. And then because AS is equal to OX, SN must needs be equal to MX or
MB, and the right angled figure made of OS and SC, is equal to the right angled
figure made of AS and SN, by the 21 th. of the second, that is, as OS, to NS,
so is SA to SC.



Now then we have already proved, that the square of AO divided by Radius, is
equal to OX, and also that OX is equal to SA, and therefore SN is less then
twice Radius by the right line AS; or thus, NS is twice Radius less by AO
square divided by Radius: and NS multiplied by SA is the same with twice Radius
less by AO square divided by Radius, multiplied into AO square divided by
Radius, and NS multiplied by SA is equal to SC multiplied by OS; and therefore
twice Radius less AO square divided by Rad. multiplied by AO square divided by
Radius, is equal to SC, multiplied by SO: or thus, 2 Radius less AO square
divided by Radius, multiplied into AO square divided by Radius, and divided by
AO or SO is equal to SC. All the parts of the first side of this Equation are
fractions, except AO and the two Radii, as will plainly appear, by setting it
down according to the form of Symbolical or specious Arithmetic; thus. ^.
Which being reduced into an improper fraction, by multiplying 2 Radius by
Radius, the Equation will run thus: ^

And then these two fractions having one common denominator, they may be
reduced into one after the manner of vulgar fractions, that is, by multiplying
the numerators, the product will be a new numerator, and by multiplying the
denominators the product will be a new denominator; thus multiplying the
numerators, 2 Rad. aa - AO aa by the numerator AO aa, the product is 2 Rad.
square into AO square, less AO square square, as does appear by the operation; ^

And then the denominators being multiplied by the other, that is, Radius being
multiplied by Radius, the product will be Radius aa for a new denominator; and
then the Equation will run thus; ^: but before this fraction can be divided by
AO, AO being a whole number, must be reduced into an improper fraction, by
subscribing an Unite, and then the Equation will be; ^. Now as in vulgar
fractions, if you multiply the numerator of the dividend by the denominators of
the divisor, the product shall be a new numerator; again, if you multiply the
denominator of the dividend by the numerator of the divisor, their product
shall be a new denominator, and this new fraction is the Quotient sought in
this example, the numerator will be still the same, and the denominator will be
Radius square multiplied in AO, and the fraction will be ^. And in its least
terms it is ^. In words thu^: Twice Radius square multiplied in AO, less by
the cube of AO divided by Radius square is equal to SC. And by adding AO to
both sides of the Equation, it will be, twice Radius square in AO, less AO
cube divided by Radius square, more AO, is equal to SC more AO, that is, to OC.
Here again AO, the last part of the first side of this Equation is a whole
number, and must be reduced into an improper fraction, by being multiplied by
Radius square, the denominator of the fraction; and then it will be Radius
square in AO divided by Radius square, which being added to twice Radius square
in AO, divided by Radius, the sum will be 3 Radius square in AO divided by
Radius square, and the whole Equation ^, the subtense of the triple arch.

For Example.

Let AO or AB, 17431. 14854. 95316. the subtense of 10 degrees be the subtense
given, and let the subtense of 30 degrees be required; the Radius of this
subtense given consists of 16 places, that is, of a unite and 15 ciphers, and
therefore thrice Rad. square is 3, and 30 ciphers thereunto annexed, by which
if you multiply the subtense given, the product will be 52293. 44564. 85948.
00000. 00000. 00000. 00000. 00000. 00000. the square of this subtense given is
3038449397.55837.60253.85793.9856, and the cube
529.63662.80907.48519.77452.00270. 23994. 54977. 14496, which being subtracted
from the former product, there will remain 51763.80902.05040.51480.22547.99729.
76005.45022.85504. this remainer divided by the square of Radius, will leave in
the quotient, 51763.80902.05040. for the subtense of 30 degrees.

31. The subtense of an arch being given, to find the subtense of the third
part of the arch given.

The Rule.

Multiply the subtense given by Radius square, and divide the product by thrice
Radius square, substracting in every operation the cube of the figure placed in
the quotient from the triple thereof; so shall the quotient in this division be
the subtense of the third part of the arch given.

The reason of the Rule.

The reason of the rule is the same with the triple arch, but the manner of
working is more troublesome, the which I shall endeovour to explain by example.

Let there be given the subtense of 30 degrees, 517638090205040, and let the
subtense of 10 degrees be required: First, I multiply the subtense given by the
square of Radius, that is, I add 30 ciphers thereunto, and for the better
proceeding in the work, I distinguish the subtense given thus enlarged by
multiplication into little cubes, setting a point between every third figure or
cipher, beginning with the last first, and then the subtense given will stand
thus: 517.638.090.205.040.000.000.000.000.000 000.000.000.000.000. And so many
points as in this manner are interposed, of so many places the quotient will
consist, the which in this example is 15, and because here are too many figures
to be placed in so narrow a page, we will take so many of them only as will be
necessary for our present purpose; as namely, the 15 first figures, which being
ordered, according to the rules of decimal Arithmetic, may be divided into
little cubes, beginning with the first figure, but then you must consider
whether the number given to be thus divided be a whole number or a fraction, if
it be a whole number, you must set your point after or over the head of the
first figure, if it be a fraction, place as many ciphers before the fraction
given, as will make it consist of equal places with the denominator of the
Fraction given; thus the subtense given being a fraction, part of the supposed
Radius of a circle, the which, as has been said does consist of 16, and the
subtense given but of fifteen, I set a cipher before it, and distinguish that
cipher from the subtense given by a point or line, and every third figure
after, so will the subtense given be distinguished into little cubes, as
before. This done, I place my divisor thrice Radius square, that is, 3 with
ciphers (or at least supposing ciphers to be thereunto annexed) as in common
division under the first figure of the subtense given, that is, as we have now
ordered it under the cipher, and ask how often 3 in naught, which being not
once, I put a cipher in the margin, and move my divisor a place forwarder,
setting it under 5, and ask how often 3 in 5, which being but once, I place one
in the quotient, and the triple thereof being 3, I place under 3 my divisor,
and the cube of the figure placed in the quotient, which in this case is the
same with the quotient it self, I set under the last figure of the first cube,
and supposing ciphers to be annexed to the triple root, I substract this cube
from it, and there does remain 299, which is my divisor corrected; with this
therefore I see whether I have rightly wrought or not, by asking, how often 299
is contained in the first cube of the subtense given, 517, which being but
once, as before, the former work must stand, and this divisor corrected must be
subtracted from the first cube in the subtense given, and there will rest 218,
and so have I wrote once. To this remainer of the first cube 218, I draw down
638, the figures of the next cube and moving my divisor a place forwarder, I
ask, how often 3 in 21, which being 7 times, I put 7 in the quotient, and under
the first figure of this second cube, that is, under 6 I set the triple square
of the first figure in the quotient, that is, 3, for the quotient being but
one, the square is no more, and the triple thereof is 3; under the second
figure of this second cube I set the triple quotient, the which in this example
is likewise 3, and both these added together, do make 33, which being
subtracted from my divisor 3000, there will remain 2967, for the divisor
corrected, and by this also I find the quotient to be 7, and yet I know not
whether my work be right or not, I must therefore proceed, and set the triple
of the figure last placed in the Quotient under the first figure of the
remainer of the first cube, that is, I must set 21, the triple of 7 under 2,
the first figure of 218, and now having two figures in the quotient, for
distinction sake I call the first a, and the second e, that so the method of
the work may the better be seen in the margin, and I set 3 aae, that is, 3,
the square of the first figure noted with the letter a, viz. 1. multiplied by
the second figure, noted with the letter ( e) to wit, 7, under the first figure
of the next cube, now the square of ( a) that is, of one is one, and the triple
of this square is 3, and 3 times 7 is 21, which is (3 aae) or thrice ( a)
square in e, the last figure whereof, to wit, one, I place under 6, the first
figure of the next cube 638: next I set (3 aee) that is, three times one
multiplied by the square of 7, that is, 3 multiplied by 49, which is 1^^ under
the 2 figure of the cube 638: and lastly, I set ( eee, that is) the cube of e,
that is, the cube of 7, viz. 343, under the last figure of the cube 638, and
these 3 sums added together do make 3^^3, which being subtracted from the
triple root, that is, from 21, supposing ciphers to be thereunto annexed, as
before, there will remain (...), and because this may be subtracted from the
2d. cube, and the remainer of the first, I find that 7 is the true figure to
be placed in the quotient, and such a subtraction being made, the remainer will
be 12511, and so have I wrote twice. The work following must be done in all
things, as this second, save only in this particular, that both the figures in
the quotient are reckoned but as one, which for distinction sake I called a,
and the figure to be found by division I called e, and therefore in this third
work 3 aa, or thrice a square is the square of 17, that is 289, 3 a or thrice a
is 3 times 17, that is, 51, and so of the rest, in the fourth work the three
first figures must be called a, in the fifth work the four first figures found,
and so forward, till you have finished your division, and therefore this second
manner of working being well observed, there can be no difficulty in that which
follows.



32. The subtense of an arch being given to find the subtense of the arch
quintuple, or of an arch five times as much.

The Rule.

From the product of the subtense given, multiplied by 5 times Radius square
square, subtract the cube of the subtense given multiplied by 5 times Radius
square, the squared cube of the subtense given being first added thereunto, the
remainer divided by Radius square square, shall leave in the quotient the
subtense of the arch quintuple, or the arch 5 times as much.

The reason of the Rule.

In the annexed Diagram, twice ET more CB is equal to OE, because OE is the
subtense of five equal arches, by the work, and by letting fall the
perpendicular CT, the right line OT does answer to three equal arches, AO, AB,
and BC; and therefore ET does answer to the other two: now if you deduct the
right line CB from the right line OT, the remainer must be equal to ET, and so
it follows, that 2 ET + CB = OE. And the triangles OBM and OCT are equiangled,
because of their equal angles CTO and MBO, which are both right, and the
angles BMO and COT are equal, because they are measured by equal arches; and
therefore, as MO is to MB: so is OC, to TO: that is, as has been showed in the
triplication of an angle. As twice Radius, is to twice Radius, less by the
square AO divided by Radius: so is thrice Radius square in AO, less by the cube
of AO divided by Radius square, to a fourth number represented by the right
line OT, what that number is by the rule of proportion may be thus found:

Multiply the numerator of the fractions in the second place by the numerator
of the fraction in the third, and their product will be a new numerator, the
numerator of the fraction in the second term is 2 Rad. - AO aa And in the
third, 3 Rad. aa x AO - AO aaa

That one of these terms may be the better multiplied by the other, the first
of the second term, 2 Rad. must be reduced into an improper fraction, by the
multiplication thereof by Radius, the denominator of that fraction, and then
the 2d. term will be 2 Rad. aa - AO aa, and because this second term is the
less, we will multiply the third thereby, the work stands thus: ^

Thrice Radius square in AO multiplied by twice Radius square, does make 6 Rad.
square squares, and AO cube multiplied by 2 Radius square is 2 Rad. square in
AO cube, and because it has the sign less, therefore the first product is 6
Rad. aaaa x AO - 2 Rad. aa x AO aaa. Again, 3 R. aa in AO, multiplied by AO aa,
does make 3 R. aa in AO aaa, and AO aa multiplied by AO aaa, does make AO
aaaaa, and because it has the sign less, therefore the 2. product is 3 R.
square x AO aaa + AO aaaaa, and so both the products will be 6 Rad. square of
squares multiplied by AO less by 5 Rad. square in AO cube more by AO square
cube. And if you multiply Rad. square, the denominator of the third term by
Rad. the denominator of the second, the product will be Rad. cube, and the
whole product will stand thus, ^

To divide this product by twice Radius, twice Radius being a whole number must
be first reduced into an improper fraction, by subscribing an unite thus, ^.
then if you multiply the numerator of the product by one, the denominator of
this fraction, the product will be still the same, and if you multiply the
denominator of the product Rad. aaa by 2 Radius, the numerator of this improper
fraction, the product will be 2 Rad. square square for a new denominator, and
the Quotient will be ^ the quantity of the right line OT, the double whereof is
^ which is the quantity of the right line OE more by CB, and therefore CB or AO
being deducted, the remainer will be the right line OE, which is the
quintuplation of an angle, and to this end AO must be reduced into an improper
fraction of the same denomination, that is, by multiplying thereof by 2 Rad.
aaaa, and then the fraction will be ^ and this being deducted from ^ the
remainer will be ^. And this reduced into its least terms, will be ^, which was
to be proved.

For example.

Let AO or AB 349048, the subtense of 2 degrees be given, and let the subtense
of 10 degrees be demanded, 5 times Radius square square is
50000000.000000.00000 00.0000000. by which if you multiply the subtense given,
the product will be 1745240 0000000.0000000.0000000.0000000. The Cube of the
subtense given multiplied by 5 times Radius square is
212630453781992960.0000000.0000000. the squared cube of the subtense given is
5184639242824921385360723968, the which being added to the product of 5 Rad.aa
in AO, that is, to 212630453781992960.0000000.0000000 the sum will be
21268230017442120921385360723968. And this being subtracted from the product of
the subtense given multiplied by 5 times Radius square square, the remainer
will be 17431141769982557879078614639276032, and this remainer divided by
Radius square square, that is, cutting off 28 figures, their quotient will be
1743114, the subtense of 10 degrees.

33. The subtense of an arch being given to find the subtense of the fifth part
of the arch given.

The Rule.

Divide the subtense given by five roots, less 5 cubes, more one Quadrato
cube, the quotient shall be the fifth part of the arch given.

The reason of the rule depends upon the foregoing Problem, in which we have
proved, that the subtense of five equal arches is equal to 5 roots, less 5
cubes, more by one quadrato cube, of which 5 roots one of them is the subtense
of the fifth part of the arch given. And consequently, if I shall divide the
subtense of five equal arches by 5 roots, less 5 cubes, more one quadrato
cube, the quotient shall be the subtense of the fifth part of the arch.

The manner of the work is thus: First, consider whether the subtense given to
be divided does consist of equal, or of fewer places then the Radius thereof,
if it consist of equal places, set a point over the head of the first figure of
the subtense given, if of fewer places, make it equal, by prefixing as many
ciphers before the subtense given as it wants of the number of places of the
Radius thereof.

For example.

Let the subtense of 10 degrees be given, viz. 0.17431.14854.95316.34711. This
is less then the Rad. by one place, and therefore I have set one cipher
before, and have distinguished it from the subtense given by a point set
between, the which is all one, as if it had been put over the head thereof:
next you must distinguish the subtense given into little cubes, and into
quadratocubes, which may be conveniently done thus; having found the place of
the first point, which is always the place of the Radius, the subtense given
must be distinguished into little cubes, by putting a point under every third
figure, as in the trisection of an angle: thus in this example the first cubick
point will fall under the figure 4, and the subtense given must be
distinguished into quadrato cubes, by setting a point over the head, or else
between every fifth figure from the place of the Radius: thus in this example
the first quadrato cubick point must be set over the head, or after the figure
of 1, the second after 4, as here you see.

After this preparation made, you must place your two divisors, 5 roots and 5
cubes in this manner, the first as in ordinary division under the first figure
of the subtense given, the other 5 under the first cubick point, and they will
stand as in the work you see; then ask how often 5 in one, which being not
once, I put a cipher in the quotient, and remove my first divisor a place
forwarder, as in ordinary division, but the other 5 I remove to the next cubick
point, then, as before, I ask how often 5 in 17, which being 3 times, I set 3
in the quotient, and of this quotient I seek the quadrato cube, and find it to
be 243, the last figure whereof, namely, 3, I set under the last figure of the
second quadrato cubick point (because there are but 3 figures between my
divisor 5 and the first cubick point, whereas there must be always four at the
least) then I multiply the figure 3 placed in the quotient by my divisor 5, and
the product thereof is 15, the first figure whereof I place under my said
divisor 5, to which having annexed ciphers, or at least supposing them to be
annexed, (as to the triple root in the trisection) I draw the quadrato cube of
the figure in the quotient, and these 5 roots or 5 quotients into one sum,
the which is 1500000243, under this sum I draw a line, so have we five roots
more one quadrato cube, from which I must subtract 5 cubes, I therefore seek
the cube of 3, the figure placed in the quotient, and find it to be 27, which
multiplied by 5, the product will be 135, the last figure of these five cubes,
viz. 5, I set under my second 5 or cubick divisor, and substracting these 5
cubes from the 5 roots more one quadrato cube, the remainer will be (...),
which remainer being also subtracted from the figures of the subtense given
standing over the head thereof, the remainer of the subtense given will be
244464611, and so have I wrought once.

To this remainer of the two first quadrato cubes, I draw down 95316, the
figures of the next quadrato cube, and setting my first divisor a place
forwarder, I ask how often 5 in 24, which being four times, I set 4 in the
quotient, not knowing yet whether this be the true quotient or not, but with
this I proceed to correct my divisor, and first I seek the quadrato quadrat of
3, the first quotient, and find it to be 81, this multiplied by 5, will make
405, this product I set under my divisor, and 5 the last figure thereof I set
under 9, the first figure of the 3 quadrato quadrate; next I seek the cube of
3, and find it to be 27, which being multiplied by 10, the product will be
270, and this I set a place forwarder under the former product: thirdly, I seek
the square of 3 which is 9, and this multiplied by 10 is 90, which I set a
place forwarder under the second product 270. Lastly, I multiply 3, the figure
in the quotient by 5 my divisor, this product which is 15, I set a place
forwarder under 90, the third product, and now these 4 products together with
my divisor and ciphers thereunto annexed, being gathered into one sum, will
be 500000432915, under which I draw a line. And thrice the square of 3,
multiplied by 5, which is 135, I set under this sum, the last figure thereof
5, under the first figure of the third cubick point, that is, under 4, and the
triple of 3 multiplied by 5, which is 45, I set under the former sum 135, a
place forwarder, and my cubick divisor 5 under the last sum a place
forwarder, that is, under the third cubick point, these drawn into one sum
will be 13955, and being subtracted from the former sum 500000432915, the
remainer 498.60493. + 2915 is my divisor corrected, and yet I know not whether
I have a true quotient or not; under this remainer therefore I draw a line, and
work with 4, which I suppose to be the true quotient in manner following; and
that the manner of the work may be the more perspicuous, (as in the trisection
of an angle, so here) 3 the first figure found I call ( a) and 4 the second
figure I call ( e) the square of three I note with aa, the cube with aaa, the
quadrate quadrat with aaaa, the quadrato cube with aaaaa, so likewise the
square of 4 the second figure I note with ee, the cube with eee, the quadrato
quadrate with eeee, the quadrato cube with eeeee; my first divisor I note with
ffff, because this Equation is quadrato quadratick, and 5 my second divisor, I
note with cc, because the divisor it self is cubick: these things premised, I
proceed thus: First, I multiply 405, which is 5 aaaa or 5 times the quadrato
quadrate of 3 by e, that is, by 4, and the product thereof 1620, I set under my
divisor corrected, so as the last figure thereof may stand under the first
figure of the third quadrato cubick number, and against this number I put in
the margin 5 aaaae, that is, five times the quadrato quadrate of 3 multiplied
by 4: next 270, ten times the cube of 3, by 16 the square of 4, and this
product 4320, I set under the former a place forwarder, and 90, which is 10
times the square of 3, I multiply by 64, the cube of 4, and this product 5760 I
set under the last a place forwarder then that, and 15, which is 5 times 3, I
multiply by 256, the quadrato quadrate of 4, and the product thereof 3840, I
set under the third product a place forwarder, and 1024, the quadrato cube of
four under that: lastly, I multiply four, the last figure placed in the
quotient by 5 my divisor, and the last figure of this product I set under 5 my
divisor, and supposing ciphers to be thereunto annexed, I collect these several
products into one sum, and their aggreagate 20000021135424, is five roots
more one quadrato quadrate, under which I draw a line, and seek the five cubes
to be subtracted, thus.

First, I multiply 135 (which is thrice the square of three multiplied by five
my cubick divisor) by four, the figure last placed in the quotient, and the
product thereof 540 I set under the last sum, so as the last figure thereof
may be under the first figure of the third cube; next I multiply 45 that is,
five times the triple of three, by 16 the square of four, and this product 720
I set under the former a place forwarder, and under that 320, which is five
times the cube of 4, a place forwarder too, these products drawn into one sum
do make 61520, the five cubes to the subtracted from the five roots more one
quadrato quadrate before found, which being done, the remainer will be
19938501135424, and this remainer being subtracted from the figures of the
subtense given over the head thereof, the remainer will be 450.79600. 59892,
and because such a substraction may be conveniently made, I conclude, that I
have found the true quotient, and so have I wrought twice.

The work following must be done in all things like as this second, only
remember that as in the trisection of an angle, both the figures in the
quotient are termed a in the third operation, the three figures found are a in
the fourth work; and so forward till your division be finished.

34 The Sines of two arches equally distant on both sides from 60 degrees,
being given, to find the Sine of the distance.

The Rule.

Take the difference of the Sines given, and that difference shall be the Sine
of the arch sought.

The reason of the Rule.

Let CN and PN be the two arches given, and equally distant from 60 degrees. MN,
that is equally distant on both sides from the point M. And let the right lines
CK and PL be the Sines of those arches, being drawn perpendicular to the right
line AN, and thereupon parallel to one another.

Moreover, let the right line PT be drawn perpendicular upon the right line CK,
and so parallel to the right line KL, then this right line TP cutteth from the
right line CK another line TK, equal unto PL, by the 15 of the second, and
leaves the right line TC for the difference of the Sines CK and PL. Lastly,
the Sines of the distance of either of them from 60 degrees let be the right
line CD or DP, I say, that the right line TC is equal to the right line CD or
DP.

Demonstration.

Because in the triangle GCP, that the perpendicular GD does bisect the base
CP, by the proposition: therefore the sides GC and GP are equal, and the
angles GCP and GPC are equal, because equal sides subtend equal angles: and
lastly, the angles CGD and DGP are also equal, by the same reason; but the
angle CGD is 30 degrees, for that it is equal to the angle BAM, because a^
right line drawn through two parallel right lines makes the angles opposite to
one another equal. And therefore the angle CGP is 60 degrees, because it is
double to the angle CGD. And because the angle CGP is ^0 degrees, therefore the
other two angles GCP and GPC are 120, by the 18 th. of the second, and these
two angles are demonstrated to be equal; and therefore every of them is 60
degrees. And the angle CGP is also 60 degrees, and therefore the triangle CGP
is equiangled, but because the triangle CGP is equiangled, therefore also it is
equilateral. Moreover, because the triangle CGP is equilateral, therefore the
perpendicular PT bisecteth the base CG into two equal parts, or else it could
not be perpendicular. Then the sides CP and CG are equal, and therefore also
their bi-segments CT and CD are equal: which was to be demonstrated. The Sines
therefore or whatsoever 60 degrees being given, you may find the Sines of the
other 30 degrees, by Addition or Substraction only.

Example.

Let the arches CN be 70 degrees, PN 50, CM or PM 10 degrees; for so many
degrees are the arches of 70 degrees; and 50 degrees distant from the arch of
60 degrees on both sides. And let first the Sines of 70 degrees and 10 degrees
be given, and let the Sine of 50 degrees be demanded.

From the Sine of 70d. CK 9396926 Subtract the Sine of 10d. CD or CT, 1736482
The Remainer will be the Sine of 50d. TK or PL, 7660444

Then let the Sine of 70 degrees and 50 degrees be given, and let the Sine of
ten degrees be demanded.

From the Sine of 70 degrees CK, 9396926 Substract the Sine of 50d. TK or PL,
7660444 Remainer is the Sine of 10d. CD, 1736482

Lastly, let the Sines of 50 degrees and 10 degrees be given, and let the Sine
of 70 degrees be demanded.

To the Sine of 50d. PL or TK, 7660444 Add the Sine of 10d. DP or TC, 1736482
Their sum will be the Sine of 70d. 9396926

And thus far of the making of the Tables of right Sines, the Tables of versed
Sines are not necessary, as has been said

CHAP. IV.
By the Tables of Sines to make the Tables of Tangents and Secants.
1. AS the Sine of the complement, Is to the Sine of an arch: so is the Radius,
to the tangent of that arch.

2. As the Sine of the complement, is to the Radius; so is the Radius, to the
secant of that arch. For, by the 16 th. of the second: 1. As the Sine of the
complement AB, is to the Sine CA: so is the Radius BD or BC, to DF the tangent.
2. As the sine of the complement AB, is to the Radius BD or BC: so is the
Radius BC, to the secant BF.


Example.

Let the tangent and secant of the arch CD 30 degrees be sought for. The sine
AC 30 degrees is 5000000, the sine of the complement AB 60 degrees is 8660254.
Now then if you multiply the sine AC 5000000, by the Radius CB 10000000, the
product will be 50000000000000, which divided by the sine of the complement AB
8660254: the quotient will be 5773503, the right line FD or the tangent of the
arch of 30 degrees.



2. As the sine of the complement AB 8660254, Is to the Radius DB 10000000: so
is the Radius BC 10000000, to FB, the secant of the arch of 30 degrees: and so
for any other: but with more ease by the help of these Theorems following.

Theorem 1.
The difference of the Tangents of any two arches making a Quadrant, is double
to the tangent of the difference of those arches
The Declaration.

Let the two arches making a Quadrant be CD and BD, whose tangents are CG and
BP, and let BS be an arch made equal to CD; and then SD will be the arch of
the difference of the two given arches CD or BS, and BD. And also let the
tangent BT be equal to the tangent CG, and then the right line TP will be the
difference of the tangents given CG or BT, and BP. Lastly, let the arches BL
and BO (whose tangents are BK and BM) be made equal to the arch SD; I say, the
right line TP being the difference of the two given tangents, CG and BP is
double to the right line BK, being the tangent of the difference of the two
given arches; or which is all one, I say, that the right line TP is equal to
the right line MK.

Demonstration.

If you take equal things from equal, the remainer shall be equal: but the
right lines ^P and MT are equal; therefore if you take the right line KNIGHT from
both of them, the right lines TP and MK remaining shall be equal; because those
things that are equal to one and the same things are also equal to one another;
but the right lines KP and MT are equal to the same right line KA, and
therefore they are equal to one another. The right line KP is equal to the
right line KA, because he angles KAP and KPA are equal. And that the angles KAP
and KPA are equal to one another, thus appears; for that they are equal to
one and the same angle DAC. The angle KPA is equal to the angle DAC, because
the right line PA is drawn through the parallel lines MP and AC: and the angle
KAP is equal to the angle DAC, by the construction, for the arch BL is to be
made equal to the arch SD, being the difference of the arches DC and BD.
Therefore the angle BAL or BAK is the difference betwixt the angles BAP and
DAC. Seeing therefore that the angles KAP and KPA are equal to the same angle
DAC; it follows necessarily, that they are equal to one another.

Then that the right line MT is equal to the right line KA is thus proved; the
right line MA is equal to the right line KA, by the work, but the right line
MT is equal to the right line MA, and therefore it is also equal to the right
line KA.

That the right line MT is equal to the right line MA does thus appear: for
that the angles MAT and MTA are equal; and therefore the sides opposite unto
them are equal, for equal sides subtend equal angles: and the angles MTA and
MAT are equal, because the angle MTA is equal to the angle TAC, by the like
reason, that the angle KPA is equal to the angle DAC; and the angle MAT is
equal to the angle TAC, by the proposition: for the arches CS and SO are put
to be equal: therefore it follows, that they are also equal one to another.
Generally therefore, the difference of the tangents of two arches, making a
Quadrant, is double to the tangent of the difference of those arches, which was
to be demonstrated. And by consequence, the tangents of two arches being given,
making a Quadrant, the tangent of the difference of those arches is also given.
And contrarily, the tangent of the difference of those two arches being given,
together with the tangent of one of the arches; the tangent of the other arch
is also given.

Example.

Let there be given the Tang. of 72 de. 94 m. And the Tang. of its complement,
that is, of 17 6 Half the difference of these two arches is 27 94

Tangent of 72 de. 94 m. is 32586438 Tangent of 17 6 306^761 Their difference
is 29517677 The half whereof is 14758838The Tangent of 55 de. 88 min.

Or let the tangent of the greater arch 72 d. 94 m. be given, with the Tangent
of the difference 55 de. 88 m. and let the lesser arch 17 de. 6 m. be demanded.
Tangent of 72 de. 94 m. is 32586438 Tang. of 55 de. 88 m. doubled is 29517676
Their difference is 03068762The Tangent of 17 de. 6 m.

Or lastly, let the lesser arch be given, with the Tangent of the difference,
and let the greater arch be demanded. Tang. of 55 de. 88 m. the diff. is
14758838 Which doubled is 29517676 To which the tang. of 17 d. 6 m. ad. 3068761
Their aggregate is 32586437the tangent of 72 degrees, 94 minutes.

Theor. 2.
The tangent of the difference of two arches making a Quadrant, with the
tangent of the lesser arch makes the secant of the difference.
The Reason is

Because the tangent of the difference BL or BO, that is, the right line BK or
BM with the tangent of the lesser arch BS, that is, with the right line BT,
makes the right line MT, which is equal to the Secant AK, by the
demonstration of the first Theorem. Therefore, the tangent of the difference of
two arches making a Quadrant, and the tangent of the lesser arch being given,
the secant of the difference is also given. And contrarily.

For example.

Let the tangent of the former difference 55 degrees, 88 minutes, and the
tangent of the lesser arch 17 degrees, ^^ minutes, be given; I say, the secant
of this difference is also given. Tang. of the diff. 55 de. 88 m. is 14758838
The tangent of 17 06 is 3068762 Their sum is the secant of 55 88, 17827600

Theor. 3.
The tangent of the difference of two arches making a Quadrant, with the secant
of their difference, is equal to the tangent of the greater arch.
Because the tangent of the arch BL, being the difference of the two arches BC
and DC, making a Quadrant with the secant of the same arch BL, that is, the
right line BK with the right line AK, is equal to the right line BP, by the
demonstration of the first Theorem: therefore the tangent of the difference of
two arches making a Quadrant being given, with the secant of their difference,
the tangent of the greater arch is also given.

For example.

Let the tangent of the difference be the tang. of the arch of 55 de. 88 m.
viz. 14758838 The secant of this difference is 17827600 Their sum is the tang.
of 72 94, 32586438the greater of the two former given arches.

And now by the like reason these Rules may be added by way of Appendix.

Rule I.

The double tangent of an arch, with the tangent of half the complement, is
equal to the tangent of the arch, composed of the arch given and half the
complement thereof.

For if the arch BL be put for the arch given, the double tangent thereof shall
be TP, by the demonstration of the first Theorem. And the complement of the
arch BL, shall be the arch LC, whose half is the arch LD or DC, whose tangent
is the right line GC or BT, but TP added to BT makes BP, being the tangent of
the arch BD, composed of the given arch BL, and half the complement LD,
therefore the double tangent, etc.

Rule II.

The tangent of an arch with the tangent of half the complement is equal to the
secant of that arch. For if you have the arch BL or BO for the arch given, the
tangent of the arch given shall be BM, the tangent of half the complement shall
be BT, which two tangents added together, make the right line MT, but the right
line MT is equal to the right line AK, by the demonstration of the first
Theorem; which right line AK is the secant of the arch given BL, by the
proposition: Therefore the tangent of an arch, etc.

Rule III.

The tangent of an arch with the secant thereof is equal to the tangent of an
arch composed of the arch given, and half the complement. For if you have the
arch BL for the arch given, BK shall be the tangent, and AK the secant of that
arch. But the right line AK and KP are equal, by the demonstration of the first
Theorem: therefore the tangent of the arch given BL, that is, the right line
BK, with the secant of the same arch, that is, AK is equal to the right line
BP, which is the tangent of the arch BD, being composed of the given arch, BL
and LD being half the complement.

These rules are sufficient for the making of the Tables of natural Sines,
Tangents, and Secants. The use whereof in the resolution of plain and spherical
triangles should now follow; but because the Right Honorable John Lord Nepoir,
Baron of Marchiston, has taught us how by borrowed numbers, called
Logarithmes: to perform the same after a more easy and compendious way: we
will first speak something of the nature and construction of those numbers,
called Logarithmes; by which is made the Table of the artificial Sines and
Tangents, and then show the use of both.

CHAP. V.
Of the nature and construction of Logarithmes.
LOgarithmes are borrowed numbers, which differ amongst themselves by
Arithmetical proportion, as the numbers that borrow them differ by Geometrical
proportion: So in the first column of the ensuing Table the numbers
Geometrically proportional being 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024,
etc. you may assign unto them for bo^rowed numbers or Logarithmes, the numbers
subscribed under the letters A, B, C, D, or any other at pleasure; provided,
that the Logarithmes so assigned still differ amongst themselves by
Arithmetical proportion, as the numbers of the first column differ by
Geometrical proportion: For example. In the column C, if you will appoint 5 to
be the Logarithme of one, 8 the Logarithme of 2, and 11 the Logarithme of 4, 14
must needs be the Logarithme of 8, the next proportional, because the numbers
5, 8, 11, and 14 differ amongst themselves by Arithmetical proportion, as 1, 2,
4, and 8 (the proportional numbers unto which they are respectively assigned)
differ by Geometrical proportion, that is, as the numbers 5, 8, 11, and 14 have
equal differences: so the numbers 1, 2, 4, and 8 have their differences of the
same kind: for as the difference between 5 and 8, 8 and 11, 11 and 14, is 3:
so in the other numbers, as 1 is half 2, so 2 is half 4, 4 half 8, etc. The
same observation may be made of the Logarithmes placed in the columns, A, B,
and D, or of any other numbers which you shall assign as Logarithmes unto any
rank of numbers, which are Geometrically proportional, and these Logarithmes or
borrowed numbers you may propound to increase, and to be continued upwards, as
those of the columns A, B, C, or otherwise to decrease, and to be continued
downwards, as those of the column D.

A B C D 1 1 5 5 35 2 2 6 8 32 4 3 7 11 29 8 4 8 14 26 16 5 9 17 23 32 6 10 20
20 64 7 11 23 17 128 8 12 26 14 256 9 13 29 11 512 10 14 32 8 1024 11 15 35 5
Log Log Log Log

The numbers continually proportional, which Mr. Briggs (after a conference had
with the Lord Nepeir) has proposed to himself in the Calculation of his
C^ili^des, are 1, 10, 100, 1000, etc. to which numbers he has assigned for
Logarithmes 000, etc. 1000, and 2000, and 3000, that is to say, to 1, the
Logarithme 0.000, and to 10, the Logarithme 1,000, and to 100 the Logarithme
2.000, as in the table following you may perceive. In the column marked by the
letter A, there is a rank of numbers continually proportional from 1, and over
against each number his respective Logarithme in the other column, signed by
the letter B.

A B 1 0.00000 10 1.00000 100 2.00000 1000 3.00000 10000 4.00000

Having thus assigned the Logarithme to the proportional numbers of 1, 10, 100,
1000, etc. in the next place, it is requisite to find the Logarithmes of the
mean numbers situate amongst those proportionals of the same table, viz. of 2,
3, 4, etc. which are numbers situate betwixt 1 and 10, of 11, 12, 13, etc.
which are placed betwixt 10 and 100; and so consequently of the rest: wherefore
how this also may be done we intend to explain by that which follows.

1.. Make choice of one of the propotional numbers in the Table AB, and by a
continued extraction of the square root create a rank of continual means
betwixt that number and 1, in such sort, that the continual mean which comes
nearest 1 may be a mixed number, less then 2, and so near 1, that it may have
as many ciphers before the significant figures of the numerator, as you intend
that the Logarithmes of your Table shall consist of places.

Example.

In the premised Table AB, I take 10, the second proportional of that Table,
then annexing unto it a compent company of ciphers, as twenty and four, thirty
and six, forty and eight, or any other number at pleasure; only observe, that
the more ciphers you annex unto the number given, the more just and exact the
operation will prove; to make the Logarithmes of a Table to seven places 28
ciphers will be sufficient, they being therefore added to 10, I extract the
square root thereof, and find it to be 3.16227766016837; again, annexing unto
this root thus found 14 ciphers more, and working by that entire number so
ordered, as if it were a whole number, I extract the root thereof, which I
find to be 1.77827941003892: and so proceeding successively by a continued
extraction, I produce 27 square roots, or continual means betwixt 10 and 1, and
write them down in the first column of the Table hereunto annexed, in which you
may observe, that the three last numbers marked by the letters G, H, and L,
viz. 1.00000006862238 1.00000003431119 1.00000001715559
are each of them mixed numbers less then 2, and greater then 1, and likewise
to have seven ciphers placed before the significant figures of their
numerators, according to the true meaning and intention of this present rule.

2.. Having thus produced a great company of continual means, annex unto them
their proper Logarithmes, by halfing first the Logarithme of the number taken,
and then successively the Logarithme of the rest.

For example.

1.000000000000000 being assigned the Logarithme of 10, the number taken
0.500000, etc. marked by the letter D, in the second column of the following
Table, which is the half of 1.0000, etc. is the Logarithme of the number A, the
square root of 10: in like manner 0.25000, etc. being half 0.5000, and is the
Logarithme of the number B, and 0.125000, etc. is the Logarithme of the number
C, and so of the rest in their order. So that at last, as you have in the first
column of the following Table 27 continual means, betwixt 10 and 1, as
aforesaid: So in the other column you have to each of those continual means,
his respective Logarihme.

3.. When a number which being less then 2, and greater then 1, comes so near
to 1, that it has seven ciphers placed before the significant figures of the
numerator, the first seven significant figures of the numerator of such a
number, and the first seven significant figures of the numerator of his square
root lessen themselves like their Logarithmes, that is, by halfes.

This is proved by the Table following; for there in the second column thereof,
the number N being the Logarithme of the number G, I say, as the Logarithme K
is half the Logarithme N, so 3431119, the first seven figures of the numerator
of the number H, are half 6862238, the first seven significant figures of the
numerator of the number G. Any two numbers of this kind therefore being given,
their Logarithmes and the significant figures of their numerators are
proportional.

Example. The numerators G and H being given, I say, as 6862238, the
significant figures of the numerator of the number G; are to 3431119, the
significant figures of the numerator of the number H; so is 29802322, the
Logarithme of the number G, to 140901161, the Logarithme of the number H. In
like manner, G and L being given, as 6862238, is to 1715559, so is 29802322,
the Logarithme of the number G, to 7450580, the Logarithme of the number L.
This holds also true in any other number of this kind, though it be not one
of the continual means betwixt 10 and 1, for the significant figures of the
numerator of any such number bear the same proportion to his proper Logarithme,
that the significant figures of any of the numbers marked by the letters G, H,
or L bear to his.

10.0000, etc. 1.000000000000000 A 3.16227766016837 0.500000000000000 D B
1.77827941003892 0.250000000000000 C 1.33352143216332 0.125000000000000
1.15478198468945 0.062500000000000 1.07460782832131 0.031250000000000
1.03663292843769 0.015625000000000 1.01815172171818 0.007812500000000
1.00903504484144 0.003906250000000 1.00450736425446 0.001953125000000
1.00225114829291 0.000976562500000 1.00112494139987 0.000488281250000
1.00056231260220 0.000244140625000 1.00028111678778 0.000122070312500
1.00014054851694 0.000061035156250 1.00007027178941 0.000030517578125
1.00003513527746 0.000015258789062 1.00001756748442 0.000007629394531
1.00000878270363 0.000003814697265 1.00000439184217 0.000001907348632
1.00000219591867 0.000000953674316 1.00000109795873 0.000000476837158
1.00000054897921 0.000000238418579 1.00000027448957 0.000000119209289
1.00000013724477 0.000000059604644 G 1.00000006862238 0.000000029802322 N H
1.00000003431119 0.000000014901161 K L 1.00000001715559 0.000000007450580 M

4.. These things being thus cleared, it is manifest, that a number of this
kind being given, the Logarithme thereof may be found by the Rule of three
direct. For as the significant figures of the numerator of any one of the
numbers (signed in the first column of the last Table by the letters G, H, or
L) are to his respective Logarithme: so are the significant figure of the
numerator of the number given, to the Logarithme of the same number.

Example. The number 1.00000001021301 being given, I demand the Logarithme
thereof: I say then,

As 6862238, the significant figures of the numerator of the number G, are to
29802322, the logarithme of the same number G: so are 1021301, the significant
figures of the numerator of the number given, to 4357281, the Logarithme
sought; before which if you prefix 9 ciphers, to the intent it may have as many
places as the Logarithme in the last premised Table, ( viz. 16) the true and
entire Logarithme of 1.00000001021301, the number given is 0.000000004357281,
as before. And to every Logarithme thus found, you must prefix as many ciphers
as will make the said Logarithme to have as many places as the other
Logarithmes in the same table: for though you make your Table of Logarithmes to
consist of as many places as you please, yet when you are once resolved of how
many places the Logarithmes of your Table shall consist, you must not alter
your first resolution, as to make the Logarithme of 2 to consist of six places,
and the Logarithme of 16 to have seven, but if the significant figures of the
numerator of the Logarithme of 2 have not so many places as the significant
figures of the Logarithme of 16, you must prefix a cipher or ciphers to make
them equal; because (as has been said, the Logarithmes of this kind ought all
to consist of equal places in the same Table.

5.. Now then to find the Logarithme of any number whatsoever, you are first
to search out so many continual means betwixt the same number and 1, till the
continual mean that comes nearest 1 has as many ciphers placed before the
significant figures of his numerator, as you intend the Logarithmes of your
Table shall consist of places; Again, this being done, you are to find the
Logarithme of that continual mean: And lastly, by often doubling and redoubling
of that Logarithme so found (according to the number of the continual means
produced) in conclusion you shall fall upon the Logarithme of the number given.

Example. the number 2 being given, I demand the Logarithme thereof to seven
places: Here first in imitation of that which is before taught in the first
rule of this Chapter, I produce so many continual means between 2 and 1, till
that which comes nearest 1 has seven ciphers before the significant figures
of the numerator, which after three and twenty continued extractions, I find
to be 1.00000008262958 This continual mean being thus found (by the direction
of the last rule aforegoing) I find the Logarithme thereof to be
0.000000035885571. for, As 6862238, is to 29802322: So 8262958, is to 35885571.


This Logarithme being doubled will produce the Logarithme of the continual
mean next above 1.00000008262958, and so by doubling successively the
Logarithme of each continual mean one after another, according to the number of
the extractions ( viz. three and twenty times in all) at last you shall happen
upon the Logarithme 0.301029987975168, which is the Logarithme of 2 the number
propounded: The whole frame of the work is plainly set down in the table
following; for in the first column thereof you have 23 continual means betwixt
2 and 1, and in the other column their respective Logarithmes, found by a
continual doubling and redoubling of 0.000000035885571, the Logarithme of the
last continual mean in the table.

2.0000, etc. 0 301029987975168 1.41421356237309 0.150514993987584
1.18920711500272 0.075257496993792 1.19050713266525 0.037628748496896
1.04427378243220 0.018814374248448 1.02189714865645 0 009407187124224
1.01088928605285 0.004703593562112 1.00542990111387 0.002351796781056
1.00271127505073 0.001175898390528 1.00135471989237 0.000587949195264
1.00067713069319 0.000293974597632 1.00033850805274 0.000146987298816
1.00016923970533 0.000073493649408 1.00008461627271 0.000036746824704
1.00004230724140 0.000018373412352 1.00002115339696 0.000009186706176
1.00001057664255 0.000004593353088 1.00000528830729 0.000002296676544
1.00000264415015 0.000001148338272 1.00000132207420 0.000000574169136
1.00000066103688 0.000000287084568 1.00000033051838 0.000000143542284
1.00000016525917 0.000000071771142 1.00000008262958 0.000000035885571

But now because the Logarithme of the number propounded was to con^ist only
of seven places; therefore of the Logarithme so found I take only the first
seven figures rejecting the rest as superfluous, and then at the last the
proper Logarithme of 2, the number given will be found to be 0.301029, and
because the eighth figure being 9, does almost carry the value of an unit to
the same seventh figure, I add one thereto, and then the precise Logarithme of
2 will be 0.301030. And thus as the Logarithme of 2 is made, so may you
likewise make the Logarithme of any other number whatsoever: Howbeit, the
Logarithmes of some few of the prime numbers being thus discovered, the
Logarithmes of many other derivative numbers may be found out afterward
without the trouble of so many continued extractions of the square root, as
shall appear by that which follows.

6.. When of four numbers given, the second exceeds the first as much as the
fourth exceeds the third; the sum of the first and fourth is equal to the
sum of the second and third; and contrarily.

As 8, 5: 6, 3. here 8 exceeds 5, as much as 6 exceeds 3: therefore the sum
of the first and fourth, namely, of 8 and 3 is equal to the sum of the
second and third; namely of 5 and 6: from whence necessarily follows this
Corollary; When four numbers are proportional, the sum of the Logarithmes of
the mean numbers is equal to the sum of the Logarithmes of the extremes.

Example.

Let the four proportional numbers be those expressed in the first column of the
first Table in this Chapter, viz. 4, 16, 32, 128, in which Table the Logarithme
of 4 under the letter A is 3, the Logarithme of 16, 5, the Logarithme of 32, 6;
and the Logarithme of 128 is 8. Now as the sum of 5 and 6, the Logarithmes of
the mean numbers do make 11, so the sum of 3 and 8, the Logarithmes of the
extremes, do make 11 also.

7.. When four numbers be proportional, the Logarithme of the first subtracted
from the sum of the Logarithmes of the second and third, leaves the
Logarithme of the fourth.

Example.

Let the proportion be, as 128, to 32; so is 16, to a fourth number: here
adding 5 and 6, the Logarithmes of the second and third, the sum is 11, from
which substracting 8, the Logarithme of 128, the first proportional, the
remainer is 3, the Logarithm of 4, the fourth proportional.

8.. If instead of substracting the aforesaid Logarithme of the first, we add
his complement arithmetical to any number, the total abating that number, is
as much as the remainer would have been.

The complement arithmetical of one number to another, (as here we take it) is
that, which makes that first number equal to the other; thus the complement
arithmetical of 8 to 10 is 2, because 8 and 2 are 10. Now then whereas in the
example of the last Proposition, substracting 8 from 11, there remained 3, if
instead of substracting 8, we add his complement arithmeticall to 10, which is
2, the total is 13, from which abating 10, there remains 3, as before: both
the operations stand thus: As 128, is to 32: So is 16, Logar 8 compl.
arithmetical 2 6 6 5 5 The aggreg. of 1.2. 11 Their aggregate is 13 To 4, 3
from which abate 10, there remains 3, and the like is to be understood of any
other.

The reason is manifest, for whereas we should have abated 8 out of 11, we did
not only not abate it, but added moreover his complement to 10, which is 2,
wherefore the total is more then if should be by 8 and 2, that is by 10;
wherefore abating 10 from it, we have the Logarithme desired; which rule,
although it be general, yet we shall seldom have occasion to use any other
complements, then such as are the complements of the Logarithmes given either
to 10,000000, or to 20,000000, the ^ complement arithmetical of any Logarithme
to either of these numbers, is that which makes the Logarithme given equal to
either of them. Thus the complement arithmetical of the Logarithme of 2 viz.
0301030, is 9698970, because these two numbers added together, do make
10.000000, and thus the complement thereof to 20.000000is 19698970: if
therefore 0301030 be subtracted from 10.000000, the remainer is his complement
arithmetical.

But to find it readily, you may instead of substracting the Logarithme given
from 10.000000, write the complement of every figure thereof unto 9, beginning
with the first figure toward the left hand, and so on, till you come to the
last figure toward the right hand, and thereof set down the residue unto 10.
Thus for the complement arithmetical of the aforesaid Logarithme, 0301030; I
write for 0, 9: for 3, 6: for 0, 9: for 1, 8: for 0, 9: for 3 again I should
write 6: but because the last place of the Logarithme is a cipher, and that I
must write the complement thereof to 10, instead of 6 I write 7, and for 0, 0:
and so have I this number, 9698970, which is the complement arithmetical of
0301030, as before.

9. Every Logarithme has his proper Characteristick, and the Character or
Characteristicall root of every Logarithme is the first figure or figures
toward the left hand, distinguished from the rest by a point or comma. Thus
the Character of the Logarithmes of every number less then 10 is 0, but the
Character of the Logarithme of 10 is 1; and so of all other numbers to 100, but
the Character of the Logarithme of 100 is 2; and so of the rest to 1000; and
the Character of the Logarithme of 1000 is 3; and so of the rest to 10000: in
brief, the Characteristick of any Logarithme must consist of a unite less then
the given number consists of digits or places, And therefore by the Character
of a Logarithme you may know of how many places the absolute number answering
to that Logarithme does consist.

10.. If one number multiply another, the sum of their Logarithme is equal to
the Logarithme of the product.

As let the two numbers multiplied together be 2, and 2 the products is 4, I
say then that the sum of the Logarithmes of 2 and 2, or the Logarithme of 2
doubled is equal to the Logarithme of 4, as here you may see. 2. 0.301030 2.
0.301030 4. 0.602060

Again, let the two numbers multiplied together be 2, and 4, the product is 8,
I say then that the sum of the Logarithmes of 2 and 4 is equal to the
Logarithme of 8, as here you may also see, 2. 0.301030 4. 0.602060 8.
0.903090And so for any other.

The reason is, for that (by the ground of multiplication) as unit is in
proportion to the multiplier: so is the multiplicand, to the product: therefore
(by the sixth of this Chapter) the sum of the Logarithmes of a unit, and of the
product is equal to the sum of the Logarithmes of the multiplier and
multiplicand, but the Logarithme of a unit is 0, therefore the Logarithme of
the product alone is equal to the sum of the Logarithmes of the multiplier
and multiplicand.

And by the like reason, it three or more numbers be multiplied together, the
sum of all their Logarithmes is equal to the Logarithme of the product of
them all.

11.. If one number divide another, the Logarithme of the Divisor being
subtracted from the Logari^hme of the Dividend, leaves the Logarithme of the
Quotient.

As let 10 be divided by 2, the quotient is 5. I say then, if the Logarithme of
2 be subtracted from the Logarithme of 10, there will remain the Logarithme of
5, as here is to be seen. 10. 1.000000 2. 0.301030 5. 0.698970

For seeing that the quotient multiplied by the divisor produces the dividend,
therefore, by the last proposition, the sum of the Logarithmes of the quotient
and of the divisor is equal to the Logarithme of the divi^^^ if therefore the
Logarithme of the divid^^ol, be subtracted from the Logarithme of the divi^^^
there remains the Logarithme of the quotient.

12.. In any continued rank of numbers Geometrically proportional from 1, the
Logarithme of any one of them being divided by the denomination of the power
which it challenges in the same rank, the quotient will give you the
Logarithme of the root. In the rank of the proportional numbers of the Table
ABCD, 2 being the root, or first power; 4 the square or second power, 8 the
cube, or third power, 16 the bi-quadrate or fourth, 32 the fifth power, 64* the
sixth power, etc. I say, the Logarithme of 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or of any of the
other subsequent proportionals in that rank, being divided by the demonination
of the power that the same proportional claims in the same rank, you shall
find in the quotient the Logarithme of 2 the root.

For example.

In the same Table the Logarithme of 4. the square or second power, viz. 3.
being given, I demand the Logarithme of 2, the root: here the denomination of
the power that the proportional 4 challenges in that rank (being the square or
second power) is 2, wherefore if 3, the Logarithme of 4 be divided by 2, the
quotient will be 1, and there will remain 1 for a fraction; so that you see it
comes very near in the Logarithmes of but one figure, but if you take it to
seven places, as in this table is intended, you shall find it exactly: for
then the Logarithme of 4 will be 0.602060, and this being divided by 2, the
quotient will be 0.301030, the Logarithme of 2 the root. So likewise 0.903090,
the Logarithme of 8 the third power, being divided by 3, leaves 0.301030 in the
quotient, as before, and so of any other.

13.. In any rank of numbers Geometrically proportional from 1, the Logarithme
of the root being multiplied by the denomination of any of the powers, the
product is the Logarithme of the same power.

This Rule is the inverse of the last.

For example.

In the rank produced in the last rule 0.301030, (the Logarithme of 2 the root)
being doubled, or multiplied by 2, produces 0.602060, the Logarithme of 4, the
square or second power, and the same Logarithme of 0.301030, being trebled or
multiplied by 3, produces 0.903090, the Logarithme of 8, the cube or third
power, and so of the rest.

The truth of these two last rules may thus be proved. In arithmeticall
proportion, when the first term is the common difference of the terms, the last
term being divided by the number of the terms, the quotient will give you the
first term of the rank: again, in this case, the first term multiplied by the
number of the terms produces the last term. So this rank 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18,
21 being propounded, wherein three is both the first term and also the common
difference of the terms: I say, 21, the last term being divided by 7, the
number of the terms, the quotient is 3, the first term. Contrariwise, 3 the
first term multiplied by 7, produces 21, the last term; and by the like
reason, 0.301030 being the first term, and also the common difference of the
terms, that is, of the Logarithmes of 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64, the Logarithme of 2
the first term, being multiplied by 6, the number of the terms, produces the
Logarithme of 64, the last term, and the garithme of 64, the last term, being
divided by 6, leaves in the quotient the Logarithme of 2 the root.

Hence it also follows, that if you add the Logarithme of 2, the common
difference of the terms, to the Logarithme of any term, their aggregate shall
be the Logarithme of the next term. Thus if I add 0.301030, the Logarithme of
2 the root or first term, to 0.903090, the Logarithme of 8, the third term,
their aggregate is 1.204120, the Logarithme of 16, the fourth term; and so of
the rest.

14.. Thus having showed the construction of the Logarithmetical Tables, the
converting of the Table of natural Sines, Tangents, and Secants into
artificial cannot be difficult, the artificial Sines and Tangents being
nothing but the Logarithmes of the natural.

15.. In the conversion whereof Mr. Briggs in his Trigonometria Britannica,
thought fit to make the Radius of his natural Canon to consist of 16 places,
and to confine his artificial to the Radius of eleven, whose Characteristick
is 10, but the Characteristick of the rest of the Sines till you come to the
sine of 5 degrees and 73 centesmes is 9, and from thence to 57 centesmes, the
Characteristick is 8, and from thence 7, till you come to 5 centensmes, and
from thence but 6, to the beginning of the Canon. The Characteristick still
decreasing in the same proportion with the natural numbers, and the number of
the places in the natural Canon, do therefore exceed the Characteristick in
the artificial, that so the artificial numbers might be the more exact.

16.. In the Canon herewith printed, the Characteristick in the artificial
numbers does exceed the number of places in the natural, which is not done so
much out of necessity as convenience, for the artificial numbers in this Canon
might in all respects have been made answerable to the natural, and so the
Characteristick of the Radius, or whole Sine would have been seven, the
Characterick of the first minute 3, but thus the subduction of the Radius would
not have been so ready as now it is, nor yet the Canon it self altogether so
exact, and therefore as Master Briggs confined the Radius of his artificial
Canon to eleven places for convenience sake, though he made the Logarithmes to
the Radius of sixteen: so here for convenience and exactness both, the same
Characterick is here continued, though the natural numbers do not require it,
if any think this a defect, I answer, that it could not well be avoided here,
but may be supplied by Master Briggs his Canon, of which this is an
abbreviation: and yet even here there is so small a difference between the
Logarithmes of these natural numbers, and the Logarithmes in the Canon, that
any one may well perceive the one to be nothing else but the Logarithme of the
other, if they do but change the Characteristick.

And hence we may gather, that the making of this Canon is not so difficult as
laborious, and the labor thereof may be much abridged by this Proposition
following. 17.. The Sine of an arch and half the Radius are mean proportionals
between the Sine of half that arch, and the Sine complement of the same half.

In the annexed Diagram, let DE be the sine of 56 degrees, BC the sine of 28,
AC the sine complement thereof, that is, of 62. DB the subtense of 56. CF
perpendicular to the Radius, then are ABC and ACF like triangles, by the 22 of
the second, and their sides proportional that is, AB AB BC AO AC DE CF CF



And therefore the oblongs of BCxAC, AO x DE, and AB x CF are equal, and the
sides of equal rectangled figures reciprocally proportional, that is, as BC, AO
DE, AC. or as AO, BC AC, DE.

If therefore you multiply AO, the half Radius, by DE, the sine of the arch
given, and divide the product by BC, the sine of half the arch given, the
quotient shall be AC, the sine complement of half the given arch.

Or if you multiply BC, the sine of an arch by AC, the sine complement of the
same arch, and divide the product by AO, the half Radius, the quotient shall be
DE, the sine of the double arch. And therefore the sines of 45 degrees being
given, or the Logarithmes of those sines, the rest may be found by the rule of
proportion. For illustration sake we will add an example in natural and
artificial numbers.

Natural, As BC 28, 46947 Is to AO 30; 50000 So is DE 56, 82903 To AC 62: 88294

Logarith. As BC 28, 9.671609 Is to AO 30; 9.698970 So is DE 56, 9.918574 To AC
62. 9.945935

18.. The composition of the natural Tangents and Secants, by the first and
second of the fourth are thus to be made.

1. As the sine of the complement, is to the sine of an arch: So is the Radius,
to the tangent of that arch.

2. As the sine of the complement, is to the Radius: so is the Radius, to the
Secant of that arch; and by the same rules may be also made the artificial;
but with more ease, as by example it will appear.

Let the tangent of 30 degrees be sought. Logarith. As the cosine of 60
degrees, 9.937531 Is to the sine of 30; 9.698970 So is the Radius, 10.000000 To
the tangent of 30: 9.761439

And thus having made the artificial Tangents of 45 degrees, the other 45 are
but the arithmeticall complements of the former, taken as has been showed in
the eighth rule of the fifth Chapter.

Again, let the secant of 30 degrees be sought. As the cosine of 60 degrees,
9.937531 Is to the Radius, 10.000000 So is the Radius, 10.000000 20.000000 To
the secant of 30: 10.062469

And thus the Radius being added to the arithmetical complement of the sine of
an arch, their aggregate is the secant of the complement of that arch. And this
is sufficient for the construction of the natural and artificial Canon. How
to find the Sine, Tangent or Secant of any arch given in the Canon herewith
printed, shall be shown in the Preface thereunto: here follows the use of
the natural and artificial numbers both; first, in the resolving any
Triangle, and then in Astronomy, Dialling, and Navigation.

CHAP. VI.
The use of the Tables of natural and artificial Sines, and Tangents, and the
Table of Logarithmes.
In the Dimension
I. Of plain right angled Triangles.
THe measuring or resolving of Triangles is the finding out of the unknown
sides or angles thereof by three things known, whether angles, or sides, or
both; and this by the help of that precious gemme in Arithmetic, for the
excellency thereof called the Golden Rule, (which teaches of four numbers
proportional one to another, any three of them being given, to find out a
fourth) and also of these Tables aforesaid.

Of Triangles, as has been said, there are two sorts; plain and sphericall. A
triangle upon a plain is right lined, upon the Sphere circular. Right lined
Triangles are right angled or oblique.

A right angled, right-lined Triangle we speak of first, whose sides then
related to a circle are inscribed totally or partially.

Totally, if the side subtending the right angle be made the Radius of a
Circle, and then all the sides are called Sines, as in the Triangle ABC.



Partially, if either of the sides adjacent to the right angle be made the
Radius of a circle, and then one side of the Triangle is the Radius or whole
Sine, the shorter of the other two sides is a Tangent, and the longest a
secant. Now according as the right angled Triangle is supposed, whether to be
totally or but partially inscribed in a circle; so is the trouble of finding
the parts unknown more or less, whether sides or angles; for if the triangle
be supposed to be totally inscribed in a circle, we are in the solution thereof
confined to the Table of Sines only, because all the sides of such a triangle
are sines: but if the triangle be supposed to be but partially inscribed in a
circle, we are left at liberty to use the Table of Sines, Tangents, or Secants,
as we shall find to be most convenient for the work.

In a right angled plain Triangle, either all the angles with one side are
given, and the other two sides are demanded, I say, all the angles, because one
of the acute angles being given, the other is given also by con^^quence.

Or else two sides with one angle, that is, the right angle are given and the
other two angles with the third side are demanded. In both which cases this
Axiom following is well nigh sufficient.

The first AXIOM.

In all plain Triangles, the sides are in portion one to another, as are the
sines o^ the angles opposite to those sides.

As in the triangle ABC, the side AB is in proportion to the side AC, as the
sine of the angle at B is in proportion to the sine of the angle at c and so of
the rest.



Demonstration.

The circle ADF being circumscribed about the Triangle ABC, the side AB is made
the chord or subtense of the angle ACB, that is, of the arch AB, which is
opposite to the angle ACB. The side AC is made the subtense of the angle ABC;
and the side BC is made the subtense of the angle BAC, and are the double
measures thereof, by the 19 Theorem of the second Chapter: therefore the side
AB is in proportion to the side AC, as the subtense of the angle ACB is in
proportion to the subtense of the angle ABC, but half the subtense of the angle
ACB is the sine of the angle ACB, and half the subtense of the angle ABC is the
sine of the angle ABC; now as the whole is to the whole; so is the half, to the
half. Therefore in all plain Triangles, etc.

The first Consectary.

The angles of a plain triangle, and one side being given, the reason of the
other sides is also given.

The second Consectary.

Two sides of a plain Triangle, with an angle opposite to one of them being
given, the reason of the other angles is also given, by this proportion.

If the side of a Triangle be required, put the angle opposite to the given
side in the first place.

If an angle be sought, put the side opposite to the given angle in the first
place.

For the better understanding whereof we will add an example, and to
distinguish the sides of the Triangle, we call the side subtending the right
angle, the Hypothenusall, and of the other two the one is called the
perpendicular, and the other the base, at pleasure, but most commonly the
shortest is called the perpendicular, and the longer the base. As in the former
figure, the side BC is the Hypothenusal, AC the base, and AB the perpendicular.

Now then in the Triangle ABC, let there be given the base AC 768 paces, and
the angle CBA 67 degrees, 40 minutes, (then the angle ACB is also known, it
being the complement of the other) and let there be required the perpendicular:
because it is a side that is required, I put the angle opposite to the given
side in the first place, and then the proportion is:

As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular, is in proportion to the base:
So is the sine of the angle at the base, to the perpendicular.

Now if you work by the natural Sines, you must multiply the second term given,
by the third, and divide the product by the first, and then the quotient is the
fourth term required, and the whole work will stand thus: As sine the ang. at
the perpend. ABC 67 degrees 40 minutes 9232102 Is in proportion to the base AC;
768 So is sine the angle at the base, ACB 22 degrees 60 minutes 3842953
30743624 23057718 26900671 The product of the 2d. and 3d. 2951387904Which
divided by 9232102, the first term given, leaves in the quotient 320 fere.

But if you work by the artificial sines, that is, by the Logarithmes of the
natural, then you must add together the Logarithmes of the second and third
terms; given, and from their aggregate substract the Logarithme of the first,
and what remains will be the Logarithme of the fourth proportional, whether
side or angle: the work stands thus. As sine the angle at the perpendicular B
67 degrees. 40 min. 9.9653006 Is in proportion to the base AB 768; 2.8853612 So is
sine the angle at the base C 22 degree, 60 minutes. 9.5846651 The aggregate of
the 2d. and 3d. 12.4700263From which I substract the first, 9.9653006, and the
remainer which is 2.5047257, is the Logarithme of the fourth: wherefore looking
in the Table for the absolute number answering thereunto, I find the nearest
to be 320, which is the length of the perpendicular, as before.

The operation it self may yet be performed with more ease, if instead of the
Logarithme of the first proportional, we take his complement arithmetical, as
has been showed in the eighth rail of the fifth Chapter: for then the total
of the arithmaticall complement, and the Logarithme of the second and third
proportionals, abating Radius, is the Logarithme of the fourth proportional,
as does appear in this example. As sine of ABC 67 de. 40m. co. ar. 0.0346994 To
the base AC 768; 2.8853612 So the sine of ACB 22 de. 60m. 9.5846651 To the
perpendic. AB 320 fere 2.5047257

Thus having sufficiently explained the operation in this first example, we
shall be briefer in the rest that follow, understanding the like in them also.

In this manner may all the cases of a plain right angled Triangle be resolved
by this proportion, except it be when the base and perpendicular with their
contained angle (that is the right angle) is given, to find either an angle or
the third side; in this case therefore we must have recourse to the 17 th.
Theorem of the second Chapter, by help whereof the Hypothenusall may be found
in this manner: square the sides, and from the aggregate of their squares
extract the square root, that square root shall be the length of the
Hypothenusal. For example. Let the base be four paces, and the perpendicular 3,
the square of the base is 16, the square of the perpendicular is 9, the sum
of these two squares is 25, the square root of this sum is 5 paces, and that
is the length of the hypo^enusal; and this hypothenusal being thus found, the
angles also may be ^ound, as before.

Nor are we tied to this way of finding the hypothenusal, unless we confine
our selves to the Tables of Sines only; if we would make use of the Tables of
Tangents or Secants, the hypothenusal may not only be found with more ease,
but all the cases of a right angled plain triangle may be also found several
ways, by the help of this Axiom following.

The second AXIOM.

In a plain right angled triangle, any of the three sides may be made the
Radius of a circle, and the other sides will be as Sines, Tangents, or Secants.
And what proportion the side put as Radius has unto Radius; the same
proportion has the other sides unto the Sines, Tangents, or Secants of the
opposite angles by them represented.

If you make the hypothenusal Radius, the triangle will be totally inscribed in
the circle, and consequently the other two sides shall represent the sines of
their opposite angles, that is, the base shall represent the sine of the angle
at the perpendicular, and the perpendicular shall represent the sine of the
angle at the base, as in the preceding Diagram.

If you make the base Radius, the triangle will be but partially inscribed in
the circle, and the other two sides shall be one of them a tangent, and the
other a secant. Thus in the first Diagram of this Chapter, the base BD is made
the Radius of the circle, the perpendicular D^ is the tangent of the angle at
the base, and B^ is the secant of the same angle.

If you make the perpendicular Radius, the triangle will be but partially
inscribed in the circle, as before, and the other two sides will be also the
one a tangent and the other a secant. As in this example, the perpendicular AB
is made the Radius of the circle, the base AC is the tangent of the angle at
the perpendicular, and the hypothenusal BC is the secant of the same angle.



Hence it follows, that if you make AB the Radius, the base and perpendicular
being given, the angle at the perpendicular may be found by this proportion.

As the perpendicular, is in proportion to Radius: So is the base, to tang^nt
of the angle at the perpendicular; for the perpendicular being made the Radius
of the circle, it must of necessity bear the same proportion unto Radius, as
the hypothenusal does, when that is made the Radius of the circle: and if the
perpendicular be the Radius, the base must needs represent the tangent of the
angle at the perpendicular.

And the angle at the perpendicular bebeing thus found, the hypothenusal may be
found by the first Axiom. For,

As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular, is in proportion to his
opposite side the base; So is Radius, to his opposite side the hypothenusal:
and thus you see that the hypothenusal may be found without the trouble of
squaring the sides, and thence extracting the square root. And hence also all
the cases of a right angled plain triangle may be resolved several ways: that
is to say,

1. In a plain right angled triangle: the angles and one side being given,
every of the other sides is given, by a threefold proportion, that is, as you
shall put for the Radius, either the side subtending the right angle, or the
greater or lesser side including the right angle.

2. Any of the two sides being given, either of the acute angles is given by a
double proportion, that is, as you shall put either this or that side for the
Radius: to make this clear, we will first set down the grounds or reasons for
varying of the terms of proportion: and then the proportions themselves in
every case, according to all the variations.

The reasons for varying of the terms of proportion are chiefly three.

The first reason is, because the Radius of a circle does bear a threefold
proportion to a sine, tangent, or secant; and contrariwise, a sine, tangent, or
secant has a threefold proportion to Radius, by the second Axiom of this
Chapter.



For As sine BC, to Rad. AC in the 1. triangle So Rad. BC, to secant AC in the
3d. tri. So tang. BC, to secant AC in the 2d. tri. and contra


Again, As tang. BC, to Rad. AB in the 2d. triang. So Rad. BC, to tang. AB in
the 3d. trian. So sine BC, to sine BA in the first triang. and contra


Lastly, As secant AC, to Rad. BC in the 3d. tri. So Rad. AC, to sine BC in the
first trian So secant AC, to tang. BC in the 2d. tri. and contra


Hence then As the sine of an arch or ang. is to Rad. So Rad. to the secant
comp. of that arch and so is the tang. of that arch, to his sec. and contr.


Also As the tang. of an arch or ang. is to Rad. So is Rad. to the tangent
compl. thereof. And so is the sine thereof, to the sine of its complement. and
contra.


Lastly, As the secant of an arch or ang. to Rad. So is Radius, to the sine
compl. thereof And so is secant complement to tangent complement thereof. and
contra.


Example.

Let there be given the angle at the perpendicular 41 degrees 60 minutes, and
the base 768 paces, to find the perpendicular.

First, by the natural numbers, As the secant of BAC 41 d. 60m. 13372593 Is to
Radius, 10000000 So is the base AB 768 To the perpendicular BC ^74 574

By the Artificial. As the secant of BAC 41.60. 10.1262157 Is to Radius;
10.0000000 So is the base 768, 2.8853612 12.8853612 To the perpendicular 574:
2.7591455

Secondly, by the natural numbers. As the Radius, 10000000 To the cosine of
BAC 41.60. 7477981 So is the base AB 768 To the perpendicular BC 574

By the Artificial. As the Radius 10.0000000 To the cosine of BAC 41.60.
9.8737843 So is the base AB 768, 2.8853612 To the perpendicular BC 574:
2.7591455

Thirdly, by the natural numbers. As the co-secant of BAC 41.60. 15061915 Is to
the co-tang. of BAC 41.60. 11263271 So is the base AB 768 To the perpendicular
BC 574

By the artificial. As the co-secant of BAC 41.60. 10. 1778802 Is to the
co-tang. of BAC 41.60 10.0516645 So is the base AB 768 2.8853612 To the
perpendicular BC 574 2.7591455

COROLLARY.

Hence it is evident, that Radius is a mean proportional between the sine of an
arch, and the secant complement of the same arch; also between the tangent of
an arch, and the tangent of the complement of the same arch.

The second Reason.

The sines of several arches, and the secants of their complements are
reciprocally proportional, that is,

As the sine of an arch or angle, is to the sine of another arch or angle: So
is the secant of the complement of that other, to the co-secant of the former.

For by the foregoing Corollary, Radius is the mean proportional between the
sine of any arch and the co-secant of the same arch.

Therefore, whatsoever sine is multiplied by the secant of the complement, is
equal to the square of Radius; so that all rectangles made of the sines of
arches and of the secants of their complements are equal one to another; but
equal rectangles have their sides reciprocally pro portional, by the tenth
Theorem of the second Chapter. Therefore the sines of several arches, etc.

The third Reason.

The tangents of several arches, and the tangents of their complements are
reciprocally proportional, that is,

As the tangent of an arch or angle, is to the tangent of another arch or
angle, so is the co-tangent of that other, to the cotangent of the former.

For by the foregoing Corollary, Radius is the mean proportional between the
tangent of every arch and the tangent of his complement.

Therefore the Rectangle made of any tangent, and of the tangent of his
complement, is equal to the square of Radius: so that all rectangles made of
the tangents of arches, and of the tangents of their complements are equal one
to another, but equal rectangles, etc. as before.

To these three reasons a fourth may be added. For in the rule of proportion;
wherein there are always four terms, three given, the fourth demanded: It is
all one, whether of the two middle terms is put in the second or third place.

For it is all one, whether I shall say;

As 2, to 4; so 5, to 10: or say, as 2, to 5; so 4, to 10: and from hence every
example in any triangle may be varied, and thus you see the reasons of varying
the terms of proportion, we come now to show you the various proportions
themselves of the several Cases in right angled plain triangles.

Right angled plain triangles may be distinguished into seven Cases; whereof
those in which a side is required, viz. three, may be found by a triple
proportion; and those in which an angle is required, viz. three, may be found
by a double proportion.

CASE 1.
The angles and base given, to find the perpendicular.
First, As sine the angle at the perpendicular, is to the base: so is sine the
angle at the base, to the perpendicular.

Or secondly, thus: As Radius, to the base; so tangent the angle at the base,
to the perpendicular.

Or thirdly, thus: As the tangent of the angle at the perpendicular, is to the
base: so is Radius, to the perpendicular.

CASE 2.
The angles and base given, to find the hypothenusal.
First, As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular, is to the base; so is
Radius, to the hypothenusal.

Or secondly thus: As Radius, is to the base; so the secant of the angle at the
base, to the hypothenusal.

Or thirdly, thus: As the tangent of the angle at the perpendicular, is to the
base: so is the secant of the same angle in proportion to the hypothenusal.

CASE 3.
The angles and hypothenusal given, to find the base.
First, As Radius, to the hypothenusal: so the sine of the angle at the
perpendicular, to the base. Or secondly, thus:

As the secant of the angle at the base, to the hypothenusal: so is Radius, to
the base.

Or thirdly, thus: As the secant of the angle at the perpendicular, to the
hypothenusal: so the tangent of the same angle, to the base.

CASE 4.
The base and perpendicular given, to find an angle.
First, As the base, to Radius: so the perpendicular, to the tangent of the
angle at the base. Or secondly, thus:

As the perpendicular, is to Radius: so the base, to the tangent of the angle
at the perpendicular.

CASE 5.
The base and hypothenusal given, to find an angle.
1. As the hypothenusal, is to Radius: so is the base, to the sine of the angle
at the perpendicular.

Or secondly thus, As the base is to Radius; so is the hypothenusal, to the
secant of the angle at the base.

CASE 6.
The base and perpendicular given, to find the hypothenusal.
First, find the angle at the perpendicular, by the fourth Case: Then,

As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular, is to the base: so is Radius,
to the hypothenusal.

Otherwise by the Logarithmes of absolute numbers.

From the doubled Logarithme of the greater side, whether base or
perpendicular, substract the Logarithme of the less, and to the absolute
number answering to the difference of the Logarithmes add the less, the half
sum of the Logarithmes of the sum, and the less side, is the Logarithme of
the hypothenusal inquired.

The Illustration Arithmetical.

Let the base be 768, and the perpendicular 320. The Logarithme of 768 is
2.8853612 This Logarithme doubled is 5.7707224 From which substr. the Log. of
320, 2.5051500 The remain. is the Log. of 1843: 3.2655724To which the lesser
side being added 320, their aggregate is 2163. The Logarithme of 2163 is
3.3350565 The Logarithme of 320 is 2.5051500 The sum is 5.8402065 The half
sum is the Log. of 832. 2.9201032which is the length of the hypothenusal
inquired.

CASE 7.
The base and hypothenusal given, to find the perpendicular.
The resolve this Problem by the Canon, there is required a double operation:
First, by the 5 Case, find an angle. Secondly, by the first Case, find the
perpendicular.

But Mr. Briggs resolves this Case more readily, by the Logarithmes of the
absolute numbers, Briggs Arithmetica Logarith. cap. 17.

Take the Logarithmes of the sum and difference of the hypothenusal and side
given, half the sum of those two Logarithmes, is the Logarithme of the
perpendicular, or side inquired.

As let the hypothen. be 832 The side given 768 Logarith. The sum is 1600
3.2041200 The difference is 64 1.8061800 The sum is, 5.0103000 The half sum
is the Logarith. of 320 the side inquired. 2.5051500

The two Axioms following are true in all plain triangles, but are chiefly
intended for the oblique angled; which now we come to handle.

II. Of plain oblique angled Triangles.
In a plain oblique angled triangle, there are four varieties.

1. All the angles may be given, (for when two are given, the third is given by
consequence) and one side, and the other two sides demanded.

2. Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them may be given, and the angle
opposite to the other, with the third side are demanded. In both which cases
the first Axiom is fully sufficient.

3. Two sides with an angle comprehended by them may be given, and the other
two angles with the third side demanded. For the solution whereof we will lay
down this Axiom following.

The third AXIOM.

As the sum of the two sides, is to their difference: so is the tangent of
half the sum of the opposite angles, to the tangent of half the difference.

Let ABC be the oblique angled triangle, in which let the side AB be continued
to H, and let the line of continuation BH be made equal to BC, and BK equal to
AB; then is AH the sum of the sides, AB, BC, and KH is their difference, now
if you draw the lines BD and KG parallel unto AC, then shall the angle CBH be
equal to the two angles of the triangle given ACB and CAB, because the angle
CBA common to both is their complement to a Semicircle, and DB being parallel
to CA, the angle DBH shall be equal to the angle CAB, and the angle DBC equal
to the angle ACB, if therefore you let fall the perpendicular BE, and draw the
periphery MEL, the right line CE shall be the tangent of half the sum of the
angles ACB and CAB, it being the tangent of half the angle CBH.



Again, if you make E^ equal to DE, and draw the right line FB, then shall the
angle DBF be the difference between the angles CBD and DBH, or between the
angles ACB and CAB, and DE the tangent of half the difference. And because the
right sines AC, DB, and KG are parallel, and CD, DG, and FH are equal, and DF
equal to GH, and the triangles ACH and KGH are like, and therefore; As AH is in
proportion to HK: so is CH, to HG: or as AH, the sum of the sides, is in
proportion to HK, their difference: so is CE the tangent of the half sum of
the angles ACB and CAB, to DE, the tangent of half their difference.

Consectary.

Hence it follows, that in a plain oblique angled Triangle; if two sides and
the angle comprehended by them be given, the other two angles and the third
side are also given.

As in the triangle ABC, having the sides AC 189, and AB 156, whose sum is
345, and difference 33, with the angle BAC 22 degrees, 60 minutes, to find the
angle ABC or ACB. The proportion is As the sum of the sides given 345,
2.5378190 Is to their difference 33, 1.5185139 So the tangent of half the
angles at B and C 78de. 70m. 10.6993616 To the tangent of half their difference
25 degr. 58 minutes 9.6800565

Which being added to the half sum 78 degrees, 70 minutes, the obtuse angle at
B, is 104 degrees, 28 minutes; and subtracted from the half sum, it leaves
53 degrees, 12 minutes for the quantity of the acute angle ACB.

Then to find the third side BC, the proportion, by the first Axiom, is,

As the sine of the angle at ^, is in proportion to his opposite side AB; so is
the sine of the angle at A, to his opposite side BC.

4. And lastly, all the three sides may be given, and the angles may be
demanded; for the solution whereof we will lay down this Axiom.

The fourth AXIOM.

As the base, is to the sum of the sides: So is the difference of the sides,
to the difference of the segments of the base.

Let BCD be the triangle, CD the base, BD the shortest side; upon the point B
describe the circle ADFH, making BD the Radius thereof, let the side BC be
produced to A, then is CA the sum of the sides, because BA and BD are equal,
by the work, CH is the difference of the sides, CF the difference of the
segments of the base.



Now if you draw the right lines AF and HD, the triangles CHD and CAF shall be
equiangled, because of their common angle ACF or HCD, and their equal angles
CAF and HDC, which are equal, because the arch HF is the double measure to
them both; and therefore, as CD, to CA; so is CH, to CF, which was to be proved.

Consectary.

Therefore the three sides of a plain oblique angled triangle being given, the
reason of the angles is also given.

For first, the obliquangled triangle may be resolved into two right angled
triangles, by this Axiom, and then the right angled triangles may be resolved
by the first Axiom.

As in the plain oblique angled triangle, BCD, let the three sides be given, BD
189 paces, BC 156 paces, and DC 75 paces, and let the angle CBA be required.

First, by this Axiom, I resolve it into two right angled triangles; thus: As
the true base BD 189 co. ar. 7.7235382 Is to the sum of BC and DC 231 2.3636120
So the difference of BC and DC 81 1.9084850 To the alternate base BG 99
1.9956352

Having thus the true and the alternate base, substract the lesser 99 from the
greater 189, and there rests 90, and in the middle of this remainer, that is,
at 45 paces, let fall the perpendicular AC. Then in the right angled triangle
ABC, we have known the base AB, viz. the sum of the alternate base B^ 99, and
the half sum of GD, that is, the length of GA 45, which added together is
144, and the hypothenusal BC 156, hence to find the angle at B, by the fifth
Case of right angled Triangles, I say.

As the the hypothenusal BC, is to Radius: So is the base AB 144, to the sine
of the angle at the perpendicular, whose complement is the angle at the base
inquired.

In like manner may be found the angle at D, and then the angle BCD is found by
consequence, being the complement of the other two to two right angles or 180
degrees.

CHAP. VII.
Of Sphericall Triangles.
A Sphericall Triangle is a figure described upon a Sphericall or round
superficies, consisting of three arches of the greatest circles that can be
described upon it, every one being less then a Semicircle.

2. The greatest circles of a round or Spherical superficies are those which
divide the whole Sphere equally into two Hemispheres, and are every where
distant from their own centers by a Quadrant, or fourth part of a great circle.

3. A great circle of the Sphere passing through the poles or centers of
another great circle, cut one another at right angles.

4. A spherical angle is measured by the arch of a great circle described from
the angular point betwixt the sides of the triangle, those sides being
continued to quadrants.

5. The sides of a Spherical triangle may be turned into angles, and the angles
into sides, the complements of the greatest side or greatest angle to a
Semicircle, being taken in each conversion.

It will be necessary to demonstrate this, which is of so frequent use in
Trigonometry. In the annexed Diagram let ABC be a sphericall triangle, obtuse
angled at B, let DE be the measure of the angle at A. Let FG be the measure of
the acute angle at B, (which is the complement of the obtuse angle B, being the
greatest angle in the given triangle) and let HI be the measure of the angle at
C, KL is equal to the arch DE, because KD and LE are Quadrants, and their
common complement is LD. LM is equal to the arch FG, because LG and FM are
Quadrants, and their common complement is LF. KM is equal to the arch HI,
because KI and MH are Quadrants, and their common complement is KH. Therefore
the sides of the triangle KLM are equal to the angles of the triangle ABC,
taking for the greatest angle ABC, the complement thereof FBG.



And by the like reason it may be demonstrated, that the sides of the triangle
ABC are equal to the angles of the triangle KLM. For the side AC is equal to
the arch DI, being the measure of the angle DKI, which is the complement of the
obtuse angle MKL. The side AB is equal to the arch OP, being the measure of
the angle MLK. And lastly, the side BC is equal to the arch FH, being the
measure of the angle LMK, for AD and CI are Quadrants: so are AP and OB, BF and
CHAPTER And CD, AO, and CF are the common complements of two of those arches.
Therefore the sides of a spherical triangle may be changed into angles, and the
angles into sides, which was to be demonstrated.

6. The three sides of any spherical triangle are less then two Semicircles.

7. The three angles of a spherical triangle are greater then two right angles,
and therefore two angles being known, the third is not known by consequence, as
in plain triangles.

8. If a spherical triangle have one or more right angles, it is called a right
angled spherical triangle.

9. If a spherical triangle have one or more of his sides quadrants, it is
called a quadrantal triangle.

10. If it have neither right angle, nor any side a quadrant, it is called an
oblique spherical triangle.

11. Two oblique angles of a spherical triangle are either of them of the same
kind of which their opposite sides are.

12. If any angle of a triangle be nearer to a quadrant then his opposite side:
two sides of that triangle shall be of one kind, and the third less then a
quadrant.

13. But if any side of a triangle be nearer to a quadrant then his opposite
angle, two angles of that triangle shall be of one kind, and the third greater
then a quadrant.

14. If a spherical triangle be both right angled and quadrantal, the sides
thereof are equal to the opposite angles.

For if it have three right angles, the three sides are quadrants, if it have
two right angles, the two sides subtending them are quadrants; if it have one
right angle, and one side a quadrant, it has two right angles and two
quadrantal sides, as is evident by the third Proposition. But if two sides be
quadrants, the third measures their contained angle, by the fourth
proposition. Therefore for the solution of these kinds of triangles, there
needs no further rule: But for the solution of right angled, quadrantall, and
oblique spherical triangles there are other affections proper to them, which
are necessary to be known as well as these general affections common to all
spherical triangles. The affections proper to right angled and quadrantal
triangles we will speak of first.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the affections of right angled Sphericall Triangles.
IN all spherical rectangled Triangles, having the same acute angle at the
base: The sines of the hypothenusals are proportional to the sines of their
perpe^diculars. As in the annexed diagram, let ADB represent a spherical
triangle, right angled at B: so that AD is the sine of the hypothenusal, AB the
sine of the base, and DB is the perpendicular. Then is DAB the angle at the
base, and IH the sine, and LM the tangent thereof: Also DF is the sine of the
perpendicular DB, and KB is the tangent thereof: I say then, As AD, is to FD:
So is AI, to IH, by the 16 th. Theoreme of the second Chapter.

And because it is all one, whether of the mean proportionals be put in the
second place; therefore I may say: As AD, the sine of the hypothenusal, is in
proportion to AI Radius: So is FD, the sine of the perpendicular, to IH the
sine of the angle at the base.



2. In all rectangled spherical triangles, having the same acute angle at the
base. The sines of the bases, and the tangents of the perpendiculars are
proportional.

For as AB, to KB; so is AM, to ML, by the 16 th. Theorem of the second
Chapter: or which is all one; As AB, the sine of the base, is in proportion to
AM Radius: so is BK, the tangent of the perpendicular, to ML, the tangent of
the angle at the base.

3. If ^ circles of the Sphere be so ordered, that the first intersect the
second, the second the third, the third the fourth, the fourth the fifth, and
the fifth the fifth at right angles: the right angled triangles made by their
intersections do all consist of the same circular parts.

As in this Scheme, let IGAB be the first circle, BLF the second, FEC the
third, GAD the fourth, HLEI the fifth.



Then do these five circles retain the conditions required. The first
intersecting the second in B, the second the third in F, the third the fourth
in C, the fourth the fifth in H, the fifth the angle, we mark or note
intersections at B, F, ^ to a quadrant. As angles; therefore I say^nt as the
completriangles made by the inte^^or AD we write circles; namely, ABD, D^ write
compl. EGI, and GCA do all co^^d AB besame circular parts; for the circu^^^
(...) in every of these triangles are, as h^^d by peareth.

In ABD are AB BD c BDA c AD c DA^ DHL c HLD c LD c LDH DH HL LFE co^ ELF LF FE
co^ FELL c EL EGI IG co^ IGE c GE co^ GEI IE GCA c GA c AGC GC CA c CAG

Where you may observe, that the side AB in the first triangle is equal to
compl. HLD in the second, or compl. ELF in the third, or IG in the fourth, or
com. GA in the fifth; and so of the rest.

To express this more plainly, AB in the first triangle is the complement of
the angle HLD in the second, or the complement of the angle ELF in the third,
or the side IG in the fourth, or the complement of the hypothenusal GA in the
fifth. And from these premises is deduced this universal proposition.

4. The sine of the middle part and Radius are reciprocally proportional, with
the tangents of the extremes conjunct, and with the co-sines of the extremes
disjunct.

Namely; As the Radius, to the tangent of one of the extremes conjoined: so is
tangent of the other extreme conjoined, to the sine of the middle part.

And also; As the Radius, to the cosine of one of the extremes dis-joyned: so
the cosine of the other extreme dis-joyned, to the sine of the middle part.

Therefore if the middle part be sought, the Radius must be in the first place,
if either of the extremes; the other extreme must be in the first place.

For the better Demonstration hereof, it is first to be understood, that a
right angled Spherical Triangle has five parts besides the right angle. As the
triangle ABD in the former Diagram, right angled at B, has first, the side AB:
secondly, the angle at A: thirdly, the hypothenusal AD: fourthly, the angle
ADB: fifthly, the side DB. Three of these parts which are farthest from the
right angle, we mark or no^e by their complements to a quadrant. As the angle
BAD we account as the complement to the same angle. For AD we write comp. AD,
and for ADB we write compl. ADB. But the two sides DB and AB being next to the
right angle, (...) are not noted by their complements. Of these five parts, two
are always given to find a third, and of these three one is in the middle,
and the other two are extremes either adjacent to that middle one, or opposite
to it. If the parts given and required are all conjoined together, the middle
is the middle part conjunct, and the extremes the extreme parts conjunct. If
again any of the parts given or required be dis-joyned, that which stands by it
self is the middle part dis-joyned, and the extremes are extreme parts
dis-joyned. Thus, if there were given in the triangle ABD, the side AB, the
angle at A, to find the hypothenusal AD, there the angle at A is in the
middle, and the sides AD and AB are adjacent to it; and therefore the middle
part is called the middle conjunct, and the extremes are the extremes
conjunct; but if there were given the side AB, the hypothenusal AD, to find
the angle at D, here AB is the middle part dis-junct, because it is dis-joyned
from the side AD by the angle at A, and from the angle at D by the side DB, for
the right angle is not reckoned among the circular parts, and here the extremes
are extremes dis-junct.

These things premised, we come now to demonstrate the proposition it self,
consisting of two parts: first, we will prove, that the sine of the middle part
and Radius are proportional with the tangents of the extremes conjunct.

The middle part is either one of the sides, or one of the oblique angles, or
the hypothenusal.

CASE 1.

Let the middle part be a side, as in the right angled spherical triangle ABD
of the last diagram, let the perpendicular AB be the middle part, the base DB
and comp. A the extreme conjunct, then I say, that the rectangle of the sine
of AB and Radius is equal to the rectangle of the tangent of DB, and the
tangent of the complement of DAB: for, by the second proposition of this
Chapter, As the sine of AB, is in proportion to Radius: so is the tangent of
DB, to the tangent of the angle at A. Therefore if you put the third term in
the second place, it will be, as the sine of AB, to the tangent of DB: so is
the Radius, to the tangent of the angle at A. But Radius is a mean proportional
between the tangent of an arch, and the tangent of the complement of the same
arch, by the Corollary of the first reason of the second Axiom of plain
Triangles: and therefore as Radius, is to the tangent of the angle at A; so is
the tangent complement of the same angle at A unto Radius: Therefore as the
sine of AB is in proportion to the tangent of DB; so is the co-tangent of the
angle at A, to Radius: and therefore the rectangle of AB* Radius, is equal to
the rectangle of the tangent of DB, and the co-tangent of the angle at A.

CASE 2.

Let the middle part be an angle, as in the triangle DHL of the former Diagram,
and let compl. HLD be the middle part, HL and compl. LD the extremes conjunct;
then I say, that the rectangle made of the cosine of HLD and Radius, is equal
to the rectangle of the tangent of HL and the co^tangent of LD. For* by the
third proposition of this Chapter, compl. HLD is equal to AB, and compl. LD to
DB, and HL to compl. DAB; and here we have proved before, that the rectangle of
the sine of AB and Radius, is equal to the rectangle of the tangent of DB, and
the co-tangent of the angle at A; therefore also the rectangle of the cosine
of HLD and Radius, is equal to the rectangle of the co-tangent of LD, and the
(...) tangent of HL.

CASE 3.

Let the middle part be the hypothenusal, as in the triangle GCA, let compl. AG
be the middle part, compl. AGC, and compl. CAG the extremes conjunct; then I
say, that the rectangle of the cosine of* AG and Radius, is equal to the
rectangle of the co-tangent of AGC, and the co-tangent of CAG: for we have
proved before, that the rectangle of the sine of AB and Radius is equal to the
rectangle of the tangent of DB and the co-tangent of DAB, but, by the third
proposition of this Chapter, compl. AG is equal to AB, compl. AGC to DB, and
compl. CAG to compl, DAB; therefore also the rectangle of the cosine of AG and
Radius, is equal to the rectangle of the co-tangent of AGC and the co-tangent
of CAG, which was to be proved.

It is further to be proved, that the sine of the middle part and Radius are
proportional with the co-sines of the extremes dis-junct. Here also the middle
part is either one of the sides, or the hypothenusal, or one of the oblique
angles.

CASE 1.

Let the middle part be a side: as in the triangle ABD, let DB be the middle
part, compl. AD and compl. A the opposite extremes: then I say, that the
rectangle of the sine of BD and Radius is equal to the rectangle of the sine of
AD, and the sine of the angle at A; for, by the first proposition of this
Chapter, as the sine of AD, is to Radius; so is the sine of DB, to the sine of
the angle at A. Therefore, the rectangle of the sine of DB and Radius, is equal
to the rectangle of the sine of AD and the sine of the angle at A.

CASE 2.

Let the hypothenusal be the middle part; as in the triangle DHL, let compl. LD
be the middle part, DH and HL the extremes dis-junct. Then I say, that the
rectangle of the cosine of LD and Radius is equal to the rectangle of the
cosine of DH and the cosine of HL: for compl. LD is equal to DB, and DH is
equal to compl. AD, and HL to compl. DAB, by the third proposition of this
Chapter: therefore the rectangle of the cosine of LD and Radius, is equal to
the rectangle of the cosine of DH and the cosine of HL.

CASE 3.

Let one of the oblique angles be the middle part, as in the triangle IEG, let
compl. IGE be the middle part: then I say, that the rectangle of the cosine of
IGE and Radius is equal to the rectangle of the sine of GEI and the cosine of
IE: for compl. IGE is equal to DB, and GEI is equal to AD, and EI to compl.
DAB.

5. In any Spherical triangle, the sines of the sides are proportional to the
sines of their opposite angles.

Let ABC be a spherical triangle, right angled at C, then let the sides AB, AC,
and CB be continued to make the quadrants AE, AF, and CD, and from the pole of
the quadrant AF, to wit, from the point D, let be drawn down the other
quadrants DF and DH; so there is made three new triangles BDE, GDE, and the
obliquangled triangle BDG. I say, in the right angled triangle ABC, that the
sine of the side AB is in proportion to the sine of his opposite angle ACB: as
the sine of the side AC, is to his opposite angle ABC; or as BC, to BAC:
likewise in the obliquangled spherical triangle BDG, I say, that as BG, is to
BDG: so is BD, to BGD; or so is DG, to DBG.



For first, in the right angled triangle ABC, the angle ACB and the arch AE are
of the same quantity, to wit, quadrants, so likewise the angle BAC and the arch
OF are of the same quantity, it being the measure of the said angle. Now then
as AB, to AE; so is BC, to OF, by the first proposition of this Chapter:
therefore also as AB, to ACB; so is BC, to BAC. Then in the obliquangled
Triangle BDG, because, by the demonstration of right angled triangles, they are
as DB, to DEB; so is DE, to DBE: and as DG, to DEGREES* so is DE, to DGE, or to
DGB. Therefore changing of the proportional terms, it shall be, as DG, to DB:
so is DBE, or DBG, to DGB, which was to be demonstrated.

These foundations being thus laid, the business of right angled spherical
triangles is easily dispatched. And the proportions to be used in every case may
be discovered either by the first, second and fifth propositions; or by the
fourth proposition only. The several cases in a right angled sphericall
triangle are sixteen in number, whereof six may be resolved by the first
proposition: seven by the second, and three by the fifth; an example in each
will suffice.

In the triangle ABC, let there be given the hypothenusal AB, and the
perpendicular BC, to find the base AC; then by the first proposition, the
Analogy is,

As the cosine of the perpendicular, is to Radius: so is the cosine of the
hypothenusal, to the cosine of the base.

2. Let there be given the base AC, and the angle at the base BAC, to find the
perpendicular BC, by the second proposition, the analogy is:

As Radius, to the sine of the base; so is the tangent of the angle at the
base, to the tangent of the perpendicular.

3. Let there be given the hypothenusal AB, the angle at the base BAC, to find
the perpendicular BC, by the fifth proposition, the analogy is:

As Radius, to the sine of the hypothenusal: so is the sine of the angle at the
base, to the sine of the perpendicular: and so of the rest.

By the fourth or universal Proposition, the proportions for right angled
sphericall triangles may be found two ways:

First, by the equality of the Sines and Tangents of the circular parts of a
triangle, that is, of the Logarithmes of the natural, thus by the universal
proposition in the aforesaid triangle ABC, the hypothenusal AB, and the angles
at AM and B being noted by their complements, I say. 1. The sine of AC added to
Radius; is equal to the sine of AB added to the sine of the angle at ^. 2. The
cosine of A added to Radius is equal to the cosine of BC added to the sine of
the angle at B. 3. The cosine of AB added to Radius, is equal to the cosine
of AC added to to the cosine of BC. 4. The cosine of AB added to Radius is
equal to the co-tangent of A, added to the co-tangent of the angle at B. 5. The
cosine of the angle at B added to Radius is equal to the tangent of BC, added
to the cotangent of AB. 6. The sine of BC added to Radius is equal to the
co-tangent of the angle at B added to the tangent of AC.


And thus he that lists may set down the equality of the sines and tangents
of the other sides and angles, and so there will be ten in all; but these may
here suffice: for to these may the sixteen cases of a right angled spherical
triangle be reduced; namely, three to the first, three to the second, two to
the third, two to the fourth, three to the fifth, and three to the sixth.

As admit there were given the hypothenusal BA, and the angle at B, to find
the base AC; then, by the first, seeing that the sine of AB added to the sine
of the angle at B, is equal to the sine of AC added to Radius. Therefore, if
working by natural numbers I multiply the sine of AB by the sine of B, and
divide the product by Radius, the remainer will be the sine of AC: and working
by Logarithmes, if from the sum of the sines of AB and B I substract Radius,
the rest is the sine of AC.

Secondly, admit there were given AB and AC, to find B, then seeing that the
sine of AC added to Radius is equal to the sines of AB and B. Therefore, if
working by natural numbers I multiply the sine of AC by Radius, and divide the
product by AB, the remainer is the sine of B. Or working by Logarithmes, if
from the sum of the sines of AC and Radius, I substract the sine of AB, the
remainer will be the sine of B.

Or thirdly, if there were given AC and the angle at B, to find AB: then
forasmuch as AC and Radius is equal to the sines of AB and B, therefore if
working by natural numbers I multiply AC by the Radius, and divide the product
by the sine of B, the remainer is the sine of AB. Or working by Logarithmes, if
from the sine of AC and Radius, I substract the sine of B the remainer is the
sine of AB: an so of the rest.

Which that you may the better perceive, I have here added in express words,
the Canons or rules of the proportions of the things given and required in
every of the sixteen cases of a right angled sphericall triangle, as they are
collected from the Catholic Proposition. And here the side subtending the
right angle we call the hypothenusal, the other two containing the right angle
we may call the sides; but for further distinction, we call one of these
containing sides (it matters not which) the base, and the other the
perpendicular.

The base an angle at the base given, to find 1. The Perpendicular.] As
Radius, to the sine of the base; so is the tangent of the angle at the base, to
the tangent of the perpendicular. 2. Angle at the perpendicular.] As Radius, to
the cosine of the base; so the sine of the angle at the base, to the cosine
of the angle at the perpendicular. 3. Hypothenusal.] As Radius, to the cosine
of the angle at the base: so the cotangent of the base, to the co-tangent of
the hypothenusal.


The perpendicular and angle at the base given, to find 4. Angle at perpend.]
As the cosine of the perpendicular, to Radius; so the cosine of the angle at
the base, to the sine of the angle at the perpendicular. 5. Hypothenusal.] As
the sine of the angle at the base, to Radius; so the sine of the perpendicular,
to the sine of the hypothenusal. 6. The Base.] As Radius, to the co-tangent of
the angle at the base; so is the tangent of the perpendicular, to the sine of
the base.


The hypothenusal and angle at the base given, to find 7. The base.] As
Radius, to the cosine of the angle at the base; so the tangent of the
hypothenusal, to the tangent of the base. 8. Perpendicular.] As Radius, to the
sine of the hypothenusal, so the sine of the angle at the base, to the sine of
the perpendicular. 9. Angle at perpend.] As Radius, to the cosine of the
hypothenasal; so the tangent of the angle at the base, to the co-tangent of the
angle at the perpendicular.


The base and perpendicular given, to find 10. Hypothenusal.] As Radius, to
the cosine of the perpendicular: so the cosine of the base, to the cosine of
the hypothenusal. 11. Angle at the base] As Radius, to the sine of the base: so
is the co-tangent of the perpendicular, to the co-tangent of the angle at the
base.


The base and hypothenusal given, to find the 12. Perpendicular.] As the
cosine of the base, to Radius; so the cosine of the hypothenusal, to the
cosine of the perpendicular. 13. Angle at the base.] As Radius, to the tangent
of the base; so the co-tangent of the hypothenusal, to the cosine of the angle
at the base. 14. Angle at the perpend.] As the sine of the hypothenusal, to
Radius; so the sine of the base, to the sine of the angle at the perpendicular.


The angles at the base and perpendicular given, to find 15. The
perpendicular.] As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular, is to Radius: so
the cosine of the angle at the base, to the cosine of the perpendicular. 16.
The hypothenusal.] As Radius, to co-tangent of the angle at the perpendicular;
so the co-tangent of the angle at the base, to the cosine of the hypothenusal.


Secondly, the proportions of all the cases of a right angled spherical
triangle, may by the aforesaid Catholic Proposition be known thus: If the
middle part be sought, put the Radius in the first place; if either of the
extremes, the other extreme put in the first place.

And note, that when a complement in the proposition does chance to concur with
a complement in the circular parts, you must take the sine it self, or the
tangent it self, because the cosine of the cosine is the sine, and the
co-tangent of the co-tangent is the tangent.

As in the following triangle ABC, let there be given the base AB, and the
angle at C, to find the hypothenusal BC. Here AB is the middle part, BC and C
are the opposite extremes, or the extremes disjunct. Now because the extreme BC
is sought, therefore I must put the other extreme, that is, the angle at C, in
the first place; and because that angle, as also the side sought are noted by
their complements, therefore I must not say: As the cosine of the angle at C,
is to Radius: so is the sine of the base AB, to the cosine of the hypothenusal
BC: but thus;

As the sine of the angle at the perpendicular ACB, is to Radius; so is the
sine of the base AB, to the sine of the hypothenusal BC. The like is to be
understood of the rest.

Thus much concerning right angled spherical triangles: as for Quadrantal there
needs not much be said, because the circular parts of a quadrantal triangle,
are the same with the circular parts of a right angled triangle adjoining.

As let ABC be a triangle, right angled at A, and let one of the sides thereof;
namely, AC be extended, till it become a quadrant, that is to D; then draw an
arch from D to B; then is DBC a quadrantal triangle, to which there is a right
angled triangle adjoining, as ABC. I say therefore that the circular parts of
the quadrantal triangle BCD are the same with the circular parts of the right
angled triangle ABC: for the circular parts of either of them are as here
appears.



The five circular parts of the triangle. ABC are AC AB co ABC co^ B^ co^ BCA
BCD are com CD CDB DBC co^ BC co^ BCD


Where it is evident, that AD and DB being quadrants, DBA is a right angle, and
BA is the measure of the angle at D, so that the side AC in the one is equal
to compl. CD in the other: and the side AB in the one is equal to the angle BDC
in the other: and compl. ABC in the one is equal to DBC in the other, and
compl. BC in the one is the same with BC in the other: and lastly, compl. BCA
in the one is the same with compl. DCB in the other; for the compl. of the
acute angle A^^ unto a quadrant is also the complement of the obtuse angle BCD,
and the circular parts of both triangles being the same, it follows, that that
which is here proved touching right angled triangles is also true of
quadrantal. And all the sixteen cases thereof may also be resolved by the
aforesaid Catholic Proposition.

As let there be given the side DC, and the angle at C, to find the angle at
D, then is the side DC the middle, and the angles at D and C are extremes
adjacent; now because the angle at D, one of the extremes is sought, we must
put the other extreme, to wit, the angle at C in the first place, and that is
noted by its complement: and therefore the Analogy is*

As the co-tangent of the angle at C, to Radius; so the cosine of DC, to the
tangent of the angle at D: and so of the rest; and what is said of the addition
of the artificial numbers is to be understood of the rectangles of the natural.

CHAP. IX.
Of Oblique angled Sphericall Triangles.
IN an obliquangled spherical triangle, there are twelve Cases; two whereof,
that is, those wherein the things given and required are opposite, may be
resolved by the fifth proposition of the last Chapter.

CASE 1.
Two angles with a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
opposite to the other.
As in the triangle ABC, let there be given the side BC, with his opposite
angle at A, and the angle ABC, to find the side AC. I say then, by the fifth
proposition of the last Chapter:

As the sine of the angle at A, is to the sine of his opposite side BC: so is
the sine of the angle at B, to the sine of his opposite side AC.

CASE 2.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find an angle
opposite to the other.
As in the triangle ABC, let there be given the sides BC and AC, with the angle
at A, to find the angle at B: I say then, by the fist proposition of the last
Chapter:

As the sine of BC, to the sine of his opposite angle at A: so is the sine of
AC, to the sine of his opposite angle B.

Other eight cases must be resolved by the aid of two Analogies at the least,
and that by reducing the triangle proposed to two right angled triangles, by a
perpendicular let fall from one of the angles to his opposite side, which
perpendicular falls sometimes within, sometimes without the triangle.

If the perpendicular be let fall from an obtuse angle, it falls within, but
if it fall from an acute angle, it falls without the triangle: however it
falls, it must be always opposite to a known angle.

For your better direction, in letting fall the perpendicular take this
general rule.

From the end of a side given, being adjacent to an angle given, let fall the
perpendicular.

As in the triangle, ABC, if there were given the side AB, and the angle at A:
by this rule the perpendicular must fall from B upon the side AC; but if there
were given the side AC, and the angle at A; then AB must be produced to D; and
the perpendicular must fall from C upon the side AD. Thus shall we have two
right angled triangles, and the side or angle required may easily be resolved
by the Catholic Proposition.

As suppose there were given the side AB, the angles at A and C, and required
the side AC; then the perpendicular must fall from B upon the side AC, as in
the first triangle, and divide the oblique triangle ABC into two right angled
triangles, to wit, ABF and BFC. And in the triangle ABF we have given the side
AB, and the angle at A, to find the base AF, for which the analogy, by the
Catholic Proposition, is,

As the co-tangent of AB, to Radius: so is the cosine of the angle at A, to
the tangent of AF: that is, by the seventh case of right angled triangles.

Secondly, by the eighth case, find the perpendicular BF. Lastly, in the
triangle BFC, having the perpendicular BF, and the angle at C, by the sixth case
of right angled spherical triangles, you may find the base FC, which being
added to AF, is the side AC.

But thus there are three operations required; whereas it may be done at two:
for the obliquangled triangle being reduced into two right angled triangles, by
letting fall a perpendicular, as before: the hypothenusal in one of the right
angled triangles will be correspondent to the hypothenusal in the other, and
the base in the one to the base in the other; and so the other parts.

Then in one of these right angled triangles (which for distinction sake we
call the first) there is given the hypothenusal and angle at the base, whereby
may be found the base or angle at the perpendicular, as occasion requires; by
the seventh or ninth cases of right angled triangles. And this is the first
operation.

For the second, there must (of the things thus given and required) two things
in one triangle, be compared to two correspondent things in the other triangle,
which two in each with the perpendicular make three things in each triangle,
either adjacent, that is, lying together, or opposite of which three the
perpendicular is always one of the extremes, and the thing required one of the
other extremes.

Thus in the triangle ABF, if there were given AF and BF, to find AB: AB is
the middle part, AF and BF are opposite extremes; and therefore by the
Catholic Proposition.

Radius added to the cosine of AB, is equal to the co-sines of AF and BF.

Then in the triangle BFC, if there were given BF and FC, to find BC: BC will
be the middle part, BF and FC opposite extremes; and therefore by the Catholic
Proposition.

The co-sines of BF and FC are equal to the cosine of BC and Radius.

But if from equal things we take away equal things, the things remaining must
needs be equal; if therefore we take away the Radius, and cosine BF in both
these proportions, it follows, that the cosine of AB added to the cosine of
FC is equal to the cosine of BC added to the cosine AF. And therefore, the
middle part AB in the first, and the extreme FC in the second, is equal to the
middle part BC in the second, and the extreme AF in the first: or thus;

As the middle part in the first triangle, is in proporion to the middle part
in the second: so is the extreme in the first, to the extreme in the second.

Thus by the Catholic Proposition, and the help of this, the eight cases
following may be resolved. In the exemplification whereof this sign + signifies
addition.

By the Catholic Proposition, it is evident that 1 Rad. + cs AB is equal to cs
AF + cs FB cs BF + cs FC cs BC + Rad 2 Rad. + s AF is equal to ct A + t FB t FB
+ ct C s FC + Rad. 3 Rad. + cs A is equal to s ABF + cs FB cs FB + s FBC cs C +
Rad 4 Ra. + cs ABF is equal to ct AB + t FB t FB + ct BC cs FBC + Ra.

Then taking from either side tangent FB and Radius, or cosine FB and Radius,
it follows, by the former proposition, that 1. cs AB + cs FC is equal to cs
BC + cs AF. 2. s AF + ct C is equal to s FC + ct A. 3. cs A + s FBC is equal
to cs C + s ABF 4. cs ABF + ct BC is equal to cs FBC + ct AB


For seeing that AF and FB are opposite extremes to AB, as CF and FB are to BC:
therefore,

1. As cs AF, to cs FC; so is cs AB, to cs BC: that is, As cosine the first
base, to cosine the second; so cosine the first hypotheriusal, to cosine the
second. And this serves for the third and seventh cases following.

And seeing that A and FB are adjacent extremes to AF: as C and FB are to FC:
therefore,

2. As s AF, to s FC; so ct A, to ct C: that is, as the sine of the first base,
to the sine of the second; so co-tangent the first angle at the base, to
co-tangent the second, which serves for the fourth and tenth cases.

Again, seeing that ABF and FB are opposite extremes to A, as CBF and FB are to
C: therefore,

3. As s ABF, to s CBF; so cs A, to ^s C: that is, as the sine of the first
angle at the perpendicular, to the sine of the second; so cosine the first
angle at the base, to cosine the second: which serves for the fifth and ninth
cases.

Lastly, seeing AB and FB are adjacent extremes to ABF, as BC and FB are to
CBF: therefore,

4. As cs ABF, to cs CBF; so ct AB, to ct BC: that is, as cosine the first
angle at the perpendicular, to cosine the second; so co-tangent the first
hypothenusal, to co-tangent the second: this serves for the sixth and eighth
cases following. And this foundation being thus laid, we come now to the
several Cases thereon depending.

CASE 3.
Two sides and their contained angle given, to find the third side.
First, by the seventh case of right angled triangles, the analogy is:

As Radius, to the cosine of the angle at the base: so is the tangent of the
hypothenusal, to the tangent of the base, or first arch. Which being added to
or subtracted from the base given, according to the following direction,
gives the second arch.



If the perpendicular fall Within the triangle, subtract AF the base found from
AC the base given, the remainer is EC, the second arch. Without, and the
contained angle obtuse, add the arch found to the arch given, and their
aggregate is the second arch. Without, and the contained angle acute, substract
the arch given from the arch found, the remainer is the second arch.

Then, by the first Consectary aforegoing say: as the cosine of the first
base, to the cosine of the second; so the cosine of the first hypothenusal,
to the cosine of the second: but this we will illustrate by example.

Let there be therefore given in the oblique angled spherical triangle ABC, the
side or arch AB 38 degrees 47 minutes, the side AC 74 degrees, 84 minutes, and
their contained angle BAC 56 degrees, 44 minutes, to find the side BC. Now
then according to the rules given, I let fall the perpendicular BF, and so have
I two right angled triangles, the triangle ABF and the triangle BFC. In the
triangle ABF, we have the hypothenusal AB 38 degrees, 47 minutes, and the angle
at the base BAF 56 degrees 44 minutes, to find the base AF. First therefore I
say, As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the cosine of BAC 56.44. 9.742576 So is
the tangent of AB 38 47. 9.900138 To the tangent of AF 23.72. 9.642714

Now because the perpendicular falls within the triangle, I substract AF 23
degrees, 7^ minutes from AC 74 degrees, 84 min. and there remains FC 51
degrees, 1^ minutes, the second arch. Hence to find BC, I say; As the cosine
of AF 23. 72. co. ar. 0.038331 Is to the cosine of FC 51.12. 9.797746 So is
the cosine of AB 38.47. 9.893725 To the cosine of BC 57.53. 9.729802

2. Example.

In the same triangle, let there be given the side AB 38 degr. 47 min. the side
BC 57 degr. 53 min. and their contained angle ABC 107 degrees. 60 min. and let the
side AC be sought. First, let fall the perpendicular DC, and continue the side
AB to D, then in the right angled triangle BDC, there is given the angle DBC 72
degrees. 40 min. the complement of the obtuse angle ABC, and the hypothehusal BC 57
degrees 53 minutes: to find BD, I say first; As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to
the cosine of DBC 72.40. 9.480539 So is the tangent of BC 57.53. 10.196314 To
the tangent of BD 25.42. 9.676853

Now because the perpendicular falls without the triangle, and the contained
angle obtuse, I add BD 25 degrees, 42 minutes to AB 38 degrees. 47 min. and their
aggregate is AD 63 degrees. 89 min. the second arch: hence to find AC, I say, As
the cosine of BD, 25.42. 0.044223 Is to the cosine of 63.89. 9.643547 So is
the cosine of BC 57.53. 9.729859 To the cosine of AC 74.84. 9.417629

3 Example.

In this triangle, let there be given the side BC 57 degrees. 53 min. the side AC
74 degrees. 84 min. and their contained angle ACB 37 degrees. 92 min. and let the side
AB be sought. First, I let fall the perpendicular AE, and the side BC I
continue to E, then in the right angled triangle AEC, we have known the angle
ACE, and the hypothenus;al AC, to find EC, I say then: As the Radius 90,
10.000000 Is to the cosine of ACE 37.92. 9.897005 So is the tangeent of AC
74.84. 10.567120 To the tangent of EC 71.5. 10.464125

Now because the perpendicular falls without the tringle, and the contained
angle acute, I substract the arch given BC 57 degrees 53 minutes from EC 71
degrees 5 minutes, the arch found, and their difference 13 degrees. 52 min. is EB,
the second arch. Hence to find AB, I say: As the cosine of EC 71.5. co. ar.
0.488461 Is to the cosine of EB 13.52. 9.987795 So is the cosine of AC 74.84.
9.417497 To the cosine of AB 38.47. 9.893753

CASE 4.
Two sides and their contained angle given, to find one of the other angles.
First, by the seventh case of right angled spherical triangles, I say: As
Radius, to the cosine of the angle at the base; so is the tangent of the
hypothenusal, to the tangent of the base, or first arch: which being added to,
or subtracted from the base given, according to those directions given in the
third case, gives the second arch; then by the second Consectary of this
Chapter, the proportion is:

As the sine of the first base, to the sine of the second: so is the co-tangent
of the first angle at the base, to the co-tangent of the second.

1 Example.

Thus if there were given, as in the first example of the last case, the side
AB 38 degrees, 47 minutes, the side AC 74 degrees, 84 minutes, and their
contained angle BAC 56 degrees, 44 min. and ACB, the angle sought, the first
operation will in all things be the same, and AF 23 degrees, 72 minutes, the
first arch, FC 51 degrees, 12 minutes, the second; hence to find the angle
ACB, I say: As the sine of AF 23.72. co. ar. 0.395486 To the sine of FC 51.12.
9.891237 So is the co-tang. of BAC 56.44. 9.821771 To the co-tangent of ACB
37.92. 10.108494

There being no other variation in this case then what has been showed in the
former, one example will be sufficient.

CASE 5.
Two angles, and the side between them given, to find the third angle.
First, by the ninth case of right angled spherical triangles, the proportion
is; As Radius, to the cosine of the hypothenusal; so the tangent of the angle
at the base, to the co-tangent of the angle at the perpendicular, which being
added to, or subtracted from the other given angle, according to the following
direction, gives the second arch.

If the perpendicular fall Within the triangle, substract the angle found from
the angle given, the remainer is the second arch. Without, and both the angles
given acute, substract the angle given from the angle found, and the remainer
is the second arch. Without, and one of the angles given be obtuse, add the
angle found to the angle given, and their aggregate is the second arch.

Then, by the third Consectary of this Chapter, the analogy is; As the sine of
the first at the perpendicular, to the sine of the second angle sound: so is
the cosine of the first angle at the base, to the cosine of the second.

1 Example.

In the triangle ABC, let there be given the angles BAC 56 degrees 44 minutes,
and ABC 107 degrees, 60 minutes, and the side between them AB 38 degrees 47
minutes, to find the angle ACB. First, let fall the perpendicular BF, and then
in the right angled spherical triangle ABF we have known the angle at the base
BAF, and the hypothenusal AB, to find the angle at the perpendicular ABF.
First, then I say: As the Radius 90, 10.000000 To the cosine of AB 38.47.
9.893725 So is the tangent of BAF 56.44. 10.178229 To the co-tangent of ABF
40.28. 10.071954

Now because the perpendicular falls within the triangle, therefore I substract
the angle found ABF 40 degrees 28 minutes, from ABC 107 degrees 60 minutes, the
angle given, and their difference 67 degr. 32 min. is the angle FBC, the second
arch: hence to find the angle ACB, I say; As the sine of ABF 40.28. co. ar.
0.189415 To the sine of FBC 67.32. 9.965047 So is the cosine of BAF 56.44.
9.742576 To the cosine of ACB 37.92. 9.897038

Let there be given, as before, the two angles BAC and ABC, with the side
between them AB, to find the angle ACB, and let the perpendicular EA, and let
the side BC be continued to E, then in the right angled triangle AEB we have
known the hypothenusal AB 38 degrees, 47 minutes, and the angle at the base ABE
72 degrees, 40 minutes, the complement of the obtuse angle ABC, to find the
angle EAB. First then I say: As the Radius 90. 10,000000 To the cosine of AB
38.47. 9.893725 So is the tangent of ABE 72.40. 10.498641 To the co-tangent of
EAB 22.6. 10.392366

And because the perpendicular falls without the triangle, and one of the
angles given obtuse, I add the angle found EAB 22 degrees 6 minutes to the
angle given BAC 56 degrees, 44 minutes, and their aggregate 78 degrees 50
minutes is the angle EAC, the second arch; and hence to find the angle at C, I
say, as before. As the sine of EAB 22.6. co. ar. 0.425300 To the sine of EAC
78.5^ 9.991194 So is the cosine of ABE 72.40. 9.480538 To the cosine of ACB
37.92. 9.897032

3 Example.

Let there be given the angles BAC 56 degrees 44 minutes, and ACB 37 degrees,
92 minutes, with their contained side AC 74 degres, 84 minutes, to find the
angle ABC, let fall the perpendicular CD, and let the side AB be continued to
D, then in the right angled triangle ADC, we have known the hypothenusal AC,
and the angle at the base DAC, to find ACD; first, then I say; As the Radius
90 10.000000 To the cosine of AC 74.84. 9.417497 So is the tangent of DAC
56.44. 10.178229 To the co-tangent of ACD 68.48. 9.595726

Now because the perpendicular falls without the triangle, and both the angles
given acute, therefore I substract the angle given ACB 37 degrees, 92 minutes
from the angle found ACD 68 degrees 48 minutes, and their difference 30 degrees
56 minutes is the angle BCD, the second arch. Hence to find the angle CBD, I
say, as before; As the sine of ACD 68.48. co. ar. 0.031382 To the sine of BCD
30.56. 9.706240 So is the cosine of DAC 56.44. 9.742575 To the cosine of CBD
72.40. 9.480197

CASE 6.
Two angles and the side between them given to find the other side.
First, by the ninth case of right angled triangles, I say, as before; As
Radius, to the cosine of the hypothenusal; so the tangent of the angle at the
base, to the co-tangent of the angle at the perpendicular. Which being added to
or subtracted from the other angle given, according to the direction of the
fifth case, gives the second arch.

Then by the fourth Consectary of this Chapter, As the cosine of the first
angle at the perpendicular, to the cosine of the second; so is the co-tangent
of the first hypothenusal, to the co-tangent of the second.

Example.

If there were given, as in the first example of the last case, the angles BAC
56 degrees 44 minutes, and ABC 107 degrees 60 minutes, with the side AB 38
degrees, 47 minutes, to find the side BC. The first operation will be in all
things the same, and the first arch ABF 40 degrees, 28 minutes; the second arch
FBC 67 degrees, 32 minutes. Hence to find the side BC, I say: As the cosine
of ABF 40.28. co. ar. 0.117536 To the cosine of FBC 67.32. 9.5861^9 So is the
cotangent of AB 38.47. 10.09986^ To the co-tangent of BC 57.53 9.803517

CASE 7.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them, to find the third side.
First, by the seventh case of right angled sphericall triangles, I say; As
Radius, to the cosine of the angle at the base; so is the tangent of the
hypothenusal, to the tangent of the base, or first arch.

Then, by the first Consectary of this Chapter, the analogy is,

As the cosine of the first hypothenusal, to the cosine of the second; so the
cosine of the first arch found, to the cosine of the second. Which being
added to or subtracted from the first arch found, according to the direction
following, their sum or difference is the third side.

If the perpendicular fall Within the triangle, add the first arch found to
the second arch found, and their aggregate is the side required. Without, and
the angle given obtuse, substract the first arch found from the second arch
found, and what remains is the third side. Without, and the given angle
acute, substract the second arch found from the first, and what remains is
the side required.

1 Example.

In the oblique angled triangle ABC, let there be given the sides AB 38
degrees, 47 minutes, and BC 57 degrees, 53 minutes, with the angle BAC 56
degrees, 44 minutes, and let the side AC be required. First, I let fall the
perpendicular BF, and then in the right angled triangle ABF, we have given the
hypothenusal AB, and the angle at the base BAF, to find the base AF, for which
I say: As the Radius 90 10.000000 To the cosine of BAF 56.44. 9.742576 So is
the tangent of AB 38.47. 9.900138 To the tangent of AF 23.72. 9.642714

Secondly, for FC, I say: As the cosine of AB 38.47. co. ar. 0.106275 To the
cosine of BC 57.53. 9.729859 So is the cosine of AF 23.72. 9.^61669 To the
cosine of FC 51.12. 9.797803

Now because the perpendicular fell within the triangle, therefore I add the
first arch found AF 23 degrees, 72 minutes to the second arch found FC 51
degrees 12 minutes, and their aggregate 74 degrees, 84 minutes is AC the side
required.

2 Example.

In the same triangle ABC, let there be given the sides AB 38 degrees, 47
minutes and AC 74 degrees 84 minutes, and the angle ABC 107 degrees, 60
minutes, and let BC be required. First then, I let fall the perpendicular AE,
and continue the side BC to E, and then in the right angled triangle AEB we
have given the side AB 38 degrees, 47 minutes, and the angle ABE 72 degrees, 40
minutes, the complement of ABC, to find EB: for which I say: As the Radius 90
10.000000 To the cosine of ABE 72.40. 9.480538 So is the tangent of AB 38.47.
9.900138 To the tangent of EB 13.51. 9.380676

Secondly, to find EC, I say: As the cosine of AB 38.47. co. ar. 9.106275 To
the cosine of AC 74.84. 9.^17497 So is the cosine of EB 13.51. 9.987813 To
the cosine of EC 71.4. 9.511585

Now because the perpendicular falls without the triangle, and the given angle
obtuse, therefore I substract the first arch found EB 13 degrees 51 minutes,
from the second arch EC 71 degrees, 4 minutes, and their difference 57 degrees,
53 minutes is BC, the side required.

3 Example.

In the same triangle ABC, let there be given the sides AC 74 degrees, 84
minutes, and BC 57 degrees, 53 minutes, and the angle BAC 56 degrees. 44 min. to
find the side AB: I let fall the perpendicular DC, and continue the side AB to
D, then in the right angled triangle ADC we have given the hypothenusal AC, and
the angle at A, to find AD.

As the Radius 90 10.000000 To the cosine of BAC 56.44. 9.742576 So is the
tangent of AC 74.84. 10.567119 To the tangent of AD 63.89. 10.309695

Secondly, to find DB, I say: As the cosine of AC 74.84. co. ar. 0.582503 To
the cosine of BC 57.53. 9.729859 So is the cosine of AD 63.89. 9.643547 To
the cosine of DB 25.39. 9.95^909

Now because the perpendicular falls without the triangle, and the angle given
acute, therefore I substract the second arch found DB 25 degrees, 39 minutes,
from the first arch found AD 63 degrees 89 minutes, and their difference 38
degrees 50 minutes is AB, the side required.

CASE 8.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find their
contained angle.
First, by the ninth case of right angled spherical triangles, I say; As
Radius, to the cosine of the hypothenusal; so the tangent of the angle at the
base, to the cotangent of the angle at the perpendicular. Then, by the fourth
Consectary of this Chapter, the proportion is:

As the co-tangent of the first hypothenusal, to the co-tangent of the second;
so the cosine of the first angle at the perpendicular, to the cosine of the
second: which being added to, or subtracted from the first arch found,
according to the direction of the seventh case, gives the angle sought.

Example.

If there were given, as in the first example of the last case, the sides AB 38
degrees. 47 min. and BC 57 degrees. 53 min. with the angle BAC 56 degrees. 44 min. to find
the obtuse angle ABC. The perpendicular BF falling within the triangle, then in
the right angled triangle ABF, we have known the hypothenusal AB, and the
angle at A, to find the angle ABF, I say then, As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is
to the cosine of AB 38.47. 9^93725 So is the tangent of BAF 56.44. 10.178229
To the co-tang. of ABF 40.28. 10.071954

Secondly, to find FBC, I say: As the co-tangent of AB 38.47. 9.900138 To the
co-tangent of BC 57.53. 9.^03686 So is the cosine of ABF 40.28. 9.882464 To
the cosine of FBC 67.32. 9.586288

Now because the perpendicular falls within the triangle, I add the first arch
found ABF 40 degrees, 28 minutes, to the second arch found FBC 67 degrees, 32
minutes, and their aggregate is 107 degr. 60 min. the angle ABC required.

CASE 9.
Two angles and a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the third
angle.
First, by the ninth case of right angled spherical triangles, I say: As the
Radius, to the cosine of the hypothenusal; so the tangent of the angle at the
base, to the cotangent of the angle at the perpendicular.

Then by the third Consectary of this Chapter, the proportion is. (...) the
cosine of the first angle at the base, to the cosine of the second; so is the
sine of the first angle at the perpendicular, to the sine of the second: which
being added to, or subtracted from the first arch found, according to the
^i^ect^on following, their sum or difference is the angle sought.

If the perpendicular fall Within the triangle, add both arches together.
Without, and the angle opposite to the given side acute, substract the first
from the second arch. Without, and the angle opposite to the given side obtuse,
substract the second from the first.

1. Example.

In the oblique angled Triangle ABC, let there be given the angle BAC 56 degrees.
44 min. and ACB 37 degrees. 92 min. and the side AB 38 degrees. 47 min. to find the
angle ABC. First, let fall the perpendicular FB, then in the right angled
triangle AFB we have known, the hypothenusal AB, and the angle at A, to find
the angle ABF, for which I say, As Radius, 90 degrees. 10.000000 To cosine of AB,
38.47 9.893^26 So the tangent of BAF, 56.^4 10.178229 To the co-tangent of ABF,
40.28. 10.071955

Secondly, to find FBC, I say, As the cosine of BAF, 56.44 0.257424. To the
cosine of ACB, 37.92 9.8970^5 So is the sine of ABF, 40.28 9.810584 To the
sine of FBC, 67.32 9.965013

Now because the perpendicular falls within the Triangle, I add the first arch
found ABF 40 degrees. 28 min. to the second arch found FBC 67 degrees. 32 min. and
their aggregate is 107 degrees. 60 min. the angle ABC required.

2. Example.

In the same Triangle let there be given the angle ACB 37 degrees. 92 min. and ABC
107 degrees. 60 min. and the side AB 38 degrees. 47 min. to find the angle BAC. First,
let fall the perpendicular AE, and let the side BC be continued to E, then in
the right angled triangle AEB we have known the Hypothenusal AB, and the angle
at B, 72 degrees. 40 min. the complement of ABC, to find EAB, I say then, As the
Radius 90, 10.000000 To the cosine of AB, 38.47 9.893726 So is the tangent of
ABE, 72.40 10.498641 To the co-tangent of EAB, 22.^6 10,392367

Secondly, to find EAC, I say, As the cosine of ABE, 72.40 0.519462 To the
cosine of ACB, 37.92 9.897005 So is the sine of EAB, 22.6 9.574699 To the sine
of EAC 78.49 9.99^166

Now because the perpendicular falls without the triangle and the angle
opposite to the given side acute, I substract the first angle found E. AB 22
degrees. 6 min. from the second arch found 78 degrees. 49 min. and their difference 56
degrees. 43 min. is the angle BAC required.

3 Example.

In the same triangle ABC, let there be given the angles ACB 37 degrees. 92 min.
and ABC 107 degrees. 60 min. and the side AC 74 degrees. 84 min. to find the angle
BAC. Let fall the perpendicular AE, and then in the right angled triangle AEC,
we have known the hypothenusal AC, and the angle ACB, to find the angle EAC.

As the Radius 90, 10.000000 To the cosine of AC, 74.84 9.417497 So is the
tangent of ACE, 37.92 9.891559 To the co-tangent of EAC, 78.49 9.3090^6

Secondly, to find EAB, I say, As the cosine of ACE, 37.92 0.102^95 To the
cosine of ABE, 72.40 9.480538 So is the sine of EAC, 78.49 9.991177 To the
sine of EAB, 22.6 9.574790



Now because the perpendicular falls without the Triangle, and the angle
opposite to the given side obtuse, therefore I substract the second arch found
EAB, 22 degrees. 6 min. from the first arch found, EAC 78 degrees. 49 min. and their
difference 56 degrees. 43 min. is the angle BAC required.

CASE 10.
Two angles, and a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
between them.
First, by the 7th. Case of right angled Sphericall Triangles, I say, As
Radius, to the cosine of the angle at the base; so is the Tangent of the
Hypothenusal, to the Tangent of the Base.

Then by the second Consectary of this Chapter, the proportion is, As the
co-tangent of the first angle at the base, to the cotangent of the second; so
is the sine of the first base, to the sine of the second: which being added to,
or subtracted from, the first arch found, according to the direction of the
9th. Case, gives the side required.

Example.

In the oblique angled triangle ABC, let there be given the two angles BAC 56
degrees. 44 min. and ACB 37 degrees. 92 min. with the side BC 57 degrees. 53 min. to find
the side AC. Let fall the perpendicular BF, then in the right angled triangle
BCF, we have known the Hypothenusal BC, and the angle FCB, to find the base
FC: say then, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the cosine of FCB, 37.92
9.897005 So is the tangent of BC, 57.53 10.196314 To the tangent of FC, 51.11
10.093319

Secondly, to find AF, I say, As co-tangent FCB, 37.92, co. ar. 9.891559 To
co-tangent of BAC. 56.44 9.821771 So is the sine of FC, 51.11 9.891176 To the
sine of AF, 23.72 9.604506

Now because the perpendicular falls within the Triangle, I add the first arch
FC 51 degrees. 11 min. to the second arch AF, 23 degrees. 72 min. and their aggregate
is 74 degrees. 83 min. the side AC required.

CASE 11.
The three sides given to find an angle.
The solution of this and the Case following, depends upon the Demonstration of
this Proposition.

As the Rectangular figure of the sines of the sides comprehending the angle
required; Is to the square of Radius:

So is the Rectangular figure of the sines of the difference of each containing
side taken from the half sum of the three sides given; To the square of the
sine of half the angle required.

Let the sides of the triangle ZPS be known, and let the vertical angle SZP be
the angle required, then shall ZS the one be equal ZC. In like manner PS the
base of the vertical angle shall be equal to PH or PB, then draw PR the sine of
PZ and CK the sine of CZ or ZS. Divide CH into two equal parts in G, draw the
Radius AG and let fall the perpendiculars P^ and CN which are the sines of the
arches PG and CG. The right line EV is the versed sine of a certain arch in a
great circle, and SC the versed of the like arch in a less, then if you draw
the right line NF parallel to SH bisecting CH in N, it shall also bisect the
versed sine SC in F by the 15th. of the second and RM bisecting TP in R, and
drawn parallel to TX, shall for the same reason bisect PX in M, and the
triangles SCH and FNC shall be like, as also the triangles TPX and RPM are
like; and ZG shall be equal to the half sum of the three sides given, which
thus I prove. Of any three unequal quantities given, if the difference of the
two lesser be subtracted from the greatest, and half the remainer added to the
mean quantity, the sum shall be equal to half the sum of the three unequal
quantities given.

Example.

Let the quantities given be 9, 13, and 16, the difference between 9 and 13 is
4, which being subtracted from 16, there remains 12, the half whereof is 6,
which being added to 13 makes 19, the half sum of the three unequal
quantities. Now then in this Diagram PC is the difference of the two lesser
sides, which taken from PH, the remainer is CH, the half whereof is CG, and CG
added to CZ, the mean side, gives GZ the half sum, and if we substract ZP
the lesser containing side of the angle required, from ZG the half sum, their
difference will be PG, and if we substract ZC the other side, the difference
will be CG. Lastly, let the arch IV be the measure of the vertical angle PZS,
and the right line OQ bisect the lines EV and IV, and the right line AQ
perpendicular to the right line IV, bisecting the same in Q, I say then.

As the Rectangular figure of the sines of the sides PR and CK, is to the
square of AC: so is the Rectangular figure of the sines of the difference of
each containing side taken from the half sum, that is of PM and CN, to the
square of VQ the sine of half the vertical angle SZP. The triangles TPX and SCH
are equiangled, because of their equal angles at P and C, at T and H, the
angles TPX and ^CH are equal, because of there parallel sides TP and SC, PH and
CH, and the angles PTX and SHC are equal, because the arches PGX and BPH are
equal, and the double measure of those angles, that the arches PCX and BP^ are
equal, may thus be proved. PB and PH are equal by construction, PC and HX are
equal, because of the parallel lines PX and CH, and therefore CX is equal to
PB, and CP being common to both, CB must needs be equal to PX. Now then, as
TP, to PX; so is CH, to CS: and as PR to PM, so is CN to CF, and a line drawn
from F to L, parallel to AK, shall cut the sides AC and CK proportional by the
15th. of the second, and therefore as CK, to CA; so is CF, to CL: and because
AV equal to AC, the Radius of a great circle is proportional to CK, the Radius
of a lesser; therefore, as CK, to AV; so is CF, to VO. And because VAQ and VOQ
are like Triangles, by the 22 of the second; therefore, as AV, to VQ; so is VQ,
to VO: and so the rectangle of AV and VO is equal to the square of VQ; from
which proportions this proposition may be thus deduced. PR Proportional CK And
by composition PR x CK PM AV PM x VA CN CF CN x CF CF VO CF x VO

And dividing the two last rectangles by CF, the proportion will be PR x CK And
because VO in VA is equal to VQ square; therefore if you multiply CN by VA, the
proportion will be, as PR x CK, to PM x VA; so is CN x VA, to VO x VA equal to
VQ square, which was to be proved. PM x VA CN VO

If then the three sides of an oblique angled spherical triangle be given, and
an angle inquired; do thus: 1. Take the sines of the sides comprehending the
angle inquired. Or the Logarithmes of those sines. 2. Take also the quadrat of
the Radius, or the Logarithme of the Radius doubled. 3. Substract each side
comprehending the angle inquired from the half sum of the three sides given,
and take the sines of their differences, or the Logarithmes of those sines. 4.
If the rectangle of the first divide the rectangle of the second and third, the
side of the quotient is the sine of half the angle inquired.


Or if the sum of the Logarithme of the first be deducted from the sum of the
Logarithmes of the second and third, the half difference is the Logarithme of
half the angle sought.

Arithmeticall illustration by Natural Numbers.

In the Oblique angled Triangle SZP, having the Sides PS, 42 degrees. 15 min. PZ,
30 00 And SZ, 24 7To find the angle PZS.

Sines. The side PZ, 30 degrees. 50000 The side SZ, 24 degrees. 7 min. 40785 1 The
factus of the Sines 2039250000 2 Quadrat of the Radius 10000000000 The sum of
the sides 96 degrees. 22 min. The half sum, 48 11

Sines. The difference of ZS 24 de. 4 min. 40737 The difference of PZ 18 11
31084 3 Factus of the sines 1266268908

Which being multiplied by Radids square, 100000.00000, and divided by
2039250000, the quotient will be 620^^83^7^, the side whereof is 78802, the
sine of 52 degrees. which doubled is 104, the angle PZS inquired.

Arithmeticall illustration by artificial numbers.

The side PS, 42.15. Logar. Sine. The side PZ, 30 9.698970 The side SZ, 24.7
9.610503 Sum of the sides, 96.22 19.309473 The half sum, 48.11 Diff. of ZS and
the half sum, 24.4 9.609993 Dif. of PZ and the half sum, 18.11 9.492540 The
doubled Radius 20.000000 39.102533 From which substract the sum of the Log. of
the sides, ^S. PZ 19.309473 There does remain, 19.793060

The half thereof, 9.896530 is the Logarithm of the sine of 52 degrees. whose
double 104 is the angle PZ Sinquired as before.

Or if instead of the Logarithms of the sines of the sides ^S and PZ, you take
their Arithmeticall complements, as was showed in the 8th. Proposition of the
4th. Chapter, and leave out the doubled Radius, the work may be performed
without substraction in this manner. The side PZ, 30 co. ar. 0.301030 The side
ZS. 14.7 co. ar. 0.389497 Dif. of ZP and half sum, 18.11 9.492540 Dif. of ZS
and half sum, 24.4 9.609993 The sum is 19.793060 The half thereof 9.896530Is
the Logarithm of the sine of 52 degrees. as before.

CASE 12.
The three angles of a Sphericall Triangle given, to find a side.
This Case is the converse of the former, and to be resolved after the same
manner, if so be we convert the angles into sides, according to the fifth of
the sixth Chapter. For the two lesser angles are always equal unto two sides
of a Triangle comprehended by the arkes of great Circles drawn from their
Poles, and the third angle may be greater then a Quadrant, and therefore the
complement thereof to a Semicircle must be taken for the third side.

The angle being found, shall be one of the three sides inquired.



As in the Triangle ABC, the poles of those arks L, M, K, which connected do
make the Triangle LMK, the sides of the former Triangle being equal to the
angles of this latter, taking the complement of the greater angle to a
semicircle for one. As AB is equal to the angle at L, or the arc EG. The side
BC is equal to the angle at M, or the arch FH. And the side AC is equal to the
complement of the angle LKM, or the arch DI. Therefore if the angles of the
latter triangle LMK be given, the sides of the former triangle AB, BC, and AC
are likewise given. And the angles of the triangle LMK being thus converted
into sides, if we resolve the triangle ABC, according to the precepts of the
last Case, we may find any of the angles, which is the side inquired.

Illustration Arithmetical, by the Artificial Canon.

Let the three angles of the triangle LMK be given. LMK, 104 degrees. or the
complement of DKI, 76 degrees. equal to AC. MLK, or the side AB, 46 degrees. 30 min.
LMK, or the side BC, 36 degrees. 14 min.
To find the side ML, or the angle ABC.

The sides AC 76. AB 46.30 9.859118 BC 36.14 9.770675 Sum of the sides 158.44
19.629893 Half sum 79.22 Diff. of AB and the sum 32.92 9.735173 Dif. of BC and
half sum 43.08 9.834432 The doubled Radius 20.000000 The sum 39.569605 Sum of
the sides substract 19.629893 The difference 19.939712 Half difference
9.969856

The Sine of 68 degrees. 90 min. which doubled is 137 degrees. 80 min. the quantity of
the angle ABC, and the complement thereof to a semicircle 42 degrees. 20 min. is
the angle FBG, or the arch FG, equal to the side ML which was inquired.

Institutio Mathematica: OR, A MATHEMATICAL Institution: The second Part.
Containing the application and use of the Natural and Artificial SINES and
TANGENTS, as also of the LOGARITHMS, IN Astronomy, Dialling, and Navigation.
By JOHN NEWTON.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1654.

A Mathematical Institution:
The second Part.
CHAP. I.
Of the Tables of the Suns motion, and of the equation of time for the
difference of Meridians.
WHereas it is requisite that the Reader should be acquainted with the Sphere,
before he enter upon the practice of Spherical Trigonometri, the which is fully
explained in Blundeviles Exercises, or Ch^lmades translation of Hues on the
Globes, to whom I refer those that are not yet acquainted therewith: that which
I here intend is to show the use of Trigonometrie in the actual resolution of
so me known Triangles of the Sphere.

And because the Suns place or distance from the next Equinoctial point is
usually one of the three terms given in Astronomical Questions, I will first
show how to compute that by Tables calculated in Decimal numbers according to
the Hypothesis of Bullialdus, and for the Meridian of London, whose Longitude
reckoned from the Canarie or Fortunate Islands is 21 degrees. and the Latitude,
North, 51 degrees. 57 parts (min.) or centesms of a degree.

Nor are these Tables so confined to this Meridian, but that they may be
reduced to any other: If the place be East of London, add to the time given,
but if it be West make substraction, according to the difference of Longitude,
allowing 15 degrees. for an hour, and 6 minutes or centesms of an hour to one
degree, so will the sum or difference be the time aequated to the Meridian of
London, and for the more speedy effecting of the said Reduction, I have added a
Catalogue of many of the chiefest Towns and Cities in diverse Regions, with
their Latitudes and difference of Meridians from London in time, together with
the notes of Addition and Substraction, the use whereof is thus.

Suppose the time of the Suns entrance into Taurus were at London April the
10th. 1654, at 11 of the clock and 16 centesms before noon, and it be required
to reduce the same to the Meridian of Vraniburge, I therefore seek Vraniburge
in the Catalogue of Cities and Places, against which I find 83 with the letter
A annexed, therefore I conclude, that the Sun did that day at Uraniburge enter
into Taurus at 11 of the clock and 99 min. or centesms before noon, and so of
any other.

Problem 1.
To calculate the Suns true place.
THe form of these our Tables of the Suns motion is this, In the first page is
had his motion in Julian years complete, the Epochaes or roots of motions being
prefixed, which shows the place of the Sun at that time where the Epoch
adscribed has its beginning: the Tables in the following pages serve for
Julian Years, Months, Days, Hours, and Parts, as by their Titles it does
appear. The Years, Months, and Days, are taken complete, the Hours and
Scruples current. After these Tables follows another, which contains the
Aequations of the Eccentrick to every degree of a Semicircle, by which you may
thus compute the Suns place.

First, Write out the Epoch next going before the given time, then severally
set under those the motions belonging to the years, months, and days
complete, and to the hours and scruples current, every one under his like,
(only remember that in the Bissextile year, after the end of February, the
days must be increased by an unit) then adding them all together, the sum
shall be the Suns mean motion for the time given.

Example.

Let the given time be 1654, May 13, 11 hours, 25 scruples before noon at
London, and the Suns place to be sought.

The numbers are thus: Longit. Aphel. The Epoch 1640 291.2536 96.2297 Years
compl. 13 359.8508 2052 Month co. April 118.2775 53 Days compl. 12 11.8278 6
Hours 23 9444 Scruples 25 102 Su^ or mean motion 782.1643 96.4308

2. Substract the Aphelium from the mean Longitude, there rests the mean
Anomalie, if it exceed not 360 degrees, but if it exceed 360 degr. 360 being
taken from their difference, as often as it can, the rest is the mean Anomalie
sought.

Example.

The mean Longitude 782.1643 The Aphelium subtracted 96.4308 There rests
685.7335 From whence deduct 360. There rests the mean Anomalie. 325.7335

3. With the mean Anomalie enter the Table of the Suns Eccentrick Equation,
with the degree descending on the left side, if the number thereof be less
then 180; and ascending on the right side, if it exceed 180, and in a straight
line you have the Equation answering thereunto, using the part proportional, if
need require.

Lastly, according to the title Add or Substract this Equation found to or from
the mean longitude; so have you the Suns true place.

Example.

The Suns mean longitude 782.1643 Or deducting two circles, 720. The Suns mean
longitude is 62.1643 The Suns mean Anomalie 325.7335 In this Table the Equation
answering to 325 degrees is 1.1525 The Equation answering to 326 degrees is
1.1236And their difference 289.

Now then if one degree or 10000 Give 289 What shall 7335Give, the product of
the second and third term is 2119815, and this divided by 10000 the first term
given, the quotient or term required will be 212 fere, which being deducted
from 1.1525, the Equation answering to 325 degr. because the Equation
decreased, their difference 1.1313. is the true Equation of this mean Anomalie,
which being added to the Suns mean longitude, their aggregate is the Suns place
required.

Example.

The Suns mean longitude 62.1643 Equation corrected Add 1.1313 The Suns true
place or Longitude 63.2956That is, 2 Signs, 3 degrees, 29 minutes, 56 parts.

The Suns Equation in this example corrected by Multiplication and Division may
more readily be performed by Addition and Substraction with the help of the
Table of Logarithmes: for, As one degree, or 10000, 4.000000 Is to 289;
2.460898 So is 7335, 3.865400 To 212 fere 2.326298

The Suns mean Motions.
Epochae Longitud Aphelium Per. Jul. 242 99 61 355 85 44 M^^di 248 71 08 007 92
42 Christi 278 98 69 010 31 36 An. Do. 1600 290 95 44 095 58 78 An. Do. 1620
291 10 41 095 90 39 An. Do. 1640 291 25 36 096 21 97 An. Do. 1660 291 40 33 096
53 56 1 356 76 11 0 01 58 2 359 52 22 0 18 17 3 359 28 30 0 04 74 B 4 000 03 00
0 06 30 5 359 79 11 0 07 89 6 359 55 19 0 09 47 7 359 31 30 0 11 05 B 8 000 05
97 0 12 64 9 359 82 08 0 14 22 10 359 58 19 0 15 78 11 359 34 30 0 17 36 B 12
000 08 97 0 18 94 13 359 85 08 0 20 52 14 359 00 19 0 22 11 15 359 37 30 0 23
69 B 16 000 11 97 0 25 25 17 359 88 08 0 26 83 18 359 64 19 0 28 41 19 359 40
28 0 30 00 B 20 000 14 97 0 31 61 40 000 29 91 0 63 19 60 000 44 83 0 94 77 80
000 59 83 1 26 39 100 000 74 80 1 57 97 100 00 74 80 01 57 97 200 01 49 58 03
15 94 300 02 24 39 04 73 94 400 02 99 19 06 31 94 500 03 73 97 07 89 91 600 04
48 77 09 47 92 700 05 23 58 11 05 89 800 05 98 36 12 63 89 900 06 73 17 14 21
86 1000 07 47 97 15 79 86 2000 14 95 92 31 59 69 3000 22 43 89 47 39 55 4000 29
91 82 63 19 41 5000 37 39 80 78 99 25 January 030 55 50 0 00 14 February 058 15
30 0 00 25 March 088 70 83 0 00 39 April 118 27 75 0 00 53 May 148 83 28 0 00
67 June 178 40 19 0 00 80 July 208 95 69 0 00 94 August 239 51 22 0 01 06
September 269 08 17 0 01 19 October 299 63 66 0 01 33 November 329 20 61 0 01
44 December 359 76 11 0 01 58

The Suns mean motions in Days.
Longit. Aphel. D 1 0 98 55 0 00 2 1 97 14 0 00 3 2 95 69 0 00 4 3 94 25 0 02 5
4 92 83 0 02 6 5 91 39 0 03 7 6 89 94 0 03 8 7 88 52 0 03 9 8 87 08 0 05 10 9
85 63 0 05 11 10 84 22 0 05 12 11 82 78 0 06 13 12 81 33 0 06 14 13 79 91 0 06
15 14 78 47 0 06 16 15 77 03 0 08 17 16 75 61 0 08 18 17 74 16 0 08 19 18 72 72
0 08 20 19 71 30 0 08 21 20 69 86 0 08 22 21 68 41 0 11 23 22 67 00 0 11 24 23
65 56 0 11 25 24 64 11 0 11 26 25 62 94 0 11 27 26 61 25 0 11 28 27 59 80 0 11
29 28 58 36 0 13 30 29 56 94 0 14 31 30 55 50 0 14 32 31 54 05 0 14

Longit. Long. Long. H M M 1 0 04 11 34 1 39 67 2 75 2 0 08 22 35 1 43 68 2 79
3 0 12 31 36 1 47 69 2 83 4 0 16 42 37 1 51 70 2 87 5 0 20 52 38 1 56 71 2 91 6
0 24 63 39 1 60 72 2 96 7 0 28 75 40 1 64 73 3 00 8 0 32 86 41 1 68 74 3 04 9 0
36 97 42 1 72 75 3 08 10 0 41 06 43 1 76 76 3 12 11 0 45 17 44 1 80 77 3 16 12
0 49 27 45 1 84 78 3 20 13 0 53 39 46 1 88 79 3 24 14 0 52 50 47 1 93 80 3 28
15 0 61 61 48 1 97 81 3 32 16 0 65 72 49 2 01 82 3 37 17 0 69 80 50 2 05 83 3
41 18 0 73 91 51 2 09 84 3 45 19 0 78 03 52 2 13 85 3 49 20 0 82 14 53 2 17 86
3 53 21 0 86 25 54 2 21 87 3 57 22 0 90 36 55 2 25 88 3 61 23 0 94 44 56 2 30
89 3 65 24 0 98 55 57 2 34 90 3 69 25 1 02 66 58 2 38 91 3 74 26 1 06 77 59 2
42 92 3 78 27 1 10 88 60 2 46 93 3 82 28 1 14 99 61 2 50 94 3 86 29 1 19 10 62
2 54 95 3 90 30 1 23 21 63 2 58 96 3 94 31 1 27 32 64 2 62 97 3 98 32 1 31 43
65 2 67 98 4 02 33 1 35 54 66 2 71 99 4 06 100 4 11 ''''

The Equations of the Suns Eccentrick.
Aeq. sub 0 0 00 00 360 1 0 03 52 359 2 0 07 03 358 3 0 10 56 357 4 0 14 05 356
5 0 17 53 355 6 0 21 00 354 7 0 24 44 353 8 0 27 89 352 9 0 31 30 351 10 0 34
72 350 11 0 38 17 349 12 0 41 56 348 13 0 44 94 347 14 0 48 30 346 15 0 51 67
345 16 0 55 03 344 17 0 58 36 343 18 0 61 67 342 19 0 64 97 341 20 0 68 24 340
21 0 71 53 339 22 0 74 78 338 23 0 78 03 337 24 0 81 22 336 25 0 84 41 335 26 0
87 56 334 27 0 90 69 333 28 0 94 26 332 29 0 97 30 331 30 1 00 19 330 31 1 03
33 329 32 1 06 41 328 33 1 09 41 327 34 1 12 36 326 35 1 15 25 325 36 1 18 03
324 37 1 20 78 323 38 1 23 50 322 39 1 26 22 321 40 1 28 91 320 41 1 31 58 319
42 1 34 22 318 43 1 36 86 317 44 1 39 50 316 45 1 42 08 315 46 1 44 52 314 47 1
47 05 313 48 1 49 47 312 49 1 51 89 311 50 1 54 16 310 51 1 56 47 309 52 1 58
69 308 53 1 60 86 307 54 1 63 00 306 55 1 65 14 305 56 1 67 25 304 57 1 69 30
303 58 1 71 33 302 59 1 73 28 301 60 1 75 05 300 1 76 92 299 62 1 76 69 298 63
1 80 39 297 64 1 81 97 296 65 1 83 50 295 66 1 85 00 294 67 1 86 44 293 68 1 87
83 292 69 1 89 16 291 70 1 90 44 290 71 1 91 69 289 72 1 92 86 288 73 1 93 96
287 74 1 95 28 286 75 1 96 22 285 76 1 97 14 284 77 1 97 97 283 78 1 98 72 282
79 1 99 61 281 80 2 00 41 280 81 2 01 14 279 82 2 01 72 278 83 2 02 25 277 84 2
02 94 276 85 2 03 14 275 86 2 03 44 274 87 2 03 66 273 88 2 04 05 272 89 2 04
22 271 90 2 04 41 270 91 2 04 47 269 92 2 04 41 268 93 2 04 27 267 94 2 04 11
266 95 2 03 89 265 96 2 03 61 264 97 2 03 33 263 98 2 02 94 262 99 2 02 50 261
100 2 02 03 260 101 2 01 42 259 102 2 00 64 258 103 1 99 83 257 104 1 99 27 256
105 1 98 47 255 106 1 97 64 254 107 1 96 67 253 108 1 95 67 252 109 1 94 55 251
110 1 93 39 250 111 1 92 11 249 112 1 90 89 248 113 1 89 58 247 114 1 88 28 246
115 1 86 89 245 116 1 85 44 244 117 1 83 97 243 118 1 82 39 242 119 1 80 72 241
120 1 79 00 240 121 1 77 19 239 122 1 75 39 238 123 1 73 50 237 124 1 71 50 236
125 1 69 50 235 126 1 67 53 234 127 1 65 39 233 128 1 63 22 232 129 1 61 28 231
130 1 58 77 230 131 1 56 44 229 132 1 54 05 228 133 1 51 64 227 134 1 49 16 226
135 1 46 97 225 136 1 44 16 224 137 1 41 58 223 138 1 38 94 222 139 1 36 31 221
140 1 33 58 220 141 1 30 83 219 142 1 28 08 218 143 1 25 28 217 144 1 22 42 216
145 1 19 55 215 146 1 16 67 214 147 1 13 72 213 148 1 10 61 212 149 1 07 47 211
150 1 04 27 210 151 1 01 00 209 152 0 97 75 208 153 0 94 47 207 154 0 91 19 206
155 0 87 89 205 156 0 84 58 204 157 0 81 28 203 158 0 77 97 202 159 0 74 61 201
160 0 71 25 200 161 0 67 86 199 162 0 64 44 198 163 0 60 97 197 164 0 57 44 196
165 0 53 89 195 166 0 50 33 194 167 0 46 75 193 168 0 43 19 192 169 0 39 64 191
170 0 36 06 190 171 0 32 50 189 172 0 28 91 188 173 0 25 31 187 174 0 21 69 186
175 0 17 08 185 176 0 14 47 184 177 0 10 86 183 178 0 07 25 182 179 0 03 64 181
180 0 00 00 180

A Catalogue of some of the most eminent Cities and Towns in England, Ireland,
and other Countries, wherein is showed the difference of their Merdians from
London, with the height of the Pole Artique.
Names of the Places. Diff. in time Pole ABerden in Scotland S 0 12 58 67 S.
Albons S 0 02 51 92 Alexandria in Egypt A 2 18 30 97 Amsterdam in Holland A 0
35 52 42 Athens in Greece A 1 87 37 70 Bethelem A 2 77 31 83 Barwick S 0 10 55
82 Bedford S 0 03 52 30 Calice in France 0 00 50 87 Cambridge A 0 03 52 33
Canterbury A 0 08 51 45 Constantinople A 2 30 43 00 Darby S 0 08 53 10 Dublin
in Ireland S 0 43 53 18 Dartmouth S 0 25 50 53 Ely A 0 02 52 33 Grantham S 0 03
52 97 Gloucester S 0 15 52 00 Hartford S 0 02 51 83 Jerusalem A 3 08 32 17
Huntington S 0 02 52 32 Leicester S 0 07 52 67 Lincoln S 0 02 57 25 Nottingham
S 0 07 53 05 Newark S 0 05 53 03 Newcastle S 0 10 54 97 Northampton S 0 07 52
30 Oxford S 0 08 51 90 Peterborough S 0 03 52 38 Richmond S 0 10 54 43
Rochester A 0 05 51 47 Rochel in France S 0 07 45 82 Rome in Italy A 0 83 42 03
Stafford S 0 13 52 92 Stamford S 0 03 52 68 Sbrewsbury S 0 18 54 80 Tredagh in
Ireland S 0 45 53 63 Uppingham S 0 05 52 67 Uraniburge A 0 83 55 90 Warwick S 0
10 52 42 Winchester S 0 08 51 17 Waterford in Ireland S 0 45 52 37 Worcester S
0 15 52 33 Yarmouth A 0 10 52 75 York S 0 07 54 00 LONDON 0 00 51 53

Probl. 2.
To find the Suns greatest declination, and the Poles elevation.
THe Declination of a Planet or other Star is his distance from the Equator,
and as he declines from thence either Northward or Southward, so is the
Declination thereof counted either North or South.



In the annexed Diagram, GMNB represents the Meridian, LK the Equinoctial, HP
the Zodiac, A the North pole, O the South, MB the Horizon, G the Zenith, N the
Nadir, HC a parallel of the Suns diu^nall motion at H, or the Suns greatest
declination from the Equator toward the North pole, PQ a parallel of the Suns
greatest declination from the Equator toward the South pole. From whence it is
apparent, that from M to H is the Suns greatest Meridian altitude, from M to Q
his least; if therefore you deduct MQ, the least Meridian altitude from MH, the
greatest, the difference will be HQ, the Suns greatest declination on both
sides of the Equator, and because the angles HDL and KDP are equal, by the 9th.
of the second, therefore the Suns greatest declination toward the South pole
is equal to his greatest declination toward the North; and consequently, half
the distance of the Tropicks, or the arch HQ, that is, the arch HL is the
quantity of the Suns greatest declination. And then if you deduct the Suns
greatest declination, or the arch HL from the Suns greatest Meridian altitude,
or the arch MH, the difference will be ML, or the height of the Equator above
the Horizon, the complement whereof to a Quadrant is the arch MO equal to AB,
the height of the Pole.

Example.

The Suns greatest meridian altitude at London about the 11 th. of June was
found to be 62 00 00 His least December 10. 14 94 00 Their difference is the
distance of the Tropicks 47 06 00 Half that the Suns greatest declin. 23 53 00
Whose difference from the greatest Altitude is the height of the Equator 38 47
00 Whose complement is the Poles elevation 51 53 00

Probl. 3.
The Suns place and greatest declination given to find the declination of any
point of the Ecliptique.
IN this figure let DFHG denote the Solsticiall Colure, FBAG the Equator, DAH
the Ecliptique, I the Pole of the Ecliptique, E the Pole of the Equator, CEB a
Meridian line passing from E through the Sun at C, and falling upon the Equator
FAG with right angles in the point B. Then is DAF the angle of the Suns
greatest declination, AC the Suns distance from Aries the next Equinoctial
point, BC the declination of the point sought.



Now suppose the sun to be in 00 degrees. of Gemini, which point is distant from
the next Equinoctial point 60 degrees. and his declination be required. In the
rectangled spherical triangle we have known, 1 The hypothenusal AC 60 degrees. 2
The angle at the base BAC 23 degrees. 53 min. Hence to find the perpendicular BC,
by the 8 Case of right angled sphericall triangles, the analogy is, As the
Radius, 90 10.000000 To the sine of BAC, 23.53. 9.601222 So is the sine of AC,
60 9.937531 To the sine of BC, 20.22 9.538753

Probl. 4.
The greatest declination of the Sun, and his distance from the next
Equinoctial point given, to find his right ascension.
IN the Triangle ABC of the former diagram, having as before, the angle BAC,
and the hypothenusal AC, the Right Ascension of the sun AB may be found by the
7 Case of right angled spherical triangles: for As the Radius, 90 10.^00000 To
the Cosine of CAB, 23.53 9.962299 So is the tangent of AC, 60 10.238561 To the
Tangent of AB, 57.80 10.200860

Only note, that if the Right Ascension of the point sought be in the second
Quadrant (as in) the complement of the arch found to 180 is the arch sought. If
in the third Quadrant (as in) add a semicircle to the arch found; if in the
last Quadrant, substract the arch found from 360, and their difference shall be
the Right Ascension sought.

Probl. 5.
The Latitude of the place, and declination of the Sun given, to find the
Ascensionall difference, or time of the Suns rising before or after the hour
of six.
THe Ascensionall difference is nothing else but the difference between the
Ascension of any point in the Ecliptique in a right Sphere, and the ascension
of the same point in an oblique Sphere.



As in the annexed Diagram, AGEV represents the Meridian, EMT the Horizon, GMCV
the Equator, A the North Pole, VT the complement of the Poles elevation, BC the
Suns declination, DB an arch of the Ecliptique, DC the Right Ascension, MC the
Ascensionall difference. Then in the right angled triangle BMC, we have
limited, 1 The angle BMC, the complement of the Poles elevation, 38 degrees. 47
min. 2 The perpendicular BC, the Suns Declination 20 degrees. 22 min.


Hence to find MC the Ascensional difference, by the 6 Case of right angled
Spherical Triangles, the Proportion is, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 To the
tangent of BC, 20.22 9.566231 So is co-tangent of BMC, 38.47 10.099861 To the
sine of MC, 27.62 9.666092

Probl. 6.
The Latitude of the place, and the Suns Declination given, to find his
Amplitude.
THe Suns Amplitude is an arch of the Horizon intercepted between the Equator,
and the point of rising, that is, in the preceding Diagram the arch MB,
therefore in the right angled Sphericall triangle MBC, having the angle BMC the
height of the Equator, 38 degrees. 47 min. and BC the Suns declination 20 de. 22 m.
given, the hypothenusal MB may be found by the 5 Case of right angled
sphericall triangles: for As the sine of BMC, 38.47 9.793863 Is to the Radius,
90 10.000000 So is the sine of BC, 20.22 9.538606 To the sine of MB, 33.75
9.744743

Probl. 7.
The Latitude of the place, and the Suns Declination given, to find the time
when he will be East or West.
LEt ABCD in the annexed diagram represent the Meridian, BD the Horizon, FG the
Equator, HNK an arch of a Meridian, AC the Azimuth of East and West, or first
Vertical, EM, a parallel of declination. Then in the right angled sphericall
triangle AHN, we have known, 1 The perpendicular AH, the complement of the
Poles elevation, 38 degrees. 47 mi. 2 The hypothenusal HN, the complement of the
Suns declination, 69 degrees. 78 m.


Hence the angle AHN may be found by the 13 Case of right angled sphericall
triangles.



As the Radius 90 10,000000 To the tangent of AH 38.47. 9.900138 So is the
co-tangent HN 69.78. 9.566231 To the cosine of AHN 72.98. 9.466369

Whose complement NHZ 17 degr. 2 min. being converted into time, gives one
hour, 13 minutes, or centesmes of an hour, and so much is it after six in the
morning when the Sun will be due East, and before six at night, when he will be
due West.

Probl. 8.
The Latitude of the place and Declination of the Sun given, to find his
Altitude when he comes to be due East or west.
IN the right angled sphericall triangle NQZ of the last Diagram, we have
limited. 1. The perpendicular QN, the Suns declination. 2. The angle at the
base NZQ, the Poles elevation 51 degr. 53 min. Hence to find the hypothenusal
NZ, by the fifth Case of right angled sphericall Triangles, the proportion is;
As the sine of the ang. NZQ 51.53. 9.893725 Is to the Radius 90 10.000000 So is
the sine of NQ 20.22. 9.538606 To the sine of NZ 26.20. 9.644881

Probl. 9.
The Latitude of the place, and Declination of the Sun given, to find the Suns
Azimuth at the hour of six.
IN the right angled sphericall triangle AIH of the seventh Problem, we have
known: 1. The base AH, the complement of the Poles elevation 38 degr. 47 min.
and the perpendicular IH, the complement of the Suns declination 69 degr. 78
min. Hence to find the angle at the base HAI the suns Azimuth at the hour of
six, by the 11 Case of right angled spherical triangles, the proportion is, As
the Radius, 90 10.000000 To the sine of AH, 38.47 9.793863 So the co-tangent of
HI, 69.78 9.566231 To the co-tangent of HAI, 77. 9.360094

Probl. 10.
The Poles elevation, with the Suns Altitude and Declination given, to find
the Suns Azimuth.
IN the oblique angled Spherical triangle AHS, in the Diagram of the seventh
Problem, we have known, the side AH, the complement of the Poles elevation, 38
degrees. 47 min. HS, the complement of the Suns declination, 74 degrees. 83 min. And
the side SA, the complement of the Suns altitude, 57 degrees. 53 min, to find the
angle SAH: Now then, by the 11 Case of Oblique angled Sphericall Triangles, I
work as is there directed.

SH, 74.83 HA, 38,47 9.793863 SA, 57.53 9.9^6174 Sum of the sides 170.83
19.720037 Half sum 85. 41. 50 Dif. of HA and half sum, 46.91.50 9.863737
Dif. of SA and half sum, 27.88.50 9.669990 The doubled Radius 20.000000 Their
sum 39.533727 From whence substract 19.720037 There rests 19.813690 The half
whereof 9.906845

Is the sine of 53 degrees. 80 min. which doubled is 107 degrees. 60 min. the Suns
Azimuth from the north, and 72 degrees. 40 min. the complement thereof to a
Semicircle is the Suns Azimuth from the South.

CHAP. II.
THE ART OF SHADOWS: Commonly called DIALLING. Plainly showing out of the
Sphere, the true ground and reason of making all kind of Dials that any plain
is capable of.
Problem 1.
How to divide diverse lines, and make a Chord to any proportion given.
FOrasmuch as there is continual use both of Scales and Chords in drawing the
Scheams and Dials following, it will be necessary first to show the making of
them, that such as cannot have the benefit of the skilful artificers labor,
may by their own pains supply that defect.

Draw therefore upon a piece of paper or pastboard a straight line of what
length you please, divide this line into 10 equal parts, and each 10 into 10
more, so is your line divided into 100 equal parts, by help where of a line of
Chords to any proportion may be thus made.

First, prepare a Table, therein set down the degrees, halves, and quarters, if
you please, from one to 90. Unto each degree and part of a degree join the
Chord proper to it, which is the natural sine of half the arch doubled, by
the 19th. of the second of the first part: if you double then the natural
sines of 5. 10. 20. 30. degrees, you shall produce the Chords of 10. 20. 40.
60. degrees: Thus 17364 the sine of 10 de. being doubled, the sum will be
34^28, the Chord of 20 degrees. and so of the rest as in the Table following.

De Chord 1 17 2 35 3 52 4 70 5 87 6 105 7 122 8 139 9 157 10 175 11 192 12 209
13 226 14 244 15 261 16 278 17 296 18 313 19 330 20 347 21 364 22 382 23 398 24
416 25 432 26 450 27 466 28 384 29 501 30 ^18 31 534 32 551 33 568 34 585 35
601 36 618 37 635 38 651 39 668 40 684 41 700 42 717 43 733 44 749 45 765 44
781 47 797 48 813 49 830 50 845 51 861 52 876 53 892 54 908 55 923 56 939 57
954 58 970 59 984 60 1000 61 1015 62 1030 63 1045 64 1060 65 1074 66 1089 67
1104 68 1118 69 1133 70 1147 71 1161 72 1176 73 1190 74 1204 75 1217 76 1231 77
1245 78 1259 79 1273 80 1286 81 1299 82 1312 83 1325 84 1338 85 1351 86 1364 87
1377 88 1389 89 1402 90 1414

This done, proportion the Radius of a circle to what extent you please, make
AB equal thereto, in the middle whereof, as in C, erect the perpendicular CD,
and draw the lines AD and BD, equal in length to your line of equal parts, so
have you made an equiangled Triangle, by help whereof and the Table aforesaid,
the Chord of any arch proportionable to this Radius may speedily be obtained.

As for example. Let there be required the Chord of 30 degrees. the number in the
Table answering to this arc is 518, or in proportion to this Scale 52 almost,
I take therefore 52 from the Scale of equal parts, and set them from D to E and
F, and draw the line OF, which is the Chord desired. Thus may you find the
Chord of any other arch agreeable to this Radius. Or if your Radius be either
of a greater or lesser extent, if you make the base of your Triangle AB equal
thereunto, you may in like manner find the Chord of any arch agreeable to any
Radius given. Only remember that if the Chord of the arch desired exceed 60
degrees. the sides of the Triangle AD and DB must be continued from A and B as far
as need shall require. In this manner is made the line of Chords adjoining,
answerable to the Radius of the Fundamental Scheme.



And in this manner may you find the Sine, Tangent or Secant of any arch
proportionable to any Radius, by help of the Canon of Natural Sines, Tangents
and Secants, and the aforesaid Scale of equal parts, as by example may more
plainly appear.

Let there be required the sine of 44 degrees in the table of natural sines,
the number answering to 44 degrees is 694. I take therefore with my compasses
69 from my Scale of equal parts, and set them from D to G and H; so is the line
GH the sine of 44 degrees, where the Radius of the circle is AB.

Again, if there were required the tangent of 44 degrees, the number in the
table is 965; and therefore 96 set from D to K and L shall give the tangent
required; and so for any other.

Your Scales being thus prepared for the Mechanical part, we will now show you
how to project the Sphere in plano, and so proceed to the arithmeticall work.

Probl. 2.
The explanation and making of the fundamental Diagram.
THis Scheme represents to the eye the true and natural situation of those
circles of the Sphere, whereof we shall have use in the description of such
sorts of Dials as any flat or plane is capable of. It is therefore necessary
first to explain that, and the making thereof, that the Symetry of the Scheme
with the Globe being well understood, the representation of every plane therein
may be the better conceived.

Suppose then that the Globe elevated to the height of the Pole be pressed flat
down into the plane of the Horizon, then will the outward circle or limb of
this Scheme NESW represent that Horizon, and all the circles contained in the
upper Hemisphere of the Globe may artificially be contrived, and represented
thereon, as Azimuths, Almicanters, Meridians, Parallels, Equator, Tropicks,
circles of position, and such like, the which in this Diagram are thus
distinguished.

The letter Z represents the Zenith of the place, and the center of the
horizontal circle, NZS represents the meridian, P the pole of the world
elevated above the North part of the Horizon N here at London, 51 degrees 53
minutes, or centesmes of a degree, the complement whereof PZ 38 degrees, 47
minutes, and the distance between the Pole and the Zenith; EZW is the prime
vertical, DZG and CZV any other intermediate Azimuths, NOS a circle of
position, EKW the Equator, the distance whereof from Z is equal to PN, the
height of the Pole, or from S equal to PZ, the complement thereof, HBQX the
Tropic or parallel of Cancer, LFM, the Tropique of Capricorn, the rest of the
circles intersecting each other in the point P, are the meridians or
hour-circles, cutting the Horizon and other circles of this Diagram in such
manner as they do in the Globe itself.



Amongst these the Azimuths only in this projection become straight lines, all
the rest remain circles, and are greater or lesser, according to their natural
situation in the Globe, and may be thus described.

Open your compasses to the extent of the line AB in the former Problem, (or
to any other extent you please) with that Radius, or Semidiameter describe the
horizontal circle NESW, cross it at right angles in Z with the lines NZS and
EZW.

That done, seek the place of the Pole at P, through which the hour circles
must pass, the Equinoctial point at K, the Tropiques at T and F, the reclining
circle at O, and the declining reclining at A; all which may thus be found.

The Zenith in the Globe or Material Sphere is the Pole of the Horizon, and Z
in the Scheme is the center of the limb, representing the same, from which
point the distance of each circle being given both ways, as it lies in the
Sphere, and set upon the Azimuth, or straight line of the Scheme proper
thereunto, you may by help of the natural tangents of half their arches give
three points to draw each circle by, for if the natural tangents of both
distances from the Zenith be added together, the half thereof shall be the
Semidiameters of those circles desired.

The reason why the natural tangent of half the arches are here taken, may be
made plain by this Diagram following. Wherein making EZ the Radius, SZN is a
tangent line thereunto, upon which if you will project the whole Semicircle
SWN, it is manifest, by the work, that every part of the lines ZN or ZS can be
no more then the tangent of half the arch desired, because the whole line ZN or
ZS is the tang. of no more then half the Quadrant, that is, of 45 degrees, by
the 19th. of the second Chapter of the first Part; and therefore WEA is but
half the angle WZA and WEB is but half the angle WZB.



Now then if EZ or Radius of the fundamental Scheme be 1000, ZP shall be 349,
the natural tangent of 19 degrees, 23 minutes, 50 seconds, the half of 38
degrees, 47 minutes, the distance between the North pole and the Zenith in our
Latitude of 51 degrees, 53 minutes, or centesmes of a degree. And the South
pole being as much under the Horizon as the North is above it, the distance
thereof from the Zenith must be the complement of 38 degrees, 47 minutes to a
Semicircle, that is, 141 degrees, 53 minutes; and as the half of 38 degrees, 47
minutes, viz. 19 degrees, 23 minutes, 50 seconds is the quantity of the angle
PEZ, and the tangent thereof the distance from Z to P, so the half of 141
degrees, 53 minutes, viz. 70 degrees, 76 minutes, 50 seconds must be the
measure of the angle in the circumference between the Zenith and the South, the
tangent whereof 2866 must be the distance also, and the tangents of these two
arches added together 3215, is the whole diameter of that circle, the half
whereof 1607, that is, one Radius, and near 61 hundred parts of another is the
Semidiameter or distance from P to L in the former Scheme, to which extent open
the compasses, and set off the distance PL, and therewith draw the circle WPE
for the six of the clock hour.

The Semidiameters of the other circles are to be found in the same manner: the
distance between the Zenith and the Equinoctial is always equal to the height
of the Pole, which in our Latitude is 51 degr. 53 min. and therefore the half
thereof 25 degrees, 76 minutes, 50 seconds is the measure of the angle WEB, and
the natural tangent thereof 483, which being added to the tangent of the
complement 2070, their aggregate 2553 will be the whole diameter of that
circle, and 1277 the Radius or Semidiameter by which to draw the Equinoctial
circle EKW.

The Tropique of Cancer is 23 degrees, 53 minutes above the Equator, and 66
degrees 47 minutes distant from the Pole, and the Pole in this Latitude is 38
degrees 47 min. distant from the Zenith, which being subtracted from 66
degrees 47 minutes, the distance of the Tropique of Cancer from the Zenith,
will be 28, the half thereof is 14, whose natural tangent 249 being set from Z
to T, gives the point T in the Meridian, by which that parallel must pass;
the distance thereof from the Zenith on the North side is TN 90 degrees, and
substracting 23 degrees, 53 minutes, the height of the Tropique above the
Equator, from 38 degrees, 47 minutes, the height of the Equator above the
Horizon, their difference is 14 degrees, 94 minutes, the distance of the
Tropique from N under the Horizon; and so the whole distance thereof from Z is
104 degrees, 94 minutes, the half whereof is 52 degrees, 47 minutes, and the
natural tangent thereof 1302 added to the former tangent 249, gives the whole
diameter of that circle 1551, whose half 776 is the Semidiameter desired, and
gives the center to draw that circle by.

The Tropique of Capricorn is 23 degrees, 53 minutes below the Equator, and
therefore 113 degrees 53 minutes from the North pole, from which if you deduct,
as before, 38 degrees, 47 minutes, the distance of the Pole from the Zenith,
the distance of the Tropique of Capricorn from the Zenith will be 75 degrees, 6
minutes, and the half thereof 37 degrees, 53 minutes, whose natural tangent 768
being set from Z to F, gives the point F in the Meridian, by which that
parallel must pass: the distance thereof from the Zenith on the North side is
ZN 90 degrees, as before; and adding 23 degrees, 53 minutes, the distance of
the Tropique from the Equator to 38 degrees, 47 minutes, the distance of the
Equator from the Horizon, their aggregate is 62 degrees, the distance of the
Tropique from the Horizon, which being added to ZN 90 degrees, their aggregate
is 152 degrees, and the half thereof 76 degrees, whose natural tangent 4011
being added to the former tangent 768, gives the whole diameter of that circle
4.779, whose half 2.389 is the Semidiameter desired, and gives the center to
draw that circle by.

The distance of the reclining circle NOS from Z to O is 40 degrees, the half
thereof 20, whose natural tangent 3.64 set from Z to O, gives the point O in
the prime vertical EZW, by which that circle must pass; the distance thereof
from the Zenith on the East side is ZE 90 degrees, to which adding 50 degrees,
the complement of the former arch, their aggregate 140 degrees is the distance
from Z Eastward, and the half thereof 70 degrees, whose natural tangent 2747
being added to the former tangent 364, their aggregate 3111 is the whole
diameter of that circle, and the half thereof 1555 is the Semidiameter desired,
and gives the center to draw that circle by.

The distance of the declining reclining circle DAG from the Zenith is ZA 35
degrees. the half thereof 17 degrees, 50 minutes, whose natural tangent 315 being
set from Z to A, gives the point by which that circle must pass, and the
natural tangent of 7^ degr. 50 min. the complement thereof 317^ being added
thereto is 3486, the whole diameter of the circle, and the half thereof 1743,
the Semidiameter desired, and gives the center to draw that circle by.

The straight lines CZA or DZG are put upon the limb by help of a line of
Chords 30 degrees distant from the Cardinal points NESW, and must cross each
other at right angles in Z, representing two Azimuths equidistant from the
Meridian and prime vertical.

Last of all, the hour-circles are thus to be drawn; first, seek the center of
the six of clock hour-circle, as formerly directed, making ZE the Radius, and
is found at L upon the Meridian line continued from P to L, which cross at
right angles in L with the line 8 L 4, extended far enough to serve the turn,
make PL the Radius, then shall 8 L 4 be a tangent line thereunto, and the
natural tangents of the Equinoctial hour arches, that is the tangent of 15
degrees 268 for one hour, of 30 degr. 577 for two, hours, of 45 degrees 1000
for three hours of 60 degrees. 1732 for four hours, and 75 degrees. 3732 for five hours
set upon the line from L both ways, that is, from L to 5 and 7, 4 and 8, and
will give the true center of those hour-circles: thus, 5 upon the line 8 L 4 is
the center of the hour-circle 5 P 5, and 7 the center of the hour-circle 7 P 7;
and so of the rest.

The centers of these hour-circles may be also found upon the line 8 L 4 by the
natural secants of the same Equinoctial arches, because the hypothenuse in a
right angled plain triangle is always the secant of the angle at the base, and
the perpendicular the tangent of the same angle: if therefore the tangent set
from L does give the center, the secant set from P shall give that center also.
The Scheme with the lines and circles thereof being thus made plain, we come
now to the Art of Dialling it self.

Probl. 3.
Of the several plains, and to find their situation.
ALL great Circles of the Sphere, projected upon any plain, howsoever situated,
do become straight lines, as any one may experiment upon an ordinary bowl
thus. If he saw the Bowl in the midst, and join the two parts together again,
there will remain upon the circumference of the Bowl, some sign of the former
partition, in form of a great Circle of the Sphere: now then, if in any part of
that Circle the roundnesse of the bowl be taken off with a smoothing plain or
otherwise, as the bowl becomes flat, so will the Circle upon the bowl become
a straight line; from whence it follows, that the hour lines of every Dial
(being great Circles of the Sphere) drawn upon any plain superficies, must also
be straight lines.

Now the art of Dialling consists in the artificial finding out of these
lines, and their distances each from other, which do continually vary
according to the situation of the plain on which they are projected.

Of these plains there are but three sorts. 1. Parallel to the Horizon, as is
the Horizontal only. 2. Perpendicular to the Horizon, as are all erect plains,
whether they be such as are direct North, South, East or West, or such as
decline from these points of North, South, East, or West. 3. Inclining to the
Horizon, or rather Reclining from the Zenith, and these are direct plains
reclining and inclining North and South, and reclining and inclining East and
West, or Declining-reclining and inclining plains.


To contrive the hour lines upon these several plains, there are certain
Spherical arches and angles, in number six, which must of necessity be known,
and diverse of these are in some Cases given, in others they are sought.

1. The first is an arch of a great Circle perpendicular to the plain,
comprehended betwixt the Zenith and the plain, which is the Reclination, as ZT,
ZK, and ZF, in the fundamental Diagram. 2. The second is an arch of the Horizon
betwixt the Meridian and Azimuth passing by the poles of the plain, as SV or NC
in the Scheme. 3. The third is an arch of the plain betwixt the Meridian and
the Horizon, prescribing the distance of the 12 a clock hour from the
horizontal line, as PB in the Scheme of the 11th. Probl. 4. The fourth is an
arch of the plain betwixt the Meridian and the substile, which limits the
distance thereof from the 12 a clock hour line, as ZR in the Scheme. 5. The
fifth is an arch of a great Circle perpendicular to the plain, comprehended
betwixt the Pole of the World; and the plain, commonly called the height of the
style, as PR in the Scheme. 6. The last is an angle at the Pole betwixt the two
Meridians, the one of the place, the other of the plain (taking the substile in
the common sense for the Meridian of the plain) as the angle ZPR in the
fundamental Scheme.
The two first of these arches are always given, or may be found by the rules
following.

To find the Inclination or Reclination of any plain.
If the plain seem to be level with the Horizon, you may try it by laying a
ruler thereupon, and applying the side of your Quadrant AB to the upper side of
the ruler, so that the center may hang a little over the end of the ruler, and
holding up a thread and plummet, so that it may play upon the center, if it
shall fall directly upon his level line AC, making no angle therewith, it is an
horizontal plain.



If the plain seem to be vertical, like the wall of an upright building, you
may try it by holding the Quadrant so that the thread may fall on the plumb
line AC, for then if the side of the Quadrant shall lie close to the plain, it
is erect, and a line drawn by that side of the Quadrant shall be a Vertical
line, as the line DE in the figure.

If the plain shall be found to incline to the Horizon, you may find out the
quantity of the inclination after this manner. Apply the side of your Quadrant
AC to the plain, so shall the thread upon the limb give you the inclination
required.

Suppose the plain to be BGED, and the line FZ to be vertical, to which
applying the side of your Quadrant AC, the thread upon the limb shall make the
angle CAH the inclination required, whose complement is the reclination.

To find the declination of a plain.
To effect this, there are required two observations, the first is of the
horizontal distance of the Sun from the pole of the plain, the second is of the
Suns altitude, thereby to get the Azimuth: and these two observations must be
made at one instant of time as near as may be, that the parts of the work may
the better agree together.

1. For the horizontal distance of the Sun from the pole of the plain, apply
one edge of the Quadrant to the plain, so that the other may be perpendicular
to it, and the limb may be toward the Sun, and hold the whole Quadrant
horizontal as near as you can conjecture, then holding a thread and plummet at
full liberty, so that the shadow of the thread may pass through the center and
limb of the Quadrant, observe then what degrees of the limb the shadow cuts,
counting them from that side of the Quadrant which is perpendicular to the
horizontal line, those degrees are called the Horizontal distance. 2. At the
same instant observe the Suns altitude, by this altitude you may get the Suns
Azimuth from the South, by the 10th. Problem of the first Chapter hereof.
When you make your observation of the Suns horizontal distance, mark whether
the shadow of the thread fall between the South, and the perpendicular side of
the Quadrant, or not, for, 1. If the shadow fall between them, then the
distance and Azimuth added together do make the declination of the plain, and
in this case the declination is upon the same coast whereon the Suns Azimuth
is. 2. If the shadow fall not between them, then the difference of the distance
and Azimuth is the declination of the plain, and if the Azimuth be the greater
of the two, then the plain declineth to the same coast whereon the Azimuth is,
but if the distance be the greater, then the plain declneth to the contrary
coast to that whereon the Suns Azimuth is.


Note here further, that the declination so found, is always accounted from
the South, and that all declinations are numbered from North or South, toward
East or West, and must not exceed 90 degrees.

1. If therefore the number of declination exceed 90, you must take its
complement to 180, and the same shall be the plains declination from the North.
2. If the declination found exceed 180 degrees. then the excess above 180, gives
the plains declination from the North, toward that Coast which is contrary to
the Coast whereon the Sun is.
By this accounting from North and South, you may always make your plains
declination not to exceed a Quadrant or 90 de. And as when it declines nothing,
it is a full South or North plain, so if it decline just 90, it is then a full
East or West plain.

These precepts are sufficient to find the declination of any plain howsoever
situated, but that there may be no mistake, we will add an Example.

1 Example.

Let the horizontall distance from the pole of the plains horizontal line
represented in the last diagram by RZ the line of shadow, be 24 degrees, and
let the Suns Azimuth from the South be 40 degrees. describe the circle BCMP, the
which shall represent the horizontal circle, and draw the diameter BAC
representing the horizontal line of the plain, and the diameter MP representing
the poles of the plains horizontal line; then by a line of Chords set off your
horizontal distance 24 degrees (found by observation in the afternoon) from P
to G, and from G to S set off the suns Aizmuth 40 degrees, so shall the point S
represent the South, N the North, E the East, and W the West.

Now because the line of shadow AG, falls between P the pole of the plains
horizontal line, and S the South point, therefore according to the former
direction, I add the horizontal distance PG 24 degrees. to the Suns Azimuth GS 40
degrees, and their aggregate is PS 64 degrees. the declination sought; and in this case
it is upon the same coast with the sun, that is West, according to the rule
given, and as the figure it self shows, the East and North points being hid
from our sight by the plain it self; this therefore is a South plain declining
West 64 degrees.

2. Example.

Let the horizontal distance taken in the afternoon by observation, be 67
degrees, and the Suns Azimuth from the South 42 degr be given, then draw, as
before, the Circle BCMP, and from P to H set off the horizontal distance 67
degrees. from H to S the suns Azimuth, 42 degrees. Now then, because the South point
does fall between P the pole of the plains horizontal line, and H, the
horizontal distance, I deduct the Suns Azimuth HS 42 degrees, from HP the
horizontal distance, and their difference is SP 25 degrees, the declination
sought; and because the horizontal distance is greater than the Azimuth,
therefore the declination is contrary to the Coast of the Sun. This then is a
South plain declining East 25 degrees.

To find a Meridian line upon an Horizontal plain.
If your plain be level with your Horizon, draw thereon the Circle BCMP, then
holding a thread and plummet, so as the shadow thereof may fall upon the
center, and draw in the last diagram the line of shadow HA: then if the Suns
Azimuth shall be 50 degrees. and the line of shadow taken in the afternoon, set off
the 50 degrees. from H to S, and the line SN shall be the Meridian line desired.

Probl. 4.
To draw the hour lines upon the Horizontal plain.
THis plane in respect of the Poles thereof, which lie in the Vertex and Nadir
of the place may be called vertical, in respect of the plane it self, which is
parallel to the Horizon, horizontal, howsoever it be termed, the making of the
Dial is the same, and there is but one only arch of the Meridian betwixt the
pole of the world and the plane required to the artificial projecting of the
hour lines thereof, which being the height of the pole above the horizon (equal
to the height of the style above the plane) is always given, by the help
whereof we may presently proceed to calculate the hour distances in manner
following.

This plane is represented in the fundamental Diagram by the outward circle
ESWN, in which the diameter SN drawn from the South to the North may go both
for the Meridian line, and the Meridian circle, Z for the Zenith, P for the
pole of the world, and the circles drawn through P for the hour-circles of 1,
2, 3, 4, etc. as they are numbered from the Meridian, and limit the distance of
each hour line from the Meridian upon the plane, according to the arches of the
Horizon, N 11, N 10, N 9, etc. which by the several Triangles SP 11, SP 10, SP
9, or their verticals NP 11, NP 10, NP 9 may thus be found; because every
quarter of the Horizon is alike, you may begin with which you will, and resolve
each hours distance, either by the small Triangle NP 11, or the vertical
Triangle KP 11. In the Triangle PN11, the side PN is always given, and is the
height of the pole above the horizon, the which at London is 51 degrees. 53 min.
and the angle at P is given one hours distance from the Meridian, whose measure
in the Equinoctial is 15 degrees. and the angle at N is always right, that is 90
degrees. wherefore by the first case of right angled spherical Triangles, the
perpendicular N 11 may thus be found. As Radius 90, 10.000000 To the tangent of
NP11, 15d. 9.428052 So is the sine of PN 51.53. 9.893725 To the tangent of N11,
11.85. 9.321777

Which is the distance of the hours of 1 and 11, on each side of the Meridian,
thus in all respects must you find the distance of 2 and 10 of clock, by
resolving the triangle NP10, and of 3 and 9 of clock, by resolving the triangle
NP9; and so of the rest: in which, as the angle at Pincreafeth which for 2
hours is 30 degrees, for 3 hours 45 degr. for 4 hours 60 degr. for 5 hours 75
degr. so will the arches of the Horizon N10, N9, N8, N7, vary proportionably,
and give each hours true distance from the Meridian, which is the thing desired.

Probl. 5.
To draw the hour lines upon a direct South or North plane.
EVery perpendicular plane, whether direct or declining, lies in some Azimuth
or other; as here the South wall or plane does lie in the prime vertical or
Azimuth of East and West, represented in the fundamental Diagram by the line
EZW, and therefore it cutteth the Meridian of the place at right angles in the
Zenith, and has the two poles of the plane seated in the North and South
intersection of the Meridian and Horizon; and because the plane hides the
North pole from our sight, we may therefore conclude, (it being a general rule
that every plane has that pole depressed, or raised above it, which lies open
unto it) that the South pole is elevated thereupon, and the style of this Dial
must look downwards thereunto, erected above the plane the height of the
Antartick Pole, which being an arch of the Meridian betwixt the South pole and
the Nadir, is equal to the opposite part thereof, betwixt the North pole and
the Zenith; and therefore the complement of the North pole above the horizon.

Suppose then that P in the fundamental Scheme, be now the South pole, and N
the South part of the Meridian, S the North; then do all the hour-circles from
the pole cut the line EZW, representing the plane unequally, as the hour lines
will do upon the plane it self, and as it does appear by the figures set at the
end of every hour line in the Scheme. Now having already the poles elevation
given, as was in the horizontal, there is nothing else to be done, but to
calculate the true hour-distances upon the line EZW from the meridian SZN; and
then to proceed, as formerly, and note that because the hours equidistant on
both sides the meridian, are equal upon the plane, the one half being found,
the other is also had, you may therefore begin with which side you will.

In the triangle ZP11, right angled at Z, I have ZP given, the complement of
the height of the pole 38 degrees. 47 min. the which is also the height of the
style to this Dial, and the angle at P15 degrees one hours distance from the
meridian upon the Equator to find the side Z11, for which by the first case of
right angled sphericall triangles, the proportion is, as before. As the Radius
90, 10.000000 To the sine of PZ 38.47. 9.793863 So is the tangent of ZP11, 15d.
9.428052 To the tangent of Z11, 9.47. 9.221915

And thus in all respects must you find the distance of 2 and 10, of 3 and 9;
and so forward, as was directed for the hours in the horizontal plane.

The North plane is but the back side of the South, lying in the same Azimuth
with it, and represented in the Scheme by the back part of the same straight
line EZW, whatsoever therefore is said of the South plane may be applied to the
North; because as the South pole is above the South plane 38 degr. 47 min. so
is the North pole under the North plane as much, and each style must respect
his own pole, only the meridian upon this plane represents the midnight, and
not the noon, and the hours about it 9, 10, 11, and 1, 2, 3, are altogether
useless, because the Sun in his greatest northern declination has but 39
degr. 90 min. of amplitude in this our Latitude; and therefore rises but 22
min. before 4. in the morning, and sets so much after 8 at night; neither
can it shine upon this plane longer then 35 min. past 7 in the morning, and
returning to it as much before 5 at night, because then the Sun passes on the
North side of the prime vertical, in which this plane lies, and comes upon
the South.

Now therefore to make this Dial, is but to turn the South Dial upside down,
and leave out all the superfluous hours between 5 and 7, 4 and 8, and the Dial
to the North plane is made to your hand.

The Geometrical projection.
To project these and the Horizontal Dials, do thus: First, draw the
perpendicular line CEB, which is the twelve of clock hour, cross it at right
angles with 6C6, which is the six of clock hour; then take with your compasses
60 degrees. from a line of Chords, and making C the center draw the circle 6E6,
representing the azimuth in which the plane does lie; this done, take from the
same Chord all the hour distances, and setting one foot of your compasses in E,
with the other mark out those hour distances before found by calculation, both
ways upon the circle 6E6; straight lines drawn from the center C to those
pricks in the circle are the true hour lines desired.

Having drawn all the hour lines, take from the same line of Chords the arch of
your poles elevation, or style above the plane, and place it from E to O, draw
the pricked line COA representing the axis or height of the style, from any
part of the meridian draw a line parallel to 6C6, as is BA, and it shall make a
tria^gle, the fittest form to support the style at the true height; let the
line 6C6 be horizontal, the triangular style CBA erected at right angles over
the 12 of clock line, and then is the Dial perfected either for the
Horizontal, or the direct North and South planes.

Probl. 6.
To draw the hour lines upon the direct East or West planes.
AS the planes of South and North Dials do lie in the Azimuth of East and West,
and their poles in the South and North parts of the meridian; so do the planes
of East and West Dials lie in the South and North azimuth, and their poles in
the East and West part of the Horizon, from whence these Dials receive their
denomination, and because they are parallel to the meridian line in the
fundamental Scheme SZN, some call them meridian planes.

And because the meridian, in which this plane lies, is one of the
hour-circles, and no plane that lies in any of the hour circles can cut the
axis of the world, but must be parallel thereunto; therefore the hour lines of
all such planes are also parallel each to other, and in the fundamental Scheme
may be represented in this manner.

Let NESW in this case be supposed to be the Eq^inoctiall divided into 24
equal parts, and let the pricked line E 8. 7. parallel to ZS be a tangent line
to that circle in E, straight lines drawn from the center Z through the equal
divisions of the limb, intersecting the tangent line, shall give points in 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, through which parallels being drawn to the prime
vertical, or 6 of clock hour line EZW, you have the hour lines desired, which
may for more certainties sake be found by tangents also; for making ZE of the
former Scheme to be the Radius, and E 8. 7. a tangent line, as before; then
shall the natural tangent of 15 degr. 268 taken from a diagonal scale equal to
the Radius, and set both ways from E upon the tangent line E 8. 7. gives the
distance of the hours of 5 and 7, the tangent of 30 degr. the distance of the
hours of 4 and 8, and the tangent of 45 degr. the distance of the hours of 3
and 9, etc. from the six of clock hour, as before; and is a general rule for
all Latitudes whatsoever.

The Geometrical projection.
Proceed then to make the Dial, and first draw the horizontal line BA upon any
part thereof, as at A, draw two obscure arches DBG and FCE; and with that line
of Chords, with which the arches were drawn set off 38 degrees. 47 min. the height
of the Equator at London from B to D, and from C to E, set off likewise 51 degrees.
53 min. the height of the Pole from B to G, and from C to F, and draw the
straight line DAE, representing the Equinoctial, as is manifest by the angle
BAD 38 degrees. 47 min. which the Horizon makes with the Equator: and the straight
line FAG representing the Axis of the World, as is manifest by the angle FAC 51
degrees. 53 min. which the Pole and Horizon make, and this will be also the six of
clock hour, or substile of this Dial, seeing the plain it self lies in the
Meridian, 90 degrees. distant. And because the top of the Style (which may be a
straight pin fixed in the point A) does give the shadow in all plains that are
parallel to the Axis, it will be necessary to proportion the style to the
plain, that the hour lines may be enlarged or contracted according to the
length thereof, the which is done in this manner. Let the length of the plain
from A be given in some known parts, then because the extreme hour of the East
Dial is 11, in the West 1, reckoning 15 degrees. to every hour from six, the arch
of the Equator will be 75 degrees. and therefore in the right angled plain triangle
AHE, we have given the base AE, which is the length of the plain from A, and
the angle AHE 75 degrees. to find the perpendicular HA, for which (by the 1 Case of
right angled plain Triangles) the proportion will be, As the Radius, 90
10.000000 To the Base AE, 3.48 2.541579 So the Tangent of AEH, 15 9.428052 To
the perpendicular HA, 93 1.969631

The length of the style being thus proportioned to the plain, make that the
Radius of a Circle, and then the Equator DAE shall be a Tangent line thereunto,
and therefore, the natural Tangent of 15 degrees. being set upon the Equinoctial
DAE both ways from A, shall give the points of 5 and 7: the Tangent of 30 degrees.
the points of 8 and 4, etc. through which straight lines being drawn parallel
to the six a clock hour, you have at one work made both the East and West
Dials, only remember that because the Sun rises before 4 in Cancer, and
sets after 8, you must add two hours before six in the East Dial, and two
hours after six in the West, that so the plain may have as many hours as it
is capable of.

The West Dial is the same in all respect with the East, only the arch BD, or
the height of the Equator, must be drawn on the right hand of the center A for
the West Dial, and on the left for the East, that so the hour lines crossing
it at right angles, may respect the Poles of the world to which they are
parallel.

Probl. 7.
To draw the houre-lines upon a South or North erect plain declining East or
West, to any declination given.
EVery erect plain lies under some Azimuth or other, and those only are said
to decline which differ from the Meridian and Prime Vertical. The declination
therefore being attained by the rules already given, (or by what other means
you like best) we come to the calculation of the Dial it self, represented in
the fundamental Scheme by the right line GZD, the Poles whereof are C and V,
the declination from the South Easterly NC, or North Westerly SV, 25 degrees.
supposing now S to be North, and N South; W East, and E the West point, the
hour circles proper to this plain are the black lines passing through the Pole
P, and crossing upon the plain GZD, wherein note generally that where they run
nearest together, thereabouts must the sub-stile stand, and always on the
contrary side to the declination, as in this example declining East, the style
must stand on the West side (supposing P to be the South Pole) between Z and D,
the reason whereof does manifestly appear; because the Sun rising East, sends
the shadow of the Axis West, and always to the opposite part of the Meridian
wherein he is, wherefore reason enforces, that the morning hours be put on
the West side of the Meridian, as the evening hours are on the East, and from
the same ground that the substile of every plain representing the Meridian
thereof, must always stand on the contrary side to the declination of the
plain and that the houre-lines must there run nearest together, because the Sun
in that position is at right angles with the plain. For the making of this
Dial three things must be found. 1. The elevation of the Pole above the plain,
represented by PR, which is the height of the style, and is an arch of the
Meridian of the plain, between the Pole of the world and the plain. 2. The
distance of the substile from the Meridian, represented by ZR, and is an arch
of the plain between the Meridian and the substile. 3. The angle ZPR, which is
an arch between the substile PR the meridian of the plain, and the line PZ the
meridian of the place, and these are thus found.


Because the substile is the Meridian of the plain, it must be part of a great
circle passing through the pole of the world, and crossing the plain at right
angles, therefore in the supposed right angled triangle PRZ, (for yet the place
of R is not found) you have given the base PZ 38 degrees. 47 min. and the angle PZR
the complement of the declination 65 degrees. and the supposed right angle at R, to
find the side PR, which is the height of the style as aforesaid, but as yet
the place unknown: wherefore by the 8 Case of right angled Spherical Triangles
the analogy is, As the Radius, 10.00000 To the sine of PZ, 38.47 9.793863 So
the sine of PZR, 65 9.957275 To the sine of PR, 34.32 9.751138

Secondly, you may find ZR the distance of the substile from the meridian, by
the 7 case of right angled Spherical Triangles. As the Radius, 90 10.000000 To
the Cosine of PZR, 65 9.629378 So is the tangent of PZ, 38.47 9.900138 To the
tangent of ZR, 18.70 9.529516

These things given, the angle at P between the two meridians may be found by
the 9 Case of right angled Sphericall Triangles, for the proportion is, As the
Radius, 10.000000 To the Cosine of PZ, 38.47 9.893725 So the Tangent of PZR,
65 10.331327 To the Co-tang. of RPZ, 30.78 10.225052

Having thus found the angle between the Meridians to be 30 degrees. 78 min. you
may conclude from thence, that the substile shall fall between the 2d. and
third hours distance from the Meridian of the place, and therefore between 9
and 10 of the clock in the morning, because the plain declineth East from us, 9
of the clock being 45 degrees. from the Meridian, and 10 of the clock 30 degrees.
distant, now therefore let fall a perpendicular between 9 and 10, the better to
inform the fancy in the rest of the work, and this shall make up the Triangle
PRZ before mentioned and supposed, which being found we may calculate all the
hour distances by the first case of right angled sphericall Triangles. For, As
the Radius, Is to the sine of the base PR; S^ is the Tangent of the angle at
the perpendicular, RP 9, To the tangent of R 9 the perpendicular


The angle at P is always the Equinoctial distance of the hour line from the
substile, and may thus be sound: If the angle between the Meridians be less
than the hour distance, substract the distance of the substile from the hour
distance; if greater substract the hour distance from that, and their
difference shall give you the Equinoctial distance required.

Thus in our Example, the angle between the Meridians was found to be 30 degrees.
78 m. and the distance of 9 of the clock from 1^ is three hours, or 45 degrees. if
therefore I substract 30 degrees. 78 min. from 45 degrees. the remainder will be 14
degrees. 22 min. the distance of 9 of the clock from the substile. Again, the
distance of 10 of the clock from the Meridian is 30 degrees. and therefore if I
substract 30 degrees. from 30 degrees. 78 min. the distance of 10 of the clock from the
substile will be 78 centesms or parts of a degree: the rest of the hours and
parts are easily found by a continual addition of 15 degrees. for every hour, 7
degrees. 50 min. for half an hour, 3 degrees. 75 min. for a quarter of an hour, as in
the Table following you may perceive, the which consists of three columns, the
first contains the hours, the second their Equinoctial distances from the
substile, the third and last the hour arches, computed by the former
proportion in this manner. As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the sine of PR,
34.32 9.751136 So is the tang. of RP 9, 14.22 9.403824 To the tangent of R 9,
8.13 9.154960

H Aequ. Arches 4 89 22 88 61 5 74 22 63 38 6 59 22 43 43 7 44 22 28 75 8 29 22
17 50 9 14 22 8 13 merid. substil 10 00 78 00 44 11 15 78 9 05 12 30 78 18 56 1
45 78 30 08 2 60 78 45 23 3 75 78 65 80 4 90 78 88 61

The Geometrical Projection.
Having calculated the hour distances, you may thus make the Dial; Draw the
Horizontall line ACB, then cross it at right angles in C, with the line CO 12.
Take 60 degrees from a Chord, and making C the Center, draw the Semicircle AOB,
representing the azimuth GZD in the Scheme, in which the plane lies; upon this
circle from O to N set off the distance of the substile from the Meridian,
which was found before to be 18.70. upon the West side of the Meridian, because
this plane declineth East, then take off the same Chord the several
hour-distances, as they are ready calculated in the table, viz. 8.13. for 9,
17.50. for 8: and so of the rest; and set them from the substile upon the
circle RNO, as the Table it self directs; draw straight lines from the center
C to these several points, so have you the true hour lines, which were desired:
and lastly, take from the same Chord the height of the style found to be 34.
32. which being set from N to R, and a straight line drawn from C through R
representing the axis, the Dial is finished for use.

In applying it to any wall or plane, let ACB be horizontal, CO perpendicular,
and the side or axis of the style, CR pointing downwards, erected over the
substile line CN; so have you fitted a Dial for any South plane declining East
25 degrees.

Nay, thus have you made four Dials in one, viz. a South declining East and
West 25 degrees, and a North declining East or West as much; to make this
plainly appear, suppose in the fundamental Scheme if N were again the North
part of the horizon, P the North pole, and that GZD were a North declining West
25 degrees, then do all the hour-circles cross the same plane, as they did the
former; only DZ which was in the former the East side will now be the West:
and consequently the afternoon hours must stand where the forenoon hours did,
the style also, which in the East declining stood between 9 and 10, must now
stand between 2 and 3 of the afternoon hours. And lest there should be yet any
doubt conceived, I have drawn to the South declining East 25, the North
declining West as much; from which to make the South declining West, and North
declining East, you need to do no more then prick these hour lines through the
paper, and draw them again on the other side, style and all; so shall they
serve the turn, if you place the morning hours in the one, where the afternoon
were in the other.

APPENDIX.
To draw the hour lines upon any plane declining far East or West, without
respect to the Center.
THe ordinary way is with a Beamcompasse of 16, 18, or 20 foot long, to draw
the Dial upon a large floor, and then to cut off the hours, style and all, at
10, 12, or 14 foot distance from the center, but this being too mechanical for
them that have any Trigonometrical skill, I omit, and rather commend the way
following; by help whereof you may upon half a sheet of paper make a perfect
model of your Dial, to what largeness you please, without any regard at all
to the Center.

Suppose the wall or plane DZG, on which you would make a Dial to decline from
N to C, that is from the South Easterly 83 degrees, 62 min. set down the Data,
and by them seek the Quaesita, according to the former directions.

The Data or things given are two. 1. PS the poles elevation 51 degrees, 53
minutes. 2. SA, the planes declination southeast 83 degrees. 62 min.


The Quaesita or things sought are three, 1. PR the height of the style 3
degrees 97 minutes. 2. ZR, the distance of the substile from the meridian 38
degrees. 30 min. 3. ZPR, the angle of the meridian of the plane with the meridian
of the place 85 degrees, which being found, according to the former directions,
the substile line must fall within five degrees of six of the clock, because 85
degrees wants but 5 of 90, the distance of 6 from 12.


Now therefore make a table, according to this example following, wherein set
down the hours from 12, as they are equidistant from the meridian, and unto
them adjoyn their Equinoctial distances, and write Meridian and substile
between the hours of 6 and 7, and write 5 degrees against the hour of 6, 10
degrees against the hour of 7, and to the Equinoctial distances of each hour
add the natural tangents of those distances, as here you see. So is the Table
prepared for use, by which you may easily frame^ the Dial to what greatness
you will, after this manner. Hours Equ. did. Tang. 4 8 35 0 700 5 7 20 0 364 6
6 5 0 087 Meridia^ Substile 7 5 10 0 176 8 4 25 0 166 9 3 40 0 839 10 2 55 0
1.428 11 1 70 0 2.747 12 12 85 0 11.430

The Geometrical projection.
Proportion the plane BCDE, whereon you will draw the Dial to what scantling
you think fit. Let UP represent the horizontal line, upon any part thereof, as
at P, make choice of a fit place for the perpendicular style (though afterward
you may use another form) near about the upper part of the plane, because the
great angle between the two Meridians makes the substile, which must pass
through the point P, to fall so near the 6 of clock hour, as that there may be
but one hour placed above it, if you desire to have the hour of 11 upon the
plane, which is more useful then 4, let P be the center, and with any Chord
(the greater the better) make two obscure arches; one above the horizontal
line, the other under it, and with the same Chord set off the arch of 51.70.
which is the angle between the substile and horizon, and is the complement of
the angle between the substile and meridian, and set it from V to T both ways,
then draw the straight line TPT, which shall be the substile of this Dial.

This done, proportion the length of PO the perpendicular style to what
scantling you will, and from a diagonal Scale fitted to the Radius of your
intended perpendicular style, set off 69, the natural tangent of 3 degrees 97
min. the height of the style found by calculation from P to H. Then by a scale
proportional to the Radius PO, and at the point H draw the Equinoctial KH11,
cutting the substile at right angles; which if rightly drawn, will cut the
horizontal line at 6 of the clock, and make an angle of 38 degrees. 30 min. with
the horizon, equal to the distance of the substile from the Meridian, upon this
Equinoctial line making HO the Radius, set off 364, the natural tangent of 20
degrees from H upwards for the 5 of clock hour, and 2747 the natural tangent of
70 degrees, from H downwards for the 11 of clock hour, if these two hour
distances fit not the plane to your liking, make PO greater or lesser, as you
see cause, for according to this, the distance of H from P, (by which the
Equinoctial line must be drawn) the length of HO, and the width of all the hour
lines must vary proportionably, but if they fit the plane, then by your scale
proportioned to the Radius HO, and the help of the natural tangents set the
hours upon the Equinoctial, after this manner: In the right angled plain
triangle HG11, having the perpendicular HG equal to HO given in some known
parts: as suppose 206, that is 2 inches and 6 parts of an inch, and the angle
HG11, 70 degrees, the base H11 may be found by the first case of right angled
plain triangles: for, As the Radius 90 10.000000 Is to the perpendicular HG
206, 2.313867 So is the tangent of HG11, 70. 10.438935 To the base H11, 566.
2.752802

Which is 5 inches, and 66 hundred parts for the distance of 11 a clock from
the point H, and will be the same with those points set off by the natural
tangents in the Table. Having done with this Equinoctial, you must do the like
with another: to find the place whereof, it will be necessary first to know
the length of the whole line from H the Equinoctial to the center of the Dial
in parts of the perpendicular style PO, if you will work by the scale of
inches, or else the length in natural tangents, if you will use a diagonall
Scale: first therefore, to find the length thereof in inch-measure, we have
given in the right angled plain triangle HOP, the base OP, and the angle at O
to find HP, and in the triangle OP center. We have given the perpendicular OP,
and the angle PO center the complement of the former, to find H center:
wherefore, by the first case of right angled plain triangles: As the Radius 90
10.000000 Is to the base OP 206; 2.313867 So is the tang. of HOP 3.97. 8.841364
To the perpendicular PH14. 1.155231

Again, As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the perpend. OP 206, 2.313867 So is
the tang. PO center 86.3. 11.158636 To the base P center 2972 3.472403

Add the two lines of 014 and 2972 together, and you have the whole line H
center 2986 in parts of the Radius PO, viz. 29 inches, and 86 parts; out of
this line abate what parts you will, suppose 343, that is, 3 inches and 43
parts, and then the remainer will be 2643. Now if you set 343 from H to I, the
triangle IO center will be equiangled with the former, and I center being
given, to find LO, the proportion is; As H center the first base 2986, co. ar.
6.524911 Is to HO, the first perpend. 206. 2.313867 So is I center the 2d. base
2643, 3.422097 To IO the 2d. perpend. 182, 2.260875

Having thus found the length of IO to be one inch, and 82 parts; make that the
Radius, and then NT4 shall be a tangent line thereunto, upon which, according
to this new Radius, set off the hour-distances before found, and so have you 2
pricks, by which you may draw the height of the style OO, and the hour lines
for the Dial.

The length of H center in natural tangents, is thus found, HP 069 is the
tangent line of the angle HOP 3 degrees. 97 min. and by the same reason P center
14421 is the tangent line of PO center 86.3. the complement of the other, and
therefore these two tangents added together do make 14490, the length of the
substile H center, that is, 14 times the Radius, and 49 parts, out of which
substract what number of parts you will, the rest is the distance from the
second Equinoctial to the center in natural tangents; suppose 158 to be
subtracted, that is, one radius, and 58 parts, which set from H to T, in
proportion to the Radius HO, and from the point T draw the line NT4 parallel to
the former Equinoctial, and there will remain from T to the center 1291. Now to
find the length of LO, the proportion, by the 16 th. of the second, will be As
H center 1449, co. ar. 6.838932 Is to HO 321, 2.506505 So is T center 1291,
3.110926 To TO 286, 2.456363

Now then if you set 286 from T to O in the same measure, from which you took
HO, then may you draw ONO, and the tangents in the Table set upon the line NT
in proportion to this new radius TO, you shall have two pricks, by which to
draw the hour lines, as before.

Probl. 8.
To draw the hour lines upon any direct plane, reclining or inclining East or
West.
HItherto we have only spoken of such planes, as are either parallel or
perpendicular to the horizon, all which except the horizontal, lie in the plane
of some azimuth or other. The rest that follow are reclining or inclining
planes, according to the respect of the upper or nether faces of the planes, in
those that recline, the base is a line in the plane, parallel to the Horizon or
Meridian, and always situate in some azimuth or other: thus the base of the
East and West reclining planes lie in the Meridian, or South and North azimuth,
and the poles thereof in the prime vertical, but the plane it self in some
circle of position (as it is Astrologically taken) which is a great circle of
the Sphere, passing by the North or South intersections of the meridian and
horizon, and falling East or West from the Zenith upon the prime vertical, as
much as the poles of the plane are elevated and depressed above and under the
horizon. And this kind of plane rightly conceived and represented in the
fundamental Scheme by NOS, is no other but an erect declining plane in any
Country, where the pole is elevated the complement of ours: for if you
consider the Sphere, it is apparent, that as all the azimuths, representing the
decliners, do cross the prime vertical in the Zenith, and fall at right angles
upon the horizon, so do all the circles of position, representing the reclining
and inclining East or West planes cross the horizon in the North and South
points of the Meridian, and fall at right angles upon the prime vertical. From
which analogy it comes to pass, that making a Dial declining 30 degr. from
the Meridian, it shall be the same that a reclining 30 degr. from the Zenith,
and contrary, only changing the poles elevation into the complement thereof,
because the prime vertical in this case is supposed to be the horizon, above
which the pole is always elevated the complement of the height thereof above
the horizon.

And therefore the poles elevation and the planes reclination being given,
which for the one suppose to be, as before, 51 degrees. 53 min. and the other, that
is, the reclination 35 degrees toward the West, we must find (as in all
decliners) first the height of the pole above the plane, which in the
fundamental diagram is PR, part of the meridian of the plane between the Pole
of the world and the plane. 2. The distance thereof from the meridian of the
place, which is NR part of the plane betwixt the substile and the meridian. 3.
The angle betwixt the two meridians NPR, by which you may calculate the hour
distances, as in the decliners.

First, therefore in the supposed triangle NPR (because you know not yet where
R shall fall) you have the right angle at R the side opposite PN 51 degr. 53
min. and the angle at N, whose measure is the reclination ZO 35 degr. to find
the side PR, the height of the style, or poles elevation above the plane,
wherefore, by the eighth case of right angled spherical triangles, the analogy
is As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the sine of PN 51.53. 9.893725 So is the
sine PNR 35. 9.758591 To the sine of the side PR 26.69. 9.652316

Secondly, you may find the side NR, which is the distance of the substile
from the meridian, by the seventh case of right angled spherical triangles; for
As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the ^^sine of PNR 35. 9.913364 So is the
tangent of PN 51.53. 10.099861 To the tangent of NR 45.87. 10.013225

Thirdly, the angle at P between the two meridians m^^ be found by the ninth
case of right angle^ spherical triangles. As the Radius ^^ 10.000000 Is to the
cosine ^^N, 51.53. 9.793864 So is the tangent ^f ^NR 35. 9.845227 To the
co-tangent of RPN 66.46. 9.639091

The angle at P being 66 degrees. 46 min. the perpendicular PR must needs fall
somewhat near the middle between 7 and 8 of the clock; if then you deduct the
Equinoctial distance of 8, which is 60, from 66 degrees. 46 min. the Equinoctial
distance of 8 of the clock from the substile will be 6 degrees. 46 min. again, if
you deduct 66 degr. 47 min. from 75 degrees. the distance of 7 from the Meridian,
the Equinoctial distance of 7 from the substile will be 08. degrees. 53 min. the
rest are found by the continual addition of 15 degrees. for an hour: thus, 15 degr.
and 6 degr. 47 min. do make 21 degrees. 47 min. for 9 of the clock; and so of the
rest. And now the hour distances upon the plane may be found by the first case
of right angled spherical triangles: for As the Radius 90 10.000000 Is to the
sine of PR 26.69. 9.652404 So is the tangent of RP. 8, 6.46. 9.053956 To the
tangent of R 8, 2.91. 8.706360

These 2 degrees. 91 min. are the true distance of 8 of the clock from the
substile. And there is no other difference at all in calculating the rest of
the hours, but increasing the angle at ^, acccording to each hours Equinoctial
distance from the substile.

The Geometrical Projection.
Having calculated the hour distances, you shall thus make the Dial; let AD be
the base or horizontal line of the plane parallel to NZS, the meridian line of
the Scheme. And ADEF the plane reclining 35 degr. from the Zenith, as does SON
of the Scheme* through any part of the plane, but most convenient for the
hours, draw a line parallel to the base AD, which shall be GO 12, the 12 of
the clock hour representing NZS of the Scheme; because the base AD is parallel
to the meridian, take 60 degrees from a Chord, and make G the center, and draw
the circle PRO, representing the circle of position NOS in the Scheme in which
this plane lies; from the point O to R Westerly in the East reclining, and
Easterly in the West reclining, set off the distance of the substile and
meridian formerly found to be 45 degrees, 87 min. and draw the pricked line GR
for the substile, agreeable to PR in the Scheme, GO in the Dial representing
the arch PN, and OR in the plane the arch NR in the Scheme. From the point R of
the substile both ways set off the hour distances, by help of the Chord, for 8
of the clock 2 degr. 91 min. and so of the rest; and draw straight lines from
the center G through those points, which shall be the true hour lines desired.
Last of all, the height of the style PR 26 degr. 69 min. being set from R to P,
draw the straight line GP for the axis of the style, which must give the shadow
on the dial, Erect GP at the angle RGP perpendicularly over the substile line
GR, and let the point P be directed to the North pole, GO12 placed in the
Meridian, the center G representing the South, and the plane at OF elevated
above the horizon 55 degrees; so have you finished this dial for use, only
remember, because the Sun rises but a little before 4, and sets a little
after 8, to leave out the hours of 3 and 9, and put on all the rest.

And thus you have the projection of four Dials in one; for that which is the
West recliner is also the East incliner (...) you take the complements of the
recliners ^ours unto 12, and that but from 3 in the afternoon till 8 at night:
again, if you draw the same lines on the other side of your ^^per, and change
the hours of 8, 7, 6, etc. into 4, 5, 6, etc. you have the East recliner, and
the complement of the East recliners hours from 3 to 8 is the West incliner:
only remember, that as the style in the West recliner beholds the North, and
the plane the Zenith; so in the East incliner, the style must behold the South,
and the plane the Nadir.

Probl. 9.
To draw the hour lines upon any direct South reclining or inclining plane.
AS the base of East and West reclining or inclining planes do always lie in
the meridian of the place, or parallel thereunto, and the poles in the prime
vertical; so does the base of South and North reclining or inclining planes lie
in the prime vertical or azimuth of East and West, and their poles consequently
in the Meridian. Now if you suppose the circle of position, (which
Astrologically taken is fixed in the intersection of the meridian and horizon)
to move about upon the horizon, till it comes into the plane of the prime
vertical, and being fixed in the intersection thereof with the horizon, to be
let fall either way from the Zenith upon the meridian, it shall truly represent
all the South and North reclining and inclining planes also, of which there are
six varieties three of South and three of North reclining; for either the South
plane does recline just to the pole, and then it becomes an Equinoctial,
because the poles of this plane do then lie in the Equinoctial; some call it a
polar plane, or else it reclineth more and less then the pole, and consequently
the poles of the plane above and under the Equinoctial, somewhat differing
from the former. In like manner, the North plane reclineth just to the
Equinoctial, and then becomes a polar plane, because the poles of that plane
lie in the poles of the world; some term it an Equinoctial plane. Or else it
reclineth more or less then the Equinoctial, and consequently the poles of the
plane above and under the poles of the world, somewhat differing from the
former.

Of the Equinoctial plane.
The first of these six varieties which I call an Equinoctial plane, is in the
fundamental Scheme, and also in this, represented by the six of clock
hour-circle EPW, wherein you may observe out of the Scheme it self that none of
the other hour circles do cut the same, and therefore (as in the 5 Probl.) you
may conclude, that the hour lines thereof have no center to meet in, but must
be parallel one to another, as they were in the East and West Dialls.

And because this Dial is no other but the very horizontall of a right Sphere,
where the Equinoctial is Zenith, and the Poles of the world in the Horizon;
therefore it is not capable of the six of clock hour (no more then the East and
West are of the 12 a clock hour) which vanish upon the planes, unto which they
are parallel: and the twelve a clock hour is the middle line of this Dial
(because the Meridian cutteth the plane of six a clock at right angles) which
the Sun attaineth not, till he be perpendicular to the plain. And this in my
opinion, besides the respect of the poles, is reason enough to call it an
Equinoctial Dial, seeing it is the Dial proper to them that live under the
Equinoctial.

This Dial is to be made in all respects as the East and West were, being
indeed the very same with them, only changing the numbers of the hours: for
seeing the six of clock hour in which this plane lies crosses the twelve of
clock hour at right angles, in which the East and West plane lies, the rest of
the hour lines will have equal respect unto them both: so that the fifth hour
from six of the clock is equal to the fifth hour from twelve; the four to the
four; and so of the ^est. These analogies holding, the hour distances from six
are to be set off by the natural tangents in these Dials, as they were from
twelve in the East and West Dials.

The Geometrical Projection.
Draw the tangent line DSK, parallel to the line EZW in the Scheme, cross it
at right angles with MSA the Meridian line, make SA the Radius to that tangent
line, on which prick down the hours; and that there may be as many hours upon
the plane as it is capable of, you must proportion the style to the plane (as
in the fifth Problem) after this manner: let the length of the plane from A be
given in known parts, then because the extreme hours upon this plane are 5 or
7, reckoning 15 degrees to every hour from 12, the arch of the Equator will be
75 degrees: and therefore in the right angled plain triangle SA, we have given
the base A, the length of the plane from A, and the angle AS 75 degrees, to
find the perpendicular SA; for which, as in the fifth Chapter, I say; As the
Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the base A 3.50. 2.544068 So is the tangent of A S
15 9,428052 To the perpendicular AS 94 1.972120



At which height a style being erected over the 12 a clock hour line, and the
hours from 12 drawn parallel thereunto through the points made in the tangent
line, by setting off the natural tangents thereon, and then the Dial is
finished.

Let SA 12 be placed in the meridian, and the whole plane at S raised to the
height of the pole 51 degr. 53 min. then will the style show the hours truly,
and the Dial stand in its due position.

2. Of South reclining less then the pole.
This plane is represented by the pricked circle in the fundamental Diagram ECW,
and is intersected by the hour circles from the pole P, as by the Scheme
appears, and therefore the Dial proper to this plane must have a center,
above which the South pole is elevated; and therefore the style must look
downwards, as in South direct planes; to calculate which Dials there must be
given the Poles elevation, and the quantity of reclination, by which to find
the hour distances from the meridian, and thus in the triangle PC 1, having the
poles elevation 51 degr. 53 min. and the reclination 25 degr. PC is given, by
substracting 25 degr. from PZ 38 degr. 47 min. the complement of the poles
height, the angle CP 1 is 15 degrees, one hours distance, and the angle at C
right, we may find C 1, by the first case of right angled spherical triangles:
for, As the Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the sine of PC 13.47. 9.367237 So is the
tangent of CP 1. 15. 9.428052 To the tangent of C 1 3.57. 8.795289

And this being all the varieties, save only increasing the angle at P, I need
not reiterate the work.

3. Of South reclining more then the pole.
This plane in the fundamental Scheme is represented by the pricked circle EAW,
of which in the same latitude let the reclination be 55 degrees, from which if
you deduct PZ 38 degrees. 47 min. the complement of the poles height, there will
remain PA 16 degrees. 53 min. the height of the north pole above the plane, and
instead of the triangle PC 1, in the former plane we have the triangle PA 1, in
which there is given as before the angle at P 15 degrees. and the height of the
pole PA 16 degrees. 53 min. and therefore the same proportion holds: for, As the
Radius 90, 10.000000 Is to the sine of PA 16.53. 9.454108 So is the tangent of
A 15. 9.428052 To the tangent of A 1. 4.36. 8.882160

The rest of the hours, as in the former, are thus computed, varying only the
angle at P.

The Geometrical Projection.
These arches being thus found, to draw the Dials true, consider the Scheme,
wherein so often as the plane falls between Z and P, the Zenith and the North
pole, the South pole is elevated; in all the rest the North; the substile is in
them all the meridian, as in the direct North and South Dials; in which the
style and hours are to be placed, as was for them directed: which being done
let the plane reclining less then the pole, be raised above the horizon to an
angle equal to the complement of reclination, which in our example is to 65
degr. and the axis of the plane point downwards; and let all planes reclining
more then the pole have the hour of 12 elevated above the horizon to an angle
equal to the complement of the reclination also, that is in our example, to 35
degrees. then shall the axis point up to the North pole, and the Diall-fitted to
the plane.

Probl. 10.
To draw the hour lines upon any direct North reclining or inclining plane.
THe direct north reclining planes have the same variety that the South had;
for either the plane may recline from the Zenith just to the Equinoctial, and
then it is a Polar plane, as I called it before, because the poles of the plane
lie in the poles of the world; or else the plane may recline more or less then
the Equinoctial, and consequently their poles do fall above or under the poles
of the world, and the hour lines do likewise differ from the former.

Of the Polar plain.
This place is well known to be a Circle divided into 24 equal parts, which
may be done by drawing a circle with the line of Chords, and then taking the
distance of 15 degrees from the same Chord, drawing straight lines from the
center through those equal divisions, you have the houre-lines desired. The
houre-lines being drawn, erect a straight pin of wier upon the center, of wh^^
length you please, and the Dial is finished: yet seeing our Latitude is
capable of no more then 16 hours and a half, the six hours next the South
part of the Meridian, 11, 10, 9, 1, 2, and 3, may be left out as useless. Nor
can the reclining face serve any longer then during the Suns abode in the North
part of the Zodiac, and the inclining face the rest of the year, because this
plain is parallel to the Equinoctial, which the Sun crosses twice in a year.
These things performed to your liking, let the hour of 12 be placed upon the
Meridian, and the whole plain raised to an angle equal to the complement of
your Latitude, the which in this example is 38 degrees. 47 min. so is this Polar
plain and Dial rectified to show the true hour of the day.

2. Of North reclining less then the Equator.
The next sort is of such reclining plains as fall between the Zenith and the
Equator, and in the Scheme is represented by the pricked circle EFW, supposed
to recline 25 degrees from the Zenith, which being added to PZ 38 degrees. 47 min.
the complement of the poles elevation, the aggregate is PF, 63 degrees. 47 min. the
height of the Pole or style above the plane. And therefore in the triangle PF1,
we have given PF, and the angle at P, to find F1, the first hours distance
from the Meridian upon the plain, for which the proportion is, As the Radius,
90, 10.000000 Is to the sine of PF, 63.47 9.951677 So is the tangent of FP1, 15
9.428052 To the Tangent of F1, 13.48 9.379729

In computing the other hour distances there is no other variety but
increasing the angle at P as before we showed.

3. Of North reclining more then the Equator.
The last sort is of such reclining plain; as fall between the Horizon and
Equator, represented in the fundamental Scheme by the pricked circle EBW,
supposed to recline 70 degrees. And because the Equator cutteth the Axis of the
world at right angles, all planes that are parallel thereunto have the height
of their styles full 90 degrees. above the plane: and by how much any plane
reclineth from the Zenith, more then the Equator, by so much less then 90 is
the height of the style proper to it, and therefore if you add PZ 38 degrees. 47
min. the height of the Equator, unto ZB 70 degrees. the reclination of the plain,
the total is PB 108 degrees. 47 mi. whose complemenc to 180 is the arch BS, 71
degrees. 53 min. the height of the pole above the plain. To calculate the hour
lines thereof, we must suppose the Meridian PFB and the hour circles P1, P2,
P3, etc. to be continued till they meet in the South pole, then will the
proportion be the same as before.

As the Radius, 90, 10.000000 To the sine of PB, 71.53 9.977033 So is the
tangent of 1PB, 15 9.428052 To the tangent of B1, 14.27 9.405085

And so are the other hour distances to be computed, as in all the other
planes.

The Geometrical Projection.
The projection of these planes is but little differing from those in the last
Probl. for the placing the hours and erecting the style, they are the same, and
must be elevated to an angle above the horizon equal to the complement of
their reclinations, which in the North reclining less then the Equator is in
our example 65 degrees, and in this plane the hours about the meridian, that
is, from 10 in the morning till 2 in the afternoon, can never receive any
shadow, by reason of the planes small reclination from the Zenith, and
therefore needless to put them on. In the North reclining more then the
Equator, the plane in our example must be elevated 120 degr. above the horizon,
and the styles of both must point to the North pole.

Lastly, as all other planes have two faces respecting the contrary parts of
the heavens; so these recliners have opposite sides, look downwards the Nadir,
as those do toward the Zenith, and may be therefore made by the same rules; or
if you will spare that labor, and make the same Dials serve for the opposite
sides, turn the centers of the incliners downwards, which were upwards in the
recliners; and those upwards in the incliners which were downwards in the
recliners, and after this conversion, let the hours on the right hand of the
meridian in the recliner become on the left hand in the incliner, and
contrarily; so have you done what you desired: and this is a general rule for
the opposite sides of all planes.

Probl. 11.
To draw the hour lines upon a declining reclining, or declining inclining
plane.
DEclining reclining planes have the same varieties that were in the former
reclining North and South; for either the declination may be such, that the
reclining plane will fall just upon the pole, and then it is called a declining
Equinoctial; or it may fall above or under the pole, and then it is called a
South declining cast and west recliner: on the other side the declination may
be such, that the reclining plane shall fall just upon the intersection of the
Meridian and Equator; and then it is called a declining polar; or it may fall
above or under the said intersection, and then it is called a North declining
East and West recliner. The three varieties of South recliners are represented
by the three circles, AHB falling between the pole of the world and the Zenith:
AGB just upon the pole; and AEB between the pole and the horizon: and the
particular pole of each plane is so much elevated above the horizon, (upon the
azimuth) DZC, crossing the base at right angles) as the plane it self reclines
from the Zenith, noted in the Scheme, with I, K, and L.



1. Of the Equinoctial declining and reclining plane.
This plane represented by the circle AGB, has his base AZB declining 30
degrees from the East and West line EZW equal to the declination of the South
pole thereof 30 degrees from S the South part of the Meridian Easterly unto D,
reclining from the Zenith upon the azimuth CZD the quantity ZG 34 degrees, 53
min. and Passes through the pole at P. Set off the reclination ZG, from D to
K, and K shall represent the pole of the reclining plane so much elevated above
the horizon at D, as the circle AGB representing the plane declineth from the
Zenith Z, from P the pole of the world, to K the pole of the plane, draw an
arch of a great circle PK, thereby the better to inform the fancy in the rest
of the work. And if any be desirous, to any declination given, to fit a plane
reclining just to the pole: or any reclination being given, to find the
declination proper to it, this Diagram will satisfy them therein: for in the
Triangle ZGP, we have limited,

First, the hypothenusal PZ 38 degrees, 47 min.

Secondly, the angle at the base PZG, the planes declination 30 degrees. Hence
to find the base GZ, by the seventh case of right angled spherical triangles,
the proportion is; As the Radius 90, 10.000000 To the cosine of GZP 30;
9.937531 So the tangent of PZ 38.47. 9.900138 To the tangent of GZ 34.53.
9.837669 the reclination required.

If the declination be required to a reclination given, then by the 13 case of
right angled spherical triangles, the proportion is As the Radius 90, 10.000000
To the tangent of ZG 34.53. 9.837669 So the co-tangent of PZ 38.47. 10.099861 o
the cosine of GZP 39. 9.937530

And now to calculate the hour lines of this Dial, you are to find two
things: first, the arch of the plane, or distance of the meridian and substile
from the horizontal line, which in this Scheme is PB, the intersection of the
reclining plane with the horizon, being at B. And secondly, the distance of the
meridian of the place SZPN, from the meridian of the plane PK, which being had,
the Dial is easily made.

Wherefore in the triangle ZGP, right angled at G, you have the angle GZP given
30 degrees, the declination; and ZP 38 degr. 47 min. the complement of the
Pole; to find GP: and therefore, by the eighth case of right angled spherical
triangles, the proportion is: As the Radius, 90 10.000000 To the sine of ZP,
38.47 9.793863 So is the sine of GZP, 30 9.698970 To the sine of GP, 18.12
9.492833Whose complement 71 degrees. 88 min. is the arch PB desired.

The second thing to be found is the distance of the Meridian of the place,
which is the hour of 12 from the substile or meridian of the plane,
represented by the angle ZPG, which may be found by the 11 Case of right angled
sphericall Triangles, for As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the sine of GP,
18.12 9.492833 So is the co-tang. of GZ, 34.53 10.162379 To the co-tang. of
GPZ, 65.68 9.655212Whose complement is ZPK 24 degrees. 32 min. the arch desired.

Now because 24 degrees. 32 min. is more then 15 degrees. one hours distance from the
Meridian, and less then 30 degrees. two hours distance, I conclude that the style
shall fall between 10 and 11 of the clock on the West side of the Meridian,
because the plain declineth East: if then you take 15 degrees, from 24 degrees. 32 min.
there shall remain 9 degrees. 32 min. for the Equinoctial distance of the 11 a
clock hour line from the substile, and taking 24 degrees. 32 min. out of 30 degrees.
there shall remain 5 degrees. 68 min. for the distance of the hour of 10 from the
substile: the rest of the hour distances are easily found by continual
addition of 15 degrees. Unto these hour distances join the natural tangents as in
the East and West Dials, which will give you the true dista^ces of each hour
from the substile, the plane being projected as in the 5 Pro. for the east and
west dials, or as in the 8 Prob. for the Equinoctial, according to which rules
you may proportion the length of the style also, which being erected over the
substile, and the Dial placed according to the declination 30 degrees. easterly,
and the whole plain raised to an angle of 55 degrees. 47 min. the complement of the
reclination, the shadow of the style shall give the hour of the day desired.

2. To draw the hour lines upon a South reclining plain, declining East or
West, which passes between the Zenith and the Pole.
In these kind of declining reclining plains, the South pole is elevated above
the plane, as is clear by the circle AHB representing the same, which falls
between the Zenith and the North pole, and therefore hides that pole from the
eye, and forces you to seek the elevation of the contrary pole above the
plain, which notwithstanding makes the like and equal angles upon the South
side objected to it, as the North pole does upon the North side, (as was showed
in the 7 Prop.) so that either you may imagine the Scheme to be turned about,
and the North and South points changed, or you may calculate the hours as it
stands, remembering to turn the style upwards or downwards, and change the
numbers of the hours, as the nature of the Dial will direct you.

In this sort of declining reclining Dials, there are four things to be sought
before you can calculate the hours. 1 The distance of the Meridian from the
Horizon. 2 The height of the pole above the plain. 3 The distance of the
substile from the Meridian. 4 The angle of inclination between the Meridian of
the plane, and the meridian of the place.


1 The distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, is represented by the arch
OB, to find which, in the right angled Triangle HOZ, we have HZ the
reclination 20 degrees. and the angle HZO the declination, to find HO, the
complement of OB, for which, by the first case of right angled sphericall
triangles, the analogy is, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 o the sine of HZ, 20
9.534051 o is the tangent of HZO, 30 9.761439 o the tangent of HO, 11.17
9.295490Whose complement 78 degrees. 83 min. is OB, the arch desired.

2. To find the height of the pole above the plane, there is required two
operations, the first to find OP, and the second to find PR; OP may be found
by the 3 Case of right angled Sphericall Triangles, for, As the Radius, 90
10.000000 Is to the cosine of HZP. 30 9.937531 So is the co-tang. of HZ, 20.
10.438934 To the co-tangent of ZO, 22.80 10.376465Which arch being found, and
deducted out of, ZP 38 degrees. 47 min. there rests PO 15 degrees. 67 min.

Then may you find PR, by the triangles HZO, and PRO both together, because
the sines of the hypothenusals and the sines of the perpendiculars are
proportional, by the first of the 7 Chap. of Triangles.

Therefore, As the sine of ZO, 22.80 9.588289 Is to the sine of ZH, 20 9.534052
So is the sine of PO, 15.67 9.431519 To the sine of PR, 13.79 9.377282The
height of the style desired.

3 The distance of the substile from the Meridian may be found by the 12 Case
of right angled sphericall triangles, for As the cosine of PR, 13 78 9.987298
Is to the Radius, 90 10.000000 So is the cosine of PO, 15.67 9.983551 To the
cosine of OR, 7.41 9.996253The arch desired.

4. The angle of inclination between the Meridians, may be found by the 11 Case
of right angled Spherical triangles, for, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the
sine of PR, 13.79. 9.377241 So is the co-tang. of OR 7.51 10.879985 To the
co-tang. of OPR, 28.93 10.257226

Now as in all the former works, the angle P between the two Meridians being 28
degrees. 93 min. which is more then one hours distance from the Meridian, and
less then two, you may conclude that the substile must stand between the first
and second hours from the Meridian or 12 of the clock Westerly, because the
declination is easterly: and 28 degrees. 93 min. being deducted out of 30 degrees.
there rests 1 degrees. 7 min. for the distance of 10 of the clock from the
substile; again, deducting 15 degrees. from 28 degrees. 93 min. there rests 13 degrees.
73 min. the distance of the 11 a clock hour line from the substile, the rest
are found by continual addition of 15 degrees. as before.

And here the true hour distances may be found by the first case of right
angled Sphericall triangles, for, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the sine of
PR 13.79 9.377240 So is the tangent of RP, 11.15 9.428052 To the tangent of R
11, 3.66 8.805292And so proceed with all the rest.

3. To draw the hour lines upon a South reclining plain, declining East or
west, which passes between the Pole and the Horizon.
In this plain represented by the circle of reclination AFB, the North pole is
elevated above the plane, as the South pole was above the other, and the same
four things that you found for the former Dial must also be sought for this;
in the finding whereof there being no difference, save only deducting ZP from
ZO, because ZO is the greatest arch, as by the Scheam appears: to calculate
the hours of this plane needs no further instruction.

Probl. 12.
To draw the hour lines upon a polar plain, declining East or west, being the
first variety of North declining reclining planes
AS in the South declining recliners, there are three varieties, so are there
in the North as many: for either the plane reclining does pass by the
intersection of the Meridian and Equator, and then it is called a declining
Polar, which has the substile always perpendicular to the Meridian; or else
it passes above or under the intersection of the Meridian and Equator, which
somewhat differs from the former. I will therefore first show how they lie in
the Scheam, and then proceed to the particular making of the Dials proper to
them.



1. Of the Polar declining reclining plane.
This plane is in this diagram represented by the circle AGB, ZG is the
reclination, ZAE the distance of the Equator from the Zenith, the declination
NC, K the pole thereof. Here also as in the last Probl. there may be a
reclination found to any declination given, and contrary, by which to fit the
plane howsoever declining, to pass through the intersection of the Meridian
and Equator, by the 7 and 13 Cases of right angled sphericall triangles.

As the Radius, 90 10.000000 To the cosine of GZAE, 60 9.698970 So is the
tangent of ZAE, 51.53 10.099861 To the tangent of ZG, 32.18 9.798871The
reclination desired.

And, As the Radius, 90 10.000000 To the tangent of GZ, 32.18 9.798831 So is
the co-tangent of ZAE, 51.53 9.900138 To the cosine of GZAE, 60 9.698969The
declination.

And now to calculate the hour lines of this Dial, you must find, first, the
distance of the Meridian from the Horizon, by the 8 Case of right angled
Spherical triangles. As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the sine of ZAE, 51.53
9.893725 So is the sine of GZAE, 60 9.937531 To the sine of AEG, 42.69
9.831256Whose complement 47 degrees. 31 min. is AAE the arch desired.

2. You must find RP, the height of the pole above the plane, by the 2 Case of
right angled Sphericall Triangles, for As the Radius, 90 10.000000 Is to the
sine of AEZG, 60 9.937531 So is the cosine of ZG, 32.11 9.927565 To the
cosine of ZAEG, 42.87 9.865^9^ Which is the height of the pole above the
plane, AER being a Quadrant, PR must needs be the measure of the angle at AE.

3. Because in all decliners (whose planes pass by the intersection of the
Meridian and Equinoctial) the substile is perpendicular to the Meridian,
therefore you need not seek AER, the distance between the substile and
Meridian, which is always 90 degrees. and falls upon the 6 a clock hour.

4. Lastly, the arch AER, which is the distance of the substile from the
Meridian: being 90 degrees, the angle at P opposite thereunto must needs be 90
also: from whence it follows, that the hours equidistant from the six of the
clock hour in Equinoctial degrees shall also have the like distance of degrees
in their arches upon the plane, and so one half of the Dial being calculated,
serves for the whole; these things considered, the true hour-distances may be
found, by the first case of right angled spherical triangles: for, As the
Radius, 10.000000 Is to the sine of PR 42.87. 9.832724 So is the tangent of RP
5. 15 d. 9.428052 To the tangent of R 5* 10.34. 9.260776

The which 10 degr. 34 min. is the true distance of 5 and 7 from the substile
or six of the clock hour, and so of the rest.

The Geometrical projection of this plane needs no direction; those already
given are sufficient, according to which this Dial being made and rectified by
the declination and reclination given, it is prepared for use.

2. To draw the hou^^ lines upon a North reclining plane, declining East or
West, which cutteth the meridian between the Zenith and the Equinoctial.
All North reclining planes howsoever declining, have the North pole elevated
above them, and therefore the center of the Dial must be so placed above the
plane, that the style may look upwards to the pole, neither can it be expected
that the plane being elevated above the horizon Southward, should at all times
of the year be enlightened by the Sun, except it recline so far from the
Zenith, as to intersect the Meridian between the horizon and the Tropique of
Capricorn; this plane therefore reclining but 16 degrees from the Zenith, and
declining 60 cannot show many hours, when the Sun is in his greatest Northern
declination, partly by reason of the height of the plane above the horizon, and
partly by reason of the great declination thereof, hindering the Sunbeams from
all the morning hours, which may be therefore left out as useless.

In this second variety, the plane represented by the Circle AMB in the last
Diagram, cutteth the Meridian at O between the Zenith and the Equator, ZM being
the reclination, 16 degrees. ZAE the distance of the Equator from the Zenith, 51
degrees. 53 m. and the declination NC 60 as before.

As in the former, so in this Dial, the same four things are again to be found
before you can calculate the hour distances thereof. The first is the distance
of the Meridian from the Horizon, represented in this plain by the arch A^. The
second is PR, the height of the pole above the plane. The third is ^R, the
distance of the substile or Meridian of the plane, from the Meridian of the
place. The fourth is the angle ^PR between the two Meridians: all which, and
the hour distances also, being to be found according to the directions of the
last Probl. there needs no further instruction here.

3 To draw the hour lines upon a North reclining plane, declining East or
West, which cutteth the Meridian between the Equator and Horizon.
The last variety of the six declining recliners, represented by the circle
ALB, and cutteth the Meridian at H, between the Equator and the Horizon, ZL
being the reclination, 54 degrees. the declination NC, 60 degrees. as before; and hence
the four things mentioned before must be sought ere you can calculate the hour
distances.

1 The distance of the Meridian and Horizon, represented by AH. 2 RH the
substile. or Meridian of the plane from the Meridian of the place. 3 PR, the
height of the pole above the plane. 4 HPR, the angle between the two Meridians.
In finding whereof the proportions are still the same, though the triangles
are somewhat altered, for when you have found ZH, it is to be added to ZP to
find PH, both which together do exceed a Quadrant, therefore the sides PN must
be continued to X, then is PX the complement of PH to a semicircle, and if RB
be continued ^o X also, RX may be found by the 12 Case of right angled
spherical triangles as before, whose complement is RH, the distance of the
substile from the Meridian; and hence the angle at P must be found in that
triangle also, though the proportion be the same, there being no other variety,
I think it needless to reiterate the work.

The Geometrical Projection.
There is so little difference between the South and North declining reclining
planes, that the manner of making the Dials for both may be showed at once: Let
the example therefore be a Dial for a South plane declining East 30 degrees.
reclining 20 degrees.

First, draw the horizontal line ACB in the middle of the plane, because the
style of this Dial must look downwards to the South pole, and because the
plane declineth East, therefore the morning hours must stand on the West side
of the Meridian, and the distance of the Meridian and Horizon 78 degrees. 83 min.
must be set upon the circle ADBF, from A to E, and there draw the line CE for
the 12 a clock hour, from E reckon 7 degrees. 51 min. the distance of the substile
and Meridian Westwards to D, and draw the pricked line CD for the substile: from
the point of the substile at D, set off the hour distances, as of 3 degrees. 66
min. for 11, and so of the rest: unto every prick draw straight lines from the
center C, so have you all the hours truly drawn. Last of all, see off from D
the height of the style DE, and draw the line CE for the axis, which being
erected over the substile, CD, the Dial is fit for use, but must be placed in
its due position by the declination and reclination thereof.

And thus have you made four Dials at once, or at least, this Dial thus drawn
may be made to serve four sorts of planes, for first, it serves for a South
declining East 30 degrees. reclining 20 degrees. and if you prick the hour lines
through the paper, and draw them on the other side style and all, this Dial
will then be fitted for a South plane declining West 30 degrees. reclining 20 degrees.
only remember to change the hours, that is to say, instead of writing 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, from A, the west side of the East declining
plane, you must write, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Again, if you
turn the Zenith of your Dial downwards, the South declining East reclining
shall in all respects serve for a North declining west inclining as much; and
the South declining West reclining, will likewise serve for a North declining
East inclining; and therefore there needs no further direction either to make
the one, or calculate the other.

CHAP. III.
Of the Art of NAVIGATION.
Probl. 1.
Of the 32 winds, or Seamans Compass.
THe course of a ship upon the Sea depends upon the winds: The designation
of these depends upon the certain knowledge of one principal; which considering
the situation and condition of the whole Sphere, ought in nature to be North or
South, the North to us upon this side of the Line, the South to those in the
other hemisphere; for in making this observation men were to intend themselves
toward one fixed part of the heavens or other, and therefore to the one of
these. In the South part there is not found any star so notable, and of so near
distance from the Pole, as to make any precise or firm direction of that wind,
but in the North we have that of the second magnitude in the tale of the lesser
Bear, making so small and incensible a circle about the Pole, that it comes
all to one, as if it were the Pole it self. This pointed out the North wind to
the Mariners of old especially, and was therefore called by some the Lead or
Lead star; but this could be only in the night, and not always then. It is now
more constantly and surely showed by the Needle touched with the Magnet, which
is therefore called the Load or Lead-stone, for the same reason of the leading
and directing their courses to the North and South position of the earth, not
in all parts directly, because in following the constitution of the great
Magnet of the whole earth, it must needs be here and there led aside toward
the East or West by the unequal temper of the Globe; consisting more of water
then of earth in some places, and of earth more or less Magnetical in others.

This deviation of the Needle, the Mariners call North-easting, and
North-westing, as it falls out to be, otherwise, and more artificially, the
Variation of the Compass, which though it pretend uncertainty, yet proves to
be one of the greatest helps the Seaman has. And the North and South winds
being thus assured by the motion either of direction or variation of the
needle, the Mariner supposes his ship to be (as it always is) upon some
Horizon or other, the center whereof is the place of the ship.



The line of North and South found ou^ by the Needle, a line crossing this at
right angles, shows the East and West, and so they have the four Cardinal
winds, cross again each of these lines, and they have the eight whole winds,
as they call them. Another division of these makes eight more which they call
half winds, a third makeeth 16, which they call the quarter winds, so they
are 32 in all. Every one of these Winds is otherwise termed a several point of
the Compass, and the whole line consisting of two winds, as the line of North
and South, or that of East and West is called a Rumb. The Winds and Rumbs thus
assigned by an equal division of a great Circle into 32 parts, the angle which
each Rumb makes with the Meridian is easily known, for if you divide a
quadrant or 90 degrees in eight parts: you have the angles which the eight
winds reckoned from North to East or West do make with the meridian; and those
reckoned from South to the East or West are the same, and for your better
direction are here exhibited in the Table following.

A Table for the angles which every Rumb^ makes with the Meridian.
North South D. part South North 02.8125 05.6250 08.4375 N by E S by E 11.2500
S by W N by W 14.0625 16.8750 19.6875 NNE SSE 22.5000 SSW NNW 25.3125 28.1250
30.9375 NE by N SE by S 33.7500 SW by S NW b N 36.5625 39.3750 42.1875 NE SE
45.0000 SW NW 47.8125 50.6250 53.4375 NE by E SE by S 56.2500 SW b W NW b W
59.0625 61.8650 64.6875 ENE ESE 67.5000 WSW WNW 70.3125 73.1250 75.9375 E by N
E by S 78.7500 W by S W by N 81.5625 84.3750 87.1875 East East 90.0000 West
West

Probl. 2.
Of the description and making of the Sea-chart.
THe Sea-mans Chart is a Parallelogram, divided into little rectangled figures,
and in the plain Chart are equal Squares, representing the Longitudes and
Latitudes of such places, as may be set in the Chart, but the body of the earth
being of a Globular form, the degrees of Longitude reckoned in the Equator from
the Meridian, are in no place equal to those of the Latitude reckoned in the
Meridian from the Equator, save only in the Equinoctial; for the degrees of
latitude are all equal throughout the whole Globe, and as large as those of
the Equinoctial; but the degrees of Longitude at every parallel of Latitude
lessen themselves in such proportion as that parallel is less then the
Equinoctial: This dis-proportion of longitude and latitude caused for a long
time much error in the practice of Navigation, till at last it was in part
reconciled by Mercator, that famous Geographer: and afterward exactly
rectified by our worthy Countreyman Master Edward Wright, in his Book
entitled, The Correction of Errors in Navigation: In which he has
demonstrated by what proportion the degrees of Longitude must either increase
or decrease in any Latitude, his words are as follows.

Suppose, says he, a spherical Superficies, with Meridians, Parallels, Rumbes,
and the whole Hydrographial description drawn thereupon, to be inscribed into a
concave Cylinder, their axes agreeing in one.

Let this Spherical superficiees swell like a bladder (whiles it is in blowing)
equally always in every part thereof (that is as much in Longitude as in
Latitude, til it apply and join it self (round about and all along also toward
either pole) unto the concave superficies of the Cylinder: each parallel upon
this spherical superficies increasing successively from the Equinoctial toward
either pole, until it come to be of equal diameter with the Cylinder, and
consequently the Meridians, still inclining themselves, till they come to be so
far distant every where each from other, as they are at the Equinoctial.

Thus it may most easily be understood, how a spherical superficies may by
extension be made a Cylindrical, and consequently a plain parallelogram
superficies; because the superficies of a cylinder is nothing else but a plain
parallelogram wound about two equal equidistant circles, that have one common
axletree perpendicular upon the centers of them both, and the peripheries of
each of them equal to the length of the parallelogram, as the distance betwixt
those circles, or height of the cylinder is equal to the breadth thereof. So
as the Nautical planisphere may be defined to be nothing else but a
parallelogram made of the Spherical superficies of an Hydrographical Globe
inscribed into a concave cylinder, both their axes concurring in one, and the
sphericall superficies swelling in every part equally in longitude and
latitude, till every one of the parallels thereupon be inscribed into the
cylinder (each parallel growing as great as the Equinoctial, or till the whole
spherical superficies touch and apply it self every where to the concavity of
the cylinder.

In this Nautical planisphere thus conceived to be made, all places must needs
be situate in the same longitudes, latitudes, and directions or courses, and
upon the same meridians, parallels and rumbes, that they were in the Globe,
because that at every point between the Equinoctial and the Pole we understand
the spherical superficies, whereof this planisphere is conceived to be made, to
swell equally as much in longitude as in latitude (till it join it self unto
the concavity of the cylinder; so as hereby no part thereof is any way
distorted or displaced out of his true and natural situation upon his meridian,
parallel or rumbe, but only dilated and enlarged, the meridians also,
parallels, and rumbes, dilating and enlarging themselves likewise at every
point of latitude in the same proportion.

Now then let us diligently consider of the Geometrical lineaments, that is,
the meridians, rumbes, and parallels of this imaginary Nautical planisphere,
that we may in like manner express the same in the Mariners Chart: for so
undoubtedly we shall have therein a true Hydrographical description of all
places in their longitudes, latitudes, and directions, or respective situations
each from other, according to the points of the compass in all things
correspondent to the Globe, without either sensible or explicable error.

First, therefore in this planisphere, because the parallels are every where
equal each to other (for every one of them is equal to the Equinoctial or
circumference of the circumscribing cylinder) the meridians also must needs be
parallel and straight lines; and consequently the rumbes, (making equal angles
with every meridian) must likewise be straight lines.

Secondly, because the spherical superficies whereof this planisphere is
conceived to be made, swells in every part thereof equally, that is as much
in Latitude as in Longitude, till it apply it self round about to the concavity
of the cylinder: therefore at every point of Latitude in this planisphere, a
part of the Meridian keeps the same proportion to the like part of the
parallel that the like parts of the Meridian, and parallel have each to other
in the Globe, without any explicable error.

And because like parts of wholes keep the same proportion that their wholes
have therefore the like parts of any parallel and Meridian of the Globe, have
the same proportion, that the same parallel and meridian have.

For example sake, as the meridian is double to the parallel of 60 degrees: so
a degree of the meridian is double to a degree of that parallel, or a minute to
a minute, and what proportion the parallel has to the meridian, the same
proportion have their diameters and semidiameters each to other.

But the sine of the complement of the parallels latitude, or distance from the
Equinoctial, is the semidiameter of the parallel.



As here you see AE, the sine of AH, the complement of AF, the latitude or
distance of the parallel ABCD from the Equinoctial, is the semidiameter of the
same parallel. And as the semidiameter of the meridian or whole sine, is to the
semidiameter of the parallel; so is the secant or hypothenusa of the parallels
latitude, or of the parallels distance from the Equinoctial, to the
semidiameter of the meridian or whole sine; as FK, (that is AK) to AE (that is
GK) so is LK, to KF.

Therefore in this nautical planisphere, the Semidiameter of each parallel
being equal to the semidiameter of the Equinoctial, that is, to the whole sine;
the parts of the Meridian at every point of Latitude must needs increase with
the same proportion wherewith the secants of the ark, contained between those
points of Latitude and the Equinoctial do increase.

Now then we have an easy way laid open for the making of a Table (by help of
the natural Canon of Triangles) whereby the meridians of the Mariners Chart may
most easily and truly be divided into parts, in due proportion, and from the
Equinoctial toward either Pole.

For (supposing each distance of each point of latitude, or of each parallel
from other, to contein so many parts as the secant of the latitude of each
point or parallel contains) by perpetual addition of the secants answerable
to the latitudes of each point or parallel unto the sum compounded of all the
former secants, beginning with the secant of the first parallels latitude, and
thereto adding the secant of the second parallels Latitude, and to the sum of
both these adjoining the secant of the third parallels Latitude; and so forth
in all the rest we may make a Table which shall truly show the sections and
points of latitude in the Meridians of the Nautical Planisphere, by which
sections the parallels must be drawn.

As in the Table of meridional parts placed at the end of this Discourse, we
made the distance of each parallel from other, to be one minute or centesm of a
degree: and we supposed the space between any two parallels, next to each other
in the Planispere, to contain so many parts as the secant answerable to the
distance of the furthest of those two parallels from the Equinoctial; and so by
perpetual addition of the secants of each minute or centesm to the sum
compounded of all the former secants, is made the whole Table.

As for example, the secant of one centesm in Master Briggs 's Trigonometrica
Britannica is 100000.00152, which also shows the section of one minute or
centesm of the meridian from the Equinoctial in the Nautical Planisphere;
whereunto add the secants of two minutes or centesmes, that is 100000. 00609,
the sum is 200000.00761. which shows the section of the second minute of the
meridian from the Equinoctial in the planisphere: to this sum add the secant
of three minutes, which is 100000.01371, the sum will be 3000^0.02132, which
shows the section of the third minute of the meridian from the Equinoctial,
and so ^orth in all the rest; but after the Table was thus finished, it being
too large for so small a Volume, we have contented our selves with every tenth
number, and have also cut off eight places toward the right hand, so that in
this Table the section of 10 minutes is 100, of one degree 1000, and this is
sufficient for the making either of the general or any particular Chart.

I call that a general Chart, whose line AE in the following figure represents
the Equinoctial, (as here it does the parallel of 50 degrees) and so contains
all the parallels successively from the Equinoctial toward either Pole, but
they can never be extended very near the Pole, because the distances of the
parallels increase as much as secants do. But notwithstanding this, it may be
remed general, because a more general Chart cannot be contrived in plano,
except a true projection of the Sphere it self.

And I call that a particular Chart which is made properly for one particular
Navigation; as if a man were to sail between the Latitude of 50 and 55 degrees,
and his difference of Longitude were not to exceed six degrees, then a Chart
made, as this figure is for such a Voyage, may be called particular, and is
thus to be projected.

Having drawn the line AB, serving for the first meridian, cross it at right
angles with the two perpendiculars BC and AE; divide the line AE, or another
line parallel to it into six equal parts, noting them with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
then sub-divide each part or degree into 10, and if you can, each of those into
10 more; however, we suppose each degree to be subdivided into 1000 parts;
through each of these degrees draw lines parallel to the first meridian AB. The
meridians being drawn, to draw the parallels of latitude you must have recourse
to your Table of meridionall parts, in which finding that the distance between
the Equator and 50 degrees in the meridian should be equal to 57 degr. 909
parts in the Equator and his parallels; I may suppose the lowest parallel to be
57 degrees from the Equator. So the distance between this lowest parallel and
the parallel of 50 degrees will be 909 parts only: wherefore I take these 909
parts out of the line AE, and set them from the lowest parallel upwards, and
draw the line AE, which shall represent the parallel of 50 degrees. In like
manner, I find by the Table that the distance between the Equator and 51
degrees in the meridian is 59 degrees, 481 parts: I abate the former 57
degrees, and there remains 2 degr. 481 parts, to be set from the lowest
parallel upwards, by which to draw the parallel of 51 degrees; and so may the
other parallels be also drawn.

Probl. 3.
The Latitudes of two places being known, to find the Meridional difference of
the same Latitudes.
IN this Proposition there are three varieties: First, when one of the places
is under the Equinoctial, and the other without; and in this case the degrees
and minutes in the Table answering to the latitude of that other place are the
meridional difference of those Latitudes.

So if one place propounded were the entrance of the River of the Amazones,
which has no latitude at all, and the other the Lizard, whose latitude is 50
degrees, their difference will be found 57.905.

2. When both the places have Northerly or Southerly Latitude, in this case if
you substract the degrees and minutes in the Table answering to the lesser
Latitude, out of those in the same Table answering to the greater Latitude, the
remainer will be the Meridional difference required.

Example.

Admit the Latitude of S. Christophers to be 15 degrees. 50 parts or minutes, and
the Latitude of the Lizard to be 50 degrees. In the Table of Latitudes, the
number answering to 15 degrees. 50 min. is 15.692 50 degrees. is 57.905 Their
difference 42.213

3. When one of the places have Southerly and the other Northerly Latitude; in
this case, the sum of the numbers answering to their Latitudes in the Table, is
the meridional difference you look for.

So Caput bonae spei, whose latitude is about 36 degrees. 50 parts, and Japan in
the East Indies, whose latitude is about 30 degrees being propounded, their
meridional difference will be found to be 70.724.

For the meridional parts of 36.50. 39.252 And the meridional parts of 30 d.
31.472 Their sum is the difference required. 70.724

Probl. 4.
Two places differing only in Latitude, to find their distance.
IN this proposition there are two varieties.

1. If the two places propounded lie under the same meridian, and both of them
on one side of the Equinoctial, you must substract the lesser latitude from the
greater, and the remainer converted into leagues, by allowing 20 leagues to a
degree, will be the distance required.

2. If one place lie on the North, and the other on the South side of the
Equinoctial (yet both under the same meridian) you must then add both the
latitudes together, and the sum converted into leagues, will give their
distance.

Probl. 5.
Two places differing only in longitude being given, to find their distance.
IN this proposition there are also two varieties.

1. If the two places propounded lie under the Equinoctial, then the difference
of their Longitudes reduced into leagues (by allowing 20 leagues to a degree)
gives the distance of the places required.

2. But if the two places propounded differ only in longitude, and lie not
under the Equinoctial, but under some other intermediate parallel between the
Eqninoctial and one of the poles: then to find their distance, the proportion
is, As the Radius, Is to the cosine of the common latitude; So is the sine of
half the difference of longitude, To the sine of half their distance.


Probl. 6.
Two places being given, which differ both in Longitude and Latitude, to find
their distance.
IN this Proposition there are three varieties.

1. If one place be under the Equinoctial circle, and the other toward either
pole, then the proportion is, As Radius, To the cosine of the difference of
longitude; So is the cosine of the latitude given, To the cosine of the
distance required.


2. If both the places propounded be without the Equinoctial, and on the
Northern or Southern side thereof, then the proportion must be wrought at two
operations. 1. Say; As the Radius, To the cosine of the difference of Longitude
So the co-tangent of the lesser latitude, To the tangent of the fourth ark.


Which fourth ark substract out of the complement of the greater latitude, and
retaining the remaining ark say, As the cosine of the ark found, Is to the
cosine of the ark remaining; So is the sine of the lesser latitude, To the
cosine of the distance required.


3. If the two places propounded differ both in Longitude and Latitude, and be
both of them without the Equinoctial, and one of them toward the North pole,
and the other toward the South pole, the proportion is, As the Radius, Is to
the cosine of the difference of Longit. So is the co-tangent of one of the
Latitudes To the tangent of another ark.


Which being subtracted out of the other Latitude, and 90 degrees added
thereto, say: As the cosine of the ark found, Is to the cosine of the ark
remaining; So is the cosine of the Latitude first taken, To the cosine of the
distance.


Probl. 7.
The Rumbe and distance of two places given, to find the difference of
Latitude.
THe proportion is: As the Radius, Is to the cosine of the rumb from the
meridian: So is the distance, To the difference of Latitude.

Example.

If a ship sail West-north-west, (that is, upon the sixth rumb from the
meridian) the distance of 90 leagues; what shall be the difference of Latitude?

First, I seek in the Table of Angles which every Rumb makes with the
Meridian, for the quantity of the angle of the sixth rumb, which is 67 degr. 50
parts, the complement whereof is 22 degr. 50 parts: therefore, As the Radius,
10.000000 Is to the sine of 22.50. 9.582839 So is the distance in leagues 90,
1.954242 To the difference of Latitude 34, and better 1.537081

And by looking the next nearest Logarithm, the difference of latitude will be
34 leagues, and 44 hundred parts of a league.

And because 5 centesmes of a degree answers to one league, therefore if you
multiply 3444 by 5, the product will be 17220, from which cutting off the four
last figures, the difference of latitude will be one degree 72 centesmes of a
degree, and somewhat more.

Probl. 8.
The Rumb and Latitude of two places being given, to find the difference of
Longitude.
THe proportion is: As the Radius,

Is to the tangent of the rumb from the meridian: So is the proper difference
of latitude, To the difference of Longitude.

Example.

If a ship sail West-north-west (that is, upon the sixth Rumb from the meridian)
so far, that from the latitude of 51 degrees, 53 centesmes, it comes to the
latitude of 49 degrees, 82 centesmes; what difference of Longitude has such a
course made?

First, I seek in the Table of Meridional parts what degrees do there answer to
each latitude, and to 51 degrees, 53 min. I find 60. 328, and to 49 degrees,
82 minutes 57. 629, which being subtracted from 60. 328 their difference is 2.
699, the proper difference of latitude. Therefore, As the Radius, 10.000000 To
the tangent of 67.50. 10.382775 So is 2.699. 0.431203 To 6 the difference of
Longitude, 0.813978

Or in minuter parts 6. 515, that is 6 degr. 52 centesmes of a degree fere,
which was the thing required.

Here follows the Table of Meridional parts, mentioned in some of the
preceding Problemes, together with other Tables useful in the Arts of
Dialling and Navigation.

A Table of Meridional parts.
M. Gr.par 0.00 0.000 0.10 0.100 0.20 0.200 0.30 0.300 0.40 0.400 0.50 0.500
0.60 0.600 0.70 0.700 0.80 0.800 0.90 0.900 1.00 1.000 1.10 1.100 1.20 1.200
1.30 1.300 1.40 1.400 1.50 1.500 1.60 1.600 1.70 1.700 1.80 1.800 1.90 1.900
2.00 2.000 2.10 2.100 2.20 2.200 2.30 2.300 2.40 2.400 2.50 2.500 2.61 2.600
2.71 2.700 2.81 2.800 2.91 2.900 3.01 3.000 3.00 3.001 3.10 3.101 3.20 3.201
3.30 3.301 3.40 3.402 3.50 3.502 3.60 3.602 3.70 3.702 3.80 3.803 3.90 3.903
4.00 4.003 4.10 4.103 4.20 4.204 4.30 4.304 4.40 4.404 4.50 4.504 4.60 4.605
4.70 4.705 4.80 4.805 4.90 4.906 5.00 5.006 5.10 5.106 5.20 5.207 5.30 5.307
5.40 5.408 5.50 5.508 5.60 5.609 5.70 5.709 5.80 5.810 5.90 5.910 6.00 6.011
6.10 6.111 6.20 6.212 6.30 6.312 6.40 6.413 6.50 6.514 6.60 6.614 6.70 6.715
6.80 6.816 6.90 6.916 7.00 7.017 7.10 7.118 7.20 7.219 7.30 7.319 7.40 7.420
7.50 7.521 7.60 7.622 7.70 7.723 7.80 7.824 7.90 7.925 8.00 8.026 8.10 8.127
8.20 8.228 8.30 8.329 8.40 8.430 8.50 8.531 8.60 8.632 8.70 8.733 8.80 8.834
8.90 8.936 9.00 9.037 9.10 9.138 9.20 9.239 9.30 9.341 9.40 9.442 9.50 9.543
9.60 9.645 9.70 9.746 9.80 9.848 9.90 9.949 10.00 10.051 10.10 10.152 10.20
10.254 10.30 10.355 10.40 10.457 10.50 10.559 10.60 10.661 10.70 10.762 10.80
10.864 10.90 10.966 11.00 11.068 11.10 11.170 11.20 11.272 11.30 11.374 11.40
11.476 11.50 11.578 11.60 11.680 11.70 11.782 11.80 11.884 11.90 11.986 12.00
12.088 12.10 12.190 12.20 12.293 12.30 12.395 12.40 12.497 12.50 12.600 12.60
12.702 12.70 12.805 12.80 12.907 12.90 13.010 13.00 13.112 13.10 13.215 13.20
13.318 13.30 13.422 13.40 13.523 13.50 13.626 13.60 13.729 13.70 13.832 13.80
13.935 13.90 14.038 14.00 14.141 14.10 14.244 14.20 14.347 14.30 14.450 14.40
14.553 14.50 14.656 14.60 14.760 14.70 14.863 14.80 14.967 14.90 15.070 15.00
15.174 15.10 15.277 15.20 15.381 15.30 15.485 15.40 15.588 15.50 15.692 15.60
15.796 15.70 15.900 15.80 16.^04 15.90 16.107 16.00 16.211 16.10 16.316 16.20
16.42^ 16.30 16.524 16.40 16.628 16.50 16.732 16.60 16.836 16.70 16.941 16.80
17.045 16.90 17.150 17.00 17.255 17.10 17.359 17.20 17.464 17.30 17.568 17.40
17.673 17.50 17.778 17.60 17.883 17.70 17.988 17.80 18.093 17.90 18.198 18.00
18.303 18.10 18.408 18.20 18.513 18.30 18.619 18.40 18.724 18.50 18.830 18.60
18.935 18.70 19.041 18.80 19.146 18.90 19.251 19.00 19.356 19.10 19.463 19.20
19.569 19.30 19.675 19.40 19.781 19.50 19.887 19.60 19.993 19.70 20.100 19.80
20.206 19.90 20.312 20.00 20.419 20.10 20.525 20.20 20.632 20.30 20.738 20.40
20.845 20.50 20.952 20.60 21.059 20.70 21.165 20.80 21.272 20.90 21.379 21.00
21.486 21.10 21.593 21.20 21.701 21.30 21.808 21.40 21.915 21.50 21.023 21.60
22.130 21.70 22.238 21.80 22.345 21.90 22.453 22.00 22.561 22.10 22.669 22.20
22.777 22.30 22.885 22.40 22.993 22.50 23.101 22.60 23.210 22.70 23.318 22.80
23.427 22.90 23.535 23.00 23.643 23.10 23.752 23.20 23.861 23.30 23.970 23.40
24.079 23.50 24.188 23.60 24.297 23.70 24.406 23.80 24.515 23.90 24.624 24.00
24.734 24.10 24.844 24.20 24.953 24.30 25.063 24.40 25.173 24.50 25.282 24.60
25.392 24.70 25.502 24.80 25.613 24.90 25.723 25.00 25.833 25.10 25.943 25.20
26.054 25.30 26.164 25.40 26.275 25.50 26.386 25.60 26.497 25.70 26.608 25.80
26.719 25.90 26.830 26.00 26.941 26.10 27.052 26.20 27.164 26.30 27.275 26.40
27.387 26.50 27.499 26.60 27.610 26.70 27.722 26.80 27.834 26.90 27.946 27.00
28.058 27.20 28.283 27.30 28.396 27.40 28.508 27.50 28.621 27.60 28.734 27.70
28.847 27.80 28.959 27.90 29.072 28.00 29.186 28.10 29.299 28.20 29.413 28.30
29.526 28.40 29.640 28.50 29.753 28.60 29.867 28.70 29.981 28.80 30.095 28.90
30.300 29.00 30.324 29.10 30.438 29.20 30.553 29.30 30.667 29.40 30.782 29.50
30.897 29.60 31.012 29.70 31.127 29.80 31.242 29.90 31.357 30.00 31.473 30.10
31.588 30.20 31.704 30.30 31.820 30.40 31.936 30.50 32.052 30.60 32.168 30.70
32.284 30.80 32.409 30.90 32.517 31.00 32.633 31.10 32.750 31.20 32.867 31.30
32.984 31.40 33.101 31.50 33.218 31.60 33.336 31.70 33.453 31.80 33.571 31.90
33.688 32.00 33.806 32.10 33.924 32.20 34.042 32.30 34.161 32.40 34.279 32.50
34.397 32.60 34.516 32.70 34.635 32.80 34.754 32.90 34.873 33.00 34.992 33.10
35.111 33.20 35.231 33.30 35.350 33.40 35.470 33.50 33.590 33.60 35.710 33.70
35.830 33.80 35.950 33.90 36.071 34.00 36.191 34.10 36.312 34.20 36.433 34.30
36.554 34.40 36.675 34.50 36.796 34.60 36.917 34.70 37.039 34.80 37.161 34.90
37.283 35.00 37.405 35.10 37.527 35.20 37.649 35.30 37.771 35.40 37.894 35.50
38.017 35.60 38.140 35.70 38.263 35.80 38.386 35.90 38.509 36.00 38.633 36.10
38.757 36.20 38.880 36.30 39.004 36.40 39.129 36.50 39.253 36.60 39.377 36.70
39.502 36.80 39.627 36.90 39.752 37.00 39.877 37.10 40.002 37.20 40.128 37.30
40.253 37.40 40.379 37.50 40.505 37.60 40.63^ 37.70 40.757 37.80 40.884 37.90
41.011 38.00 41.137 38.10 41.264 38.20 41.392 38.30 41.519 38.40 41.646 38.50
41.774 38.60 41.902 38.70 42.030 38.80 42.158 38.90 42.287 39.00 42.415 39.10
42.544 39.20 42.673 39.30 42.802 39.40 42.931 39.50 43.061 39.60 43.191 39.70
43.320 39.80 43.451 39.90 43.581 40.00 43.711 40.10 43.842 40.20 43.973 40.30
44.104 40.40 44.235 40.50 44.366 40.60 44.498 40.70 44.630 40.80 44.762 40.90
44.894 41.00 45.026 41.10 45.159 41.20 45.292 41.30 45.425 41.40 45.558 41.50
45.691 41.60 45.825 41.70 45.959 41.80 46.093 41.90 46.227 42.00 46.362 42.10
46.496 42.20 46.631 42.30 46.766 42.40 46.902 42.50 47.037 42.60 47.173 42.70
47.309 42.80 47.445 42.90 47.581 43.00 47.718 43.10 47.855 43.20 47.992 43.30
48.129 43.40 48.267 43.50 48.404 43.60 48.542 43.70 48.681 43.80 48.819 43.90
48.958 44.00 49.097 44.10 49.236 44.20 49.375 44.30 49.515 44.40 49.655 44.50
49.795 44.60 49.935 44.70 50.076 44.80 50.217 44.90 50.358 45.00 50.499 45.10
50.64^ 45.20 50.783 45.30 50.925 45.40 51.068 45.50 51.210 45.60 51.353 45.70
51.496 45.80 51.639 45.90 51.783 46.00 51.927 46.10 52.071 46.20 52.215 46.30
52.360 46.40 52.505 46.50 52.650 46.60 52.795 46.70 52.941 46.80 53.087 46.90
53.233 47.00 53.380 47.10 53.526 47.20 53.673 47.30 53.821 47.40 53.968 47.50
54.116 47.60 54.264 47.70 54.413 47.80 54.562 47.90 54.711 48.00 54.860 48.10
55.010 48.20 55.160 48.30 55.310 48.40 55.460 48.50 55.611 48.60 55.762 48.70
55.913 48.80 56.065 48.90 56.117 49.00 56.369 49.10 56.522 49.20 56.675 49.30
56.828 49.40 56.981 49.50 57.135 49.60 57.289 49.70 57.444 49.80 57.598 49.90
57.754 50.00 57.909 50.10 58.065 50.20 58.221 50.30 58.377 50.40 58.534 50.50
58.691 50.60 58.848 50.70 59.006 50.80 59.164 50.90 59.322 51.00 59.481 51.10
59.640 51.20 59.800 51.30 59.960 51.40 60.120 51.50 60.280 51.60 60.441 51.70
60.601 51.80 60.763 51.90 60.925 52.00 61.088 52.10 61.250 52.20 61.413 52.30
61.577 52.40 61.740 52.50 61.904 52.60 62.069 52.70 62.234 52.80 62.399 52.90
62.564 53.00 62.730 53.10 62.897 53.20 63.063 53.30 63.231 53.40 63.398 53.50
63.566 53.60 63.734 53.70 63.903 53.80 64.072 53.90 64.242 54.00 64.412 54.10
64.582 54.20 64.753 54.30 64.924 54.40 65.096 54.50 65.268 54.60 65.440 54.70
65.613 54.80 65.786 54.90 65.960 55.00 66.134 55.10 66.308 55.20 66.483 55.30
66.659 55.40 66.835 55.50 67.011 55.60 67.188 55.70 67.365 55.80 67.543 55.90
67.721 56.00 67.900 56.10 68.079 56.20 68.25^ 56.30 68.438 56.40 68.618 56.50
68.799 56.60 68.981 56.70 69.163 56.80 69.345 56.90 69.528 57.00 69.711 57.10
69.895 57.20 70.080 57.30 70.263 57.40 70.449 57.50 70.635 57.60 70.821 57.70
71.008 57.80 71.195 57.90 71.383 58.00 71.572 58.10 71.761 58.20 71.950 58.30
72.140 55.40 72.331 58.50 72.522 58.60 72.714 58.70 72.906 58.80 73.099 58.90
73.292 59.00 73.486 59.10 73.680 59.20 73.875 59.30 74.071 59.40 74.267 59.50
74.464 59.60 74.661 59.70 74.859 59.80 75.057 59.90 75.256 60.00 75.456 60.10
75.650 60.20 75.857 60.30 76.059 60.40 76.261 60.50 76.464 60.60 76.667 60.70
76.871 60.80 77.076 60.90 77.281 61.00 77.487 61.10 77.694 61.20 77.901 61.30
78.109 61.40 78.317 61.50 78.526 61.60 78.736 61.70 78.947 61.80 79.158 61.90
79.370 62.00 79.583 62.10 79.796 62.20 89.010 62.30 89.225 62.40 89.441 62.50
89.657 62.60 89.874 62.70 81.091 62.80 81.310 62.90 81.529 63.00 81.749 63.10
81.970 63.20 82.191 63.30 82.413 63.40 82.635 63.50 82.860 63.60 83.084 63.70
83.310 63.80 83.536 63.90 83.763 64.00 83.990 64.10 84.219 64.20 84.448 64.30
84.678 64.40 84.909 64.50 85.141 64.60 85.374 64.70 85.607 64.80 85.842 64.90
86.077 65.00 86.313 65.10 86.550 65.20 86.788 65.30 87.027 65.40 87.267 65.50
87.508 65.60 87.749 65.70 87.992 65.80 88.235 65.90 88.480 66.00 88.725 66.10
88.971 66.20 89.219 66.30 89.467 66.40 89.716 66.50 89.967 66.60 90.218 66.70
90.470 66.80 90.723 66.90 90.978 67.00 91.232 67.10 91.489 67.20 91.746 67.30
92.005 67.40 92.264 67.50 92.525 67.60 92.787 67.70 93.050 67.80 93.314 67.90
93.579 68.00 93.846 68.10 94.113 68.20 94.382 68.30 94.652 68.40 94.923 68.50
95.195 68.60 95.468 68.70 95.743 68.80 96.019 68.90 96.296 69.00 96.575 69.10
96.854 69.20 97.135 69.30 97.418 69.40 97.701 69.50 97.986 69.60 98.272 69.70
98.560 69.80 98.849 69.90 99.139 70.00 99.431 70.10 99.724 70.20 100.018 70.30
100.314 70.40 100.612 70.50 100.910 70.60 101.211 70.70 101.513 70.80 101.816
70.90 102.121 71.00 102.427 71.10 102.735 71.20 103.044 71.30 103.356 71.40
103.668 71.50 103.983 71.60 104.299 71.70 104.616 71.80 104.936 71.90 105.257
72.00 105.579 72.10 105 904 72.20 106 230 72.30 106 558 72.40 106 888 72.50 107
220 72.60 107 553 72.70 107 888 72.80 108 226 72.90 108 565 73.00 108 906 73.10
109 249 73.20 109 594 73.30 109 941 73.40 110 290 73.50 110 641 73.60 110 994
73.70 111 349 73.80 111 707 73.90 112 066 74.00 112 428 74.10 112 792 74.20 113
158 74.30 113 526 74.40 113 897 74.50 114 270 74.60 114 645 74.70 115 023 74.80
115 403 74.90 115 786 75.00 116 171 75.10 116 559 75.20 116 949 75.30 117 342
75.40 117 737 75.50 118 135 75.60 118 536 75.70 118 939 75.80 119 345 75.90 119
755 76.00 120 160 76.10 120 581 76 20 121 000 76.30 121 420 76.40 121 843 76.50
12 270 76.60 12 700 76.70 123 133 76.80 123 570 76.90 124 009 77.00 124 452
77.10 124 898 72.20 125 348 77.30 125 801 77.40 126 258 77.50 126 718 77.60 127
182 77.70 127 649 77.80 128 121 77.90 128 596 78.00 129 075 78 10 129 558 78 20
130 045 78 30 130 536 78 40 131 031 78 50 131 530 78 60 132 034 78 70 132 542
78 80 113 055 78 90 113 572 79 00 134 094 79 10 134 620 79 20 135 151 79 30 135
687 79 40 136 228 79 50 136 775 79 60 137 326 79 70 137 883 79 80 138 445 79 90
139 012 80 00 139 585 80 10 140 164 80 20 140 748 80 30 141 339 80 40 141 936
80 50 142 138 80 60 143 147 80 70 143 763 80 80 144 385 80 90 145 014 81 00 145
650 81 10 146 292 81 20 146 942 81 30 147 600 81 40 148 265 81 50 148 937 81 60
149 618 81 70 150 307 81 80 151 003 81 90 151 709 82 00 152 423 82 10 153 147
82 20 153 878 82 30 154 620 82 40 155 372 82 50 156 132 82 60 156 903 82 70 157
685 82 80 158 478 82 90 159 281 83 00 160 096 83 10 160 922 83 20 161 761 83 30
162 612 83 40 163 475 83 50 164 352 83 60 165 242 83 70 166 146 83 80 167 065
83 90 167 999 84 00 168 947 84 10 169 912 84 20 170 893 84 30 171 891 84 40 172
907 84 50 173 941 84 60 174 994 84 70 176 ^67 84 80 177 160 84 90 178 275 85 00
179 411 85 10 180 569 85 20 181 752 85 30 182 960 85 40 184 194 85 50 185 454
85 60 186 743 85 70 188 062 85 80 189 411 85 90 190 793 86 00 192 210 86 10 193
661 86 20 195 151 86 30 196 680 86 40 198 251 86 50 199 867 86 60 201 529 86 70
203 240 86 80 205 005 86 90 206 825 87 00 208 705 87 10 210 649 87 20 212 668
87 30 214 745 87 40 216 909 87 50 219 158 87 60 221 498 87 70 223 938 87 80 226
486 87 90 229 153 88 00 231 95^ 88 10 234 891 88 20 237 991 88 30 241 268 88 40
244 744 88 50 248 445 88 60 252 402 88 70 256 652 88 80 261 243 88 90 266 235
89 00 271 705 89 10 277 753 89 20 284 517 89 30 292 191 89 40 301 058 89 50 311
563 89 60 324 455 89 70 341 166 89 80 365 039 89 90 408 011 90 00 Infinite

A Table of the Suns Declination, for the years 1654, 1658, 1662, 1666.
Ianu. Febr. Mar Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sep. Octo. Nov Dec. Days. south
south sout north north north north north nort south south south 1 21 78 13 85 3
48 08 52 18 03 23 18 22 16 15 28 4 50 7 15 17 60 23 13 2 21 62 13 52 3 10 08 88
18 28 23 25 22 ^3 14 98 4 11 7 53 17 86 23 20 3 21 45 13 17 2 70 09 25 18 53 23
30 21 88 14 66 3 73 7 91 18 13 23 26 4 21 27 12 83 2 30 09 60 18 77 23 35 21 73
14 36 3 35 8 28 18 40 23 33 5 21 08 12 50 1 92 09 97 19 00 23 40 21 58 14 05 2
96 8 65 18 66 23 38 6 20 88 12 15 1 52 10 31 19 23 23 43 21 42 13 73 2 56 9 03
18 91 23 43 7 20 68 11 80 1 11 10 67 19 47 23 46 21 25 13 41 2 18 9 40 19 15 23
46 8 20 48 11 43 0 72 11 02 19 68 23 50 21 07 13 08 1 80 9 76 19 40 23 48 9 20
27 11 08 0 33 11 36 19 90 23 51 20 90 12 76 1 40 10 13 19 63 23 50 10 20 05 10
72 0 06 11 70 20 11 23 52 20 71 12 43 1 01 10 48 19 86 23 51 11 19 82 10 37 N
47 12 05 20 31 23 53 20 51 12 10 0 63 10 85 20 08 23 53 12 19 58 09 83 0 85 12
38 20 51 23 52 20 31 11 76 0 23 11 20 20 30 23 51 13 19 35 09 63 1 25 12 72 20
70 23 51 20 11 11 43 0^16 11 57 20 51 23 51 14 19 11 09 25 1 65 13 05 20 88 23
50 19 90 11 08 0 55 11 91 20 71 23 48 15 18 86 08 88 2 03 13 36 21 06 23 46 19
68 10 73 0 95 12 25 20 91 23 46 16 18 61 08 52 2 41 13 68 21 25 23 43 19 47 10
38 1 33 12 60 21 10 23 43 17 18 35 08 13 2 82 14 00 21 41 23 40 19 25 10 03 1
73 12 95 21 28 23 28 18 18 08 07 75 3 20 14 31 21 58 23 35 19 01 09 68 2 11 13
28 21 46 23 33 19 17 81 07 37 3 60 14 63 21 73 23 30 18 78 09 33 2 51 13 61 21
63 23 28 20 17 53 06 98 3 98 14 93 21 88 23 25 18 55 08 96 2 90 13 95 21 80 23
21 21 17 25 06 60 4 37 15 23 22 03 23 18 18 30 08 60 3 30 14 26 21 95 23 13 22
16 96 06 22 4 75 15 53 22 16 23 10 18 05 08 25 3 68 14 60 22 10 23 05 23 16 68
05 83 5 13 15 83 22 30 23 03 17 78 07 88 4 06 14 91 22 25 22 96 24 16 38 05 45
5 51 16 13 22 41 22 95 17 53 07 51 4 46 15 23 22 38 22 86 25 16 08 05 07 5 90
16 41 22 53 22 85 17 26 07 ^5 4 85 15 55 22 51 22 76 26 15 78 04 67 6 28 16 70
22 65 22 75 17 00 06 76 5 23 15 85 22 63 22 65 27 15 46 04 28 6 67 16 97 22 75
22 65 16 71 06 40 5 63 16 15 22 75 22 53 28 15 15 03 88 7 03 17 23 22 85 22 53
16 43 06 01 6 00 16 45 22 85 22 40 29 14 83 7 41 17 50 22 95 22 41 15 86 05 26
6 76 17 03 23 05 22 11 30 14 51 7 78 17 77 23 ^3 22 30 15 86 05 26 6 76 17 03
23 05 22 11 31 14 18 8 15 23 77 15 56 04 88 17 31 21 96

A Table of the Suns Declination, for the years 1655, 1659, 1663, 1667.
Ianu. Febr. Mar Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sep. Octo. Nov Dec. Days. south
south sout north north north north north nort south south south 1 21 81 13 93 3
58 08 43 17 96 23 16 22 20 15 35 4 58 7 06 17 53 23 10 2 21 65 13 60 3 18 08 80
18 21 23 23 22 06 15 05 4 20 7 43 17 80 23 18 3 21 48 13 26 2 80 09 15 18 46 23
30 21 91 14 75 3 81 7 81 18 06 23 25 4 21 30 12 91 2 40 09 51 18 71 23 35 21 76
14 43 3 43 8 20 18 33 23 31 5 21 11 12 58 2 00 09 88 18 95 23 40 21 61 14 13 3
05 8 56 18 60 23 36 6 20 93 12 23 1 61 10 23 19 18 23 43 21 45 13 81 2 66 8 93
18 85 23 41 7 20 73 11 88 1 21 10 58 19 41 23 46 21 28 13 50 2 28 9 30 19 10 23
45 8 20 53 11 53 0 81 10 93 19 63 23 48 21 11 13 16 1 88 9 66 19 33 23 48 9 20
32 11 16 0 43 11 28 19 85 23 50 20 93 12 85 1 50 10 03 19 56 23 50 10 20 10 10
81 ^^03 11 61 20 06 23 51 20 75 12 51 1 10 10 40 19 80 23 51 11 19 88 10 45 0
36 11 96 20 26 23 53 20 56 12 18 0 71 10 76 20 03 23 53 12 19 65 10 08 0 76 12
30 20 46 23 51 20 36 11 85 0 33 11 11 20 25 23 52 13 19 41 09 71 1 15 12 63 20
66 23 51 20 16 11 51 0^06 11 46 20 46 23 51 14 19 16 09 35 1 55 12 96 20 85 23
50 19 95 11 16 0 46 11 81 20 66 23 50 15 18 92 08 96 1 93 13 28 21 03 23 48 19
75 10 81 0 85 12 16 20 86 23 46 16 18 67 08 60 2 33 13 61 21 20 23 45 19 53 10
65 1 25 12 51 21 06 23 43 17 18 41 08 23 2 71 13 93 21 38 23 41 19 30 10 13 1
63 12 86 21 25 23 40 18 18 15 07 85 3 11 14 25 21 55 23 36 19 06 09 76 2 03 13
20 21 41 23 35 19 17 88 07 46 3 50 14 56 21 70 23 31 18 83 09 41 2 41 13 53 21
60 23 28 20 17 60 07 08 3 88 14 86 21 85 23 26 18 60 09 06 2 80 13 86 21 76 23
21 21 17 31 06 70 4 28 15 16 22 00 23 20 18 35 08 70 3 20 14 20 21 91 23 15 22
17 03 06 31 4 66 15 46 22 13 23 13 18 10 08 33 3 60 14 51 22 06 23 06 23 16 75
05 93 5 05 15 76 22 26 23 05 17 85 07 96 3 98 14 83 22 21 22 98 24 16 45 05 53
5 43 16 05 22 40 22 96 17 58 07 60 4 36 15 15 22 35 22 88 25 16 15 05 15 5 81
16 35 22 51 22 88 17 31 07 23 4 76 15 46 22 48 22 78 26 15 85 04 76 6 20 16 63
22 63 22 78 17 05 06 85 5 15 15 76 22 60 22 68 27 15 53 04 36 6 56 16 90 22 73
22 68 16 78 06 48 5 53 16 08 22 71 22 56 28 15 23 03 98 6 95 17 18 22 83 22 56
16 50 06 11 5 91 16 38 22 83 22 43 29 14 91 7 31 17 45 22 93 22 45 16 21 05 73
6 30 16 68 22 93 22 30 30 14 58 7 70 17 71 23 01 22 33 15 93 05 36 6 68 16 96
23 01 22 16 31 14 26 8 06 23 10 15 65 04 98 17 25 22 01

A Table of the Suns Declination, for the years 1656, 1660, 1664, 1668.
Ianu. Febr. Mar Apr. May. June July Aug. Sep. Octo Nov Dece. Days south south
sout north north north north north nort south south south 1 21 85 14 01 3 28 08
70 18 16 23 21 22 08 15 11 4 30 7 35 17 73 23 16 2 21 70 13 68 3 90 09 06 18 41
23 28 21 95 14 81 3 91 7 73 18 00 23 23 3 21 53 13 35 2 50 09 43 18 65 23 33 21
80 14 51 3 53 8 10 18 26 23 30 4 21 35 13 00 2 10 09 78 18 90 23 38 21 65 14 20
3 15 8 48 18 53 23 35 5 21 16 12 66 1 66 10 15 19 13 23 41 21 50 13 88 2 75 8
85 18 78 23 40 6 20 98 12 31 1 33 10 50 19 36 23 45 21 33 13 56 2 36 9 21 19 03
23 45 7 20 78 11 96 0 91 10 85 19 58 23 48 21 16 13 25 1 98 9 58 19 28 23 48 8
20 58 11 61 0 53 11 20 19 80 23 50 20 98 12 91 1 58 9 95 19 51 23 50 9 20 36 11
26 0 13 11 53 20 01 23 51 20 80 12 60 1 20 10 31 19 75 23 51 10 20 15 10 90 N26
11 88 20 21 23 52 20 61 12 26 0 81 10 68 19 98 23 52 11 19 93 10 53 0 66 12 21
20 41 23 53 20 41 11 93 0 41 11 03 20 20 23 53 12 19 70 10 16 1 05 12 55 20 61
23 51 20 21 11 60 0 03 11 38 20 41 23 51 13 ^9 46 09 80 1 45 12 88 20 80 23 50
20 00 11 25 0^36 11 73 20 61 23 50 14 19 23 09 43 1 83 13 20 20 98 23 48 19 80
10 90 0 75 12 08 20 81 23 48 15 18 98 09 06 2 23 13 53 21 16 23 45 19 58 10 56
1 15 12 43 21 01 23 45 16 18 73 08 70 2 63 13 85 21 33 23 41 ^9 35 10 21 1 55
12 78 21 20 23 40 17 18 48 08 31 3 03 14 16 21 50 23 38 ^9 13 9 85 1 93 13 11
21 38 23 35 18 18 21 07 93 3 41 14 48 21 66 23 33 18 90 9 50 2 31 13 45 21 55
23 30 19 17 95 07 55 3 80 14 80 21 81 23 26 18 65 9 15 2 71 13 78 21 7^ 23 25
20 17 66 07 16 4 18 15 10 21 96 23 21 18 41 8 78 3 10 14 11 21 88 23 18 21 17
40 06 78 4 56 15 40 22 10 23 15 18 16 8 41 3 50 14 43 22 03 23 10 22 17 11 06
40 4 95 15 70 22 23 23 06 17 91 8 05 3 88 14 76 22 18 23 01 23 16 81 06 01 5 33
15 98 22 36 22 98 17 66 7 68 4 28 15 08 22 31 22 91 24 16 53 05 63 5 71 16 28
22 48 22 90 17 40 7 31 4 66 15 40 22 45 22 81 25 16 23 05 25 6 10 16 56 22 60
22 80 17 11 6 95 5 05 15 70 22 58 22 70 26 15 91 04 86 6 48 16 83 22 71 22 70
16 85 6 56 5 43 16 00 22 70 22 58 27 15 61 04 48 6 85 17 11 22 81 22 60 16 56 6
20 5 81 16 30 22 80 22 46 28 15 30 04 06 7 23 17 38 22 90 22 48 16 28 5 83 6 20
16 60 22 90 22 33 29 14 98 03 68 7 60 17 65 22 98 22 35 16 00 5 45 6 58 16 90
23 00 22 20 30 14 66 7 96 17 90 23 06 22 21 15 71 5 06 6 96 17 ^8 23 08 22 05
31 14 35 8 33 23 15 15 41 4 68 17 46 21 90

A Table of the Suns Declination, for the years 1657, 1661, 1665, 1669.
Ianu. Febr. Mar Apr. May. June July Aug. Sep. Octo Nov Dece. Days. south
south sout north north north north north nort south south south 1 21 73 13 76 3
40 08 60 18 08 23 20 22 13 15 20 4 40 7 25 17 66 23 15 2 21 56 13 43 3 00 08 96
18 33 23 26 22 00 14 90 4 01 7 63 17 93 23 21 3 21 38 13 08 2 61 09 33 18 58 23
31 21 85 14 60 3 63 8 00 18 20 23 28 4 21 21 12 75 2 21 09 70 18 83 23 36 21 70
14 28 3 25 8 36 18 46 23 33 5 21 03 12 41 1 81 10 05 19 06 23 41 21 53 13 96 2
86 8 75 18 71 23 38 6 20 83 12 06 1 41 10 40 19 30 23 45 21 36 13 65 2 48 9 11
18 96 23 43 7 20 63 11 71 1 01 10 75 19 51 23 48 21 20 13 33 2 08 9 48 19 21 23
46 8 20 43 11 35 0 63 11 10 19 73 23 50 21 03 13 01 1 70 9 85 19 45 23 50 9 20
21 11 00 0 23 11 45 11 95 23 51 20 85 12 68 1 31 10 21 19 68 23 51 10 20 00 10
63 N16 11 78 20 16 23 52 20 66 12 35 0 91 10 58 19 91 23 52 11 19 76 10 26 0 55
12 11 20 36 23 53 20 46 12 01 0 53 10 93 20 13 23 53 12 19 53 09 90 0 95 12 46
20 56 23 51 20 26 11 68 0 13 11 30 20 35 23 51 13 19 30 09 53 1 35 12 80 20 75
23 50 20 06 11 35 0^26 11 65 20 56 23 50 14 19 05 09 16 1 73 13 11 20 93 23 48
19 85 11 15 0 65 12 00 20 76 23 48 15 18 80 08 80 2 13 13 45 21 11 23 46 19 63
10 65 1 05 12 35 20 96 23 45 16 18 55 08 41 2 51 13 76 21 28 23 43 19 41 10 30
1 43 12 68 21 15 23 41 17 18 28 08 05 2 90 14 08 21 45 23 38 19 20 9 95 1 83 13
20 21 33 23 36 18 18 03 07 66 3 30 14 40 21 61 23 33 18 96 9 60 2 21 13 36 21
51 23 31 19 17 75 07 28 3 68 14 70 21 76 23 28 18 71 9 25 2 61 13 70 21 68 123
26 20 17 46 06 90 3 08 15 01 21 91 23 23 18 48 8 88 3 00 14 03 21 83 23 20 21
17 18 06 51 4 46 15 31 22 06 23 16 18 23 8 51 3 38 14 35 22 00 23 11 22 16 90
06 13 4 85 15 61 22 20 23 10 17 98 8 15 3 78 14 68 22 15 23 03 23 16 60 05 75 5
23 15 90 22 33 23 01 17 73 7 78 4 16 15 00 22 28 22 95 24 16 30 05 35 5 61 16
20 22 45 22 91 17 46 7 41 4 55 15 31 22 41 22 85 25 16 00 04 96 6 00 16 48 22
56 22 83 17 20 7 05 4 95 15 61 22 55 22 73 26 15 70 04 56 6 36 16 76 22 68 22
73 16 93 6 68 5 33 15 91 22 66 22 61 27 15 38 04 18 6 75 17 03 22 78 22 61 16
65 6 30 5 71 16 21 22 76 22 50 28 15 06 03 78 7 11 17 30 22 88 22 51 16 36 5 93
6 10 16 51 22 86 22 36 29 14 75 7 50 17 56 22 96 22 38 16 08 5 55 6 48 16 81 22
96 22 ^^ 30 14 43 7 86 17 83 23 05 22 26 15 80 5 16 6 86 17 10 23 06 22 08 31
14 10 8 23 23 13 15 50 4 78 17 38 21 93

A Table of the Suns right Ascension in hours and minutes.
Janu Febr. Mar. Apr. May June Jul Aug. Sept. Octo. Nov. Dece. Days H. M. H.
M. H. M. H M H. M H. M H M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M 1 19 53 21 68 23 45 1 33 3
21 5 30 7 36 9 40 11 30 13 10 15 10 17 23 2 19 61 21 75 23 51 1 38 3 28 5 36 7
43 9 46 11 35 13 16 15 16 17 31 3 19 68 21 81 23 56 1 45 3 35 5 43 7 50 9 51 11
41 13 23 15 23 17 38 4 19 75 21 88 23 63 1 51 3 40 5 50 7 56 9 58 11 48 13 28
15 30 17 45 5 19 83 21 95 23 70 1 56 3 46 5 56 7 63 9 65 11 53 13 35 15 38 17
53 6 19 90 22 00 23 75 1 63 3 53 5 63 7 70 9 71 11 60 13 41 15 45 17 60 7 19 96
22 06 23 81 1 70 3 60 5 71 7 76 9 76 11 65 13 48 15 51 17 68 8 20 05 22 13 23
86 1 75 3 66 5 78 7 83 9 83 11 71 13 53 15 58 17 75 9 20 11 22 20 23 93 1 81 3
73 5 85 7 90 9 90 11 78 13 60 15 65 17 83 10 20 18 22 26 00 00 1 88 3 80 5 91 7
96 9 96 11 83 13 66 15 71 17 90 11 20 25 22 33 0 05 1 95 3 86 5 98 8 03 10 01
11 90 13 73 15 80 17 98 12 20 33 22 40 0 11 2 00 3 93 6 05 8 10 10 08 11 95 13
80 15 86 18 05 13 20 40 22 45 0 18 2 06 4 0^ 6 13 8 16 10 15 12 01 13 85 15 93
18 11 14 20 46 22 51 0 23 2 13 4 06 6 20 8 23 10 20 12 06 13 91 16 00 18 20 15
20 53 22 58 0 30 2 18 4 13 6 26 8 30 10 26 12 13 13 98 16 08 18 26 16 20 60 22
65 0 35 2 25 4 20 6 33 8 36 10 33 12 20 14 05 16 10 18 35 17 20 66 22 70 0 41 2
31 4 26 6 40 8 43 10 38 12 25 14 11 16 21 18 41 18 20 75 20 76 0 48 2 38 4 33 6
40 8 50 10 45 12 31 14 18 16 28 18 50 19 20 81 22 83 0 53 2 45 4 40 6 53 8 56
10 51 12 38 14 23 16 36 18 56 20 20 88 22 90 0 60 2 50 4 46 6 61 8 63 10 56 12
43 14 30 16 43 18 65 21 20 95 22 95 0 66 2 56 4 55 6 68 8 70 10 63 12 50 14 36
16 50 18 71 22 21 01 23 01 0 71 2 63 4 61 6 75 8 76 10 70 12 55 14 43 16 58 18
80 23 21 08 23 08 0 78 2 70 4 68 6 81 8 81 10 75 12 61 14 50 16 65 18 86 24 21
15 23 13 0 83 2 76 4 75 6 88 8 88 10 81 12 68 14 56 16 71 18 93 25 21 21 23 20
0 90 2 81 4 81 6 95 8 95 10 88 12 73 14 63 16 80 19 01 26 21 28 23 26 0 96 2 88
4 88 7 01 9 01 10 93 12 80 14 70 16 86 19 08 27 21 35 23 33 1 01 2 95 4 95 7 10
9 08 11 00 12 86 14 76 16 93 19 16 28 21 41 23 38 1 08 3 01 5 01 7 16 9 15 11
05 12 91 14 83 17 01 19 23 29 21 48 1 15 3 08 5 08 7 23 9 21 11 11 12 98 14 90
17 08 19 30 30 21 55 1 20 3 15 5 16 7 30 9 26 11 18 13 05 14 96 17 16 19 38 31
21 61 1 26 5 23 9 33 11 23 15 03 19 45

Declination and Right Ascension of the Stars.
Declination Did. from the pole Right Ascenation The names of the Stars. D. M.
D. M. H. M. Breast of Cassiopeia 54 76 N 35 24 0 35 Pole Star 87 48 N 02 52 0 51
Girdle of Andromeda 33 83 N 56 17 0 83 Knees of Cassiopeia 58 41 N 31 59 1 05
Whales belly 12 00 S 78 00 1 58 South, foot by Andr. 40 65 N 19 35 1 70 Rams
head 21 81 N 68 19 1 80 Head of Medusa 39 58 N 50 42 2 76 Perseus right side 48
55 N 41 45 2 98 Bulls eye 15 75 N 74 25 4 26 The Goat 45 58 N 44 42 4 85 Orions
left foot 08 63 S 81 37 4 96 Orions left shoulder 05 98 N 84 02 5 10 First in
Orions girdle 00 58 S 89 42 5 25 Second in Orions gird. 01 45 S 88 55 5 31
Third in Orions girdle 02 15 S 87 85 5 38 Wagoners right should. 44 86 N 45 14 5
70 Orions right shoulder 07 30 N 82 70 5 60 Bright foot of Twins 16 65 N 73 35
6 30 The great Dog 16 21 S 73 79 6 50 Upper head of Twins 32 50 N 57 50 7 20
The less Dog 06 10 N 83 90 7 36 Lower head of Twins 28 80 N 61 20 7 40
Brightest in Hydra 07 16 S 82 84 09 16 Lions heart 13 63 N 76 37 09 83 Lions
back 22 06 N 65 94 11 50 Lions tail 16 50 N 73 50 11 51 Great Bears rump. 58 72
N 31 28 10 66 First in the great Bears tail next her rump 57 85 N 32 15 12 63
Virgins spike ^9 32 S 80 68 13 11 Middlemost in the great Bears tail 56 75 N
33 25 13 16 In the end of her tail 51 08 N 38 92 13 56 Between Boots thighs 21
03 N 68 97 14 00 South Balance 14 55 S 75 45 14 53 North Balance 08 05 S 81
95 14 96 Scorpions heart 25 58 S 64 42 16 13 Hercules head 14 85 N 75 15 16 98
Serpentaries head 12 86 N 77 14 17 31 Dragons head 51 60 N 38 40 17 80
Brightest in the Harp 38 50 N 51 50 18 41 Eagles heart 08 02 N 81 98 19 56
Swans tail 44 08 N 45 92 20 50 Pegasus mouth 08 32 N 81 68 21 45 Pegasus
shoulder 17 38 N 76 62 23 91 The head of Androm. 27 22 N 62 78 23 85

Rules for finding of the Poles elevation by the meridian altitude of the Sun
or stars, and by the Table of their Declinations aforegoing.
Case 1.
IF the Sun or star be on the meridian to the southwards, and have south
declination. Add the suns declination to his meridian altitude, and taking
that total from 90 degrees, what remains is the latitude of the place desired.

As the 7 of February, 1654, by the aforegoing Table, the suns decl. south. is
11.80 The suns meridian altitude 15.27 The sum or total is 27.07 Which
subtracted from 90.00 There remains the North latitude 62.93

But when you have added the suns declination to his meridian altitude, if the
total exceed 90: substract 90 degr. from it, and what remains is your
latitude to the southwards.

As admit the suns declination to be southerly 11.80 And his meridian altitude
87.23 The sum or total is 99.03 From which substracting 90.00 There remains the
latitude south. 09.03

Case. 2.
If the sun or star be on the meridian to the southwards, and have north
declination.

Substract the suns declination from his meridian altitude, and that which
remains substract from 90, and then the remainer is the poles elevation
northerly.

Case 3.
If the sun or star be on the meridian to the northwards, and have north
declination*

Add the suns declination to his meridian altitude, the total take from 90,
and what remains is the poles elevation southerly.

But when you have added the suns declination to his meridian altitude, if it
exceed 90, substract 90 from it, and what remains is your latitude northerly.

Case 4.
If the sun be to the northwards at noon, and declination south.

Substract the suns declination from his meridian altitude, and that which
remains substract from 90, what then remains is your latitude southerly.

And what is said of the Sun, is also to be understood of the Stars, being upon
the Meridian.

Case 5.
If you observe when the Sun has no declination.

Substract his meridian altitude from 90, what remains is your latitude.

Case 6.
If you chance to observe when the Sun or star is in the Zenith, that is 90
degrees above the Horizon. Look in the table for the declination of the Sun or
of that star, and the same is your latitude.

Case 7.
If the Sun come to the meridian under the Pole.

If you be within the Artick or Antartick circle, and observe the Sun upon the
meridian under the Pole; substract the Suns declination from 90, the remainer
is the Suns distance from the Pole; which distance added to his meridian
altitude, the sum or total is the latitude sought.

And what is here said of the Sun is to be understood of the stars, whose
declinations, distances from the pole, and right ascensions we have expressed
in the foregoing Table.

FINIS.

