THE ADVANTAGE OF A Learned Education.

BEING A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church of St. Paul On St. PAUL's Day
1697/8.

Before the GENTLEMEN Educated at That School, upon the Reviving their Ancient
Anniversary Meeting.

By W. Nicholls D. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. Redmayne for Fran. Saunders at the New Exchange in the
Strand, and Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1697/8.

To my School-Fellows Bred at St. Paul's School.
Dearest Sirs,
I Here Present You with a very hasty and a very imperfect Discourse, which I
had neither Time nor Books about me to make better; and I can only attribute it
to your kind Affection to me, that you have pressed me to the Publishing it.
And, since it has the Fate to go abroad, pray God it may do some Good, and that
it may be Read with as much Candor and Affection as you heard it; and then it
may possibly somewhat Advance the Cause both of Learning and Religion, which it
is too much the Fashion of our Age to despise. I am

Gentlemen Your Most Faithful Servant and Loving School-fellow W. NICHOLLS.

ACT. XXII. III. I verily am a Man, which am a Jew, born in Tarsus a City of
Cilicia, yet brought up in this City at the Feet of Gamaliel.


THIS Day is by the Church set aside, to give God thanks for the most excellent
Example and blessed Labors of that Glorious Apostle St. Paul: And several of
us are here met together upon another more particular Account, to thank God
Almighty for our ingenuous Education in that School, which bears the Name, and
is dedicated to the Honor of that Great Saint. And therefore the better to
suit my Discourse to both these Occasions, I have chosen these Words of that
Apostle which he spoke concerning himself. The occasion was this, as the
History of the preceding Chapter informs us: When St. Paul came to Preach the
Gospel at Jerusalem, the Jews fearing great detriment would accrue thereby to
their Religion, fancying by mistake a mighty indignity to be passed by him upon
their Public Worship, by his having brought Trophimus a Gentile into the
Temple, whom they saw he freely conversed with in the Streets, they were
presently all over the City in an Uproar: The tumultuous Multitude run
instantly in Sholes toward the Temple, to know the Truth of this heinous
Accusation, where they find St. Paul Preaching; when in a fury they drag him
from thence into the Streets, and forthwith shut up the Temple Doors: And thus
he lay at the mercy of the barbarous Multitude, which would in a little time
have murdered him, had not the Chief Captain of the Garrison rescued him by a
Band of Soldiers, which made a shift to get him out of the Hands of the Rabble,
and carry him Prisoner into the Castle; and thither the outrageous Multitude
follow likewise; but when St. Paul found, he was now got into an advantageous
Place for speaking to the People, and whom he saw somewhat awed by the
Authority of the Captain; he obtained leave to make an Apology to them, for
himself. There are several Arguments in this Speech, by which he endeavors to
justify his Actions, and to recommend himself to their good Opinion, as
particularly his Miraculous Conversion and his former Sincerity and Zeal for
the Jewish Worship, but that, which I shall particularly insist upon, is his
being brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel. To be brought up at the Feet of any
one is to be a Scholar, for the Jewish Rabbis were wont to sit in an Upper
Bench, and their Scholars at their Feet; hence came the Jewish Proverb, happy
is the Man that is dirtied by the Feet of the Wise, i. e. has had a literate
Education. But Gamaliel was a Master of greater Fame and Abilities than other
Rabbis, he was President of the Sanhedrim, and, if I may so speak, Doctor of
the Chair; a Person of whom the Jewish Books do at this time speak great things
of, That he was Grandson of the famous Hillel so renowned in their Story, and
that at his Death Onkelos the Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase spent Seventy
Pound of Frankincense upon his Funeral. Such an Education as this, under so
great a Doctor, St. Paul though would sufficiently recommend him to the Jews,
and give him a Character even above the rest of the Apostles, who were all of
them besides Men of an illiterate Education.

Therefore the Subject of my present Discourse shall be to do these three
things.

I. To show, That St. Paul had a peculiar Eminency above the rest of the
Apostles. II. That the Reason of this Eminency was because of his Learned
Education. III. To urge some Christian Exhortations upon the present Occasion.
I. St. Paul had a peculiar Eminency above the rest of the Apostles. Which is
obvious to any one who considers, 1st. How excellently this Apostle above the
rest was versed in the Jewish Learning, how knowing he was in all the Ritual
Worship of the Mosaical Law, and skilled in their Traditions and Rabbinical
Expositions of Scripture; as is to be seen in all his Epistles, particularly
that to the Hebrews, where he admirably shows the Analogy between the Law and
the Gospel, and, to the Confusion of the Jews, proves, That their whole Law
were but Temporary and Carnal Ordinances, which were only Types and
Prefigurations of the Sacrifices the Death, and the Spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, who was to be King and Priest for ever. 2. Or if we consider this great
Apostle as to his Accomplishments in Profane and Heathen Learning, he was far
superior to any of the rest; see how he bravely confutes the Idolatry of the
Athenians, by a Verse of Aratus one of their own Greek Poets, and shows that it
must be by their own Confession unreasonable, that the Soul, the Offspring of
God, should adore a gross Material Image, Act. 17.28. And how he reprimands
those vain Talkers and Deceivers which had got into the Church of Crete, by a
smart Character which Epimenides a Poet of that Country had given long before
(...), etc. The Cretians are always Liars, Evil Beasts, Slow Bellies, Titus
1.12. 3. Nor was he less eminent in deep Theological Reasoning, a judicious
stating of controverted Points, and in profitable and pressing Exhortations to
practical Duties. With what strenuous Arguments does he prove the Call of the
Gentiles to the Gospel, and their non-obligation to the performance of Judaical
and abolished Ceremonies? How prudently does he state the Point about Faith and
Works? What noble Aphorisms and Sentences do his Epistles every where abound
with, what cordial Consolations to the afflicted and persecuted, what elegant
Descriptions of the vanity and inconsiderableness of this World and the
Immortal Joys of the other, what brave encouragements to Perseverance and
Constancy, and what passionate Exhortations to Christian Charity and Unity? How
may we observe in all his Discourses a particular contempt of Worldly things,
and the pious Breathings of a Soul brim full with the Love of God? 4. Nor was
he less remarkable for his Courage and Sincerity, Virtues which are particular
Qualifications in doubtful and perilous times. What an instance of his
Christian Bravery and Resolution was it, to Preach the Gospel so publicly at
Jerusalem, where he had so many enraged Enemies, when his Friends told him, and
he himself could not but expect, to be sacrificed for it? And when the Great
St. Peter was afraid to disoblige the Judaizing Faction, and was contriving for
their sakes an odd sort of Comprehension or Medly betwixt Judaism and
Christianity; our brave Apostle withstood him to the Face, and defended the
simplicity of our Savior's Religion against all the opposition of so great an
Adversary. 5. But besides all this, the indefatigable Labors of his Preaching,
and the large Conversions to Christianity he effected in all Parts almost of
the Gentile World, is enough to raise the Honor of him far above the rest of
his Apostolic Brethren, whose Conversions were in no ways comparable to his.
Most of the Churches of Asia Minor, those in the Islands and Provinces of
Greece, those in Thrace and Dalmatia, in Spain and Italy were founded by this
same St. Paul. And the most Learned Bishop Stillingfleet in his Origines
Britannicae has made it very probable that we of this Nation did receive
Christianity likewise from this Apostle, for the Story of Joseph of Arimathea
is too Modern and too Monkish to be credited. And now what a vast Tract of
Ground is this for this one Apostle to spread the Gospel over? How incredible
almost is it that so many different Nations should enjoy the blessed Effects of
his Ministry? for give me leave to say that the Roman Arms themselves were
hardly more victorious or farther extended than the Plantation of the Gospel by
this one Apostle. I come now in the second place to show.

II. That the Reason of this Eminency of St. Paul was because of his Learned
Education.

And to make out this, I shall not tie my self strictly to show how his
Learning was the cause of those particular Qualifications I have already made
appear he was Excellent in, but shall show that which will equally prove the
same, viz.

That a Learned Education does best qualify a Man for discharging all the
Duties which are incumbent on him throughout all the Progress of Humane Life,
or in any Trust whatsoever. Now the many and different Characters which belong
to Mankind in their diverse Capacities, may all be reduced to these Three.

1. As they are Private Men, or Members of Society. 2. As they are Magistrates
or in public Capacity. 3. As they are Christians, or Members of God's Church.
Now I shall show that a Learned Education does best qualify a Man to
discharge his Duty in all these several Capacities.

I. A Learned Education does best qualify a Man to discharge his Duty as a
private Person, or Member of Society.

1. It renders a Man more agreeable in Neighborhood and Conversation. Most of
your little Animosities and Quarrels are to be found chiefly amongst uneducated
People; and though we find too much of them among Men who have been better bred,
yet they are seldom guilty of that roughness and hard Language which, is common
among others: Nay, the obliging and endearing Airs of Conversation are in the
greatest Height and Perfection to he seen only in those Gentlemen, who have had
the advantage of the most Learned Education. For, as for all the other little
Arts of Popular Talk and Refined Address, they lie but thin spread over a Man,
like Varnish, and every untoward Accident makes him liable to discover his
inward Imperfections. I will not say, that an Education perfectly Bookish where
Genius, and the Life and Brightness of Nature, and a competent knowledge of the
World, are deficient; I will not say this does render a Man more agreeable in
Conversation; but if Men would take care to talk as they ought to do, and would
be improving their Minds upon all occasions, they would find more Satisfaction
in the useful, though unpolished Discourse, of such a Person, than in all the
Circle of fine Jests and Tales that are requisite to furnish out an empty Wit.

2. A Learned Education does commonly endow Men with more than ordinary
Principles of Generosity. The Company, which they are Educated among, are
Persons who are generally Men of Honor, and who value their Reputation, and
scorn a base thing; and therefore if they fall into such Actions they must sort
out to themselves a new Acquaintance; for they will be abandoned by all their
former Friends, who are Lovers of Honor and Virtue. Besides, their Minds have
been habituated to such generous Virtues, during their whole Series of
Education, that they cannot, without a great force upon their Inclinations,
stoop to sordid Vices; and a base Covetousness, dishonest Dealing, or
Treacherousness, and such other shameful Vices, and rarely incident to Men of
such an Education. Their very Reading in Philosophy and History affords them
such excellent Rules and Examples which so tinctures their Souls with these
noble Ideas, as makes it no easy matter for them to be tempted to do an
unworthy thing. The vulgar and illiterate have very little Sense of Fame and
Honor, and do many scandalous things when they may be advantageous; but Men of
a Liberal Education have, for the most part, such a spark of Honor within
their Breasts, as is a guard to them against the Commission of any enormous
Crimes at least; and oftentimes is the last stake of Virtue within them, when
all true Piety and Religion have taken their flight: A spark which sometimes,
by God's Grace, kindles again into a bright flame of Piety and true Religion,
when others live on senseless and stupid Sinnners to the last.

3. A Learned Education does render a Man more Eminent in his particular
Calling. A Previous knowledge in any part of Literature does qualify a Man for
the understanding of any kind of Business, far better than one who is destitute
of all. It opens and clears one's Head for a ready preception of whatever shall
be proposed to us; for, the more the Mind is used to thinking and
contemplation, the more quick and perceptive it is, and is discernable even in
those that have been very little used to it. A Lad that has but gone through a
Form or two in a Grammar School, that has had Thoughts but a small matter
exercised about the propriety of Speech, and the congruity of Terms with one
another, only in the Grammatical way of Concord, shall have a far greater
facility in Learning any Art, than one taken from the Plough, or any other who
all his time has lived by pure Sense, without any manner of abstracted Thought
or Meditation. But a farther progress, in a well managed course of Studies,
gives a kind of new Genius to the Soul, and oftentimes quickens the slowest
Natures; so that, when Learning and a noble stock of natural Parts meet
together, they must needs arrive, in any thing they apply themselves to, to the
utmost Perfection that human Nature is capable of. For there is an Analogy
between all sort of Reasoning, and Men, who have been used to make good
consequences in one Art or Science, with a little Application may do it as well
in another. But I need not go to prove this; for it is evident to every ones
observation, that the most Famous in any Art whatsoever are generally the best
Scholars of that Profession. A good Philosopher and Historian shall make the
best Lawyer, and an ordinary Mathematician an excellent Mechanic; nay by
frequently reading sensible Authors, a Man will improve his Reason so that he
shall be able to Buy and Sell, and manage Trade the better for it.

2ly. A Learned Education does best qualify a Man to discharge his Duty as a
Magistrate or in any Public Capacity; because

1. Learning gives a Man a greater Knowledge in Public Affairs. Indeed a
General ought not to be made of a Cowardly Scholar, but if the General have
Learning and Courage too, he is much the fitter for that Employ; for there is a
great deal more in such a Trust than bear Fighting and Killing; and a complete
Knowledge in History which is the Experience of many Ages, is as much requisite
as making Campaigns. Nay, the greatest Generals in the World were Men of
Learning. Alexander studied and conversed with Philosophers all the while he
was Conquering the Persian Empire: And Julius Caesar was as good a Writer as he
was a Soldier. And so likewise as for Civil Trusts, though of late Years the
Characters of Bookish and Pedantical have excluded a great many worthy Men from
Public Business, yet it is well known that, in our Forefathers time, Business
was as well done when such Men, as they characterise by those Names, were in
Power. But why should a Man make a Politician, when he could not make a
Scholar? Certainly there are as much Brains and Diligence required, to be able
to Govern and Direct the Affairs of a Nation, as there is to understand a Greek
or Latin Book; and he, that was never able to attain to the latter, will find
the former a little too hard. Indeed it may sometimes happen that a Man of an
extraordinary stock of Nature, though defective in Learning, may be a
considerable Statesman, but if that Man had had the advantage of Literature
too, he would have done Wonders in such a Post. For we have Instances what
great things Learning alone has done in such Stations together with heavy
Parts; then what must it have produced, in conjunction with a noble Genius, and
all the sprightly force of Nature? For such a one shall not only have the
quickness and sagacity to discover the Intrigues of an Enemy, but shall have
before him in his mind all the old Plots and Contrivances of former Princes and
States against each other, and know how they have succeeded, or how they were
prevented; what good or ill Accidents have furthered or retarded Sieges or
Expeditions, and may be in probability of happening still; what have been the
Methods taken for the rise of the greatest Governments, and what has been the
occasion of their Decay; what has been the omission of Princes to suffer the
exorbitant growth of their Neighbors, or to breed Tumults or Seditions at
Home; what Land or Naval Forces are requisite for the situation or
circumstances of a Nation; what Taxes are least oppressive, lie more equally
upon a People are best proportioned to their Wealth and Trade, and are more
agreeable to the Inclinations; People in short, by comparing their own with
Ancient and Modern Governments, shall know wherein the true Interest and
Welfare of the Nation does consist. These are Qualifications which are
absolutely necessary for a good Statesman, and yet are not to be attained but
by an diligent application of Thought and by hard Study; but I am sure they are
never to be got only by living within the Walls of a Court, by picking up News
and attending at the Levies, and what is worse by Flattery and Dissimulation,
by betraying and undermining their best Friends; which has been the modern
Method of training a Politician.

2. Because Men of Learning are commonly more sincere and faithful in Public
Employs than others. Such Men for the most part have lived more sober and
virtuous Lives; for having spent their Youth in severe Study, they could not be
guilty of those mad Excesses, which the illiterate Gentlemen usually lay out
their Time in, and which gives them oftentimes such a vile Character in the
Opinion of the Public. The first of these when they are honored with a Public
Employ they dare not stain that good Reputation, the World has bestowed upon
them, by any foul Practices; whilst the other Gentlemen, who by their
Intemperate and Rakish Lives have made their Character so wretched and
despicable, are prompted to think that even Corruption can hardly make it
worse. The former, besides their Learning, have generally lasting Principles of
Virtue in them, which will direct them in all Stations; whilst the others,
though they leave off their scandalous irregularities, are either Virtuous
through impotence or cautiously Vicious; or, though they are arrived to an Age
when sensuality is disagreeable to them, yet then the Devil has another set of
Baits to tempt them with, and their Minds shall be liable to all the Corruption
and indirect Practices which Covetousness, the Darling Vice of an unregenerate
Old Age, shall put them upon. I do not say that all Statesmen who have not the
advantage of Learning are corrupt, or that there are no Wise and Good Men, who
have spent their Youth foolishly and extravagantly; but this I say, and I think
upon good grounds, that if care was taken, that the most considerable Stations
in the Government were filled by Men of a competency in Learning, and of a
serious and sober Life, there would be much less reason to complain of Evil
Counselors and Public Miscarriages, than when Men are suffered to get into
these Posts with no other Qualifications, than the recommendation of great
Friends.

3ly. A Learned Education does best qualify a Man to discharge his Duty as a
Christian.

1. Because such Men have a more Perfect Knowledge of all the Duties and
Obligations which are incumbent on them. God complains thus of the Jews, Hos.
4.6. My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge. A great many Men are
eternally ruined for want of due. Instruction at first in the Principles of
Christianity, some miscarry by having their Thoughts totally bent upon such
Worldly Callings as give them but little leisure to reflect upon a better
State; and lastly, others fall into dangerous Sins often upon account of
Ignorance and for want of understanding the Measures of their Duty. But a
literate Education provides against all these things. Men that have had the
advantage of this are well principled from their Childhood in Christian Duties;
they are usually bred to more generous Employs, which afford them more frequent
conversation with the best and most learned Men, and more opportunities of
Reading and Devotion; they have usually such a Knowledge in the Holy
Scriptures, and in all points of their Duty, that they themselves are able to
settle in their own thoughts the boundaries of Virtue and Vice, and upon this
account are not so liable to commit Sin through Ignorance or Mistake.

2. Because such Men are not so liable to be led away by ill Examples.

The uneducated part of Mankind live only by example, and (like Cattle)
unthinkingly follow after those that go before them, and, because the
Generality of the World have little regard to Religion, or are lewd and
debauched, they are so too. But Men of a literate Education do better consider
matters, and look into the Reasons of things; they see it is unreasonable and
foolish, to loose their Religion, for a Fashion; or to forfeit their Interest
with God, to imitate the Vices of some admired Great Man. These Men's Reasons
are too strong, and their Souls too brave to be guilty of such sordid and
foolish Compliances.

3. Because such Men have a more Rational and noble sense of Religion.

The Vulgar, for the most part, take up their Religion upon Trust, as a certain
Property belonging to their Country or their Family; which they have a
veneration for, because those Persons, they have a great Opinion of, have the
like; and which they must in some measure comply with, or they shall appear
singular or give offense to those, they are not willing to disoblige. And
others, that are better instructed practice the Rules of Christianity, as
unquestionable Truths delivered to them by their Parents, and inculcated to
them by their Pastors. And I doubt not but Men may be saved, if they be
sincerely Religious and fulfill our Saviors Commands, upon these Grounds. But
then no one can deny, but that they have a more rational Ground of their Faith,
and a nobler sense of Religion, who having leisure and learning have examined
all the Foundations of Christianity, who are fully satisfied that our Savior
and his Apostles Preached all those Doctrines, and did all those Miracles they
are reported to have done in confirmation of them, and are sure that
Christianity can be no Dream or Imposture of Designing or Enthusiastical Men,
but that it is the most Heavenly and the Wisest Institution which ever was in
the World. The former do obey our Saviors Laws only as necessary Duties, but
these readily comply with them as a reasonable service. They are brought to
their Duties by the compulsion of Hopes and Fears, by the Command or Example of
Superiors, or by warm and affectionate Discourses; whilst These Embrace our
Saviors Doctrines, because they so admirably fall in with the Dictates of
right Reason, and are worthy of God the Author of them, and because they have
all the reason in the World to think, that God Almighty commanded them. The
first breeds for the Generality only an Awful Fear of God; but the other makes
Men approach him with a hearty and generous Love. They may be true Believers,
but then they are often liable to be shocked by every captious Atheistical
Objection; whilst These have scand over all the specious Exceptions of the
Infidels against our Religion, and notwithstanding this they do adore and hope
in Crucified Jesus, in the midst of all the loud Blasphemies of an Incredulous
Age. These are the advantages which we have by a Learned Education in our
several Capacities, as we are Men in a Society, or Governors, or Christians; to
which we may add another advantage, viz. the Inward Satisfaction to our selves,
the pleasure of reading so many noble and ravishing Authors, and to spend our
time so agreeably, whilst that of others hangs so uncomfortably upon their
Hands; the inexpressible Delight of having our knowledge daily improved by
being let into so many useful and entertaining Truths; to dive into the hidden
secrets of Nature by Philosophy, to run back and converse with all the former
Ages by History, to understand the Difficulties and to reconcile the
Differences in God's Word by Theology, and to determine the measures of Right
and Wrong, and exactly to lay out the Lines of Justice and Equity by a
Knowledge in the Laws: these are such delightsome qualifications, as when they
are not soured accidentally by Pride or Discontent, but possessed together with
Modesty and a Peaceable Disposition, if there be any happiness in this World,
this is certainly one of the greatest on this side Heaven. I now come to the
third and last things.

III. To urge some Christian Exhortations upon the present Occasion.

1. And first my Christian Brethren, you my Dearest Companions of my tender
Years, You with whom I had the happiness, to lay the Foundation of my Studies
in the Neighboring School, where we have gained the advantage of such an
Education, as has improved our Minds beyond the generality of those who have
unhappily been destitute of the like noble Assistances; let me exhort you all
to pay your hearty thanks to God the Giver of every good Gift, for the great
advantage of this Education, and when in your Praises to God you recount the
many great Benefits he conferred upon you to remember this as one of the most
considerable. And now we have a happy opportunity of doing it together in
Public, especially at this time in this place, which bear a particular
relation to our School and Founder. Methinks I see darting through all our
Soulr a secret and unexpressible pleasure to think, that we should so luckily
renew this our Ancient Love Feast upon the first Anniversary of this blessed
Saint, after the Rebuilding of his Temple; and now we are grown Men, that we
can devoutly meet together and Praise God in this Glorious Edifice, where we
remember to have played our Childish Pastimes among its desolate Ruins.

2. Let us pay our utmost gratitude toward the Place and Preceptors of our
Education. Let us do our utmost to encourage and befriend this Foundation, and
to make it Flourish as much as we can; that it may be as advantageous to
Thousands more in future Times as it has been to us. Let us always bear the
greatest Respect and Veneration to those Worthy Persons by whose Care and
Learning we had our Instruction. To be Bred under a good Schoolmaster is a
lasting Blessing as long as we live, as an Education under a bad one is a
lamentable and unretrievable Misfortune; and though a Man may notwithstanding
this Disadvantage be somewhat considerable, yet he is like a House built upon a
false Foundation always weak and tottering. Therefore Great Public Schools,
where Grammatical Learning is in its highest Perfection, can never enough be
esteemed and encouraged, and the Masters honored and revered by their
Scholars, who have received such an inestimable advantage from them: From them
who have been so kind to us to afford us all the pleasures and satisfactions of
that Learning they have implasted in us, and to be content with the Toil and
Drudgery of it themselves; who have been pleased to forego the more agreeable
Employments to do a more Public Good, and to spend their time in a laborious
and what is worse a thankless Calling, when the Injustice and the Ingratitude
of the Age is such, that they are constantly blamed for every Miscarriage, and
hardly thanked for any Success.

2. Let us all unite together in a strict Bond of Love and Friendship, to each
other. Let us remember those mutual Endearments which passed between us in
those early Years, and again let us renew our Affections in a maturer Age, if
absence and discontinuance from one another has abated them. These early
Friendships of all others are the best and the strongest. The familiarities
which Men fall into afterward are generally but the forming of Designs or
courting an Interest; and if these fail so does their Friendship too. But in
that tender Age pure natural Simplicity, and Love without dissimulation governs
the Affections; and we enter then into the choicest familiarity only with them,
whose Souls we find more tuneable and agreeable with ours. And why should we
not maintain the same Friendships still, which we proved at a time when Nature
lay open and undisguised; rather than to maintain a familiarity chiefly with
those whom it may be only Craft or Design obliges to be faithful. Besides, a
mutual Friendship among our selves has a Thousand advantages attending it,
wherein we may be serviceable to one another; the Profession of one may be
beneficial to that of another, and the application of many of such a Society
may obtain a Kindness for a single Person, which he could not procure himself.

4. Let us all endeavor, that our good Lives may be answerable to the
Education, which has been given us. Let us always bear in mind that of our
Savior, He that knows his Masters Will and does it not shall be beaten with
many Stripes. God expects we should live better than the illiterate Vulgar who
have less Knowledge, and that our good Lives should be an example to them to
copy from. But if we allow our selves in shameful and beastly Vices, not only
the Rules of our Holy Religion, but the very Verses and Sentences of our
Heathen Classicks will make our Consciences and fly in our Faces. But I hope we
shall all make that good improvement of our Time and Education, as to work out
our Salvation with fear and trembling, and to let our light shine before Men
that they may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, that we shall live in the
fear of God, in Christian Charity with all Men, and a hearty Friendship among
our selves as long as God shall be pleased to continue us in this World, and
that we may all of us be happy in the next, and that at the Resurrection of the
Just, we may all meet again at the Great Marriage Supper of the Lamb, when we
shall be joined to the blessed Community of the Saints and we shall live and
enjoy and Love for ever. Which God, etc.

FINIS.

