Mr. NEWTE's SERMON Concerning the LAWFULNESS and USE OF ORGANS IN THE
Christian Church.

The Lawfulness and Use of Organs in the Christian Church.

Asserted in A SERMON Preached at TIVERTON IN THE County of Devon Upon the 13th
of September, 1696.

On Occasion of an ORGAN's being Erected in that Parish Church.

By JOHN NEWTE, M. A.

Rector of Tiverton in Devon; sometime Fellow of Baliol College in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins in the Old Baily, and are to be sold by
William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet; and
by Humphry Burton Bookseller in Tiverton. 1696.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JONATHAN Lord Bishop of EXETER.
My Lord,
WE Have at last, with your Favor and Encouragement, Erected an Organ in our
Parish Church A thing which I have almost these Ten years endeavored to do;
and had once obtained the Recommendation of it from your Lordship's worthy
Predecessor, the late most Reverend Archbishop of York* This seemed at that
Time to be Embraced and Subscribed to with great Affection by the whole Body of
our Corporation; but the want of Sincerity in some, or a vigorous Prosecution
in others, under the Everlasting Pretense of the Badness of the Times, gave a
Discouragement to the Design, however Useful and Beneficial it was. And so for
that Time it came to Nothing.

But now I hope our Tempers are changed for the better, and that they are not
so bad, as they may be Represented to be; which, our continual Aversion to this
sort of Church-Musick, would give the World too great cause to Suspect: We have
therefore taken the best Course to Remove such a Suspicion, and to show, That
we Resolve with our utmost Zeal and Diligence and Sincerity to Serve God,
according to the Methods of our Excellent Constitution, in his own House of
Prayer; and by the help of the Organ to raise our Affections and Excite our
Devotion thereto.

This being the first Erected in your Lordship's Diocese (out of the City)
since the Great Rebellion had destroyed the Use of them in many Places. I could
not but judge it most proper to Dedicate this Discourse, which was Preached to
a very Numerous Auditory, at the Time our Organ was first made Use of, to your
Name, under the happy Influence of whose Government, we enjoy so much Safety
and Defense in our present Establishment.

The Subject indeed deserves your Protection, while it already has your
Encouragement: But the Blame of the Composition must lie at my own Door, and I
have no mind to add to that by making an Apology for its Publication.

I could not indeed well avoid the giving leave to some Friends to Transcribe a
Copy who desired it; unless, I should seem to shrink from a Justification of
what I delivered to them from the Pulpit, which I think too mean a Thing, both
with Respect to the Dignity of my Office, and the Argument I have undertaken to
defend. Therefore I chose rather to Gratify them this way, than to give them
that Trouble, which I am sure would make it less Answer their Expectation.

My Lord, It is now highly to be wished (if such a Wish be not too great in our
days) That all others who possess the same Station and Dignity in our Church
with You, were as zealous and hearty in Promoting the Interest, and Defending
the Rights of its Constitution. It would make some of us happy beyond our
Expectation, and others beyond their Design, if not against their Wills. Then
we might see our Excellent Establishment and Old England flourish in our Time,
as they did in that of our Forefathers.

May you still go on with a Primitive Zeal and Courage to support this best
Part of Christianity; For, if this be ever suffered to fall, we have too much
reason to think, That little elfe but Anarchy and Confusion, if not Atheism and
Profaneness, will quickly follow. Past Experience of this will, I hope,
sufficiently forewarn us against future Danger. And that the former may never
again be tried, nor consequently the latter ever more be felt in our Land, is
and shall be the constant Prayer and Endeavors of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and most Faithful Servant JO. NEWTE.
Tidcombe, Sept. 24. 1696.
THE LAWFULNESS and USE OF ORGANS IN THE Christian Church.
PSALM CL. 4. latter part. -- Praise him with stringed Instruments and Organs.


WHEN holy David, the great Pattern for Adoration and Praise, either upon
occasion of some signal Deliverance received at the Hands of God; or being
moved with a more than ordinary Impulse of the Spirit, to Laud and Magnify his
holy Name for the multitude of his Mercies.

Or when he more ordinarily Addressed himself unto him in Public Prayer and
Thanksgiving, making known his Requests, making Profession of his Faith,
complaining of the State of the Wicked; of the Malice of his Enemies; giving
Encouragement to the Pious, or Comfort to the Afflicted; and upon most other
Occasions incident to the State and Condition of Himself and People.

He presently composed a Psalm, and sent for the chief Prefect of his Choir, to
sit and prepare it to some Musical Instrument, suitable to the Occasion, to
Elevate his Mind, and to Excite his Devotion.

And when his Predecessor Saul was possessed with the Evil Spirit, the Royal
Prophet having notice of it, 1 Samuel 16.23.
Took an Harp and played with his hand. So the latter part of the Verse says,
Saul was refreshed and was well; and the Evil Spirit departed from him.

This Evil Spirit from the Lord, A Lapide in v. 14.
was thought to be a deep Melancholy, which oppressed his Spirits and
discomposed his Mind, and which might lie the heavier upon him, through the
Instigation of the Devil, being most apt to work Mischief upon melancholy
People, and to bring them into such a kind of Distraction. The proper Cure of
this, was concluded to be, a seasonable Application of Music. The force of
which, when made by the skilful Hand of the inspired Musician, the Devil could
not withstand. But in spite of his Fomenting the Disease, Readiness Mind was
exhilerated, and his Melancholy driven away.

It will not now be amiss, I hope, if from such Instances of the Use and Power
of Music, I take the same Method of the Psalmist, in recommending to your
Practice, the constant offering up your Prayers and Praises unto Almighty God,
in this his own House of Prayer, and in order to the being more Devout and
Zealous in the Divine Worship and Service, according to the excellent Method of
our Incomparable Liturgy, if I recommend also the Use of Church-Musick in order
to your more Solemn, Lively and Affectionate Performance of it.

This being most proper to raise our Affections, to cheer up our Hearts, and to
Invigorate, as well as to Regulate our Desires; and likewise to drive away the
Evil Spirit from us. I do not mean only such an heavy and melancholy Spirit as
Readiness was, but a much worse; and no doubt, both raised and fomented by the
Devil too, viz. The Spirit of Division, and Hatred, and Animosity. The Spirit
of Anger, of Envy, of Malice, of Revenge, and other such disorderly and
mischievous Passions, which this will be apt to drive from our Minds, and is a
proper Remedy against.

Those great Ends, among many others, which I shall hereafter show, being very
likely to be promoted by this means, will abundantly compensate for that Pious
and Exemplary Beneficence we have shown, in erecting this stately and
magnificent Structure of an Organ, now Dedicated to the Honor of God, the
Service of his Church, and the Good of his People. By an happy Providence, is
this again restored to that very Place, from whence the other, by Sacrilegious
Hands, was sometime since, pulled down and destroyed.

And I doubt not but those who have so freely contributed toward it, will
conclude their Money put to a very good Use, and that they will find a great
Satisfaction in it themselves; and the greater constantly, as they see the
Benefit and Advantage of it, redound both to themselves and others. And may the
Blessing of God go along with it, and Descend upon the Heads of those
particularly, who have been the Encouragers and Promoters of it.

To which, if it may in any wise contribute, I shall make it the Business of
this Day to Assert the Lawfulness, and Recommend the Use of it. And this I have
chosen to do, from a Consideration of these most express words of the Psalmist,
to this purpose, in the Conclusion of that Divine Collection of his, in this
last Psalm; which, by the Title it bears, (...)
is Hallelujah, or Praise ye the Lord. Wherein he Exhorts All People to call
upon the Lord, and to Praise him in his Sanctuary; and that with all kinds of
Musical Instruments, particularly with stringed ones and Organs.

I may very well here take for granted, I suppose, that Praise is one of the
most Delightful, as well as one of the most Necessary Duties, we are obliged to
perform toward God. That it is of an Eternal Obligation upon us; and which
engages all People, at all Times and in all Places. And also, That we are to
take the best Course, and make use of the best Means, where they may be had,
with respect to those Times and Places, to make this Duty most Affectionate and
Ardent, considering our own Weakness and Indisposition; and likewise most
Solemn and Acceptable, with Respect to the Majesty of God.

This I am to show may be by Musical Instruments, and among them, The Organ, as
being the greatest help to this sort of Devotion.

By Stringed Instruments in this place, Lorinus in loc.
Felix Cajetan and others suppose is to be understood some sorts of them, now
unknown to us. But according to the Hebrew word (...) Species Instrumenti
Musici. (Semel extat) Buxtorf. in loc.
, it signifies such a one as is compounded of many sorts of Musical
Instruments, and contains much variety of Musical Harmony and Melodious Sounds,
like unto that of the Organ, now in use; but differs from it, in that they were
to be played upon, without the help of Wind, which this is not.

And it is further observable, that an Organ in the Original is derived from a
Root, which signifies to Love with ardency and vehemence. (...) Adamavit,
Buxtorf.
It seeming so to express the Nature of the Thing, whose use is to stir up the
Affections of the Soul toward God, that People cannot but be in love with it.

In treating of which I shall proceed after this method.

First, I shall assert the Lawfulness of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental,
and particularly of the latter, in the Time of Divine Service, as well in the
Christian Church now, as in the Jewish Church heretofore.

Secondly, I shall show the great Use and Advantages of it.

Thirdly, I shall Answer the most material Objections, which the Adversaries of
Church-Musick, have against this Practice. And

Lastly, I shall conclude the whole, with an Exhortation to you to stick
heartily and devoutly to the performance of that Excellent Church Service of
ours, established in the Church of England, as being the fittest and best of
any in the whole Christian World, to answer the ends of our Holy Profession,
namely, to give us a peaceable and happy Life here, and to bring us to Heaven
hereafter.

first, I am to Assert the Lawfulness of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental,
and particularly of the latter in the Time of Divine Service, as well in the
Christian Church now, as in the Jewish heretofore.

Toward the Proof of which, I shall draw some Arguments, * From the Light of
Nature and the Reason of the Thing. * From the Authority of the Scripture, and
the Institution of David, consequent thereupon. * From the Sense of the
Apostles in the New Testament. * From the Opinion and Practice of the Reformed
Churches, both at home and abroad. And * particularly from the Judgment of the
most Eminent Men among those, who dissent from our Church in other Matters.

This I take to be sufficient for the Proof of the Thing before us; after
which, I presume, its Lawfulness cannot well be called in question.

1. The Lawfulness of that cannot certainly, with any tolerable Reason, be
denied, which all Ages have Allowed and Approved of. 1 Chronicles. 15.16.25. 1.
Ecclus. 50.16, 17, 18. The High Priest taught the People to Praise God and Pray
therewith. 2 Chro. 15.14.

It was used at making a Covenant with God.


God's own People of old, made their Approaches unto the True God, in a
Religious manner with the Solemnity of Music, as well, as the Heathen, to
their false Gods. Both finding such a Natural fitness in the Thing, as would be
likely to Excite their Devotion, and make it the more acceptable. And
therefore, this being the general Practice of all Nations, that we read of,
seems to argue, such a way of Worship to proceed from the Dictates of Natural
Religion, which, Men were not so much Taught as Born to.

Hence we find from the Testimony of Scripture, That before the Law was given
by Moses, The Invention of Music was so early, as to be in the Days of Lamech,
the sixth from Adam; his Son Jubal, was the Father of all such as handle the
Harp and the Organ, Genesis 4.21. i. e. He was the Author and Inventor of these.
And in the Days of Job, who is thought to have lived before Moses, those
Instruments of Music which served to rejoice and cheer up Men's hearts at their
Feasts, Job 21.12. God thought fit to Consecrate to a Religious Use, and made
them Instruments of much Honor to his Church, and much Devotion to his People,
Dr. Hickman Conc. in Psalm. 100. 1. p. 14.
or Directions made in this Case by David, there were Instruments of Music
used, and a Song made upon a Religious Account; as appears by these two
Instances, of Miriam the Sister of Aaron, and of the Prophets who came to meet
Saul. The former we read of Exodus 15.20, 21. who Celebrated the Deliverance of
the Israelites out of Egypt, was no less than a Prophetess, and she did it
after this manner: She took a Timbrel in her hand, and all the Women went out
after her, with Timbrels and Dances. And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the
Lord, etc. It Is supposed here, that they sung to one another by turns, this
famous Song of Moses; the Men beginning, and the Women answering them; or else
the Propriety of Speech would not so well hold, of Miriam's answering them, etc.

The other Instance was after the Delivering of the Law, but before the Reign
of David, 1 Samuel 10.5, ^
or any prescript Appointment of it, 1 Samuel 10.5. where the Company of Prophets
(are met by Saul) coming down from the High Place, with a Psaltery, and a
Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp before them; while they Prophesied and sang
Praises unto God.

If we look into the Practice of the Heathen World, we shall find Instances of
the same kind. Homer, one of the ancientest Writers among them, Dr. Hammond in
loc.
mentions the Greeks usage in Celebrating the Praises of their Gods, with an
Harp. The Phrygians with a Drum. And the Egyptians with a Timbrel. So the
Idol-Worship in the Eastern part of the World, mentioned by the Prophet Daniel,
was performed with all kinds of Musical Instruments and Music. Dan. 3.5.
And the Western, or the Roman had Music a great Ingredient in their Religion,
and erected a College of Tibicines or Players upon Wind-Musick, and endowed
them with great Privileges, for their Solemn Performances herein.

2. But this is nothing to the Endowments that were made by David upon the
several Officers, 1 Chronicles. 25. Chap. 23.5.
which were concerned in its Performances both in the Tabernacle, and also the
Temple. David being a King and a Prophet, could not only do this at that time,
but prescribe the Use of it in the time of the Messiah, whose Type he was.
Psalm. 45. and 146.
He first gave the Establishment to it in the Jewish Church; and by the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, made such Heavenly Composures, as not only
supplied the Jews with the most Excellent Forms of Prayer and Praise, upon all
Occasions, befitting that State: But to whom all after Ages are beholding for
their Instructions herein, and for those lofty Strains of Divine Eloquence,
which have wonderfully improved the Devotions of the Christian Church.

And it is from so great a Man, 1 Samuel 13.14.
as this, after God's own heart, as well as from the Reason and Usefulness of
the Thing, that we in a great measure owe, the Advantages of Vocal and
Instrumental Music among us.

The Light of Nature indeed has given great Directions in this Matter: But the
Revelation of God to his Prophets, greater. Whereby Mankind in general have
been loudly called upon by holy David particularly, and a great part of it has
heard the Voice of the Prophet, and made use of such means, as have raised
their Devotion to an higher pitch, than otherwise they could have done, and
consequently have made the Praises of God more abundantly glorious. Psalm. 66.2.


This is done by the help of Artificial Songs and Instrumental Music, to
supply the Defects, and to heighten the Performances of Corrupted Nature; Psalm.
98.
and to assist in Repairing that Voice of Joy and Gladness in serving the Lord,
which had been miserably broken by Disobedience and Sin; and made in a great
measure defective, and not so capable alone to reach the Delights, and to
attain the Perfections of that blessed Employment.

This sweet Psalmist (or Singer) of Israel therefore, 2 Samuel 23.1.
with diverse other Prophets, who were Inspired besides him, for this purpose,
as, Heman, and Asaph, 2 Chronicles. 5.12.
and Jeduthun, and perhaps the Sons of Corah too, whom we read of among the
Compilers and Singers of David's Psalms, introduced into the Church of God
among the Jews, the Use of such Instruments, as were thought fit by them, being
so Divinely Inspired, to raise the Spirit of Devotion among the People, and to
make them Celebrate the Praises of their Creator, in the most Solemn Manner,
Psalm. 57.8.
and with the greatest Alacrity and Exultation as could be imagined; best
becoming the Reason, and answering the End of the chiefest part of the Creation.

And from thence we may Argue, If this was Useful under the Jewish State, why
not under the Christian? Have not Christians sometimes the same Deadness and
Dullness, and Spiritual Indisposition in the Service of God, which the Jews had,
and which lack to be shaken off? Do not the Members of the Christian Church in
the Performance of their Worship, labor under the same Defects of these sorts?
And consequently, Do they not stand in need of some such Helps and Assistances,
to move their Affections, to raise their Devotion, to shake off their
Drowsiness, and to inspire their Thoughts with Cheerfulness and Zeal, with Love
and Veneration, when they make their Addresses unto him, in Prayer and
Thanksgiving? If they do, as it is too manifest they do; for that Reason, have
they always had the proper, if not necessary Assistance of Church-Musick among
them.

Of Vocal I might here mention the Hymns of the Blessed Virgin, of Zacharias,
and of Simeon, Luke 1 and 2d Chapters. And what is said, in the opinion of
Socrates, concerning St. Ignatius (who was supposed to be the Child, which our
Savior took and set in the midst before his Disciples, when he said Matthew.
18.3. Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven.) That 'twas he who first brought the Alternate way
of Singing into the Christian Church, having learnt this from a Vision of
Angels, thereby concluding the better to stir up one another Affections, and
coming nearer to the Heavenly Pattern, where the Seraphims cry one to another,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts, Isai. 6.3. S^cr. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 8
Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple, Part 2. 8. And of the famous St. Ambrose,
who added most melodious and artificial Singing to the Divine Service, in the
Church of Milan, whereof he was Bishop; and this way among the rest; which soon
after was propagated to others. He it was, who composed the most Seraphick
Hymn, which is in the Church, called the Te De^m, in Honor of the Blessed
Trinity; which noble Strains, it is thought, he received down by Tradition from
the Compositions of the Apostles, or some other Primitive Christians, who were
inspired with the Gift of Singing. And for that reason have we such frequent
mention made of their Singing to and Praising God, with Spiritual Songs and
Hymns, in the first and purest Ages of Christianity, when they were so
unfortunate as to be under the severest Persecution; And to that Infelicity
alone we owe the want of Instrumental Music to help out and exalt their
Devotion. And Pliny, giving an account to the Emperor Trajan, of the
Christians, says, Hanc fuisse summam vel Culpae vel Erroris Christianorum, quod
essent soliti, stato die, ante Lucem convenire, Carmenque Christo, quasi De^
dicere secum Invicem, Lib. 10. Ep. 97. de Christianis. It will be too tedious
to mention what great things are spoken concerning the Singing among the first
of Christians, both by the Greek and Latin Fathers, St. Chrysostom, St. Basil,
Just. Martyr, St. Augustine, Tertullian, etc. And that the grave and plain Tune
to the Psalms, now retained in our Cathedral Churches, was set by Gregory the
Great, who flourished about the end of the Sixth Century; a man very diligent
in regulating and accomplishing all the Public Offices of the Church, whom
none of his Successors ever equalled, Platina de Vit. Pontif. Greg. 1. -- many
other Authorities are reckoned up by the Bishop of Cork, in his Duty of
Singing, etc. And I know not, why I might not with them, mention the Authority
of the Worthies of our own Age, the great Lights of the English Church, Hooker,
Hammond, and others, who were men of as great Learning and Piety as they, and
why not of as great Authority among us, concerning that other way of Singing,
with the Instruments of Music, joined to their Voices? If this be Ceremonial,
why not the other? and both be abolished, or neither.


from the very beginning of Christianity the Apostles of our Lord, and the
Primitive Christians practicing it themselves, and recommended it to others.
And Instrumental too, when it got Establishment in the World, and had the
Protection of Kings and Emperors, being freed from the severe and lasting
Persecutions it lay under for above Three hundred years together. And then
afterward, through the Disconsolateness of the Times which followed, it could
not presently appear with that Splendor, as to have all those Ornaments and
Advantages which might well belong to it.

We may conclude therefore, That 'twas through the Necessity, and not the
Choice of the Primitive Christians, that so helpful a Thing as Instrumental
Music in the Service of God, was not more early received into the Christian
Church. And the just Prolectat Aures Religiosa Mulcedo. S. Cypr. Epist. ad
Donatum. Vide S. Basil. Homil. in Ps. 1.

S. Aug. variis in locis.


Encomium they give of it, shows what was their Mind and Desire about it,
though they were not able to bring it to effect.

3. It is observable, That when the Apostle, St. Paul, recommends the use of
Psalms and Hymns, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.
and Spiritual Songs, and to singing and making Melody in our Hearts to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. And St. James, James 5.13.
when he speaks of Singing in token of a Religious Joy, says, Is any merry, let
him sing Psalms? By which, doubtless, they understood the Psalms of David,
which are used in the Jewish Church. And by singing them, in both those places,
it is to be supposed, Vide Criticos Guelpt. and Grot. in Ephesians. 5.19.
they mean with Instruments of Music. And to make the Truth of this
Observation the more manifest to you, it is plain they express themselves by
words, Psalmus est in quo concinendo adhibetur Musicum aliquod Instrumentum
praeter Linguam. Hymnus est proprie Laudis Canticum, sive alta Voce, sive
aliter Canatur. Oda non Lauds tantum continet, sed Paraneses and alia
Argumenta, Calvinus in Col. 3.16.
which in the Original ((...) and (...), from whence, that Instrument called
the Psaltery) signify most properly, a singing with an Instrument.

And a Reverend Bishop of Derry's Discourse concerning the Inventions of men in
the Worship of God, c. 1. 1.
Prelate observes from hence, If they had not approved the Jewish way of
Singing them, which was with Instruments, they would not have used a word that
imported it. Nay, it is not to be doubted, but (that they, who took so much
care for the Regulating and well Ordering of the Church in after Ages) would
have cautioned against it, if they thought it improper, and that Singing with
Instruments, was not consistent with the Spirit and Understanding also. But the
Lawfulness of this, 1 Cor. 14, 15.
and that Singing with the Spirit and Understanding also, is consistent with
Singing with Musical Instruments, I shall further urge from the New Testament;
and the Analogy it has with the Angelical Songs and Heavenly Exultations in the
Quire of Blessed Saints, Rev. 14.2.
who are represented Rev. 14.2. As Harpers harping with their Harps: And having
the Harps of God, 15.2.
Chap. 15.2. Which Places concern the Public Worship of God in the Church, The
Joys of the Saints in Heaven and in Earth, Baxter, Bullinger, Hammond.
and the Triumphant Rejoycings of Christians, for the Victory over their
Enemies, according to the Judgment of some Expositors.

4. And however meanly this way of making melody in our hearts unto the Lord,
may be thought by some, it has been certainly of above a Thousand years
standing in the Christian Church; and been Received and Approved of by the
Reformed, as well as as the Popish Churches (and therefore no part of Those
that have gotten the Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his
Mark, and over the Number of his Name, stand on the Sea of Glass, having the
Harps of God, Rev. 15.2.
Popery). From these latter, I draw no President, any farther, than they agree
with the Churches in the purest and best Times. And for the former, the Opinion
of Luther, Calvin, and their Followers will bear me out, whose Judgments in
this matter, I shall just mention.

Luther, speaking of the Communion-Service, that it ought to be in the Mother
Tongue, says, Missam vernaculam opto magis quam promitto; quod impar sim huic
Operi, quia Musicam simul and spiritum desiderat. In vit. Lutheri. He laments
the want of Poets and Musicians to Compose and Sing Godly Songs. Poetae and
Musici nobis desunt, etc.
I rather wish, than promise it, being not sufficient for so great a Work, for
it requires both Music and a Spirit. It is plain from hence, what he meant,
but because of the troublesome Times wherein he lived, he could not effect it.

But its Followers, it seems, who must be supposed to have best understood
their Teacher's meaning, have affected it. For, in a great part of Germany,
Swedeland, Denmark, Switzerland, and part of Poland, where his Doctrine is
received, they have the Exercise of Vocal and Instrumental Music in the
Worship of God, as we have; and where they have not this Advantage, it is
reckoned more their Unhappiness than their Choice.

So likewise Calvin gives his Approbation of it, in some Places; but being a
Man of intemperate Heat and Passion, is inconsistent with himself in others. I
shall only mention one, which is his Comment on Amos 6.5. where he highly
commends David quum esset quietus postquam defunctus or at omnibus periculis,
potuit etiam se oblectare, etc.
David; That whereas, being Musical and a Lover of Music, he might privately
have delighted himself therewith, when he was now in Peace and Ease, and past
all his Dangers: Quum tamen David applicuerit Musica Instrumenta, ad Pietatis
exercitium ut mentem suam ad Deum at tolleret; -- ut scilicet resonarent Lauds
Dei in Templo, ut inde una cum aliis Piis sese erigeret ad Pietatis Studium,
Calv. in Amos c. 6. v. 5.
yet he chose rather Musical Instruments to the Exercise of Devotion, that he
might thereby raise his Mind toward God. -- And that they sounding the Praises
of God in the Temple, he might Excite both himself and others to the Study of
Godliness.

And the Dutch Where all Sects in Religion may meet, and many do.
Churches, which mostly follow him, have the Use of Organs very frequent among
them, almost in every Church, where the People are of Ability to procure them.

But though none of the Reformed Churches abroad did use them at all, it is
sufficient that ours does, to justify their Lawfulness, being by far the best
part of the Reformation. Concerning which, omitting the Testimony of our own
Eminent Divines, who may, by some People, be thought too partial, I will give
you the Judgment of an Excellent Man, and a Forreigner, I mean the Learned
Isaac Si me conjectura non fallit totius Reformationis pars integerrima est in
Anglia, ubi cum studio veritatis, viget Studium Antiquitatis; Ad Clem. Salmaf.
Ep. 40.
Casaubon: If my Judgment (says he) does not fail me, the sincerest part of
the Reformation is in England, where, together with the Study of Truth,
flourishes also the Study of Antiquity.

And this truly was, and is the Design and Glory of our Church, That it Retains
the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church, while it throws off the
Corruptions and Errors that were foisted into it, in after times. It allows
and maintains what is agreeable to Reason, Decency, and good Report, whereby
God may be worshipped among us in Spirit and Truth, with Beauty and Devotion.

And for this Reason it Retains the Use of Organs in her Divine Service, as
well approving Instruments of Music to adorn, as to heighten her Devotion.
This being the chiefest of them all, and of such admirable Variety and Fullness,
as in a manner contains all other Musical Instruments whatsoever. Having such a
grave Decorum with it, and such a singular Capacity, as is best able to keep an
whole Congregation in decent Modulation of Voice, for singing the Praises of
God; and with due Elevation of Heart, for the better offering up their Prayers
unto him, which are certainly very great Advantages in a Christian Assembly.

And therefore, I say, she retains the Use of the Organ, but not as it were
absolutely necessary, or as if the Essence of the Church did consist in it, and
that there could be no Church without it: But only as to its Been esse, it is
flourishing estate; to which, with respect to the suitableness of the Times and
usefulness of the Thing, it does abundantly conduce. And God be thanked, we do
not stand singly in Defense of this Usage; we have all, I mean all the best
established Churches in the whole Christian World, to concur with us herein,
who are of Ability to make so great a Provision, for the better carrying on the
Worship of God in the Assemblies of his People. And if we approve our selves to
these, it is no matter if we disregard the Novelty and Phantasticalness of some
singular Humors, and be concerned no otherwise than to Pity and Discountenance
the groundless Cavils, unreasonable Prejudices of any to the contrary.

'Twas only through the Iniquity of some Times, as in our long Rebellion, this
Use was Sacrilegiously discontinued, to the Infamy of the Nation, the Dishonor
of God, and the Detriment of his Church in these Kingdoms. And no wonder, that
such an unheard of way of Reformation, by melting of Organ Pipes into Bullets,
and pulling down of Churches, should be by such Pretenders to Religion, who not
only discountenanced all Decency in Divine Worship; but destroyed that Worship
it self, so far as it was promoted by the Public Exercise of our incomparable
Liturgy, the Gloria Patri, the Lord's Prayer, the Creed and the Decalogue; all
which remarkably suffered an Eclipse together.

And it is but fitting now, That since the memory of the Profaneness, Irreligion
and Sacrilege of those Days is so offensive, and has been so long a Scandal to
us, we should endeavor to blot out a part of the remaining Odium, by Restoring
this ancient Use in our Churches, which we have so much Reason, Religion, and
Authority for.

And if now, the Judgment of Antiquity, the Use of this among the Jews, God's
own Appointment of it by his Prophets, 2 Chro. 29.25.
and the Scriptures of the New Testament no where forbidding it, or supposing
it to be only a Temporal Command, though only from the Severity of the Churches
Persecution it was sometime discontinued; but afterward it flourished again,
in the Christian Church, when that did; And in the Nature of the Thing it be of
perpetual Use, and in the Opinion of the most Learned and Pious Men, of a very
good one, be not sufficient Arguments to justify its Lawfulness, nothing will.
I am sure nothing can prove it unlawful.

5. But perhaps, what will be of greater Authority with many among us, to
Confirm the Lawfulness of this, beyond all which has been hitherto said, will
be the Opinion of some Eminent Divines, who have separated from us, as
particularly Mr. Baxter, and the Assembly of Divines, which I shall mention
before I dismiss this Particular, that you may see, How much they agree with us
in this Matter.

Mr. Baxter in his Five Disputations, gives his Opinion of Church-Musick in
these very words: As for Organs, P. 112.
or other Instruments of Music (says he) in God's Worship, they being a Help,
partly Natural and partly Artificial, to the Exhilerating of the Spirits for
the Praise of God, I know no Argument to prove them simply Unlawful, but what
would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the Tune and Meter and Melody of singing
unlawful.

And more largely does he deliver himself in these Five Arguments in his Cases
of Conscience, Quest. 127
annexed to his Christian Directory.

As 1. God set it up long after Moses's Ceremonial Law, by David, Solomon, etc.
No bad Precedents in Devotion. 1 Samuel 18.6. 1 Chro. 15.16. 2 Chronicles. 5.13. and
7.6. and 23.13. Psalm. 98. and 150.
.

2. It is not an Instituted Ceremony merely, but a Natural Help to the Mind's
alacrity: And it is a Duty, and not a Sin, to use the Helps of Nature and
Lawful Art, though not to Institue Sacraments, etc. of our own. As it is lawful
to use the comfortable Helps of Spectacles in Reading the Bible, so is it of
Music to Exhilerate the Soul toward God.

3. Jesus Christ joined with the Jews that used it, and never spoke a word
against it.

4. No Scripture forbid death it, therefore it is not unlawful.

5. Nothing can be against it, that I know of, but what is said against Tunes
and Melody of Voice. For whereas they say, That it is a Human Invention: so are
our Tunes (and Meter and Version) yea, it is not a Human Invention; as the last
Psalm and many other show, which call us to Praise the Lord with Instruments of
Music. -- And whereas some say, That they find it do them harm; so others say
of Melodious Singing: but, as wise Men say, they find it do them good. And why
should the Experience of some prejudiced self-conceited Person, or of a
half-man that knows not what Melody is, be set against the Experience of all
others, and deprive them of all such Helps and Mercies, as these People say
they find no benefit by. -- More to this effect he adds in Justification of the
Lawfulness of Music in the Service of God.

To this Opinion of Mr. Baxter's, I shall add that of the Assembly of Divines,
very different from those of Geneva on this last Psalm.

He (say they, speaking of David) exhorts them, that they might Praise God
the better, to stir up their Joy with Musical Instruments It Is to be noted,
That the Assembly refer the meaning of this Psalm to those two places of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. where they farther say, It seems most
probable, that by Psalms, he means the Psalms of David set to the Harp or
Psaltery; by Hymns, certain Ditties made upon special occasions; and by
Spiritual Songs, such as were not Composed before hand, and Pricked before them
with Musical Notes, but such as men endited by an extraordinary Gift. -- And
Mr. Pool's Annot. on Ephesians. 5.19. Most take Psalms to be such as anciently were
sung with Musical Instruments.
. And, The Remark upon it is unanswerable, If Musical Instruments (as is
granted) had that Power then, how have they changed their Nature since?

These Authorities are great enough, I hope, to balance any thing can be said,
by any of the Separation, to the contrary. But I shall speak something more in
Justification of the Lawfulness of this, when I come in the Third Place to
Answer the Objections against it.

Having spoken thus much concerning the Lawfulness of Church-Musick, which was
the First and Chief Thing to be done.



And These are so many, that it is an hard matter not to be long, if not tedious
in their Enlargement. But, for my more Regular proceeding, I shall reduce them
to these Five Heads.

1. It will Regulate the untunable Voices of the Multitude, and make the
Singing in the Church more orderly and harmonious.

2. It will stir up the Affections of Men, and make them the fitter for
Devotion.

3. It will compose their Thoughts, and drive away Evil Suggestions from their
Minds.

4. It will prepare them for the being better Edified in the Divine Service
they are about.

Lastly, It will make the whole Service of God be the more Solemn and August,
and the People more Serious and Reverential, when they are at it; and more
Silent and Grave at their coming in, or going out of the Church.

These are some of the chief Uses of the Organ which my Meditations suggest,
and of them briefly in their order.

(1.) Then the Organ will Regulate the untuneable Voices of the Multitude, and
make the Singing in the Church more orderly and harmonious. It cannot be
supposed, but there will be great Discord and Jarrings in a mixed Company of
Singers, where few perhaps have had the Benefit of Art to tune and help their
Voices. And where there is such, Confusion and Disorder will naturally follow,
which should not be permitted in the Praises of God, if it may be avoided: For
we are to endeavor to make his Praise glorious; Psalm. 66.2.
and to set it forth after the best manner we can. Praise should be uttered in
wisdom, Ecclus. 15.10.
and the Lord will prosper it, says the wise Son of Syrach. It being somewhat
unreasonable to suppose, God will be delighted with such unpleasant and harsh
Tones in his Service, as Men in their common Diversion would not endure. They
seek to Accomplish themselves by the Help of Art to sing well and regularly, to
please themselves and hearers.

And think ye, when they sing to God, it be no matter, whether they sing well
or not? They are to pay him the best Services; and in this Case the best are
the sweetest, and most harmonious and regular, when their Hearts and their
Voices are kept in the best Tune, as they will be with the help of an Organ,
which is therefore to be allowed as most useful; this being the only sort of
Musical Instruments which is able to do so, having such a Majestic Loudness,
and decent Modulation going along with it, as will keep all in, and at the same
time, both grace the Service, and please the Offerer.

(2.) It will stir up the Affections of the Soul, and make them the fitter for
Devotion.

There are very few Men of such sprightly and ardent Minds toward the Service
of God, but sometimes they will want a little quickening and stirring up to keep
the regular and intent in the Duty they are about. And, as for the generality
of People, they are flat and dull, and too listless about such a weighty
Business. And therefore, if this Indisposition can be rectified by the help of
such a Musical Instrument, as in all probability it will, since it is its Nature
thus apparently to excite and raise Men's Affections, we must conclude it to be
a mighty Advantage to Religion.

And that it will do so, we have two very remarkable Instances in the Scripture
for the immediate Confirmation of it: Both taken from that known practice of
the Prophets in the Old Testament; who, for the promoting of the Spirit of
Prophecy within them, and the better raising their Intention toward God at
that time, they called for the Musicians to play before them. The one, and the
clearest of the two, is that 2 Kings 3. where when Jehoram and Jehoshaphat, the
Kings of Israel and Judah made their joint Importunity to Elisha to get them
Water, for want of which their Hosts were greatly distressed; 2 Kings 3.15, 16,
17.
he bid them bring him a Minstrel. And it came to pass, when the Minstrel
played, the Hand of the Lord came upon him: And he said, Thus says the Lord,
make this Valley full of Diches, etc. It shall be filled with Water, that ye
may drink, etc. The other Instance is that 1 Samuel 10.5. when the Spirit of the
Lord was to come upon Saul, to make him a Prophet, and to stir up the same
Spirit in those Old Prophets who were sent to his Ordination, that they might
Prophecy together, it is said, 1 Samuel 10.5.
The Company of Prophets came down from the High Place, with a Psaltery, and a
Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp before them, etc.

In both which places, it is observable, That 'twas nothing but Instrumental
Music, which was made use of in those Cases, to awaken their Souls, and to
stir up the Spirit of Prophecy in them. And from thence I argue A Fortiori, Of
Music used in the Schools of the Prophets, vide Bp. Stillingsteet's Orig.
Sacr. l. 2. c. 4. 6, 7
If these were able to stir up the inspired Principles of their Souls, for such
a mighty Thing, as the Conveying the Prophetic Spirit into another, among the
Jews; certainly they may well be concluded proper and useful for the stirring
up the Spirit of Prayer, and to move the Affections of the Soul, that they may
be the sitter for the Worship of God, in the Christian Church.

I may well here subjoyn, what I find by many quoted concerning the regulating
and sweetning, as well as stirring up of the Affections of the Heart toward
God by this means; insomuch, that it will delight in Sorrow as well as Joy, and
make a Man cheerful, even in his Lamentation and Mourning for his Sins, and
when he is doing the severest Penances for them. The Reason whereof is
excellently well set forth by our Judicious Mr. Hooker. Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. 38.


Touching Musical Harmony, (says he) whether by Instrument or by Voice, it
being but of High and Low in Sounds a due proportionable disposition, such
notwithstanding is the Force thereof, and so pleasing Effects it has, in that
very Part of Man which is most Divine, that some have been thereby induced to
think, That the Soul it self by Nature is, or has in it Harmony.

A Thing which delights all Ages, and beseems all States; a Thing as
seasonable in Grief as in Joy; as decent, being added unto Actions of greatest
Weight and Solemnity, as being used when Men sequestered themselves from Action.
The Reason hereof is an admirable Facility which Music has to express and
represent to the Mind, more inwardly than any other sensible Mean, the very
standing, rising and falling; the very steps and inflections every way, the
turns and varieties of all Passions, whereunto the Mind is subject; yea, so to
imitate them, that whether it resemble unto us the same state wherein our Minds
already are, or a clean contrary, we are not more contentedly by the one
confirmed, than changed and led away by the other.

And so onward that excellent Man.

So that you see the admirable Use of Music to regulate the Affections, as
well as to move them in our Devotion.

I might here mention what wonderful Effects may be found in Profane Authors
concerning the Powers of Music, as the Learned Casaubon and Grotius have
observed. We are told of a famous Musician, who by Playing on his Instrument,
could work up Alexander the Great, to such a sit of Rage, as to force him, with
great fury and wrath, to grasp his Sword, ready for any Combat: and then again,
by a curious turn of Art, presently be able to allay that Passion, and produce
in him the quite contrary Effects of Gentleness and Mildness. The
Lacedaemonians, a most obstinate sort of People, Plutarch of Music.
when divided among themselves, and at Variance even to a Civil War, were
directed by the Oracle to hear the famous Terpander play upon his Harp, which,
when they had done, they made up the Difference with Tears in their Eyes, and
embracing one another, returned Friends. Homer introduces Achilles in the
height of his Fury toward Agamemnon, appeased by Music The Greeks were
careful to teach their Children Music, deeming it requisite, by the Assistance
thereof, to Form and Compose the Minds of Youth to what was decent, sober and
virtuous; believing the Use of Music beneficially efficacious to incite to all
serious Actions, etc. Ibid.
.

We are told also, That Grotius in 1 Samuel 10.5.
Pythagoras did mollify sierce Minds by Music. That Asclepiades did stop the
Rage of Sedition. Damon reduced Petulant and Debauched young Men to Modesty and
Sobriety. And Xenocrates cure Madmen by the same means.

But I shall leave these, hoping we have no such to try the Experiment upon,
and proceed

(3.) To another Use of Church-Musick, and particularly of the Organ, viz. That
it will compose Men's Thoughts, and drive away Evil Suggestions from their
Minds at their Devotion. The Devil be sure is then most busy to ply his
Mischievous Suggestions, and to endeavor the discomposing of Men's Minds, when
at their Devotion they are seeking the Ruin of his Kingdom. Then it is, That he
often injects Evil Imaginations before us; and tempts us, by raising inordinate
Passions in our Hearts, and tries to make us wander from the great Business we
are about.

But then, the seasonableness of Music will help to recall our Minds, and keep
them from such a Roving and Wandering away from it. It will be a means to keep
them from evil Objects, and from the sly and malignant Insinuations of Evil
Angels, which Represent them to our Minds. It will tend much to rid these,
Just. Mart. Quest. 107.
of all those sad and gloomy and melancholy and lustful Imaginations, which may
disturb and discompose them. It will dispel those Clouds which make them heavy
and dull. It will discharge those irregular Passions, which do torment and vex
them; and keep the Heart from being fretted with anxious Thoughts and racking
Fears and distracting Doubts, which at that time may lie heavy upon them, and
bring it in such a sedate and even Temper, as is best for Divine Contemplation
and Prayer.

Music will bring the Soul into such an Harmonious Order, as will make it ever
enjoy a pleasant state of Peace and Tranquillity. The Reflections it will prompt
it to make, on all that is good and great; and the Meditations it will Exalt in
us, of the wonderful Works of the Creation and Providence, and the Happiness is
laid up in store for good People, will always make glad the City of God, the
Tabernacle of the most Highest, which the Soul of Man may be said to be: And
whatsoever does so, will be a Torment and Vexation to those Evil Spirits
Doemones fugat Depellitque. Ibid.
who seek her Destruction.

Hence we may take up a Saying, which is fathered upon Luther; Scimus Musicam
Doemonibus etiam invisam and intolerabilem esse: That the Devils cannot endure,
but perfectly hate Music. And we have reason to believe it, because there is
no such thing in Hell; but the opposite to that, viz. weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth. Quite opposite to the Representation of the state of the
Blessed in the Kingdom of Heaven, where is Singing and Rejoicing and Gladness.
And to fit our selves for their Society, in the glorious Presence of God, we
must have our Minds calmed, our Passions subdued, and our Souls tempered with
the Precepts of Religion, for the surer Reception of which, will the Charms of
Music give a great Preparation. And

(4.) This is another Use and Advantage of it; It will prepare us for the being
better Edified in our Divine Service. For, when our Affections are hereby
Raised, our Thoughts Composed, and our Minds made Sedate and Calm, as we have
seen, then shall we be in the fittest Disposition, the more seriously to attend
upon, and the more eagerly bent to receive such Divine Instructions, as shall
in the following Service, be offered to our Understanding. The Soul will then
be qualified to take the best Impressions; the Head and the Heart will be
enlivened; and the Ears and Eyes will be opened, through those most sweet and
charming Sounds, whereby the Treasure of Goods Things will be conveyed into the
Mind, and take the deeper Root in us; and so the whole Man will be Edified in
the Precepts of Religion.

Thus Instrumental is Music to make us most Knowing, as well as most Devout.
Our Reason too, will reap a great Benefit by it, and we shall become the more
Rational, and have a clearer insight into the Things above, by being awakened
thereto, in the Service of God, with stringed Instruments and Organs.

The pleasing Force of which is so irresistible, that Men must do Violence to
their Natural Tempers (unless they are monstrously bad) to withstand it: This
being so artificially fitted, as will make at the same Time a curious Address,
as well to the Judgment as the Imagination, and must captivate both, unless so
dull and stupid, as to be beneath the Capacity of The Music of Orpheus and
Amphion, had influence upon Fishes and Beasts. Sir William Temple's fourth
Essay upon Poetry. The Powers of Music (says he) are either felt or known by
all men, and are allowed to work strangely upon the Mind and the Body, the
Passions and the Blood, to raise Joy and Grief, to give Pleasure and Pain, to
cure Diseases, and the mortal Sting of the Tarantula, to give motions to the
Feet, as well as the Heart, to compose disturbed Thoughts, to assist and
heighten Devotion it self, Ibid. p. 288. The Tarantula is a most venomous
Spider, some say a Fly, so called from Tarantum, a Neapolitan City, where they
most abound, whose Sting is deadly, yet curable by diverse Sounds of Music,
Sand's Travels, fol. 249. I appeal to the Experience of Dissenters, whether
they are not much affected, and think themselves edified with the pleasing Tone
and Cadencies and Elevations of the Voice of their Preachers? and then, Whether
they might not be assisted with the sweeter Sounds of Musical Instruments?
Bruits.

St. Augustine, among his Confessions which he makes to God in several Books,
says, speaking of Church-Musick, Quantum flevi in Hymnis and Canticis tuis,
suave sonantis Ecclesiae tuae vocibus commotus acriter. Voces illae influebant
Auribus meis, and eliquabatur Veritas tua in Cor meam, and ex ea, Aestuebat
inde affectus Pietatis, and currebant Lacrymae, and been mihi erat cum eis.
Aug. Confess. lib. 9. in Calce cap. 6.
How much did I weep at thy Hymns and Songs, being vehemently moved with the
Voices of thy Melodious Church. Those Voices did flow in at my Ears, and thy
Truth was melted into mine Heart, and from thence boiled up such an Affection
of Piety, as did make my Tears to run down, and then it was well with me,
because of them.

It seems he was so affected therewith, that he shed Tears in token of a
Religious Joy, when his Ears were delighted with the Voices which sung forth
the Praises of God, and his Heart Instructed in the Matter of them. And
notwithstanding, he seems to be afraid of being carried away with the former to
the hurt and prejudice of the latter: yet he was forced to acknowledge, the
great Profit the Church did receive by such a Custom, so fit for Edification
Confess. l. 10. c. 33.
.

I shall conclude this Particular with the words of St. Basil to this effect,
Eccl. Pol. l. 5. 38. (...), etc.
as I find them Translated by our Judicious Mr. Hooker. Whereas (says he) the
Holy Spirit saw that Mankind is unto Virtue hardly drawn, and that
Righteousness is the least accounted of, by reason of the proneness of our
Affections to that which delights. It pleased the Wisdom of the same Spirit
to borrow from Melody that Pleasure, which mingled with heavenly Mysteries,
causes the smoothness and softness of that which touches the Ear, to convey
as it were by stealth the Treasure of Good Things into Man's Mind. To this
purpose were those Harmonious Tunes and Psalms devised for us, that they which
are either in years but young, or touching Perfection of Virtue, as yet not
grown to ripeness, might, when they think they sing, Learn.

O the wise Conceit of that Heavenly Teacher, which has by his Skill found out
a way, that doing those Things, wherein we delight, we may also learn that
whereby we profit!



Thus advantageous does the Use of Church-Musick appear to be, to prepare us
the better for Edification in the Divine Service.

(5ly. and Lastly) I come now in the last place to show, That the Organ will
make the whole Service of God be the more Solemn and August, and the People
more serious and Reverential when they are at it; and more Silent and Grave at
their coming in or going out of the Church.

There is, besides at the several Times when the Psalms are sung, some other
proper Tunes customarily made use of for the Organ to play some taking Lesson
or decent Flourish or other by it self, which goes by the Name of Voluntaries;
and is chiefly to answer this last Use and Advantage of it.

This sort of Music, is either made just before the Service begins, which
seems a very proper time for it, to engage the Congregation to a serious
Thoughtfulness, and to a civil Deportment and Behavior, when they are taking
their Places, and about to enter upon the most Solemn Acts of Religion in the
Worship of God. Or it is also used at the end of the Psalms, before the Lessons
be read, to strike a reverential awe upon our Spirits, and to melt us into a
fit Temper to receive the best Impressions from the Word of God. And it is
contrived as a new Ornament and Grace to carry us through the whole Service
with Seriousness and Devout Attention, with Alacrity, Sobriety and Peace. Or
lastly, It is used at the end of the whole, to take off some little whispering
Disturbances, Vide Bishop of Cork's Duty of Singing, Cap. 3.
through the Levity of some People, and to drown that ungrateful rushing Murmur
and Noise which the stirring of so many People together, at that time of going
out of the Church, must occasion.

It being well provided and designed by the Piety and Prudence of our
Governors, to let nothing there be heard in the House of God, but what is
grateful and becoming that holy Place. And especially during the Time of Divine
Service, all Things should be performed with as great Silence and Reverence as
is possible. Nothing is then to be heard but the Word of God, and the Voice of
humble Supplicants; the Prayers of the Devout, and the Praises of such as be
joyful in the Lord.

And therefore by the way, the indecent Noise which is too often made by the
opening and clapping fast of Pew-doors (a reason why anciently Seats in the
Church had no Doors to them) and the nauseous Rawkings, and unnecessary
Coughing and Spitting, which are made by the People, though little regarded,
come within the Censure of a Disturbance, and may doubtless in a great measure
be avoided, if they be not at that time very much indisposed for Civility as
well as Devotion.

Thus I have shown, and I hope in some measure proved, The Use and Advantages,
as well as the Lawfulness of Organs in the Christian Church.

It remains now that we make our sincere and constant Attendance to the
Performance of our Duty in this best part of it established among us, where our
Devotion being raised with the additional help of Musical Instruments, we may
best acquaint our selves with the Excellency of our Service, and the Advantages
of it.



That it is a Jewish Ceremony, and an Appointment of the Law, but was to be
abolished in the Christian Church. That, though it might suit well enough with
that Infant State: yet now by the Coming of Christ, it is to be done away, as
the other Ceremonies of the Law are. This is the utmost force of the Objection,
as warranted by the Geneva Annotations on this Psalm, expressly speaking to that
effect.

And it is great pity such pernicious Annotations should be suffered to be
printed with the Bible, so contrary in many places, to the sense and meaning of
it. But for Answer to this Objection, which is very peremptorily made without
any offer of proof to justify it,



As to the former, Their being in Use before the Law, appears, in that Miriam
the Prophetess celebrated the Israelites Deliverance out of Egypt, with the
Ceremony of Musical Instruments, on that Religious Account, Exodus 15.20.
Exodus 15.20. And so likewise, they might be used on other such like occasions,
as they were when Saul was made a Prophet; 1 Samuel 10.5.
which was before the Institution of these, though long after the Time of Moses.

In short then, The Ceremonial Law was given and completely ratified by Moses:
But we cannot find any where that he gives an Institution to these Things;
Except the Trumpet for the Calling of Assemblies, etc. Numb. 10.
Instruments of Music were not appointed in Divine Service in his Time, though
possibly they might be used then by others, as well as Miriam.

But, in Answer to the latter, it is plain, That they were an Institution of
David's in his most flourishing state; and the first time we read of their
Establishment, is, at his welcoming home of the Ark from the Philistines: 1
Chro. 15.16.
And David spoke to the chief of the Levites, to appoint their Brethren to be
Singers with Instruments of Music, Psalteries, and Harps and Cymbals sounding,
by lifting up the Voice with Joy. According to which, this, afterward went by
the Name of David's Commandment, 2 Chro. 29.25.
and the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. Upon a very remarkable
occasion it was so called, when good King Hezekiah restored this Custom again,
Ezra 3.10.
which in the Reign of some evil Kings had been neglected.

From both which places, it appearing to be of David's Institution, could not
be a part of the Ceremonial Law, which was completed before by Moses, Deuteronomy.
12.32. in these words (after he had bid Israel hearken unto the Statutes and
unto the Judgments which he was to teach them -- he says) What thing soever I
command you, observe to do it: Thou shall not add thereto, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
nor diminish from it.

Law, and to be done away in Christ; it would have been as those other Typical
Things were, a Shadow of somewhat to come, which was to be done away by the
Coming of that Substance; but no such thing being to be made appear, we may
rationally conclude, this is not to be done away under the Gospel. But the same
Reason for its first Institution, will always hold good, as long as People have
dull and irregular Affections to be stirred up, and raised fit for to supply.
And it is as proper now in the Christian Church, to stir up Men's Minds, to
compose their Thoughts, and to inflame their Devotion therewith, as it was in
the Reign of David, and therefore as reasonable that it should be continued.

That it is not so edifying in the Christian Church, as we plead for; nor so
proper, where we are not to worship God, with External Ceremonies, and the
outward Formality of Serving him, as the Jews did; but in Spirit and in Truth.
John 4.23.
And for this Reason Instrumental Music ought to be abolished.

cleave unto the Lord; and the more Attentively to heed the Things that are
spoken in his Service, for our better Edification, which I have already shown.
And the Experience of those, who have professed seriously to have received
great Benefit by it, is a farther Argument to convince us of its Use; which,
when we have Experienced likewise, will, I hope, oblige us to make the same
Acknowledgment.

There be some other Objections among us against this Thing, of lesser Note,
which scarce deserve a serious Answer. Some say, They don't like it, and they
shall never endure it. Well, it may be so; but then it must argue the want of
Prudence in them, and Respect to their own Credit, in not concealing that
Dislike, because of the mean Opinion Men commonly have of such Asinus ad Lyram.
Fab. Aesopi, etc. 414. By Sir R. L.
Creatures as do not love Music.

Such a Dislike argues a morose, sour, and illnatur'd Disposition, or else a
stupid, dull and heavy Temper, and that in no small degree neither. Otherwise,
so harmonious and piercing a Thing as that, which is so every way adapted to
accost and captivate with pleasure, the Affections of a well composed Soul,
must of necessity move it to a liking and a loving of it They must have hearts
very dry and tough, says Mr. Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. 38. And sure he is of a
rugged temper, and has an ill composed Soul, who feels not these Effects
(meaning of calmed Souls, raised Affections, and mollified Hearts, by means) of
that grave and pleasant Harmony which does accompany this Office; and we may
fear he is not of David's Spirit, whose Ears are offended, whose Spirit is
disturbed, or his Devotion hindered by Vocal or Instrumental Music, says Dr.
Comber's Companion to the Temple, Part I. Sect. 8. 2. Whoever find themselves
wholly insensible to these Charms, would, I think, do well to keep their own
Counsel, for fear of Reproaching their own Temper, and bringing the Goodness of
their Natures, if not of their Understandings into question, etc. Sir William
Temple's Essay of Poetry at the very end, p. 340.
This being wrought (as Boethius acquaints us) through the answerableness of the
Notes in Music to those in Nature.

But however, if some People cannot conceal the present bent of their
particular Disaffections, and the Dissonancy of an ill Temper, yet how do they
know they shall never like this Thing?

To say so, does farther Argue a great Obstinacy and Perverseness of Mind in
them; and that they say, They cannot, when in truth They will not. Certainly,
nothing but an invincible Ignorance can Excuse them in such a Saying, because
it is plain there is no such an impossibility in the Thing, but all People may
like it, if they will. And to speak so for the future, That they never shall,
shows a Prophetic Spirit of Perverseness, That having too much Cause to know
the Inflexibility and Stubbornness of their own Natural Tempers, they believe
they shall never be able to polish and amend them; and by all their Endeavors
to make their Passions obey their Reason.

But to regulate these, I must prescribe Church-Musick as the best means; and
if Men's Prejudices against the Service of our Church, be not too great and
unreasonable, which is most to be feared, That being duly and devoutly attended
to, will in all probability effect the Cure.

So shall we be brought to live as Brethren, Converse as Neighbors, and go up
to the House of God as Friends; there jointly to partake of the great Blessings
and Benefits of our Excellent Service. On which, it shall suffice at present to
Remark, That though there be great Harmony and Sweetness in our Church-Musick,
yet none comparable to that in the Liturgy it self. So,



This Last is the great. End we are all to Aim at, and That the best Means to
direct our Aim and to carry us thither. A Church we have the happiness to be
Members of, which for the Soundness of its Doctrine, and Regularity of its
Worship, is the Beauty of Christendom, and the Glory of the Reformation.

The Value of whose Discipline is only lessened for want of a stricter
Execution, and That, though moderate in it self, if raised to its Primitive
Usage, would be thought too rigorous and severe, and not well able to comport
with the Difficulty of the Times, to solve a present Exigence.

But take the whole Constitution of our Church, as it stands, The Envy of our
Neighbors, the great Bulwark against the Inundations of Heresy and Schism,
the Hatred and Fear of the Church of Rome, and, I hope, the Rock of Ages, and
there is no Comparison between this and any other Establishment in the
Christian World: Against which, Let neither the Malice of Devils, nor the
Policy of Rome, nor the Craft of Geneva, be ever able to prevail; either to
overthrow its Strength through a fatal Division among her Members, or to rifle
its Beauty, through a Deluge of Vice; or to undermine her Foundation by a
Treacherous Comprehension.

Every Alteration in so well an ordered. Constitution, will be for the worse,
and give too great an Occasion for the Triumphs of her Enemies, who would be
glad to have her Honor laid in the Dust.

This was not long since the wished for Asylum of our oppressed Neighbors, who
would then have thought themselves the happiest Christians in the World, if
they could but have obtained such an Establishment, or but the Favor of her
Protection; but being, even beyond their Expectation, ready to receive them, is
not however so heartily embraced and stuck to, as might well be expected from
her, and pretended by many of those who are fled to us for Refuge.

And I speak it with astonishment, That they, who thought they could never do
or speak enough to promote its Interest, and advance its Glory, should hold so
treacherous a Correspondence with those who unwarrantably separate from us, and
cannot ever be thought to wish well to her Peace, when they so industriously
seek to divide her Interest.

It Is certainly too just a Reflection upon the Integrity of these Protestant
Refugees, to partake of the Protection of the Church, without obeying the Laws
of her Communion. Such do but too like the Viper's Brood, eat out the Bowels of
their Mother that Nourishes them up, and Maintains them with Ability to support
themselves.

But let us be more Consistent with one another, and with our Christian Duties;
and waving all by-Respects and sinister selfish Ends, let us firmly adhere to
its Doctrine, Discipline and Worship: So shall we best Secure the Protestant
Religion in General, by Securing this best part of it Established among us: But
chiefly hereby shall we Secure our League with Heaven, and the Interest of our
Immortal Souls, far beyond our Temporal Welfare and Interest, which this
however, through the Blessing of God, will honestly promote, and therefore the
more securely help to obtain.

We have all things that we can desire to accomplish Those great Ends; we of
this Town particularly, have the Daily Sacrifice of Prayer in this House of
God; we have with others an Accurate Form of Prayer, containing the most proper
Method and pious Matter, and suitable Expressions, fit for our Devotion. We
have proper Psalms appointed to Praise God with, and proper Lessons, and
constant Sermons to Instruct us in our Duty. We have excellent Collects, and a
most pathetical Litany to solicit our Heavenly Father, for the Mercies we want,
and to avert the Judgments and Dangers we fear. And now by a kinder Providence
to our selves, than to our Neighbors, we have the most proper Means of
Instrumental Music, to quicken our Hearts, and to raise our Affections, to
make us the more Devout.

All so Edifying and Instructive, that it must be our fault, if we be not
constantly made the wiser and better for being here. It behooves us therefore to
take care that we be here often, and that our Hearts be full of Faith and Love,
of Humility and Devotion when we come, and then we need not doubt of having
been heard and accepted when we go away.

And I must remind you, That since now we have the best Advantages of any
Church in the World, we should endeavor to be the best Christians in the
World. We must be most wanting to our selves, if we be not; and our Accounts at
the last, will be required according to the Talents given.

We may perhaps have the Vanity to imagine, That God will Excuse us for our
well Meaning, though in many Things we come short of our Duty. But let us not
deceive our selves, and think to mock God, It Is only doing of it will make us
acceptable.

Let us then endeavor to be as good Christians as we ought to be, by doing
what is required of us; So shall we oblige God to dwell among us, and to
delight to bless us, with what we wish, with Health and Happiness, with Peace
and Plenty; but above all with the Security of our Church and Religion, which
we are most of all to desire.

For the doing of what is required, is the best Sacrifice we can offer unto
him. It Is by our good Lives, we Praise and Engage him most. This makes the best
Music in the Ears of the Almighty, and is the Chief Melody of our Hearts, to
which Musical Instruments are purely subservient, as being a proper means to
excite our Devotion, to quicken our Minds, and to raise our Affections toward
him. But all this is to make us the more enflamed in our Love, and more ready
in our Obedience. It Is a severe Judgment not to be so affected. Ezekiel. 33.30,
31, 32, 33.
It being almost impossible to know God, and to be lively and devoutly affected
toward him, but we must be obedient to him. And then, we shall love what he
loves, and hate what he hates; consequently we shall be more just in our
Dealings, more upright in our Conversations, and more holy and sincere toward
God and our Neighbor. Every way better fitted to glorify him in Heaven, when
we can in fervent Devotion, be raised to glorify him here, with our cheerful
Hearts and virtuous Lives, through the help of Musical Instruments.

It will now Argue a great deal of Arrogance and Singularity in any of us, to
speak against the Use of These, which the generality of Christians, not only in
this Age, but in those that have been purer and better, have approved of, and
looked upon, as of singular Use and Advantage, for those great Ends; and to
help us forward in our way to Happiness, according to the Primitive way of
Worship, by Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, and making Melody in our
Hearts unto the Lord.

Surely this which is the Entertainment of Angels and just Men in their
glorified State, ought not to disgust any of us, who should endeavor the
utmost we can to be qualified for their Company, and to bear a part of their
happy Employment, which is with constant Readiness and Agility to obey the Will
of God, and with Everlasting Songs of Praise to magnify his ever glorious
Name. This we are to begin here, and to perfect with them above in the Quire of
Heaven.

And I will not detain you any longer at present, from the grateful Harmony
which is to follow, through the Excellency of our Organ, and the Sweetness of
so many well tuned Voices as join in Consort with it.

The Art of Singing Psalms, which some of you have happily learnt, may not
unfitly be reckoned among those that are Divine: and has no less than the Holy
Ghost for its Original, who taught the Patriarchs, the Prophets and the
Primitive Christians, to utter the Praises of God with a Song. It being so
commendable, and so religious an Accomplishment, as does become the greatest
Person, and is not debased by the meanest; and in all probability, will not
only raise your Esteem, but your Devotion too.

By the Grace and Melody of this Vocal and Instrumental Music together, I hope
This Congregation will be kept in a continual Fervor fit for Devotion, and for
retaining such Instructions from this Place, as may conduce to the making us
first Sober and Religious Christians, then happy and glorious Saints.

The Charms of which may in time melt us into Love, and so charitable an
Affection, as that we may all seek the Good and Welfare of each other. And, I
hope, bring the Use of Artificial Singing and Divine Anthems again in request,
and be both studied and practiced too, as they were in the earlier Times of
Christianity, immediately after the ceasing of that sort of Inspiration, in
singing Psalms and Hymns, which was then extraordinary, and to supply the place
of it.

Even as now, since the Expiration of some other Extraordinary Gifts which were
then in the Church, the latter Ages must be supplied from Study and Learning,
if at all. And the Pretenders now to Preaching and Praying by the Spirit,
without these, will be altogether as vain, as their ex tempore Singing can be
supposed to be without the Advantages of Art.

I am persuaded, if any thing takes us off from that Vanity, and prevents
greater Confusion and Discord from the Minds of Men, it will be the Charms of
Music, which by the Subtlety of its Nature, and the Insinuating Sweetness of
its Sound, will strike deeper into the Heads of some, than the closest Reason
possibly can into their Hearts. It may work out that Malady which first
discompose them, and then moves them to discompose others; and have the same
effect it had upon Saul, in making them well, and the Evil Spirit depart from
them, and they be turned into other Men. Into Men of calmer Tempers, more
Innocent Dispositions, and more Regular Affections.

It is reported to be the Saying of an Heathen Poet, That God loves not those
which love not Music. An Opinion indeed too Extravagant for a Christian
Entertainment. However, we may observe this Curse commonly attends an
Immelodius Constitution, That it argues a querulous, humoursom, ill-composed
and ill-natured Temper, or else a very sour and melancholy one Spiritus
Sanctus non residet super hominem maeslum. (...) 1 Kings 19.11, 12.
: which in the Opinion of the Hebrew Doctors, is quite unfit to entertain the
Shechinah, or Glorious Presence of God. Among Minds disturbed with Passion, and
polluted Hearts, is not to be found the Divine and Gentle Spirit. Nay, we
suppose the Good Angels themselves will acquit the Guardianship of those,
Cavete Scoti!
among whom they find such an uneasy Habitation. While they are most
Harmonious themselves, they will like and befriend us most, when we are so too.

And if we truly are so, nothing will more contribute to our Peace, Unity and
Agreement among each other; But we shall be all knit together in one Common
Bond of Amity and Friendship; in one Communion and Fellowship. By this means we
shall be brought to mind the same Thing, to walk in the same Way, and at last
Arrive at the same Happiness and blessed Society of Saints and Angels above,
from a zealous and devout Imitation of them here; who readily do the will of
God in Heaven, and teach us to do the same on Earth, if we hope ever to come
where they are, and with them to sing Eternal Praises and Hallelujahs unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

To which Place God of his infinite Mercy bring us All, through the Merits and
Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with thy self and blessed
Spirit of Grace, be ascribed, as is most due, by us and by all the World, all
Glory, Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion from henceforth and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
It is thought fit here to set down the Method of our Proceeding, and the
PROPOSALS were made, for the Erecting of the ORGAN in in our Parish Church of
Tiverton by way of Subscription, March 6. 1695.
Imprimis THE Undertakers do Promise all those who shall voluntarily Subscribe
to so Pious a Work, that they will apply themselves to the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, for his Approbation of their
good Intentions herein; not doubting of his Lordships Concurrence with them, in
promoting the Honor of God, and the Benefit of his Church thereby.

2. They will also apply themselves to the Reverend Dr. Lake the Archdeacon of
Exon, for his Assistance, who has already, not only Recommended so good a Work,
but has kindly offered the Interest he has in an Excellent Artist, who shall be
employed for the making of the same with all convenient speed.

3. They do undertake to procure an excellent and well-contrived Organ, of a
sufficient Bigness, and with decent and proper Ornaments of Carved Work,
answerable to the Parish Church; and the convenient Place there is for the
Erecting of it over the Skreen in the said Church. And that they will forthwith
give Directious for the making of the same, as soon as they shall receive
sufficient Subscriptions from good and piously disposed People, for a suitable
Sum of Money, to discharge the Expense of the Organ it self, the bringing it
down from London, and setting it up in a decent Gallery to be made for that
purpose.

4. The Subscribers are to pay into the Hands of one or other of the
Undertakers; half the Sum or Sums by them respectively Subscribed at Lady Day
next; and the other half at Midsummer following, or at any other Time or Times,
as shall be by them appointed.

5. The Undertakers do promise to set up the Names of all such Persons who
shall Subscribe the Sum of Ten shillings or upwards, in a decent Table in the
Church, there to remain for ever, as a lasting Testimony of their being
Benefactors to so Religious and generous an Undertaking.

Lastly, For the better Encouraging of others, who shall be well affected to
this Undertaking, the Undertakers themselves, whose Names are underwritten,
notwithstanding the great Care and Trouble and Expense they will be
extraordinarily put to beyond others, do Subscribe likewise the respective Sums
following, hoping a great many others, who are of Ability, will follow so good
an Example.

The Undertakers are
John Newte Rector. Roger Chamberlain Capital Burgess in the Corporation.
Arthur Culme Capital Burgess in the Corporation. John Vpcott Capital Burgess
in the Corporation. Robert Burridge Capital Burgess in the Corporation.
Richard Spurway Assistant in the Corporation. William Frost Assistant in the
Corporation.


The Excellent Artist, who makes our Organ, is Mr. Christian Smith, a very
Honest and Ingenious Man, and lives in Hart-street nigh Bloomsbury Market,
London.


