There is lately published an Introduction to the Art of Logic, very useful
for young Scholars and others, and has found very good entertainment in the
world already, and is sold by Tho Passinger at the three Bibles on
London Bridge, and Benjamin Hurlock over against St. Magnus Church.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ART OF Rhetoric.

Composed for the benefit of young Scholars and others, who have not
opportunity of being instructed in the Latin tongue; and is very helpful to
understand the figurative expressions in the holy Scriptures.

Published for a public Advantage.

By John Newton, D. D.

London, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for Thomas Passenger at the three Bibles on
London Bridge, and Ben. Hurlock over against St. Magnus Church* 1671.

To the Reader.
OUr English Schoolmasters, being now furnished with convenient helps, for the
instructing of their Scholars in Grammar, Arithmetic, Geometry, Music and
Astronomy; I come to these two liberal Arts, which are in themselves the most
sublime and difficult; This of Rhetoric, and the other of Logic. These are
the Arts and Sciences of which Children are the least capable, and therefore I
have reserved them for the last place; and for this reason it is I suppose that
Logic is generally looked upon, as a noli me tangere, an Art by no means to be
taught in schools, but must be altogether reserved for the University; but for
as much as Rhetoric is permitted the Grammar Master without control, and that
it is so nearly allied to Logic, as that it cannot be attained (the Oratorical
part especially) without some knowledge of it, let me without any further dint
of argument, beg thus much favor of thee, whoever thou art into whose hands
these Tracts shall fall, not too severely to prohibit a small System, a short
introduction to Logic to bear Rhetoric company, if it be but to complete our
English Academy (of which this is the sixth part:) Perhaps the advantage that
our young students shall reap, by being instructed in this science before they
smell the University air, may make thee compensation for thy indulgence. Tell
me I pray thee, is it not reasonable that the terms which Rhetoricians use,
being borrowed from other Arts, especially from Logic, should be explained;
and if this which cannot be fairly denied, will but be granted me, I will not
fear their being slighted, for their homespun garments in which they are clad;
for I persuade my self, that none will be against their speaking English, but
such illiterate Schoolmasters, who being sent to the University before they
were fit for it, and compelled for want of maintenance, very quickly to forsake
it again, do think it a disparagement to them to teach English, when yet alas,
it is many times very little, very little indeed that they understand of other
Languages, nay and it were well if they did understand the Rules for reading
and writing of their own; all others, if they are not already, will easily be
persuaded to believe, that it is no impossible thing for a man to be an Orator
or Rhetorician in any language, and that the precepts of Rhetoric may be best
taught and practiced, in men's native tongue, as much conducing to and
facilitating their learning of them, in a strange one; but in what language
soever the precepts of this Art are first taught, me think's it is an
unreasonable task, that is that is imposed upon young Lads at School, not much
unlike the burden, that the Egyptian taskmasters laid upon the children of
Israel, when they required of them such a tale of Brick, and yet would allow
them no straw. I thought it hard my self, that I should be commanded to make a
Theme before I had any other instructions for framing there of than what Clark'
s Formulae or Farnabie' s Rhetoric did afford me: As for the Oratorica* part
of Butler' s Rhetoric like terra incognita* and (...) is well if it be
otherwise (...) and then for matter, what were (...) helps, Tulli^s sent (...)
P^u^ners Symbols, and Ly(...) for as for History or Morality* we were perhaps
taught five or six leaves in Justin, as much in Salust, Lucius Florus, and
Caesar's* Commentaries, and were able to give as good an account at last, of
these Authors in reference to the matter of which they have written, ^s if we
had never seen the books, or heard of their names* now from these books thus
thoroughly read and understood, or rather neglected and scarce known, I cannot
but smile yet, and I persuade my self that many school boys now do even laugh
in themselves, that they can in their exercises of this nature put such
palpable cheats upon their Masters, and their Masters either not seeing them,
or not in the least take notice of them: but they have more cause, did they but
understand it, to lament their loss of time, and the great cheat that their
Masters put on them: for a lad having a Theme or sentence given him, runs
presently to Clark' s Formulae, Farnabie' s Index Rhetoricus, and there seeks
for some Exordium, of half a dozen lines or more, and thence transcribes with
very slender alteration so much as he thinks convenient for that time; how much
to his present purpose; he does as little care as understand; and for his next
part, the narration of his sentence in other explicatory words, he so little
understands how to do it, that setting aside the form for that purpose, which
is also transcribed from those books, you hear but little of it; to find matter
for confirmation is all his trouble, now for a Wits commonwealth, and if he
find any thing there, all his care is to translate it Grammatically true; as
for the rest, these forms Reusner's Symbols and Licosthenes, are the books that
must enrich him, and if he can but insert two or three phrases, that he did
collect from his late lectures, he is a diligent boy, and has done his Tax*
roundly, when alas if the lad did but see his own exercise in his vulgar
tongue, he would laugh at himself for writing so many words, and those none of
his own neither, and all to so little purpose; and can we expect that ever this
should be amended, unless you respite these exercises, till lads are acquainted
with the Rules of invention, have read and digested some good Histories and
moral discourses, and have furnished themselves with matter from their own
reading, and have been instructed how to dispose of it in his paper books, that
he may know where to find whatever he has formerly read of any subject; and
whether this may not be more speedily done in every ones native language, and
to as good purpose, as in a language with which they are not acquainted, is I
think very worthy thy consideration. A lad would surely much sooner understand
what is sense, by reading books in his native language, than in any other
whatsoever, and intelligibly read more at a time also, so that in this way of
education, besides the knowledge that young Lads might have, in those useful
Sciences of Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and Astronomy, they might have much
more true and solid knowledge, in this of Rhetoric also, than now they have,
though their time at School is wholly spent in the exercise of it, and the
getting of a few Latin and Greek words and phrases; and were they but thus
prepared for these languages, by a competent and a well grounded knowledge in
their own, and their affections engaged to the love of learning, by that skill
in the sciences which they have (...) might attain, what I pray would be
wanting save only words, and with what wonderful ease might that defect be
supplied; how thoroughly acquainted with the Rules of the Latin and Greek
Grammars, without torturing and tormenting themselves with a useless endeavor
to repeat orderly the rules in those Grammars by heart; the prescriptions of
Pliny in his Epistle to his friend Fuscus, Epistol. lib. 6. Epist. 7. will
surely be sufficient to manifest: His words are, Utile in primis, ut multi
praecipiunt, ex Graeco in Latinum, and ex Latino vertere in Graecum: Quo genere
exercitationis, proprietas splendorque verborum, apta structura sententiarum,
figurarum copia, and explicandi vis colligitur. Praeterea imitatione optimorum,
facultas similia inveniendi paratur: and quae legentem fefellissent,
transferentem fugere non possunt. Intelligentia ex hoc and judicium acquiritur.
And for evident proof of learning these tongues, without the horrible toil of
Grammar, I will mention Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, who as her Tutor Mr.
Aschum tells us (in the second book of his Schoolmaster, page 50.) never took
Greek or Latin Grammar in her hand, after the first declining of a Noun and a
Verb, but only by this double translating of Demosthenes and Isocrates daily
without missing every forenoon, and likewise some part of Tully every
afternoon, for the space of a year or two, did attain to such a perfect
understanding in both the tongues, and to such a ready utterance of the Latin,
and that with such a judgment, as that but few in both Universities, or
elsewhere in England, were to be compared with her: so then an English School,
where Children might be instructed in the sciences would not only send them
forth with all the useful accomplishments for any Trade, but further those,
that are intended for the University or any learned profession, in the getting
of the Latin and Greek tongues also.

And having said thus much for bringing all the sciences into English, some
account may be reasonably expected concerning this of R(...)orick with which I
present thee now, of which I must say, as my learned Mr. William Dugard in his
Rhetori^es Elementa, Animadvertendum est Quaestiones hase, maximam partem, ad
Caroli Butleri Rhetoricam, quae vulgo in Scholis teritur, formari; the truth
is, the form and Method of this our Rhetoric, in respect of Elocution, some
examples only excepted, is the same with Butler, and as for invention and
disposition, I have very much followed the first part of that excellent piece
of Oratory, which Michael Radau has published under the title of Orator
Extemporaneus, from whence I might have taken much more than I have, but that I
was afraid of being too prolixe and over burthoning my young English
Rhetorician: if this which I have done shall find acceptance, I may be
persuaded, if God shall lend me life, and it be thought necessary, more fully
to explain these precepts with variety of examples; this in the mean I here
re^ommend to thy perusal; and for the desire I have to contribute (...)ething
toward the removal of that burden which is in this science imposed on
children, am very willing to endure thy censure and judgment, be it never so
severe against me. And do therefore rest, thine in the Lord.

John Newton.

Books sold by Thomas Passenger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
A Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, showing the justice of God
on the one, and his mercy toward the other. Set forth in some thousand of
ex^mples by Sam. Clark, late Minister of Ben^et-Finck London, in 2 Volumns in
folio. Royal and Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollius and John Harsman,
faithfully rendered into English, folio, price 10s. Gods revenge against
murder, by John Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical stories, digested into
six Books, newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacons Natural history,
folio, price 8s. Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish*
Empire, of Egypt and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands
adjoining, folio, price 8 s. Markham's Masterpiece. Roman Antiquities, by Tho.
Godwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. The Famous History of the destruction of Troy,
in three books, quarto, price 3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.
Etymologicum parvum, by Fra(...) Gre(...), octavo, price 3 s. Chemical essays,
by John Beg^mis, p^ice, 18 s. Spiritual Antidotes against sinful contagion, By
Tho. Dolittle, price 18 d. P^^^s Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant,
twelves, price bound 1 s. Monasticon Favershamiense; or a description of the
Abbey of Faversham, octavo, price bound 18d. The Christians Crown of glory; or
Holiness the way to happiness, octavo, price bound 18d. The path way to health,
price bound 18d. The complete Academy, or Nursery of complements, bound 1 s.
The book of knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The book of palmistry in
octavo, price bound 18 d. The Wise Virgin, being a narrative of Gods dealing
with Martha Ha^field, price bound 18 d. The pilgrims por^, or the weary man's
rest in the grave, in twelve* price bound 1 s.
Books Printed for, and sold by Ben. Hurlock, over against St. Magnus Church on
London Bridge near Thames street.
MAriners Magazine, folio, price bound twelve shillings. Newton's Logarithms,
folio, price bound 10s. Norwood's tryangles, quarto, price bound 4s. Collins
Sector on a quadrant, quarto, price ^ound 3 s. and 6 s. Collins plain scale,
quarto, price bound 4 s. Seamans companion, quarto, price bound (...) s. 6 d.
Safeguard of Sailers, quarto, price bound (...) s. 6 d. Geometrical Seaman,
price bound 2 s. Petiscus doctrine of tryangles, quarto, ^rice bound 5 s.
Phillips advancement, quarto, price bo(...)d (...) s. 6 d. Seamans Kallendar,
quarto, price 1 s. 4 d. Seamans practice, quarto, price 1 s. 4 d. Seamans
Dictionary, quarto, price 1 s. 4 (...) Seamans glass, quarto, price 1 s.
Seamans secrets, quarto, price 1 s. Complete shipwright, quarto, price 1 s.
Complete Modellist, quarto, price 6 d. Pilots S^a mirror, quarto, price 1 s.
Mathematical Manual, octavo, price bound (...) s. 6 d. Mariners compass
rectified, octavo, price bound 2 s. Norwoods Epitomy, octavo, price bound 1 s.
6 d. Saints anchorhold, twelves, price bound 1 s. Newtons-Institutions in
twelves, price bound 2 s. 6 d. Newtons Tables in twelves, price bound 2 s. 6 d.
Newtons Geometrical Trigonometry in twelves, price bound 1 s. Carpenters Rule
in twelves, price bound 1s. Mariners divine Mate, twelves, price bound 6 d.
Seamories Architecture, quarto, price bound 5 s. Saltonstals navigator, quarto,
price 1 s. 4 d. Pathway to sailing, quarto, price 10 d. New shining light,
quarto, price 1 s. 4 d. Daries Quadrant, in octavo, price 6 d.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ART OF Rhetoric.
CHAP. I.
Of the Art of Rhetoric in the General.
RHETORICR is the Art or faculty of eloquent and delightful speaking.

And this eloquent and delightful speak(...)g, is that which we usually call
Oratory: The difference therefore between a Rhetorician and an Orator is this;
the Rhetorician delivers precepts and directions for this eloquent speaking,
and the Orator does put these precepts and directions into practice.

In this Art of Rhetoric then or in these precepts and directions for Oratory,
three things must be considered.

1. The Matter about which it is conversant. 2. The End for which it serves.
3. The Means by which that end may be attained.
The Matter or Subject of this Art or faculty is any thing whatsoever which
may be discoursed or questioned; any Theme or Case.

A Theme is an infinite Question in which an inquiry is made in the general
concerning the Thesis or Position; as, whether it be fit to wage War.

A Case is a Question confined to persons and times, in which a particular
inquiry is made concerning the Hypothesis or matter in dispute; as, whether it
be fit for England to wage War with the Dutch.

2. The End or Ends for which Rhetorich serves are these.

1. To tickle and delight the ears o^ ^he Auditors that they may be willing to
^ear that which is intended to be deli^ered.

2. To inform their judgments, and by ^trength of argument to beget a belief
of that which is spoken.

3. To move the affections and beget (...) willingness either to do themselves,
or to (...)ssist in the actions of others, or to justify that which is said or
done.

Lastly, The ways and means by which ^hese ends may be attained, are three,
Nature, Art, and Practice.

Natural abilities do much conduce to ^he attaining of this excellent faculty;
for ^hey that are naturally ingenious, and have (...) good memory will easily
attain to this Art of eloquent and delightful speaking; ^ut where Nature is
defective, more care and diligence must be used, that the de^ects of Nature may
be in part at least ^upplied by Art, whose best companion is (...) general
knowledge of things, which i^ a ^oung Student have not as yet attained unto, it
is at least necessary, that he should ^erfectly understand the Theme or case
^ropounded, or else the Rules of Art will (...)and him but in little stead; for
how should he dispose of Matter before he has it? And in vain do we speak of
Use and Practice, where Knowledge which must furnish us with Matter, and Art
which must teach us to dispose of it, are both wanting. But natural abilities
being presupposed, and matter acquired by diligent reading and observation; I
shall here show how those natural endowments may be by art improved, and the
prepared matter so disposed and ordered, as that they may make way for Use and
Practice.

CHAP. II.
Of Invention.
THE Rules of this Art or Faculty of Rhetorical and delightful speaking are
commonly reduced unto five heads, Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory and
Pronunciation.

The first of these is Invention, in which we must consider three things;
First, what we are to invent; Secondly by wha^ Arguments we may confirm the
matter invented: Thirdly, from what Topickes o^ general heads, those Arguments
may b^ raised.

And First, we are to consider what it is that we are to invent; and the thing
or matter which we are to invent or find out, is the scope and purpose, of the
intended Oration; that is, we must propound some certain proposition, to which
we mean to direct our speech; and of those several propositions which may be
raised from the Subject propounded, we should still make choice of that, which
is most agreeable to the sentence given, most suitable to the present occasion,
most profitable, and that which the Auditors may probably best apprehend. But
now a days our Orators do much labor to find out some acute proposition, and
that proposition is so stilled, which under some Allegory does express a simple
and a received truth: as in this expression; I would advise you to set the
Camp in order: the meaning is, I would advise you to prepare for War: such
propositions are not to be found fault with; but yet we must take heed of
affectation, yea and of lightness too, because gravity does become an Orator;
though young students may do well to pitch upon the most plain and obvious
propositions; and such easy arguments as are most pertinent to the matter in
hand; and after they can do this tollerably well, they may be degrees aspire
higher.

Secondly, When you have resolved upon your proposition, then you are to
bethink your self of some Arguments by which that proposition may be confirmed:
for an argument is a probable reason brought, to persuade the Auditors of the
truth of the Proposition.

I call it a probable reason, because arguments are of two sorts; some are
certain, evident and necessary, and these are convincing: as, that Peter is not
a beast, because he is induced with reason; others are probable carrying with
them some show of truth; that is, they seem to be true either from the general
received opinion, or for the similitude that they have with the truth, or from
the event; and these are the Arguments, which an Orator should chiefly enquire
after; not but that he may also use such are Demonstrable and undeniably true:
but because he many times has to do with such propositions as cannot be
demonstrated, or if they can, yet he uses probable arguments for the most
part, because he is to ^peake to such, as will be more easily per^waded by such
arguments, as come within their own sphere, which they can easily ^athom, than
by such as are Demonstrative and beyond their apprehension.

Thirdly, in Invention, we are to consider the several Topics or common
places, from whence these probable Arguments may be invented or raised; and
these are of two sorts; Intrinsecal, and Extrinsecal: those are called
Intrinsecal, which are comprised in the matter which is propounded of what kind
soever it be; and all matter is comprised in one of these three kinds of Cases
or Causes, Demonstrative, Deliberative, and Judicial.

The Demonstrative Case so called, because it does Demonstrate the Nature of
the Subject propounded. And is used either in the Commendation, or Condemnation
or persons, actions, or things. When it is used by way of commendation, it is
called an Encomium or a Penegyrick: and when it is used by way of condemnation,
it is called an Invective, if against some eminent Person, it is called
Philippick.

The (...)eliberative Case is so called, from the deliberation or
consider(...)n that should be taken before advice be given.

The subject matter in this case, is every contingent thing; every thing which
is in our own power.

More particularly, if it be a public ^ase there are five things in which
according to Aristotle, deliberation is required.

1. In public taxations. 2. In making of War and Peace. 3. In the guarding of
Countries. 4. In importation and exportation of goods. 5. In the dispensing or
not dispensing with Laws.

But in private cases the particular matters in which we should deliberate,
cannot be assigned, beacuse of the great variety; there being nothing
concerning our selves or families, in which deliberation is not convenient, if
not necessary.

The Judicial case may be so called, from the delivering of our Judgment or
opinion of the matter propounded, whether for or against, whether by way of
Accusation, or by way of Defense. And the heads from whence Arguments may be
raised in these several kinds of cases are either such as are common to them
all; or such as (...)e peculiar to each kind: I will here speak of such general
ways of inventing Arguments from the very matter propounded, as are common to
all three cases or causes; and they being well understood, the Ingenious and
Judicious Orator will need no direction for each several kind of causes in
particular.

The Topics or Heads for invention in the General are these following.

1. Definition. 2. Division. 3. Notation. 4. Conjugation. 5. Genus. 6. Species.
7. Similitude. 8. Dissimilitude. 9. Contraries. 10. Opposites. 11. Comparison.
12. Causes. 13. Effects. 14. Adjuncts. 15. Antecedents. 16. Consequents. All
other Topics from whence Intrinsical or Artificial arguments may be raised,
are contained in these or may be derived from them.

The first of these Topics I call Definition. And, Definition is a speech
explaining or declaring what a thing is. The parts of a Definition according to
the Logicians are these two 1. The Genus or general name; that is, a name that
does agree with the thing defined, and also with several other things besides.
2. The Difference or (...)ticular name, that is, a name which does only agree
with that which is defined; for example, Man is a living Creature endued with
Reason. But such Definitions are seldom used by Orators, because they afford
but little matter for an Oration; but other ways of Defining things, which may
be called Descriptions rather, and such are these that follow.

One way of Defining things, much used by Orators, is, to describe it by the
parts thereof, which may be sometimes large and yet elegant: of this way we
have an ^xample in Causinus, who does describe a Butterfly in this manner. A
Butterfly, says he, is a small Animal, seldom seen in Cities but very
frequently in the fields; it is of a full, tender, soft, and flexible body,
growing smaller and smaller to a little length, on which a dispersed gentle
down does neatly shine; there stand out as it were extended Horns, small as
thrids, between which a pleasant light of his shining eyes does sparkle; but a
special wonder is in his Wings, far beyond the bulk of his little body, they
are bedecked with flowers, adorned with Purple, shine like Gold, and glitter
with stars; being poysed with these, he ^^ies as it were with Oars into the
air, disporting himself, and cleaving almost to every stalk: sometimes he
sucks the juice of leaves with his most delicate trunk, sometimes he sweetly
reposeth amongstdelightfull odors, other while with a renewed flight he soars
aloft and escapes the hands of insulting boys, drawing in the air six hundred
Meanders.

A Second way by which Orators do define or rather describe things, is by such
effects, as do proceed from the four causes, and this way does as it were open
a gate to a large field; only you must take heed, that you reckon not every
minute or small matter for an effect; according to this way Saint Ambrose does
describe drunkenness to be an incentive of madness, the fomenter of lust, and
the poison to wisdom.

A Third way is by similitude; but not according to the usual way of expressing
them, by the particle, As: but by bare affirmation omitting the usual way of
comparison: for example: What is our life? It is a market in which we buy and
sell; in which one deceives another, and in which every one does mind his own
business; and has a care of his own wealth: it is a Comedy, in which every
one does act his own part, this man the part of a King, and that of a peasant.

A Fourth way is by Synonomie, as thus* What else is a Lilly, but an ornament
to the Earth, the glory of Plants, the very eye of Flowers, the Jewel of the
meadows and Star of the Fields, adorning the Earth, a^ the Stars do Heaven;
giving as great a luster to other flowers, as the Jasper stone does to Gold,
and as much delighting the eye as the Sun the world.

A Fifth way is by those causes by which effects are produced; as the Material,
formal, efficient and final causes. For example, the Edifice which Daedalus
has raised with his own hand, of strong and hewed stone, in a round form, is
not only fortified against the injury of weather; but has also so much
gracefullness in it, that it eases the mind of all care, yea and fills it
with delight; it is so neatly built, that you would think it Heaven upon Earth.

A Sixth way is by negation; when we first show what a thing is not, and then
what it is: Thus Babusius L^b. 3. Epigr. does describe a Friend.

A Friend is not a bare voice, or empty nutshel, but a Friend is known by his
affection and behavior, by his words and actions.

A Seventh way is by adjuncts and proprieties; Thus our blessed Savior is
called, The Assertor of humane liberty, the master of Sanctity, and absolute
perfection, the everlasting fountain of all virtues. Thus Solomon is described:
Solomon that great miracle and Oracle of humane Wisdom, the Master or Tutor of
the World.

An Eighth way, is first to describe the thing Ironically according to the
opinion of some, and then to explain the same, as in truth it is, or at least
according to your own thoughts and apprehensions of it.

The Second Topic for Invention is Division, or Distribution of the matter
propounded into its parts; thus the life of Man may be divided, into Infancy,
Childhood, Youth, middle age, old age.

Arguments may be raised from the parts unto the whole, three ways. 1. By
affirming that of the whole, which may be affirmed of all the parts; as if you
would prove the whole Fabric of a Huse to be defective; you may divide the
house, into the walls, the roof, and floores; and show the defects in each of
these.

2. By denying that of the whole, wh(...) may be denied of all the parts; as if
you were to show the inconvenience of sending Children to travel: you may
enum^ rate the several places adjoining, and show the inconveniences that may
be i^ sending them to any of those places; a(...) suppose to France, Spain, or
Italy, and by consequence any whither else.

3. By making an affirmation of one particular part, omitting or rejecting the
rest; as thus, either he loves me or hates me, for there is no third or mean;
but he does not love me, therefore he hates me.

This Topic may be elegantly used by way of Interrogation, Repetition,
Subjection, Preterition, and Apostrophe. An example whereof, may be this
excellent description of a Garden, as it is set forth by Drexelius in his
Nicetas. There was, says he, a most pleasant Garden as it were a Paradise, the
smiling Trees stood with their leaves budded, which with a delightful odor
made the shadows graceful, the gentle motion of whose boughs made a sweet
whistling noise, amongst these a murmuring Rivulet, clearer than any Crystal,
with running streams which did smoothly glide, disturbing the pible stones with
its singing waters: so that the motion thereof was almost a Musical harmony.
On either side were flowers, with Zephyrus's copious family; on the one hand
the silver Lillies from the green bank did smile (upon you) on the other the
purple Roses did glitter, from an other part the Daffidillies white as Snow or
Ivory, were set off with the Hyacinths red as blood, yellow as gold; most
pleasant gales of wind breathing from every part.

The Third Topic is Notation, or Etymology, which is the interpretation of
the word, showing as well the original thereof, as the signification: as a
Senate is so called because of convention of the Seniors, that is of old men.
Etymology is more frequent amongst Grammarians, than Orators, yet sometimes
there may be an occasion for it amongst them, even for ornament and sweetness
sake.

The Fourth Topic is Conjugation: and Conjugation is either when one word ^ath
various endings, as Knife, knives; or when several words do come from, or are
derived from one primitive; thus beautiful and beautifullness are both derived
from beauty. From this Topic we argue thus, If piety be a commendable quality,
then he that is pious is worthy of commendation.

Conjugation and Notation differ in this; Notation explains the word;
Conjugation shows its derivation and various termination.

The Fifth and Sixth Topics are Genus and Species: now that is called Genus,
which does comprehend several things under it which are really different from
one another. And that is called Form or Species, which may with other things be
referred to one common Genus: And thus this word (Art) is a Genus in respect of
the seven liberal sciences, as Grammar, Rhetoric, etc. And these sciences
Grammar, Rhetoric, etc. are the forms and Species which are contained under
this Genus or general term (Art.)

The first of these Topics namely that which is called Genus, does many times
afford the Orator plenty of matter; for by this means a finite proposition,
that is a proposition that is confined to the circumstances of time, place and
such like, is reduced to an infinite, and has all those restrictions taken
from it. From these Topics we may argue two ways.

1. That which is spoken of the Genus may sometimes be also spoken of the Form
or Species; as thus, if virtue be to be embraced, then Temperance ought to be
embraced also.

2. That which is denied of the Genus, may be also denied of the Species; as
thus, if no liberal Art be necessary for a Soldier; then Rhetoric is not
necessary for him.

The seventh Topic is Similitude; and similitude is the comparing of two or
more things together, which are in themselves diverse, but do agree in some
particular. For Example, a shadow and Glory are in themselves very different
things: but yet they agree in this, that the shadow does accompany the body,
and glory virtue. And hence Tully says, that Glory is the shadow of virtue.
Similitude may be collected, either from words, actions or fable^; nay there is
scarce any thing which may not in some particular be compared with another,
sometimes it is used for to prove, but most commonly for illustration.

The eighth Topic is Dissimilitude; and Dissimilitude is the disagreeing of
two or more things in some particular; from this Topic we argue thus: that
which agrees with one thing that is unlike, does not necessarily agree with
another; and that which does not agree with some one thing, may yet agree with
some other particular: For Exampl^ Idle Citizens care not what mischief does
befa^ the Commonwealth; therefore the more generous and public spirited men,
must endeavor to keep the Republic from danger.

The ninth Topic is from Contraries; and those things are said to be
contraries, which cannot both at the same time agree with one and the same
thing: thus no man can be said to be wise in that thing, in which he is a fool.

Contraries are distinguished into four ranks or kinds: Adverse, Privitive,
Relative and Contradictory; in these several kinds of contraries we are wont
to argue either by way of affirmation or by way of negation.

In those Contraries which we call adverse, we argue rightly, if we deny that
of one thing or person, which we affirm of another, as thus; there is no safety
in War, all men do therefore desire peace.

In those Contraries, which are Privative, we argue rightly, when one privative
is denied of that person, of which another is affirmed, as thus: you wish me
poverty, because you envy my prosperous and wealthy condition.

In Relative contraries, we argue rightly, when one is inferred from the
relation which it has unto the other; for example, ^f you be a Scholar, pray
tell me who is your Master.

In Contradictory contraries, we argue rightly, when one being denied, the
other is affirmed, or the contrary; as thus, He is just, he is not just.

The tenth Topic is from such things as are opposite to one another: And they
are said to be opposites to one another, which can never agree together: as
wrath and friendship; from which sort of Topics, the way of arguing is, to
deny that of one opposite which is affirmed of the other; as thus, If Peter
have a mind to kill Paul, surely he can have no love for him.

In the use of these Topics we must consider how things that are contraries,
unlike or opposite, do differ from one another. Those things are said to be
contrary, which cannot agree with one another; things that are unlike do not
disagree, but are diverse; but in things that are opposite, when one of the
contraries is expressed, we are to answer it by the effect of the other; as
thus, to love and to hurt; for to hurt does proceed from hatred, and hatred is
contrary unto love.

The eleventh Topic is Comparison, and Comparison is the comparing of one
thing with another. This is either equal or unequal.

Equal comparison is; when two equal(...) things ar compared together. As
thus; he has deceived thee, therefore he will deceive me also*

Unequal comparison is two ways, first when we argue from the greater to
th(...) less: As, God spared not the Angels tha(...) sinned, how then shall he
spare man?

Secondly, when we argue from the less to the greater: As, he will not let one
sin go unpunished: much more will he therefore punish (...) multitude of sins.

Comparison does differ from Similitude; in that two things are compared
together in respect of some third; but in Similitude there is no respect unto a
third, bu(...) to one another only: as thus, It is lawful(...) for M. Antony to
defend Clodius; why may not Tully then defend Milo? Here the comparison is
between Tully and Anthony, but it is in respect of a third, that is, in respect
of Defense. But in this, As they that are sick, think all things loathsome,
though never so sweet; so they that are wicked cannot relish the best
Societies: Here the sick in body are compared to the sick in mind, that is to
the wicked, but not in respect of a ^hird, but in respect of their own
corrupted tastes.

The twelvth Topic is from the cause(...)s of things: And that is said to be a
cause, from whence a thing may in any sort be said to be produced.

We commonly reckon four sorts of causes, Efficient, Material, Formal and
Fi(...)all.

The efficient cause is that which makes a thing: Thus the Sun causes or
makes the Day; to this may instruments and all other things be referred, which
do only assist in the making as well as those which make the thing: as a Pen is
an assistant in writing. From this cause we argue thus: If the cause be denied,
we deny the effect; if the cause be granted, we grant the effect also: if it be
praised or dispraised, we praise or dispraise the effect also.

The Material cause is that of which a thing is made, or is employed in; as
money of Gold, and an Orator about every matter or thing. From this cause we
argue thus; If matter be afforded, there may be such an effect, and the
goodness or the badness of the effect depends upon the goodness or the badness
of the matter.

The formal Cause is that by which the thing is what it is, or that by which it
is distinguished from other things. Thus a Ship and a Timber house do differ by
the diverse disposing of the parts. In this cause we argue from the excellence
or the meaness of the form; the more excellent the form is, the better is the
thing, and any deficiency in the form does make it the worse: and every thing
should be proportionable to his sorm: and hence a man should aim at immortal
things, because his soul (which is his form) is made immortal.

The final cause is that for which a thing is made: and the end for which we do
any thing, is generally one of these three, because it is either honest,
profitable or delightful. From this cause we argue according to these Axioms.
Such as the end is, such are the things that are done to that end. If the end
be good or bad, the things referred to that end are good or bad also.

The thirteenth Topic is from the Effects, and those are said to be Effects
which are produced by their causes. From these we argue either by inferring the
cause, the effect being granted, or by denying the cause, the effect being
denied; or by commending the cause, if the effects be good, (...)r by
condemning it, if the effects be bad: and these heads drawn from the causes and
^ffects, do afford great plenty of matter ^or discourse.

The fourteenth Topic is from the Adjuncts, and those are said to be adjuncts,
which are joined with the thing, but not of necessity; to wit, such as are
joined to persons or things. Tully reckons up twelve of the first sort, viz. Of
the Person, as the Name, the Nature, the Habit, the Fortune, the Life, the
Affection, the studies, Counsels, Actions, Chances, and Speeches. The Adjuncts
of a thing are commonly six. Place, Time, Occasion, Manner, Faculty, and
Instrument; but some there are which do reduce them to these seven.

Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.
In English thus,

First ask, Who, What, and Where, and then,
What Aid, with Why, and How, and When.
Quis, who, does signify the quality of the Person, in which there must be
considered his nature, sex, age, nation, kindred and estate, in respect of his
body, mind and fortune.

Quid, what, imports an enquiry after the nature of the thing, as whether it
be of importance or not; whether great or small; noble or ignoble.

Ubi, where, denotes the place.

Quibus auxiliis, with what aid, notes an enquiry concerning the person, that
joined with him in that action, or other instruments by which it was effected.

Cur, why, denotes the final cause, with what intent or to what end it was
done.

Quomodo, how, shows the manner of doing it, as namely with what ease, or how
hardly.

Quando, when, notes the time in which it was done, and this head does many
times afford great plenty of matter.

The fifteenth and the sixteenth Topics are the Antecedents and the
Consequents. Those are called Antecedents, which go before the thing; as, you
made him tremble, therefore he is sensible.

They are called consequents, which do necessarily follow the thing; as, he
that is thrust through the heart must needs dye. From the Antecedents we argue
thus. The Antecedent being granted, the consequent must needs follow; as, he is
wounded in the heart, therefore he will dye. But from the Consequents we argue
thus: If the consequent be affirmed, the antecedent is affirmed; as, It is a
great gash, therefore it was a great blow that made it; if the Consequent be
denied, the antecedent is denied also; as, he is not dead, therefore he is not
wounded in the heart. And these are the Intrinsecal or Artificial Topics from
whence arguments may be raised on any Theme or matter propounded. For
illustration sake, I will show you, how, from these Topics, a matter for an
Oration may be raised from this Theme or proposition, Clodius laid snares for
Milo.

The Praxis.
Every Theme or proposition does consist of three parts, a Subject, a
Predicate, and a Copula. That is called the Subject, of which we speak; The
Predicate, that which is spoken of the Subject; and the Copula is some Verb
which joins the subject with the predicate. In this proposition Clodius is the
Subject, because it is of him that we are to speak, to lay snares is the
predicate, because that is the thing which is said of Clodius.

Now therefore if you would find out arguments on this Subject, Consider well,
which is the Subject, and which is the Predicate in your proposition: Then take
the Subject and go through every Topic: first go to Definition, and ask what
it is, what is the nature of it, and how it is distinguished from other things.
Then go to Division, and see into how many parts the Subject may be divided;
and so forward from Topic to Topic. And still observe to your self every
argument, which does by this means arise from the Subject, and apply it to the
Predicate, so shall you easily see, whether it does fully confirm your
proposition; and when you have done with the Subject, take the Predicate, and
run through the several Topics, with that also; but if the matter require it,
and that you judge it more convenient to take the whole proposition, than
Subject and predicate apart by themselves, you may in that manner run through
all the heads of Invention, but stay not too long upon any one, for if matter
offer not it self in one head go to another, for every head perhaps may not
afford matter, at least not such as is apt and fit. But if you would know
whether your argument or matter be drawn from the Subject or the predicate, put
it into the form of Syllogism, and if the Major be most certain, you may
couclude, that the argument is drawn from the Predicate, but if the minor be
most certain, it is then drawn from the Subject. When you have found your
arguments which prove the proposition, you must reduce them also into the form
of Syllogism, consisting of three propositions; The Major, Minor, and
Conclusion; and then in the same manner as has been showed, you must seek out
arguments to confirm every proposition, if need be: to which purpose, Similes,
Examples, Apothegmes, sentences and such like are very serviceable and ought to
be had in readiness. But for the more easy finding out of convenient matter
you must consult such books which are written upon the subject in hand, among
the rest Polyanthea, Theatrum vitae humanae, Feltham's Resolves, and such like.

CHAP. III.
Of the Sharpness and ingenuity becoming an Oration.
SUch is the Curiosity of this age in which we live, as that it is grown weary
of these plain and ordinary ways, and requires or expects in the very style
something more than ordinary; insomuch that now a days he is not worthy the
name of an Orator, that knows not how to brandish an Oration, by some sharp
and witty flourishes. And therefore, that we may comply with the present times,
we will also speak something of that sharpness or ingenuity, with which an
oration should be adorned.

And first I will show you what is meant by sharpness or ingenuity: as Material
sharpness then, is the meeting of two lines or sides in one point: so
Metaphorical sharpness is the concourse, or disagreeing concord, of the subject
and the predicate in an Oration. Or thus, Sharpness is an agreeing discord, or
a disagreeing concord, that is, we are then said to speak smartly or wittily,
when the predicate and subject of an oration, do agree with one another in one
part, and disagree in another.

This sharpness or acuteness is threefold, unnatural, praeternatural, or
natural.

Unnatural sharpness is, when two things agree that are in themselves unlike,
opposite and contrary, or any way differing; or when there is a different
application of the subject and predicate; as thus: The fire does scorch and
burn, and oftimes flame,
Yet see, cold blasts do now come from the same.


It is against nature that cold should proceed from fire. Yet seeing that many
by that means have defended their chastity, and restrained the heat of lust,
it is fitly said, that cold proceeds from fire.

Praeternatural sharpness is that, which is not indeed against nature, but yet
is very unusual: as, Martial: Deliciae populi quae fuerunt Domini.


Natural sharpness is that which does aagree with the nature of the thing; as
Martial: Impensis vitam Principis annumeres.
It is the Kings grace that you are alive. As if he had said thus, You are
beholding to the King for your life; whereas naturally, it becomes a King to
preserve the lives of his subjects.

The best of these three is that which is called unnatural, because it
begets great admiration.

The ways by which this disagreeing concord between the subject and the
predicate may be made, are chiefly four:

1. By annexing to the subject a disagreeing Epithet; as, an innocent ruin: a
confused order.

2. By annexing to the subject another disagreeing substantive. as, The Sun is
a fountain of light.

3. By a Catacresis either in the Adjective, in the Substantive, or in the
Verb. First in the Adjective; as, a brazen forehead, meaning shameless.

In the Sustantive, as if you call Alms, an holy rain, or a golden shower of
piety.

In the Verb, as thus; the waters made the Soldiers valiant and compelled them
to fight: that is they were the more courageous, because being near the Sea it
was impossible to fly.

4. When the predicate is both affirmed and denied of the subject in a
different sense; as the Poet speaking of a Virgin that lost her beauty to
preserve her chastity said: And then she thought her self most beautiful, when
she had lost her beauty.

Matter in which to exemplify these several ways of making an agreeing
discord between the subject and the predicate in a proposition may be had first
from the Logical Topics of Definition, Division, etc. for there is none of
them so barren from whence with a little consideration you may not collect
something that is smart and ingenious. Biderm.

Quid facimus? glaciata gelu si Lympha negetur,
Ex oculis haustas funus habebit aquas.
What shall we do? if the water be by frost congealed,
Our eyes shall water for the funeral yield.
Where he shows that tears are the waters proper for or becoming funerals. To
run through all the Topics would be tedious, only observe, that the chief for
this matter, are these, Final causes, effects, adjuncts, contraries and
opposites: for hence it will be easy to find something consentaneous and
dissentaneous to the subject.

Secondly, Matter may be had from some Paradox, or some unusual speech.

And unto this head may those be reduced, which are drawn from pleasant jests:
as,

First from Metaphors; as if one seeing a horse with an ill favored mouth
should say, the Horse laughs.

2. From a Paronomasia: as, Eminent men of great note, are now adays most
subject to imminent dangers.

3. From the Etymology of the name:

4. From some rare and pleasant story.

Thirdly, From some lesson of Morality.

Fourthly, From some Ambiguous word.

Fifthly, From some Trope and Figure in Rhetoric, especially from some
Metaphor, Allegory, Catachresis, Metonymie, Prosopopoea, etc.

And now though these directions, for the finding out of something in a
proposition that is smart and ingenious are in themselves good, yet methinks
they are not clear and perspicuous enough; here therefore I will set down what
Horatius P. Matthias Sarbievius has more plainly expressed by way of Praxis,
though much to the same purpose.

The first Praxis is, when some magnitude, bulk, majesty, authority, largness,
or destruction is fitly applied to any thing, in a doubtful sense; and is
indifferent whether it be taken really or Morally. Thus Seneca, Epist. 66.
says, that Scaevola being-lame and unarmed, made war, and with that lame hand
he overcame two Kings.

The second Praxis is the contrary unto this, when a thing is diminished either
in quantity, or estimation, and in a doubtful sense.

The third Praxis is when this Sharpness does actually contain the cause, or
doubtfully insinuate some truth of a contrary effect.

The fourth Praxis is from the ambiguity of some word or sentence, as when it
does in truth signify one thing, but it is intended to signify another. Thus
when Julius Montanus was repeating his verses, and having described the rising
of the Sun, and began to describe the manner of his setting, one of the company
would have gone his way; and being asked the reason, said, Could I hear him
any longer than from Sunrise, to Sunset?

The fifth Praxis is, when that is applied to an inanimate thing, which is
proper to a thing that has life, yet so, as that the sense and meaning is
understood, by some action of the thing of which we speak, being applied to
something of a contrary nature. Thus Pliny speaking to one, that went to
plough, after he had gotten the victory in battle, says: The earth rejoices
to show it self to one that is victorious, and being tilled by a conqueror,
she waxes proud with her early fullness of princely fruits. And thus Saint
Augustine upon these words of Christ, I am the true light, says, Rise then thou
sluggard, the way it self does come unto thee, and rouzeth thee from sleep,
rise and walk.

He also speaks acutely, who applies natural things to things artificial.

Thus the Poet, of one that had a long nose, says,

Si tuus ad Solemn statuatur nasus, hiante
Ore, been ostendet dentibus hora quota est.
Hold open your mouth, your nose to the Sun direct,
So will your teeth the hour of the day detect.
The Sixth Praxis is, when that which does agree with real persons, is applied
to those that are not real. So he in Plautus, Our hands have eyes, and think
they see. But this way is most pleasing, when in one and the same thing, the
application is both true and false: such is that of Augustus Caesar, when he
said, that he had two nice daughters, which he was compelled to bear with; the
one was his daughter Julia; and the other the common wealth.

There is yet another way of Inventing that which is sharp and witty; that is
by comparing the matter with the Oratorical heads and Topics: this may be done
three ways.

First, by comparing the matter in hand with every topic severally; by
considering what the thing is which we are to speak, what the Parts, the Genus,
Species, adjuncts and the rest. Thus does that Prince of Roman Eloquence,
deride the consulship of Vatinius, by reckoning up the parts of the year in
which he was not Consul: There happened, says he, a wonderful thing in the
year of Vatinius, for while he was Consul, there was neither Spring, nor
Autumn, neither Summer nor Winter.

Secondly, by comparing one head of the matter in hand, with another different
head of the same thing: as the definition of the thing with its adjuncts, or of
the effects with the Causes. Thus Valerius Maximus by comparing the Material
cause with the Formal, that is by comparing the body with the soul, finds out
this smart commendation of Lucretia: Lucretia, says he, that mirror of Roman
chastity, whose manlike courage was by an evil mistake of fortune, confined to
a female body.

Thirdly, by comparing the Topics of one order, with other Topics of the same
order, as definition with definition, cause with cause etc. as for example, The
King whom Mutius Scaevola could not conquer by his ^rmed hand, he made to fly,
by setting his hand on fire. Here the acuteness lies, in comparing of one cause
with another, that is his armed hand, with his hand in the flames. And thus
much concerning Invention.

CHAP. IV.
Of Disposition.
DIsposition is the orderly placing of those things which are Invented. It is
two fold.

First, Natural, in which things are discoursed in that order in which they
were done, or in which according to nature, they should be done: as if you were
to commend a person, you should first begin with his childhood, next his youth,
and so to the other degrees of his age.

The second way is Artificial, which does either for delight, or profit
diversely mingle and confound the matter, putting that in the end which should
be in the beginning, and the beginning in the end, that so he may both delight
the Auditors and hold them in suspense; which in an unexpected event does not
a little please and delight the hearers. Thus does Virgil do in his Aeneades,
in which he speaks of Aeneas his voyage into Italy, but not in the same order
in which he began: thus does Barclay in his Argenes, and thus do all that write
either Comedies or Tragedies.

The Orator then having resolved of his proposition, must first consider of
what Nature it is, whether single or consisting of several parts, and which of
the parts should be first handled, which next.

Secondly, He must choose some few of the best arguments he has invented, and
place some solid argument in the beginning, those that are less forcible in the
midst, reserving still the best and most convincing argument for the
conclusion; because the Auditor at the first being greedy of knowing must be
prepossessed and convinced, but in the end he must be strongly confirmed and
forced.

And the most persuasive arguments are those, which proceed from the
Definition, Distrubution, Genus, Causes, and Effects of the thing discoursed
of, for these explain the nature thereof: The less forcible arguments are such
as are collected from some trivial adjuncts and conjectures.

Thirdly, He must Logically dispose of these reasons and arguments, first into
Syllogisms, and then consider how to enlarge them in an Oratorical manner.

Fourthly, He must consider into what parts his Oration should be divided.
Concerning the two last, I will a little enlarge my self: And

First, of the Logical Disposition of those reasons and arguments which are
invented, by way of Syllogisms, and the enlarging of those Syllogisms in an
Oratorical manner.

A logical argumentation is the disposition or explication of the argument,
which when it is perfect does consist of three parts, of which that which is
put in the first place, Logicians call the Major, Rhetoricians the Proposition:
That which is put in the second place, philosophers call the Minor, Orators the
Assumption: That which is put in the third place, is by Logicians called the
conclusion, by Rhetoricians the complexion or inference. And these three
propositions, when they are regularly placed, are called a Syllogism, which
must be framed from that proposition, and cause or reason, which was before
invented.

For example, the proposition was, That Clodius is justly put to death: the
Argument or reason given for it is, because he was a treacherous person. Now
then form your Syllogism thus: Take this cause and join it with the predicate
of your proposition, saying, Every treacherous person does deserve to be put to
death: and this is your Major. Then take the subject of your proposition, and
join that with the given cause and say, Clodius was a treacherous person; and
that is your Minor: then bring in the proposition it self, saying, therefore
Clodius deserves death, which is the conclusion, and makes up the whole
Syllogism. The like may be done in any other; but always, consider, with what
reasons, examples, sentences or similitudes your Major or Minor may be again
confirmed, especially if they be in themselves weak and but probably true; for
if they be certain, they are not then to be proved, but handsomely expressed.
This done, consider how these Syllogisms may be handled Oratorically; the which
besides many others may be effected nine several ways.

The first and most usual is so to place the parts of the Syllogism, as
Logicians do, that is the Major first, and the arguments by which it may be
proved. The Minor next with the arguments for that; And lastly the Conclusion.

Example.
Imagine that some King through ambition of reigning had killed his brother
Prince; And so make this proposition, The King ought to be deposed; The Reason,
because he is wicked: place this Logically thus: We ought not to endure a
wicked man in the Kingdom; The King is awicked man; Therefore he is not to be
endured in the King dome. The Reason of the Major is; because otherwise we
shall blemish our reputation among foreigners, by whom we have been always
esteemed honorable, and promoters of virtue, but shall now be cal^ed patrons
and servants of wickedness. The Reason of the Minor is, that he through
ambition having deceitfully killed his bro^her, has been injurious to nature
and to ^s: This proposition, may Rhetorically be ^hus handled.

The Major.
Have we the Citizens of N. now at ^ength made such progress in the love of
wickedness, as that we are not ashamed to see the power of our lives and
liberties put unto the hands of a desperately wicked person? Shall we now any
longer honor the Prince in wickedness, or wickedness in the Prince? till we
our selves are reckoned among the wicked.

The Reason of the Major.
Ah woe is me! O Citizens of N. Ah the glory of our name, bought with the bloo^
of our Ancestors, which we have so ras(...) prostituted, through our own
inadvertency! That we who were formerly reput^^ the patrons of virtue, should
now be reckoned the servants of wickedness. Wha^ will be said by the bordering,
what by the more remote nations? Behold (shall the^ say) the men for whose
virtuous acts the world it self was too narrow; who could embrace nothing, nor
do any thing, bu^ what was contained within, or did no^ exceed the bounds of
virtue: behol^ them now so far fallen into naughtiness, that laying aside all
modesty, they are no^ ashamed to adore wickedness in the Throne. And what is
the guise of the re^^ of the Citizens? What is the reputation of the nobles? if
by their approbation baseness does thus triumph in the highest plac^ of
dignity. Certainly they cannot but love wickedness, who do not only permit it,
bu^ also honor it.

The Minor.
Had our King gloried in a wicked act (...)ommitted upon one of the meanest of
his Subjects; he might perhaps have had ^ome small pretense for his cruelty,
though ^t had been accomplished with bloody ^ands.

The Reason of the Minor.
But to be so inhumanely enraged against ^he Prince his brother, who was settled
in ^he Kindome by our free and general consent, what is it but to proclaim a
War against us and nature it self, and by this one ^mpietie, to offend the
tribunals of all Nations.

Approbation.
Truly, if we do well, in judging of the day by the morning, we may be no false
Prophets, in foreseeing, what kind of Nero he will prove to us, who begins to
feed his cruelty with the blood of his own relations, and has there made an
entrance to his cruelty, where others have ended theirs. Awake therefore O ye
generous progeny of all virtue, and if you have any respect to your (...) based
name, or the glory of your Nation* depose that wicked person from the Throne;
let it be heard in the world, let (...) be known to all posterity, that
wickedne(...) might be in the Kingdom, but could no^ go unpunished, no not in
the Prince.

2. The second way of Rhetorical arguing is to put the Minor with the Reason^
thereof in the first place, the Major next and the Reasons thereof, and lastly
the Conclusion.

Example.
Let the proposition be the contrary to the former, Namely, That the King ought
not to be deposed, or put to death, for any heinous offense committed by him.
The Reason is, because in so doing, we shall blemish our own reputation. Place
it Logically thus. We who are Citizens ought not to blemish our own reputation;
but if we depose the King or put him to death, we shall blemish our own
reputation; Therefore we ought neither to depose the King, nor put him to
death. The Reason of the Major is, Because Reputation is the public treasure,
and noble patrimony of a Common wealth, which we all ought highly to regard.
The Reason of the Minor is, Because that (...)itherto we have been famous, for
that (...)e never did depose our Prince or put (...)im to death, and this
honor we shall now (...)se, if we do either.

The Approbation, Because our Ancestors (...)ave also had wicked Princes; and
yet (...)ey did let them alone. And this propo^^tion may be Rhetorically
handled in this (...)anner.

The Minor.
I Wish O Citizens of N. that they who through accursed and disloyal boldness,
^ave by their cruel suffrages decreed to (...)ob the Prince not only of his
Throne, but also of his life, would but consider the consequence of it in after
ages: I would have them consider that our ^ame shall be more stained by their
rashness, than it could have been by a patient submission to his cruelty.

The Reason of the Minor.
For hitherto it has been our peculiar honor that our natural Princes, have
been ours, not more by their birthright (...) than by our affection; neither
has the world ever heard, that our hands have been stained with the blood of
any of our Princes: which as it is our peculiar honor above other Nations; so
(...) ought to be our great study to continue it. But now if we should lay
wicked hand^ on our Prince, shall we not fall headlong from the glory of our
reputation? And be with the rest deservedly hissed at for paracides for ever?

The Approbation.
Or, look back upon your Ancestors, and let it be your care to tread in their
footsteps: Whose Kings although they were Heroes, yet they were also men, and
that they were all of them free from vice, or that none of them did burden the
Throne with wickedness, does seem to me unlikely; yet they rather endured the
wickedness of their Prince, than to make themselves wicked by deposing them;
and were willing to exceed in submission, rather than in fury.

The Major with the Reason.
Why then shall we degenerate souls ba(...)sh our fame? Why shall we cruel
wretches (...)ffer men to hatch cruelty against the com(...)on-wealth? We who
in honor are com(...)elled to have a principal regard unto our (...)lory, as
being our public treasure, and (...)e most noble patrimony of our Kingdom,
(...)nd ought, one with his arms, and another ^ith his good works, another
with Justice, ^other with Clemency ever maintain it, (...)s the great Magazin
of our honor.

Conclusion.
The King has acted wickedly against ^is brother, let not us act wickedly
against ^he King, neither let posterity deride us, for committing one
wickedness, to be ^evenged of another; let us have regard to that proverbial
speech of wise men, If a King he good, obey him, if evil, endure his
wickedness with patience.

The Third way of arguing Rhetorically is to put the Conclusion in the first
place with the Major or Minor added thereunto, by the particles, for,
therefore, for this cause, etc. And if any argument follo(...) sometimes we
find the conclusion repeat(...) and sometimes not: but if the Oration b(...)
short, as most of our common oration(...) are, the Conclusion is repeated at
last, bu^ in other words.

Example.
In a Gratulatory speech for some kindness received: of which the proposition
is (...) I owe you many thanks: The Reason, Because(...) you have given me a
preferment, and have passed by others who were my competitors.

Place it Logically thus: He who has gotten a preferment from one who has
passed by others his competitors, he owes the Don(...) many thanks; But I have
gotten such a preferment. Therefore, etc. Rhetorically thus.

Beginning with the Conclusion.
Most gracious Sovereign, The thank(...) which I owe unto your Majesty, for the
preferment, which you have bestowed upon m^ are such as cannot be expressed by
words; much less can they ever be requited by me(...) and I am necessarily
enforced to take up the words before your most gracious Majesty, which Socrates
once used to Plato; who when he had nothing to give him which was answerable to
his kindness cried out, O Plato accept of Socrates. And seeing your kindnesses
to me have far transcended them of Plato to Socrates, and also that I my self
cannot be a recompense sufficient for the kindness of a King, I do here devote
my self and all that I have to your Majesty in token of gratitude.

The Major.
Ought not he to account himself highly engaged to obedience, on whom the King
of his own mere inclination, has conferred that honor, which many near him
have in vain expected, and for which many have in vain petitioned?

The Reason of the Major.
Certainly his favor is heightened by the expectations and petitions of
others, and one bounty becomes two when he that has it, is adorned with a
much desired honor, and in being thus adorned is preferred before all his
Competitors. It is not unknown to any, what men, how much deserving of your
Majesty, and of their country, have made great suite for this dignity both by
themselves and others; with whom, if I should come in competition, I could be
hardly any way compared: but your most gracious Majesty, most bountifully
supplying the imperfections of my actions with your own benign charity, has
always looked upon me, as one that has devoted himself to you, and the
Commonwealth.

The Conclusion repeated.
What shall I now promise, but earnestly to endeavor that you may never have
occasion to think, that you have placed your kindness on an ungrateful soul? I
do therefore most humbly lay down my self and my endeavors, all that I have,
and all their endeavors, at your Majesty's feet, to be ordered according to
your will and pleasure: be pleased to command us, and you shall find our lives
to be of less value to us than your injunctions.

The Fourth way of Arguing Rhetorically, is to put the Major with the Reasons
thereof in the first place; Secondly the Conclusion, and Thirdly the Minor:
Fourthly, if it seem necessary, the Conclusion may be repeated in other words.

Example.
If you would congratulate the arrival of some Kings Ambassador, or any great
Person: you may make this proposition: We ought to rejoice in your coming to
us: The Reason; Because you are a great person. Place it Logically thus: We
ought to rejoice, at the coming of a great Person. But you are a great person.
Therefore, etc. Rhetorically thus, beginning with the Major.

The stars cannot appear without rejoicing the inanimate world; nor great
persons without affecting the souls of men, N. N. Nature has given them this,
that they cannot be, but they must be profitable.

The Reason of the Major.
Virtue has imposed this most beautiful necessity, That great men can be no
where, but where they may show favor and clemency to those that are under them.

The Conclusion.
Would to God you might this day see thoroughly into all our souls, yea even of
Momus, you might there behold Love and Fear, Joy and Sorrow, desire and
eloquence, wrestling together in our hearts, with no ordinary conflict: for
when we salute you as our great Guest we cannot well tell, whether our fear
should love, or our love fear your Excellency; whether our joy should sorrow
its straitness, or our sorrow joy your appearance; whether our desires should
speak, or our Eloquence wish: Oh that we were wholly joy, wholly love, wholly
desire, wholly Eloquence, that we might here in your presence, express our
affections toward you as we ought.

The Minor with the Approbation thereof.
The truth is, that not only the Nobleness of your birth, singular wisdom,
sweet carriage, and behavior, and your other inestimable virtues, do make you
great in our eyes: but we also reverence your greatness, because you are so in
the judgment of the whole Kingdom; which having those beams of honor on your
person, has published to the world, that you are her Starr. Our King has
greatly esteemed you in making you not only of his privy Council, but
Arbitrator of it, when he has again and again declared you worthy to accompany
him, not only in Germany and Britain, but even in all the parts of his own
Kingdom, that you might here and every where, be esteemed great. And all our
borders will for ever own your greatness, because you have condescended to
show your illustrious presence and noble soul in our mean confines: all of us
being sensible, that great men do augment their greatness by their
condescentions.

The Fifth way of arguing Rhetorically.
Sometimes the Major is omitted, and the Reason of the Major with its
Approbation is put in its place; Then the Conclusion; afterward the Minor with
the proof thereof, and lastly the conclusion is repeated.

Example.
Let the proposition be: You ought not greatly to lament the death of your
friends. The Reason is: because death is a common evil: place it Logically
thus: We ought not greatly to lament a common evil; but the Death of our
friends is a common evil; Therefore etc. The Reason of the Major is, because a
common evil cannot be eschewed; you may handle it Rhetorically thus.

Wise men do agree that what cannot be avoided, ought patiently to be endured.

The Approbation: That so in not feeling it, it may appear to us, as if it did
not particularly concern us.

The Conclusion: We then do certainly ill, to give our selves over to grief for
the departure of our friends, and in some sort to bury our joy, in the same
grave with them.

The Minor.
For this evil does not concern, assalt, or befall one only person; but it
conerns all alike, it overfloweth all.

The Reason of the Minor.
For all things on which we live, whose life we enjoy, in the use of which we
are delighted, are bound to the same Condition, are all subject unto death.

Confirmation. Morover our soul does inhabit but an infirm and weak cottage,
which does in it self consist of adverse and contrary elements, and from
without it self, is assalted with many and great dangers. To which purpose
Seneca says well, that we are deceived, when we look on our death, as if it
were to come; a great part thereof is past, and this very time which we live is
death.

The Conclusion repeated:
Divide then that grief among all men, which you have engrossed to your self
from the common bitterness of fortune; we all run the same fate, and must all
endure it; think not then that you do well, in giving your self up to too much
to grief.

The Sixth way.
Oftimes the Major is omitted, and the Minor only with the Approbation
thereof, and the Conclusion, are mentioned. This argumentation is called an
Enthymem, of which the first part is called the Antecedent, the other the
consequent. And you may place them as you please, the Antecedent first and then
the Consequent, or on the contrary.

Example.
Let the proposition be: Youths are not to be bridled with rigid discipline.
The Reason: Because they are not the better for rigor, but the worse. Omitting
the Major, place it Logically thus: Youths are worse for the rigor of
discipline, therefore they ought not to be kept under a rigid Discipline.
Oratorically thus.

You err greatly if you think that a youth may be improved by severity and
fear of discipline; for though they may by an austere carriage seem to be
reclaimed, yet really and indeed, they become thereby the more dissolute: Go to
experience, and you shall find them, to be commonly the worst of all others,
who have passed their youth under the most severe discipline. As a torrent may
for a while be stopped by an overthwart bank, but while it stops, it is but
gathering its more strong flood, by which when the bank is broken, it does
redeem the length of its cessation, with its more raging flux: so youth being
bridled under cruel pressures, after it is once freed from those laws by which
it was restrained, it does become the more violently insolent; and drowneth the
Soul in the pursuit of those Siren snares from which it was before debarred:
for we always desire forbidden fruit, and to enjoy what we cannot obtain. This
disease of the soul is best cured by indulgence: for as O vid excellently
describes such tempers.

Quod licet ingratum est, quod non licet acrius urit.
-- Ipsa potestas
Semina nequitiae languidiora facit.
We loath what is lawful, what not, we desire.
The power of doing, does put out the fire.
The Seventh way:
Cicero directs Herennius, first to place the exposition or the thing to be
proved; Secondly the Reason or Reasons; Thirdly the Approbation: Fourthly the
exornation or illustration, from the Contrary, or from Example, Similitude,
Testimony or Sentences etc. Fistly the Complexon in which all is summed up,
this is the most easy way, and most (...) for extemporary speeches.

Example.
Let the proposition be: A little knavery and wantoness does not hurt a youth.
The Reasons. Because they cannot presently be thereupon accounted bad. For a
man cannot be always good; And the clearest day has some clouds: The
Approbation. And those who are now old men, were wanton when they were young.
The Exornation from Testimony: A certain Poet said, He depriveth the year of
the Spring, who would not permit a youth to be wanton. From Sentences; And
every age ought to have that behavior, which is most agreeable thereunto. From
the Contrary. It is unseemly for an old man to behave himself like a youth:
Therefore it is also unseemly for a youth to behave himself like an old man.
From Similitude; For if Ale be not mad when it is new, it is never good when it
is stale. This you may handle Rhetorically thus.

Exposition. What great matter is it if a youth be somewhat waggish, for a
little while? The Reasons: Do the Spaniards therefore drink water, because they
tempet their Wine? or does one fair day, make a Summer? And what man is wise at
all times? The clearest day has ever had some clouds. Why do we then so
scrutinously reprehend the very least fault in a youth, and (if I may speek
freely) all that le^dness in them, which in our selves we called but waggery.
What if they Crown the streets with their friendly concourse, or pull one
another by the hair in jest; or weary their arms with a kind Wrestling, and
are not always among the prophets, not always toiling at their books, but
sometimes give themselves to dancing, laughing, and jesting; what other things,
I say, are these but the sports of youth; and keeping themselves in action,
till age and experience, lead them to more noble employments. Unless then they
disguise their faces like melancholy persons, unless their eyes be for ever
condemned to the Earth that they may there tell all the stones and atoms of
dust, unless they hang their heads upon their shoulders, and become devotionary
ghosts; they must be thought worthy of banishment to Gyarus and T^ale.

The Comprobation.
Oh rigid Catos, fit to be Judges of Manlius's laws, either you have forgotten,
your own youth, or you might from the former indulgencies of your own folly,
learn to connive for a while at ours; neither durst you by violating the
privileges of our youth accuse nature when (as the Poet says well) to deprive
youth of their maggery, is to deprive the year of its spring.

From Testimonies:
Every age has its proper limits; and it is as necessary that the behavior of
persons should be suiteable to their years, as for garments to be fitted for
the body.

From the Contrary.
And if we may deride a youthful old man, why may we not by the same rule
^etest the behavior of the aged in those that are young? And what cruelty is
it in the morning of age to exact the noondaies gravity, and when the twilight
of wisdom does scarcely appear, you require the sageness of the perfect day.
You give your Horses, and Bullocks liberty, to exercise their irregular
caperings; and are you so blind, that what you see to be natural in other
creatures, you cannot see to be so in your own children. And (that I may speak
with all mildness) be pleased at least to take a sober draught of this truth,
even out of a Barrel of Ale; unless the Ale when it is new do fill the Air,
the Cellar, the barrel, with a malepert hurly burly; it will when it is old be
neither healthful for the body, nor pleasing to the Palate. And hence an
exhortation might be made, to take well and bear with the wantonness of youth.

The Eighth way of arguing Rhetorically.
The Eighth way is by Induction; now Induction is a speech, which from
undoubted premises, does infer some one conclusion.

In this we must observe two things.

First, That the things premised be certain.

Secondly, That what is inferred have some resemblance to the things premised.
This way of arguing is most familiar unto an Orator, and does most excellently
set forth a matter. Causinus says, it sweetly instills matter, and is in
proving delightful: and if the things inferred be many, it affords a large
field for discourse.

Example.
Let, the proposition be this. A man should be commended from what he is, and
not from what he has. The Reason: because a Ship, and a Sword, and a square
are commended from what they are and not from the ornaments that they have.
Seneca does thus handle it Rhetorically.

We call not that a good Ship which is painted with curious colors or which
has a gilded head, or a stern overlaid with Ivory, or which is loaded with the
riches or revenues of Kings; but that which is stable, strong and sound, to
bear through the raging Billows of the Sea, which is easily governed by the
Helm, is able to bear a gale of wind, and is withal a nimble sayler. We call
not that a good sword which has an embroidered belt or a scabbard set with
Jewels, but which has a sharp edge and point, to hew in pieces all that
stands in its way. The goodness of a thing is not in its beauty, but in its
fitness for that use for which it properly is. Therefore in a man also we are
not to regard how much he ploweth, how much he lets out on usury, by how many
he is courted, in how magnificent a bed he lies, in how rich a Cup he
drinks, but how good he is in himself etc.

To this way does that also of the Scythian Ambassadors in Quintus Curtius
appertain, proving to Alexander, that he ought not too much to trust to his
greatness and fortitude, by an Induction thus: What, say they, know you not
that great trees grow along time, and in an hour are cut down: he is a fool
that covets the fruit and considers not the height of the tree, on which it
grows: the Lion has sometime been the food of small birds; and rust does
consume the strongest steel: there is nothing secure from being destroyed, even
by the most contemptible instrument.

The Ninth way of arguing Rhetorically, is to argue from Example.
Now an Example is an imperfect Induction, or arguing from one Similitude to
another. And is done two ways especially.

First, Explaining a thing by a Protasis and an Apodasis; so this proposition,
A General should be a lover of learning, as Julius Caesar was, is thus
handled. The more famous that Julius Caesar was in his victories, the more did
he exercise his learning; and with the same hands he scattered those Palms in
his Books, with which he won them from his enemies. Who then can deny, but
learning is well becoming the most warlike Prince or Emperor? Nay if he
despise not the best counsel that can be given him, if he mean to arrive to
the perfect perfection of a good Prince, he will labor for learning with all
his might, etc.

Secondly, We argue from Example, when after the relation we presently add some
reasons, either by way of approbation or disallowance, as we are wont to do in
other parts of the oration; but after the reasons given we apply the thing to
the matter in hand, showing in what it does or does not agree. This daily
practice is very ancient; but observe that the use of Examples is very graceful
(and the same may be said of Sentences, Apothegmes, Hieroglypicks, etc.) when
by that either in the beginning or in other parts of the Oration we express the
same thing, which we should otherwise have done in our own words.

For Example, I would say: O ye Judges ye ought to take heed, that ye ascend
not the Tribunal for hope of reward: I would do this by Example; Agathoeles,
when he went to give Judgment, was wont to say, Let us go to a Golden harvest.
Then I would add the reason which I (...)old have added to my proposition,
(...)amely it is a wicked thing to endeavor (...)o grow rich by other men's
wicked(...)ess.

Afterward I would more fully prove (...)nd enlarg it. Or instead of this
exam(...)le, I might have used this sentence: They that are entrusted with the
government of the common wealth, should not (...)o to the administration of
Justice, as (...)hose that go into a Fair or market. And to this sentence, may
be added (...)ome reasons* and arguments to prove (...)he reasonableness of
that assertion. But you must be always careful, that the ex^mple or sentence
may bear the same sense with the thing, that is in that place to ^e explained.

CHAP. V.
Of the parts in an Oration.
WHen by the former directions yo(...) have put the invented matter, i(...) to
a certain order; then consider of ho(...) many parts your Oration shall
consist. (...) tells us that an Oration ought general(...) to consists of
these five parts.

1. Exordium. 2. Proposition. 3. Narration. 4. Confirmation. 5. Peroration.
As for Confutation it is comprised in Confirmation. But all these parts, are
not always necessary; for the ingenious Orator, may as he shall see it
convenient, sometimes omit the Narration, sometimes the Exordium, sometimes the
Peroration or Conclusion; yea and the Confirmation is many times scarce
discernible; as when the things propounded are certain, there is more need of
(...)rnament than proof, as in Gratulatory Orations and the like. As for the
placing of these parts, their natural order is that (...) which we have named
them 1. The Exordium, 2. The Proposition, 3. The Narration, if it be not
thought fit to omit (...). 4. The Confirmation; and lastly the Per(...)ration.

Of each of these I will here set down some few directions; and first for
Exordiums.

An Exordium is as it were the door of the Oration, in which the Orator does
prepare the minds of the Auditors for that which is to follow: and this is
commonly done by one of these three ways; by bespeaking their favor; by
making them docible; or by begging their attention. The favor of the Auditors
is bespoke either from the person of the Orator, from the persons of the
Auditors, from the persons of the Adversaries, or from the subject matter of
the discourse. The Orator may bespeake the favor of the Auditors, in respect
of himself, if his gesture and deportment be suitable unto theirs that are his
Auditors, and express himself modestly. And in respect of the Auditors, if he
show how well they have deserved of the Common wealth, of him, and other men.
And in respect of the Adversaries, if he modestly show wherein they (...)
faulty and render them to the Auditors inaxcusable. And lastly in respect of
the matter in hand, if he say, that it is some excellent, necessary and
profitable thing.

Secondly, the Orator may be said to make the Auditors docible, if he clearly
explain the thing of which he is to speak, and how he purposes to enlarge
upon i^

Thirdly, the Attention will be quickened if he says, that he intends to speak
of some great and wonderful thing, and some thing that is delightful,
necessary, and very much concerns his Auditors, etc..

An Exordium may be said to be faulty, or not so commendable. First, if it be
vulgar or common, that is, such as may be used in many if not in all cases.
Secondly, if it be long and tedious, not proportionable to the length of the
Oration. Thirdly, if it consist of some different matter, not suitable to the
other parts of the Oration. Fourthly if it effect not that which is required or
expected.

And that is said to be a good Exordium, which is neat and elegant, fit for
the purpose, making the Auditor docible and well affected, and from which the
access to the proposition is not violent and for^ed, but easy and agreeable.
Though Tully ^oth very much insist on this, that all Ex(...)diums should be
such, as will afford an (...)asie and proper access unto the propo(...)tion;
yet practice which is the best master, and a diligent observing, what manner of
Exordiums others make to their Orations, will afford the best directions; but
yet Rhetoricians are wont to prescrbe some ^ertain forms according to which,
begin^ers may exercise themselves in framing their Exordiums aright: the
chiefest of them ^re these following.

They first way.
First, propound some proposition or protasis, by which an easy access may be
made to the proposed matter. Secondly, Add some Reason or Confirmation, to
which if you will some refutation may be annexed, for he that confirms
truths, has also the liberty to refute falsehoods. Thirdly, Add some
confirmation of the reason. Fourthly, make some particular inference or
conclusion, to which some reason may be also added, and thence an access to the
propositon.

Example.
Let the proposition be this. I will (before you my Auditors) defend my good
nam^ which wicked men have hurt. To this you may make your entrance thus. There
is nothing which Malice does not violate, nothing which it will not gnaw with
the teeth of slander, or make nauseous with the black venom of contumelious
sarcasmes. To this bas^ work it has not a little advantage by the ill nature
of this age wherein we live, in which men are so unmanly, as not only to
contemn the works of virtue, but even to oppress what ever is done by the rules
of honesty; if otherwise they cannot, they will at least do it with a mist of
scurrilous and scoffing language. And shall not we at last, by our indulgence
to vice so much increase the family of Momus, as that in the end, we shall all
be ashamed of honesty: if we can even yet tamely behold and suffer the most
wicked crime to be committed with applause and led in triumph, and virtues to
be condemned to banishment, nay to flouts and hatred. I have been unwilling to
be the first raker in this kennell, but the storm which has again and again
beat upon my head with renewed waves, has quite wearied my patience, and I
doubt that I shall wrong good men in any (...)ger sparing the bad. For now they
do not (...)ade my fortunes, which in it self were a (...)serable thing, they
do not raze my walls and (...)uses which were mischievous enough, (...)ey do
not gape after my life and safe(...) which were more than inhumane; but
(...)ving set upon my good name, my honor and (...)utation, which is to a good
man far dearer (...)an his life; they strive to overwhelm this (...)ith whole
burdens of reproaches. Therefore (...)at this audaciousness of wicked
fellows, (...)ay be by you most prudent Auditors at once (...)ppressed, be
courteous to me this day, and (...)andidly hear what I have to say for my
(...)lf.

The second way.
First understand the proposition well, of which you intend to speak, then
draw from thence some general reason, which may contain the most material thing
in the proposition; then amplify, and adorn this reason, with Sentences,
Examples, Similitudes, etc. then bring in the proposition it self, as some
particular assumption of that general discourse.

For Example, suppose you were to mak^ an Exordium to a funeral Oration, upon
the death of some noble man, according to these directions, you might perform
it in this manner.

This is a lesson so well known to all that all must die, that he would surely
b^ thought to be beside himself that should but think himself immortal. For men
alas! like running waters may not always continue in one place: one da^
thrusts out another, one year devouret^ another, and one wave overwhelmet^
another: And like as earthen vessels a(...) quickly broken and easily shivered
into many pieces; so are our bodies soo^ dissolved, and quickly reduced to
earth from whence we were taken; we may be killed with too much joy, we may be
oppressed with too much sorrow, we may die praying and fall down laughing; we
may be throttled with a hair, or strangled with a fly. And thus on a sudden we
are and we are not (...) alive to day and dead to morrow, and every hour we
hasten nearer and nearer our end. There needs no other or farther testimony to
prove the assertion, than that the many instances of mortality which so daily
and so hourly happen that it is hard to turn our eyes from them; yea even this
sad occasion of our present meeting shows us, that whatsoever difference there
is or may be in our way of living, in this there is none, in this we are
equal, the certain uncertainty of our dying: If either wealth or honor, if
either Friends, or Physic could vanquish death, or prevent the grave, we had
not met this day to lament the death of this Honorable person; we had not seen
this spectacle of mortality, but death alas respects no persons, will have no
denial unto his summons, whether it be in the evening of our days, when our
hoary hairs may seem to proclaim us as fit for his stroke, as the corn is for
the sickle, when white for the Harvest; or whether he come in the morning of
our life, when our bones are full of marrow and our blood runs briskly in our
veins, which is his case whose funeral obsequies we are now to perform. As a
green Apple is sometimes rudely pulled from off that tree on which it grew, so
was this branch cut down, before he had lived one half of the age of man. He
was indeed born of noble and unspotted Parents, but as if that wisdom were
not tied to years, his discretion did adorn his birth more, than his birth him,
etc.

The third way.
First, Propound some opinion contrary to your own, either with or without a
reason for it. Then Secondly, Deliver your own opinion, with a reason or two,
or without any reason also. Thirdly, Deliver the contrary reason, if it shall
be necessary, and so come to your proposition; that is, propound something in
your preceding words, from whence you may infer your proposition either
plainly, or obscurely. Let the proposition, for example, be: Wisdom is most
suitable to Noble men: That you may deduce this, first lay down the contrary
opinion, namely, There are many think that Wisdom becomes none but common
people. The Reason of this contrary opinon. Because N^ble men are born for the
Wars, not for the Schools, and have their commendations from their estates.
Your own proper opinion: This is an evil opinion and to be confused. The
Reason and answer to this contrary opinion. Because it is mischievous to the
world. Access to your proposition. I will therefore show that Wisdom is most
proper for a Noble man.

The Topics or heads from whence matter for an Exordium may best be had, the
most famous Rhetoricians have reduced unto these.

First, An enumeration of causes, when the Orator shows the causes which
moved him to speak: as if he were to commned some Noble person; he might begin
his Exordium thus: You need not wonder that I should speak in the commendation
of this worthy person; these reasons have induced me (and here lay down the
reasons) Therefore I shall speak, etc.

Secondly, The Adjuncts of the Person, either of the Orator himself, or of the
Auditor, or of him of whom you are to speak:

Example of the first.
If you were to praise some body, you might thus begin. To express the just
praises of this person, there should be indeed a more skillful Orator than my
self, but yet I thought my self obliged thereto, not only for my affection to
him, but also to express my gratitude, for the many favors which I have
received from him.

Example of the second.
Although my weakness might command me silence, yet courteous Auditors, the
wonted candor which you have showed to others does both invite and encourage me
to speak; Therefore etc.

Example of the third.
Though the things to be commended in this person, are so many and so great,
that they would require a Demosthenes or a Tully to set forth his worth; yet I
will endeavor, etc.

Thirdly, The Adjuncts of place. Example; If I had considered the dignity of
this place, I should not have undertaken, to speak unto you this day (and here
show the Reasons) but I considered more your humanity, and the necessity of the
thing; and therefore. etc.

Fourthly, The Adjuncts of Time; as thus: The time requires, that I should
speak this day unto you, (here show the reasons.)

Fifthly, The Adjuncts of person, time, manner and place together.

Sixthly, The opinions and affections of men, for men do either rejoice, or are
sad, or angry, etc. And according to these or the like passions or affections
you may find matter for an Exordium.

Seventhly, Some passions with which the Orator himself may be affected, as
anger or grief or admiration, or gratitude, etc.

Eighthly, The difficulty of the thing of which you are to speak.

Ninthly, Contradiction or Accusation: Example; if you would contradict
another, you may say; I like not this man's opinion, because, etc. and here show
the reasons. If you would accuse another you may say: It is not for ill will to
you or any mind to do mischief which has persuaded me to accuse you, but the
love I have to the common, for Justice sake, and for necessity.

Tenthly, Preterition; as thus: I could speak of many things, but because I
will not tire you with them, I will only mention one or two.

Eleventhly, You may find matter for an Exordium, from what has either been
said or done before; as if you were to accuse some person, you may say: This is
not the first time that this person has been thus accused, found guilty, and
yet born with, but now it cannot be sure thought fit, that he should be born
with any longer.

Twelvthly, Comparing and opposing opinions and persons: as suppose you were to
speak for peace; you migh say: Many are for War and shedding of blood; But I
believe that we can have no greater blessing than the blessing of Peace. Or if
you would compare persons, you may do it thus: Some worthy and learned men have
heretofore spoken of this subject, with whom I am in no wise to be compared;
but because the matter concerns the Common wealth, I also will speak freely,
etc. This for Exordiums.

The second part of an oration is the Proposition. And the Proposition is that
part of the Oration in which the Orator does briefly deliver the sum of the
whole matter of which he intends to speak, and bespeaks the hearers attention
if need be. Sometimes it does immediately follow the Exordium; sometimes it
follows the Narration; in what place soever it be put, it must be short and
clear, and fit for Confirmation.

And here it is to be observed first, that a Proposition may de delivered two
ways.

First, Openly, when the Orator does plainly declare the matter of which he
means to speak.

Secondly, Darkly, when the matter of his Oration is sufficiently known before
hand, or may easily be discerned from the content, or when the thing to be
proved is not laid down as a distinct part from the Exordium, but is insinuated
as a member thereof annexed, and further to be proved afterward.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that when a proposition is longer than usual,
it ought to be divided into certain parts, that so the Orator may the more
fully explain the matter, and the Auditor the better remember it.

Narration is another part of an Oration, by which a relation is made of the
matter or thing done. And this is either a distinct part of the Oration, and
then for the most part it does immediately follow the Exordium, that the
Proposition with the Confirmation thereof may be collected from it. Or else it
is joined with the Confirmation, which is to be done in such Orations which
assume the explanation of the thing done to prove the matter in hand; for
example: if you were to prove that some valiant person, had been a Soldier in
some war; it is necessary that you should declare, what the particular
actions were, in which he showed his valor.

But now in that Narration which is made a distinct part of the Oration, the
thing done must be briefly and simply declared without any exaggeration: and in
such a Narration as makes way for confirmation the things done may be
illustrated, with great neatness of language with, sentences and figures; and
some discourses may be made concerning the worthiness of the action, with some
amplification from similitudes and comparisons: In a word, where ever you make
a Protasis from any History or Fable, and afterward make an application
thereof, there you must make your Narration, and this may be in any part of the
Oration, even in the Exordium: but these kinds of Narrations are most useful
in such Orations as are in commendation or discommendation of persons, in which
it is necessary to declare their virtues or their vices.

That your Narration may be such as it ought, you must observe,

First, that the known matter must be briefly declared; the matter unknown
more largely.

Secondly, that there be in it some apt sentences, and that it express the
manners of men, as their pride, covetousness, and the like; and to this purpose
an Hypotyposis, or prosopopoea and such like figures are useful, to wit, when
some persons are introduced in their melancholy or studious mood, or speaking
something which does declare and manifest what their natural inclinations are.

Thirdly, that it be plain and clear. And that it may be so, you must avoid all
circumlocutions, the reckoning up of a multitude of things, and making large
Catalogues of persons, with frequent and long perentheses and useless
digressions.

Fourthly, that it be probable. And that it may be so, you must have a care,
that the circumstances of time, manners, place and person be all suitable;
besides some testimonies may be briefly named, unless the person from whom the
Narration is made be well known, and of good credit. But if any thing be
mentioned, not altogether probable, some admonishment must be made thereof,
either by adding the cause, as, a Covetous man throws away his wealth because
he saw his life in danger; or, a Fox despises grapes, because they are out of
his reach, Or by confessing the improbability, if nodefence can otherwise be
made, and that either plainly thus; It is wonderful if we may believe the
Poets: or with some compensation thus; It is strange, but yet it is true: or by
naming some witnesses thus; I know not the reason, but thus it is affirmed by
very sole-^men. Or by desiring the Auditors that they would at present admit
the thing, which afterward you will prove more fully.

Fifthly, that all the things declared, may ctend to the end propounded and that
the ^onfirmation may easily follow thereupon. Moreover in declaring any thing
let the Orator chiefly observe, the persons, matter, time, place, manner, and
cause, which do almost happen in all cases; but yet all these circumstances are
not always necessary to be expressed, but as many of them only, as the Orator
in his discretion shall think fit.

The Fourth part of an Oration is Confirmation; and Confirmation is as it were
the very heart and soul by which an Oration may be chiefly said to live: or it
is the chief part of an Oration in which the arguments are produced by which we
would prove our proposition, and refute or answer the contrary opinion of our
adversary, if need require. What is necessary in this behalf, may be collected
from what has been already said. Seeing that Confirmation does consist of the
arguments that are invented, and the right disposition of them, both which have
been fully enough declared before. Thus much only I will add, that the Orator
in Confirmation may do well to remember, First, to name those Arguments in the
beginning of his Confirmation, and also in the conclusion which carry with them
the greatest weight, and those of least concernment in the midst. Secondly, to
take care, that his Oration may still gather strength; and this will be done,
if the following words be still more significant than the former, and that the
affections be most moved in the very close thereof. Thirdly, let him take care,
that all his Arguments do fully prove his proposition. Fourthly, that he urge
not his arguments in one and the same manner and form, but that he use variety
of figures, and propound them sometimes by way of Syllogism, sometimes in an
Enthymem, sometimes ommitting the Major, sometimes the Conclusion, as he thinks
it most convenient. Fifthly, let him find out the Crinomenon, use fit
Transitions Sentences, Digressions and Amplifications. And the Crinomenon is
that proposition in the Argumentation, whether General or Particular, in which
the whole, strength does lie, and that being proved, the whole matter seems
to be proved also: this therefore the Orator must especially declare and
confirm.

Here then observe, 1. That the Crinomenon is sometimes the same with the
proposition of the whole Oration; and then the greater variety of arguments
may be found to prove the proposition. For Example, let the proposition be
this; I will show you that a King ought to love his subjects and the Common
wealth. The first argument is; Because the head ought to love the members; The
King is the head, the subjects are the members: Therefore etc. The second
Argument is; Every one ought to love his patrimony. The common wealth is the
Kings patrimony: Therefore etc. Here you see that several arguments may be
brought to confirm the proposition, because the Crinomenon is the same with the
general proposition of the Oration.

Note 2. That the Crinomenon is sometimes different from the General
proposition in the Oration, and then there is but one principal argument in the
whole Oration, which we must endeavor to confirm and amplify. Moreover this
Crinomenon may be discovered, if you put your principal Arguments into a true
Syllogisticall form; for the Minor in the syllogism is sometimes the
Crinomenon, as in the first argument of the Oration, which Tully made for Milo.
He that is a Traitor deserves tobe killed, Claudius was (...) Traitor:
Therefore; where the Major: is certainly true, the Minor only is to be proved;
this therefore Tully endeavors to do throughout that whole Oration.

Sometimes the Major is the Crinomenon, as Tully in his Oration for Sextus
Roscius. No Son would kill his father, but for some great cause; Sextus Roscius
is a son: Therefore. In this Syllogism the Minor is undoubtedly true, and
therefore the Major only is to be proved, for in that is the whole force.
Sometimes the Crinomenon is in the Major and Minor both. For example, He killed
Roscius that was advantaged by his death: but the death of Roscius was
advantageous to Capiton; Therefore. Here the Major and the Minor are both to be
proved. In the reading therefore, and in the composing of Orations, the
Crinomenon must be regarded. But when the General proposition has several
parts, there are several Crinomenons to be regarded.

2. As for Transitions, it is by them that the arguments for confirmation have
a dependence on one another, yea and the several parts of the Oration also. And
a Transition is a kind of speech by which we express what has been said in few
words, and briefly show what yet remains to be spoken. It is either perfect
or imperfect. That is a perfect Transition which repeats the things spoken, and
infers the things that are to be said: as if you should say; Enough has been
said concerning the necessity of Arms; let let us now see what advantage may
come from them. An imperfect Transition is when we do not revoke the things
that are spoken, but only proceed to the things that are to be spoken, with
these or the like expressions. But now, furthermore, add to this, and such
like. And note also that one argument does then properly follow another, when
in the end of one argument, such a sense thereof is given, as will easily open
away of speaking and arguing further.

3. Sometimes the Orator may declare the argument by way of Sentence, and this
may be twofold, plain or obscure.

A plain Sentence is the declaration of the truth in few words. Or, it is an
universal speech concerning the good that is to be done, and the evil that is
to be eschewed; concerning God, religion, providence, and other things
belonging to the life and manners of men. For example;

Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit;
No man is wise at all times.
An obscure sentence is a particular speech deducted from a general, the
circumstances of persons, time and place being added thereunto; as thus; It
cannot be, O Peter, that thou should be always wise.

These Occult sentences are to be very frequently used in any part of an
Oration, for they do adorn it much, and are very taking with the Auditors:
Plain sentences may be also used, but these do best become old men and such as
have experience; and are chiefly to be used in grave matters.

4. Digressions are often times and very gracefully used in Confirmation: in
which something is touched upon, which seems little to the purpose, but yet
does serve to illustrate the matter in hand. And this may be done either
briefly, and then there needs no transition; or else more largely, and then
the Orator must recall himself, as from a long and a by-path to his present
purpose.

The Orator may use Digressions, when he is to speak of universal and common
things, as, of vices, virtues, slavery, liberty, life, death and such like.

As suppose one were to prove, that it were not fit to thrust a learned man out
of a City, he might make his digression on the praise of learning, showing as
well the necessity as the profit of it. Expositions of things done and
descriptions of places, persons, customs and such like, may be handsomely used
in digressions.

5. Amplification is a speech, which does augment that, which being nakedly
related would seem small and trivial, by describing of it by adjuncts and
circumstances. It is twofold, of words and things.

Amplification of words, is that by which the matter is augmented by the choice
of words, and manner of speech. And a speech may be augmented from one word
several ways.

1. By the addition of fit Epithites; thus Tully does amplify and enlarge this
one word War saying, that it is an horrible and a villainous war, and full of
all wickedness.

2. By the use of suitable Adverbs; as, you may justly and deservedly praise
him.

3. By definition or description; as, the hands of wicked and pernicious men,
in stead of murderers.

4. By Notation; as, the golden mouthed Chrisostom.

5. Synonomies, when many expressions are used which carry the same sense; as,
this conjunction of minds, this conspiring together in one, this most pleasant
society of life, in stead of friendship.

6. By Paraphrase; as, this saying of the common people he minded us of a long
time since, in stead of this, it is a common saying; or thus, it was that
season of the year when the earth puts on her most gorgeous apparel to
entertain the sun, for, it was in the spring.

7. By Enumeration of parts, when the parts are expressed instead of the whole;
as, instead of saying, this valley is set forth with all the imbellishments
that low ground is capable of, one may say: The rich fields of corn and green
meadows lie in several divisions intercheckered like great beds of flowers, and
fresh glass pots in a large garden. The cornfieldsd look as if the roots which
were hid in them complained, that by mistake of their own strength, through a
great desire of being fruitful, they had sent forth more stalks than they could
well support, and the overladen ears increased that ^ppression; the sweet grass
grew up so thick in the meadows, that it seemed to be straightned for want
froom, and yet crowded closer to make way for those-fragrant flowers of all
sorts which grew up with it; and these mingling their various colors as they
best fitted the several greens which they found there, made a show like a rich
carpet, where grass was the ground, rarely made up with beautiful Embroideries
of flowerwork.

8. By the commemoration of causes, (...) the antecedents and consequents of
things as: Thou have done what thou can to destr(...) this city with the
sword, and with arms, an(...) with the terror of an army, and the
wickedness(...) of Consuls, and by besieging the most fortifi(...) Temples, by
prepossessing the Judges, by overawing the Courts of Judicature, at home and a
broad.

Amplification of things is, when the matter it self is increased and confirmed
wit(...) grave sentences: yet it is formed indifferently from the same places
from whence the arguments are taken, seeing there are many definitions or
descriptions of one and the sam(...) thing: as history is the witness of times,
th(...) light of truth, the memory of fashions, th(...) messenger of antiquity,
the mistress of behavior.

2. When many consequences are reckoned up; i. e. those things which may
presently or hereafter follow: as if the proposition were; Many mischiefs may
follow for want of due consideration.

This may be amplified in this manner. What are the consequences of
inconsideration? By this means the opportunity of advancement is neglected, the
present possession of goods is utterly lost, together with our own lives and
the common safety of all.

3. When many causes are reckoned up: as if the proposition were this; Never do
that of which you shall have cause to repent you afterward. Which may be
amplified in this manner.

When you do that which is to be lamented, you act inconsiderately, than which
there is nothing more foolish: you are overcome with passion, than which there
is nothing more imprudent: you foresee not what may follow, than which there is
nothing more dangerous: you restrain not your unruly lusts, than which thereis
nothing more indecent.

4. When many effects are reckoned up; as, let the proposition be, Antonius did
the Romans many mischiefs. Which may be thus Amplified. The Romans bewail the
loss of three armies, which Antonius destroyed. They stand in need of wise men,
and those Antonius has deprived them of. Their Authority and reputation is
much weakened and impaired, and that they may thank Antonius for.

5. When many similitudes are brought: for example sake, let this be the
proposition.

If small falts be not corrected, they will hardly be mended when they are
greater. Which you may amplify in this manner: Extinguish those sparks of
wickedness, unless you purpose to be consumed; stop up those fountains, unless
yo^ mean to be overflowed with those violent waters; take Physic in time, if
you fear the approach of some mortal disease. For as fire which is kindled by
small embers, does many times destroy whole Cities: as a River is by the
droppings of small springs increased to such a heap of waters as overfloweth
the whole land: as light distempers do occasion great diseases, and sweep away
whole families: so the vices of young men, unless they be timely suppressed,
will be more and more rooted in them, until they have bereft their minds of all
virtue and common honesty.

Confutation is a part or kind of Confirmation, in which we answer all
objections: it does either preceed or follow confirmation, or may be here and
there used in all the parts of the Oration. And these objections may be either
all answered together, or those first, which are first made, and then the
latter; or those first which are most material, and the rest may fall of
themselves; or the weakest first, that they being avoided, the strongest
arguments may be somewhat weakened. And the manner of doing this, is by showing,
that the Adversaries allegation is either false, impossible, uncertain, or
impertinent and the like: and because this part of an Oration is full of heat,
and sometimes of fury, it does admit of Dialogisms or conferences, Ironies,
illusions, interrogati^ns, execrations, and other like vehement figures and
affections.

These objections are sometimes rejected with great scorn, sometimes eluded not
so much by strength of argument, as by voice and gesture.

The Adversary is sometimes vexed with chiding; sometimes pressed with
Questions, and the dint of all his arguments sometimes blunted with the like
objections: sometimes there is no answer given to that which he requires of
us; sometimes the answer is not given presently, but first suspended for a long
time.

Peroration or Conclusion is the last part of an Oration, in which the Orator
should very much endeavor to set an edge in the minds of his Auditors, and
incline them to be of his side; and here he should therefore use such figures,
as are most proper to move the affections; it does chieflly consist of two
parts, Enumeration and Amplification.

Enumeration is required, that the chief arguments more largely opened in the
former discourse may be briefly and clearly repeated in a new form of words.
Amplification desires, that this repetition may be made, by some serious
expressions, adorned with sentences and figures. This part of the Oration ought
therefore to be more exactly composed; because by this the Orator is commonly
the more or less valued; for this the Auditors do best remember, and from hence
do pass their judgments of us.

CHAP. VI.
Of Elocution.
OF all the parts of Rhetoric, Elocution in my judgment is the most excellent,
for that it is but to little purpose to have a good invention, and an excellent
way of methodizing or disposing of arguments, unless we can also express them
in apt and fitting words, and handsomely adorn them with Tropes and Figures. In
the wording therefore of an Oration care must be had, that the words thereof be
first plain and significant, and then neat and elegant, and hence this part of
Rhetoric may be thus defined.

Elocution or the garnishing of speech, is an (...)rt by which the speech is
beautified with the e(...)gancy of words and sentences.

And this is performed two ways, by the ^ine manner of words called a Trope, or
by ^he fine frame of speech called a Figure.

A Trope is such an Elocution or manner of speech, as does change the
signification of a word into a different signification from the natural.

In a Trope two things are to be conside^ed.

1. The Affections. 2. The Kinds.
The Affections of a Trope are 4. Catachresis Hyperbole Metalepsis Allegoria.

Catachresis is a harsh and unpleasant change of a word; as namely when one
word or name is put for another, not by any proper relation, but by a kind of
force. He threatens me a good turn. Enoch was translated, that he should not
see death.

Hyperbole is a very false relation of a thing, or a more bold excess of a
Trope, which does exceed belief, either by augmentation or by diminution. Note,
that though an Hyperbole does vary from the truth, yet does it not deceive us
through fiction or such variation.

An Hyperbole is twofold Auxesis, or Meiosis.

An Auxesis is, when for augmentation sake or Amplification, we interpose a
more vehement expression, in his proper place; as when we say, Magnificent for
Liberal, Cruel for Severe, Sacrilegious for Wicked.

A Meiosis, or a Tapinosis is when for extenuation sake we use a milder or more
favorable expression, than the matter requires: as when we say a Flatterer is
a courteous and an affable person.

A Metalepsis is that which contains many Tropes in one expression; as when
we by an improper speech, signify, first that which is improper, and by that
improper speech perhaps another, and so forward till we come to that which is
proper, making way for transition by interposing a mean degree; as All the City
was moved. Math. 21. 10. where the City is put for Jerusalem, by a Synecdoche
Generis: and Jerusalem for its inhabitants, by a Metonymy of the subject.

An ALLEGORY is the continuation of a Trope, as where many Tropes of the same
kind are joined together: as put on the whole armor of God. Ephesians. 6. 11. He
shall be as a Tree planted by the rivers of water. Psalm. 1.

In an Allegory observe to end with the same kind of Trope with which you
begin, or else the inconsequence will be absurd.

The several kinds of Tropes are these four.

1. A Metonymy. 2. An Irony. 3. A Metaphore, and 4. A Synechdoche.
A Metonymy is a Trope of the Cause to the effect, of the subject to the
adjunct: and the contrary, of the effect to the cause, or of the adjunct to the
subject.

4. There are four kinds of Causes.

1. The Efficient cause, by which a thing is. 2. The Material cause, of which a
thing is made. 3. The Formal cause, by which a thing is what it is. 4. The
Final cause, for which a thing is: of which the two first only belong to our
present purpose.
A Metonymy of the Cause is twofold, (...)at is, of the Efficient or of the
Material Cause.

A Metonymy of the efficient Cause is, when the Author or inventor of any thing
is put for those things which they have effected, or of which he is Author, as
Mars for war, Vulcan for fire, Neptune for the Sea, Ceres for bread, Bacchus
for wine, Venus for love, Livie for the History written by Livie, Virgil for
the poems or works composed by Virgil.

And thus the instrument is also put for the thing effected by it. As the
tongue for speech, the hand for writing, the sword for slaughter, Arms for war.

A Metonymy of the Material Cause is, when the name of the matter is put for
the effect; as Brass for brass money, Silver for Silver money, Gold for goldcoin:
they worshipped wood and stone; i. e. Idols made of wood and stone: the iron
entered into his soul, i. e. fetters.

A Metonymy of the effect is, when the efficient cause is signified by the
effects: as Victory is by nature proud and insolent; that is, it makes men
proud and insolent. Pale death; which, makes pale.

Note. That is called the effect which depends upon the efficient cause.

Thus Wickedness is put for the ungodly (...)r of wicked actions, the work for
the

Quas meruit poenas jam dedivillud opus.

The work has received that punishment which it did deserve; that is Ovid the
Author of the work.

A Metonymy of the Subject is, when the proper name of any subject is made to
signify the adjunct.

Note. That is said to be a Subject, in which a thing may be any way said to be
or adhere.

There may be a Metonymy of the subject these nine several ways.

1. When a Subject is put for an inherent accident; as, Curii for Victory,
Curious being the name of a certain victorious Captain.

2. When the thing containing is put for the contained. As the Cup for the
drink in the Cup, the purse for the money.

3. When the place is put for the inhabitants; as, The City for the Citizens.
They smote the city with the sword, i. e. the men in it.

4. When the place is put for the things done in the place; as, Psalm. 68. 29.
Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem; where by Temple is understood the holy
exercises and divine worship used in the Temple.

5. When the possessor is put for the thing possessed by him; as, Joel, 3. 20.
Judah shall be inhabited for ever: where Judah the Son of Jacob is put for the
Land of Jury, which was promised to his posterity and by them possessed.

6. When the Captain is put for his army; as, Annibal is conquered, that is,
Annibal's army.

7. When a Patron or advocate is put for his client; as, The cause will go
against the Attorney General, that is, against his client.

8. When a thing which is done in time is put for the time in which it was
done; as, Harvest for Summer, Job. 32. 7. I said days should speak, and
multitude of years should teach wisdom, i. e, the aged who have seen many days.

9. When the name of the thing signified is put for the sign; as, Ovid. Fast:
1. verse. 201.

Juppiter angust a vix totus stabat in aede:
Inque Jovis dextra fictile fulmen erat.
In narrow court, Jove could scarce upright stand,
And held an earthen thunderbolt in's hand.
Virg. Eclog. 3.

Orpheaque in medio posuit, sylvasque sequentes.

In the midst he set Orpheus and the woods f^llowing, that is, the carved
images of Orpheus and the woods.

A Metonymy of the adjunct is, when the adjunct is put for the subject. Genesis
31. 53. Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, i. e. by God whom Isaac
feared.

There may be a Metonymy of the adjunct eight several ways.

1. When the names of virtues are put for good men, of vices for wicked, and of
many other things for the persons to whom they belong, or to whom they may be
called Adjuncts; as, on this side modesty contendeth, impudence on that; where
modesty is put for modest men, and impudence for impudent men.

2. When the thing contained is put for the thing containing; as, Psalm. 11. 7.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness, i. e. righteous men.

3. When the adjunct of the time is put for the subject. Thus the night is put
for sleep, which is usually taken in the night. Ephesians. 5. 16. The days are
evil, i. e. the hearts and conversations of the men of these days are evil.

4. When the Sign is put for the thing signified; as, The Scepter for the
Kingdom, a gown for peace, Arms for war.

5. When the thing placed is put for the place it self: we sought thee in all
books, that is, in booksellers shops.

6. When the Antecedent is put for the consequent; as, pray hear, meaning, pray
observe.

7. When the consequent is put for the antecedent; as, He is buried, instead
of, he is dead.

8. When one Concomitant is put for another; as, Annibal staid there, that is
the Army of Annibal.

An Irony is a Trope from one opposite to another; or, in which we speak by
contraries.

An Irony may be perceived three ways 1. by the manner of pronunciation; 2. by
the person; 3. by the nature of the thing: for if any of these do differ from
the words, it is clear, that the intention does differ from them also.
Opposites are of two sorts, Unlike, or Contrary.

All things of different natures are said to be unlike: as, A man, a Stone, a
Book, a Dog; and therefore one particular thing, may be equally opposed to many
things.

All things are said to be contrary to one another that are of contrary
natures: as light and darkness, heat and cold: and therefore one particular
thing may be equally opposed to another particular.

An Irony of a thing unlike is, when any thing is spoken of one person and
understood of another: whether it be affirmed of both, or denied of one, as,
Virgil Eclog. 3.

Tum credo cum me arbustum videre Myconis,
Atque mala vites incidere falce novellas.
Sure 'twas when I in Mycon's ground was took,
Pruning his vines with an unwelcome hook.
Where Menalcas naming himself means Dametas. Denied of one, as, Ovid Metam. 13.

Nec in his quisquam damnatus and exul.
None of these were either hanged or banished.
Where Ulysses accusing Ajax tells him that none of his kindred were either
hanged or banished; thereby intimating that some of Ajax's generation were, to
wit, his father Telamon, and his Uncle Peleus, for killing of Phocas.

An Irony from the contrary is, when one contrary is signified by another; as,
O Salve bone vir curasti probe.
O thou art an honest man, thou have done very well:
meaning that he was a very rogue and had been very careless.

Paralepsis is a kind of Irony, by which we seem to pass by or take no notice
of such things which yet we strictly observe and remember.

The forms of this figure are these; I let pass, I am silent, I omit, I will
leave out, I say not etc. as thus, I say nothing of your licentious life,
incestuous marriage, or your being perjured in such a cause, etc. Where in a
kind of elegancy we seem to pass by those crimes, which we do more eminently
remember.

Apophasis is a kind of Irony, by which we deny to say or do, which yet we
speak with greatest earnestness, and do with all our might; as, nor will I
mention these things, which if I should, you could not I am sure, deny them.
This figure differs from the former, in nothing but the manner of speaking.

A Metaphore is a Trope by which we ex press our selves by a word, which is of
like signification, with that we mean. There is nothing in the world, of which
there is not another thing to which it may be resembled; and therefore there is
nothing from whence a Metaphore may not be deducted; as, Princeps caput
Rei-publicae, The King is the head of the common wealth.

There are eight sort of things especially, from which a Metaphore may be
deduced.

1. From sacred and holy things; as, One man is a God to another. 2. From the
Heavens; as, Virgil the sun of Poets. 3. From the Elements; as, The fire of
envy; the flood of eloquence and Rhetoric. 4. From Meteors; as, The lightning
of an Oration. 5. From Minerals; as, Golden ages; an Iron breast. 6. From
Vegetables; as, The flower of nobility. 7. From living creatures; as, England
is the eye of Islands; Orators do bark not speak. 8. From Artificial things;
as, Appion is the Cymbal of the world, so called for his much talking.
And hence are these expressions, To file a writing, to polish an oration, to
rip or unsow friendship.

Synecdoche is a Trope, by which a part is put for the whole and the contrary;
i. e. the whole is put for a part.

A part is twofold. A Member, or A Species.

A Synecdoche of a Member is, when by a member the whole is signified. As the
Roof for the house, the swords point for the sword it self, a General for his
Army, the soul for a man.

Thus the singular number is put for the plural; as, The Roman was victor in
battle, meaning the army of the Romans.

Note. That the singular number is a part or member of the plural, not a
distinct nature: especially considering that every multitude does consist of
unities, as of so many particulars.

A Synecdoche of the Species is, when the Species is put for the Genus; as,
when Aristides is put for a just man, Croesus for a rich man.

Thus we put an infinite number for a great number; as, you may bring six
hundred such; Six hundred, one species or sort of a great number, for a great
number in the general.

A Synecdoche of the whole is, when the whole is put for a part.

The whole is either an Integer, or A Genus.

A Synecdoche of an Integer is, when an Integer is put for a member; as, His
Army was so great as that is drank the rivers dry: meaning a great part of the
water in the rivers.

Thus the plural number is put for the singular; as, Cicero to Brutus; we
deceived the people and seemed Orators: When the Orator spoke of himself only.

A Synecdoche of the Genus is, when the General is put for the Special; as, a
man for Catiline, Virtue for fortitude, Poet for Homer or Virgil, Orator for
Demosthenes or Tully. Mark. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every creature:
meaning manking only, and not any other creature.

Hitherto of Tropes the first kind of elocution; the second kind of elocution
is by Figure.

CHAP. VII.
A Figure is a kind of Elocution by which the form of a speech is changed from
its right and plain use.

A Figure is either of A Word, or A Sentence.

A Figure of a word is that, by which an Oration or speech is composed of words
aptly and sweetly suitable to one another. And this consists either in the
Dimension or Repetition of sounds or words.

A Figure in the Dimension of sounds is the sweet number of sounds in a
sentence.

Number is either Poetical or Oratorical.

A Poetical number is that, which is confined to a perpetual observation of
certain spaces.

A Number Poe^ical is either Rhyme or Meter.

Rhyme is a poetical number containing a certain number of feet, without any
regard to the quantity of the Syllables whether long or short. But here many
times there are several sentences joined together in which the last Syllables
are like; as,

Dare to be true: nothing can need a lie:
A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.
A Meter is a poetical number consisting of certain feet, of which the last
foot has the last Syllable indifferent or common, that is, long or short.

In this kind of Poetical number, there is a liberty granted for a certain
Metaplasm or transformation of a word, namely when there is something wanting
in it, or when there is too much, or when there is something changed.

There are four kinds of Metaplasms.

1. By Elision or taking away something from the end of a word, in the scanning
of a verse.

And this is either, Synalaepha or Ecthlipsis.

Synalaepha is an elision or striking out of one vowel before another in diverse
words; as, it is, for it is.

Ecthlipsis is when the letter m with his vowel is taken away, because the word
following begins with a vowel; as, Syncer' est, for Syncerum est.

2. The second kind of Metaplasm is by adding something to, or deducting
something from a word: and of this there are six kinds.

Prosthesis, Aphaeresis, Epenthesis, Syncope, Paragoge, and Apocope.

Prosthesis is the adding of a letter or Syllable to the beginning of a word.

Aphaeresis is the taking away of a letter or a Syllable from the beginning of
a word.

Epenthesis is the putting of a letter or Syllable into the middle of a word.

Syncope is the taking away of a letter or Syllable from the middle of a word,

Paragoge is the putting of a letter or syllable to the end of a word.

Apocope is the taking of a letter or syllable from the end of a word.

3. The third kind of Metaplasms is by dividing and contracting of words, the
one is called Diaeresis, the other Synaeresis.

Diaeresis is that which makes two syllables of one.

Synaeresis is the contracting of two syllables into one.

4. The fourth kind of Metaplasms is by changing something in a word, and of
this there are five kinds. Tmesis, Metathesis, Antithesis, Diastole and Systole.

Tmesis is that which divides the parts of a compound or simple word by putting
another word between them.

Metathesis is the transposition or misplacing of a letter in a word.

Antithesis is the putting of one letter for another.

Diastole is that which makes a short syllable long.

Systole is that which makes a long syllable short.

Oratorical number does indeed consist of feet, but not of any certain number
of feet, but of as many or as few as the Orator pleases. And although for
testimony or delight he may sometimes recite the verses of others, yet must he
not make verses, when he writes prose. He should not make the beginning or the
end of a verse to be either the beginning or end of prose. But a greater care
is to be had of the close than either of the beginning or middle of a speech,
for in that the perfection of number does chiefly appear; but these things will
be better understood by the practice of the meanest Orator, than the precepts
of the most skilful.

What the Figure of a word is, in the Dimens on of the sound thereof, has been
showed: now follows the Figure of a word in respect of the repetition thereof.

And this is twofold, Like, or Unlike.

A Figure of a word in the repetition of like sound is either with or without
intermission.

Repetition of like sound without intermission is either an Epizeuxis or an
Anadiplosis.

An Epizeuxis is, when a like sound is repeated in the same sentence without
intermission, and that either a part or a whole word.

An Epizeuxis or repetition of the part of a word is either in the beginning or
in the end of a word.

An Epizeuxis or repetition of a whole word may be in the beginning, middle, or
end of a sentence; as, Ezekiel. 21. 9, 27. A sword, a sword is sharpened etc. I
will overturn, overturn, overturn it. And thus David bewaileth the death of his
son Absolon in 2 Samuel 18. 33. O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom; would
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son.

An Anadiplosis is, when a like sound without intermission is repeated in
diverse sentences, that is when it ends one and begins another; as, in Dr.
Donne's Poems, Page 210.

If then, why I take not my leave she ask,
Ask her again, why she did not unmask?
And in the use of this Figure there is some^imes a Climax; as when an
Anadiplosis is con^inued with many degrees. Pro Milon: Nor (...)did he only
render himself to the people, but to the Senate: nor to the Senate only, but to
the public Garrisons and Armies: nor to these only, but even to him, with whom
the Senate has (...)ntrusted the commonwealth. Ad Heren: What hope of liberty
now remains; if it be lawful for them to do what they please, and that they
can do what is lawful, and dare do, what they can, and actually do, as much as
they dare, and you like whatever they do? Wherein we thought each line, each
word, each syllable breathed out the passions of a clear and candid soul.
Howels Ep. 3. Epist. 18.

Repetition of like sound but with some intermission is either in the same or
in diverse places.

Repetition of like sound with intermission in the same place is either an
Anaphora, or an Epistrophe.

An Anaphora is, when a like sound is repeated in the beginning of sentences;
as, By art of sails and oars Seas ore divided;
By art the Chariot runs; by art love's guided.


Ovid de Art amandi. lib. 1. Garm. 3. and 4. It Is safe and frequent, fraud
through lov(...) frame.

It Is safe and frequent, but deserves blam(...)

Ovid de Art amandi. lib. 1. page 197.

An Epistrophe is, when a like sound is repeated in the close of sentences; as,
2 Cor(...) 11. 22. Are they Hebrews? so am I: are the(...) Israelites? so am I:
are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

From an Anaphora and an Epitrophe joined together is made another figure
call(...) Symploce; which is, when a like sound (...) both in the beginning
and the ending of several sentences; as, Can the host of heave(...) help me?
can Angels help me? can these inferi(...)our creatures help me.

Repetition of like sound with intermission, i^ diverse parts or places, is
either an Epanalips(...) or an Epanados.

An Epanalipsis is, when a like sound is repeated in the beginning and ending
of the(...) same sentence; as, In sorrow was I born, and I must die in sorrow.
1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All things are yours, whether things present, or things to
come, all are yours.

An Epanodos is, when the like sound is in the beginning and ending of diverse
sentences, an Anadiplosis coming between; as, Parthenia desired above all
things to have Argalus; Argalus feared nothing but to miss Parthenia. Isaiah 5.
20. Woe unto them who call good evi', and evil good; who put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; who glory in their shame, and are ashamed of their
glory.

Whether the worst, the child accursed,
Or else the cruel mother?
The mother worst, the child accursed,
As bad the one as the other.
Hitherto of the Figure of a word repeated of like sound, now follow two
figures more made by the repetition of sounds somewhat unlike, Paronomasia and
Polyptoton.

Paronomasia is, when a word being changed in a letter or a syllable, it is
also changed in sense and signification; as, Though you advise me to repent, I
have not grace to follow your advice. Eminent men of great note, are now a days
most subject to imminent dangers. It Is not so tedious to me as to others, to be
thus immured, because I have been inured and habituated unto troubles. Howels
Epist. 1. Volu. sect. 6. Epist. 50.

A Polyptoton is, when words of the sam(...) original are reiterated but with
some variation, whether it be in mood or tense or person or number or any
other; as, Vanity (...) Vanities, all is vanity. Deceiving and being deceived.
The Lord when he visits, in visiting will visit you.

CHAP. VIII.
HItherto of a figure in reference to word(...) A Figure in reference to a
sentence is a figure which affects the whole sentenc(...) with some motion of
the mind.

A Figure in reference to a sentence is eithe(...) in absolute reasoning, or in
reasoning Dialogue-wise

Logismus or absolute reasoning is, when a sentence is composed without any
talking with other supposed.

And this is either E^phonesis, a recalling of one self, Apostrophe or
Prosopopeia.

Ecphonesis is a figure in reasoning, expressed or understood by an Adverb of
exclaiming: it is a very great instrument o(...) moving the mind, and
affections of those (...) whom we speak.

1. By way of Admiration; as, Oh the wonderful clemency! or, Oh happy people
that are in such a case!

2. Derision; as, Mark 15. 29. Ah thou that destroyest the Temple and buildest
it in three days.

3. Wishing; Psalm. 14. 17. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion.

4. Detestation; as, Romans 7. 24. O wrethed man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

5. Reprehensi^n; as, O Foolish Galathians who has bewitched you etc. Gal. 3.
1.

6. Indignation; Act. 13. 10. O full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child
of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness.

7. Love; as, Psalm. 84. 1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, thou Lord of
hosts.

8. Exultation; as, 1 Cor. 15. 15. O death where is thysting, Oh grave where is
thy victory?

9. Commiseration and Grief; as, Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the Prophets etc. How often would I have gathered thy children
together, etc.

12. Epiphonema is also a kind of exclamation, which is wont to be added to the
end of the narration or explication of a matter. Thus the Psalmist having
highly se(...) forth the glorious excellency of the name o(...) God, in Psalm.
72. shuts up his praise with this acclamation; Blessed be his glorious name for
ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory.

Recalling of ones self is, when something is called back: and it is as it were
a diminution of the over hastiness or heat of speech (...) and this is either
Epanorthosis or Aposiopesis.

An Epanorthosis is, when something preceding is called back by correcting it:
as, I had one only young man to my Son; ah! what have I said? I had? yea I had:
it is new uncertain whether I have or not.

An Aposiopesis is, when the close of a sentence begun is stopped by keeping in
a part which yet is understood; as, you rogue, if I live. Heb. 3. 11. To whom
Isware in my wrath, if they enter into my rest; i. e. they shall never enter
into my rest.

Hitherto of perfect and absolute reasoning by way of exclamation and
revocation. Now follows that which is in Apostrophe and Prosopopoeia.

An Apostrophe is, when a speech is directed to another, than was by the speech
it self at first intended.

And this may be done diverse ways.

As when a speech is directed

1. To God. 2. To Angels good or bad.

To men in their several ranks, whether (...)sent or present, dead or alive, as
Ad(...)rsaries or friends, to the present Auditors, (...) ones self. 4. To
brute creatures, and 5. (...)o things inanimate.

A Prosopopoeia is, when in our Oration, (...)e suppose another person to be
speaking. (...)nd by this figure, God, Angels, men dead (...) alive, the
heavens, earth, sea, and such (...)ke are brought in speaking, hearing, etc.
(...), Josh. 24. 27. Behold this shall be a witness (...)to us; for it has
heard all the words of the (...)ord which he has spoken unto us.

A Prosopopoeia is either imperfect or perfect.

An Imperfect Prosopopoeia is, when another (...)eech is lightly declared and
as it were by (...)he by; as, Psalm. 11. 1. David brings in the wicked as saying
unto his soul, flee as a Bird (...)nto your mountain.

A perfect Prosopopoeia is when in our own Oration the whole fiction of another
person is plainly declared; as, Prove. 8. Wisdom (...)ryeth at the Gates etc.
Unto you, O men, I (...)all, etc.

A Figure in reasoning Dialogue-wise is, when a sentence is composed in form of
a conference; this consists in Question an(...) Answer: of which kind of
reasoning the(...) are two parts Hypophora and Anthypophor(...)

But Dialogism or reasoning by Question(...) and Answer is twofold, Consenting
and Dissenting.

Dissenting is when ones answer does impugn or cross the objection.

A Figure of a dissenting Dialogism is either Deliberation or Occupation.

Deliberation is either an Aporia or an Anacoenosis.

An Aporia is a deliberation with ou(...) selves; as, Philip. 1. 22. But if I
live in t(...) flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what (...) shall
chose I know not; for I am in a strai(...) between two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better: nevertheless to abide in
the flesh is more needful for you etc.

An Anacoenosis is, a deliberation with others; as thus, what shall I say? what
think you? if it had been your own case, would you have done otherwise?

Occupation is when we prevent another objection and give an answer to it our
selves. This Dialogism therefore from the former part is called a Prolepsis,
from the latter a Prosapodosis.

A Prolepsis or an Hypophora propounds the objection; as, Isaiah 37. 23. Whom
have thou reproached, and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy
voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy one of Israel.

A Prosapodosis or an Anthypophora answers the objection; as, Romans 6. 15. What
then? shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under grace? God
forbid.

A Prolepsis for the most part has a Prosopopoeia joined with it, and is
therefore either oblique or direct.

An Oblique Prolepsis is that which has an imperfect Prosopopoeia joined with
it.

A Direct Prolepsis is that which has a full Prosopopoeia; as, some one may
say, is this then your Discipline? Do you thus instruct youth?

A Figure of Consenting Dialogism is, when ones answer does admit of the
objection expressed or understood: yet so, as that from thence the
inconsequence of the objection may be showed, if need be.

But this is either an Epitrope or a Synchoresis.

An Epitrope is when any ones fact is freely permitted. This is twofold Serious
or Ironical.

Serious permission; as, Take this Church plute, seeing thou have need, for
'twas thy Ancestors gift.

Ironical permission; as, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man, and let thy heart
(...) thee, etc. And walk in the ways of thy heart, etc.

A Synchoresis is when some word or deed is forgiven; as, let him be
sacrilegious, let him be a thief, let him be the vilest person in the world;
for all that he is a good Governor. James 2. 19. Thou believe that there is
one God, thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble.

CHAP. IX.
Of Secundary Figures.
TO these Primary Figures of words and sentences there may some secundary
figures be added in both kinds.

The Secundary figures of a word are eight.

1. Ellipsis. 2. Pleonasmus. 3. Asyndeton. 4. Polysyndeton. 5. Hyperbaton. 6.
Zeugma. 7. Antithesis. 8. Graeeismus.
An Ellipsis is, when some necessary word, to express the passion, is omitted
in the construction; as, Isaiah 1. 13. I cannot iniquity, that is, I cannot
bear iniquity.

A Pleonasmus is, when there is some word in an oration, more than it seems
to need; yet does emphatically and eminently express some vehemence and
certainty; as, I saw it with these eyes. And that which has not such an
Emphasis is idle and vicious.

An Asyndeton is, when in a number of words, a conjunction copulative is
omitted, either through have, or vehemence of speech; as, By thy folly and
wickedness thou have lost thy substance, thy good name, thy friends, thy
parents, and offended thy Creator.

A Polysyndeton is, when for gravity sake, more conjunctions are used than seem
needful, but not without some Emphasis; as, overmuch sleep also, and wine, and
banquets, and queaus, and bathes enervate and enfeeble the body and mind.

An Hyperbaton is a Transposition of words from the right order of
construction, into some more neat and compact form, for elegancy and variety
sake; as, Ephesians. 1. And you bath he quickened who were dead in trespasses and
sins.

A Zeugma is, when some verb or adjective but once expressed in a sentence, is
supposed to be referred to several others of diverse genders, numbers or
persons, agreeing with that which is nearest; as, lust overcomes modesty,
boldness fear, and passion reason.

This is threefold.

Prozeugma, when this common word is set in the beginning; as, For neither art
thou he, Cataline, whom shame could at any time call back from dishonesty, fear
from perils, or reason from madness.

Mesozeugma, when in the middle; as, what a shame is this, that neither hope of
reward, nor fear of reproach could any thing move him, the persuasion of his
friends, nor the love of his Country?

Hypozeugma, when in the end; as, the foundation of freedom, the fountain of
equity, the safeguard of wealth, and custody of life is preserved by law.

An Antithesis is, when the things opposed do answer one another; as, Flattery
procures friendship, truth hatred.

A Graecismus is when the proper Idiom of the Greek is used in another speech
or language; as, Edm. Spencer Chap. 13. For not to have been dipped in Lethe
lake, could save the son of Thetis from to die; that is, Achilles.

To these may be added

An Hyperologia or an Hyteron Proteron, when that which in the natural order
should be first spoken, is brought in last; as, he is in health and alive, for,
he is alive and in health.

An Antiptosis, when one case is put for another.

An Hypallage, when two words do commute or change cases with one another; as,
Thou have hid their heart from understanding, Job 17. 4. that is, thou have hid
understanding from their heart.

The Secundary figures in a sentence are ten.

1. Parrhesia. 2. Erotesis. 3. Parenthesis. 4. Parathesis. 5. Periphrasis. 6.
Synonymia. 7. Hypotyposis. 8. Praemunitio. 9. Transitio. 10. Rejectio.
Parrhesia is a free and a bold speaking of such things in their presence whom
we should fear or reverence, as are displeasing or may provoke them to envy.

And this is either when we confidently acknowledge and defend a fault not
proved against us, or when we boldly upbraid and rebuke others, for faults by
them committed.

Erotesis is a manner of speech, whereby we either,

1. Demand a question; as, How often shall any brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? till seven times? Matthew. 18. 21. Or when we

2. Earnestly affirm and reprehend; as, O faithless Generation! how long shall
I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? Mark 9. 19. Or when we

3. Vehemently avouch the contrary, whether the interrogation be affirmative or
negative; as, can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the
ditch? that is, the blind cannot lead the blind, they shall both fall.

Parenthesis is the interposing of one or more words of perfect sense, within
another sentence, for the perfecting thereof; without which interposition, the
sense would yet be perfect and entire.

Concerning which, two rules are observeable, viz.

1. That the interposition should neither be long, nor frequent, because it
will render the sentence obscure.

2. That one Parenthesis be but seldom inserted within another; as, Are they
ministers of Christ (I speak as a fool) I am more; 2 Cor. 11. 23.

Parathesis, is a figure of construction, whereby one substantive is for
declaration and distinction sake added unto another in the same case; as, the
river Isis, or the river Wye. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot. John 14. 22.

Periphrasis, is the explication of a thing by more words, which may be
expressed by one.

This figure is principally made four ways.

1. When some notable enterprise, ones native country, or some strange sect or
opinion, is put instead of the proper name; as, The writer of the Trojan war
for Homer.

2. In Etymology, when the cause or reason of a name is unfolded; as, a man
studious of wisdom, for a Philosopher.

3. In Annotation, when by certain marks or tokens something is described; as,
Anger is a vehement heat of the mind, which brings paloness to the countenance,
burning to the eyes, and trembling to the parts of the body.

4. When a thing is described by definition; as, the art of speaking
eloquently, for Rhetoric. An oppressor of the laws and liberties of the
people, for a Tyrant.

Synonymia or Palilogia, is a heaping together of many words of one
signification; as, Wisdom in a poor man lies as a thing despised, rejected,
oppressed, buried and utterly extinct.

Hypotypoois is a figure by which a whole matter is particularly and orderly
expressed, as that it seems to be represented unto ocular inspection; as, It is
a place which now humbling it self in fallowed plains, now proud in well
husbanded hills, marries barren woods to cultivated valleys, and joins neat
gardens to delicious fountains, etc.

Praemunition or preparation is, when we presuppose what may be said by way of
defense for those, whom we intend to reprehend or reprove.

Transition is that by which the parts of an oration are joined together. And
this is

1. Perfect, by which is declared what has been spoken, and what remains to
be said; as, hitherto we have spoken of tillage and Astronomy, now we will
treat of etc.

2. Imperfect, by which is declared either what has been said, or what
remains to be spoken.

This may be done eight several ways.

1. By something that is equal or parallel; as, Those are most pleasant, nor
are these less delightful. 2. By something that is unequal; you have heard very
sad things; but I shall now tell you sadder things than these. 3. By something
that is like. 4. By something that is contrary; These things he did when he was
young; hear now his virtuous progress in his elder days. 5. By something that
is diverse; as, you have heard of his behavior, I will now inform you of his
learning. 6. By preoccupation; as, We will now hasten to the rest, only give me
leave to add this one thing. 7. By reprehension; Why should I dwell on this
subject; I hasten to that which is the cause of all. 8. From some consequent or
relative; as, you have heard what I have done for him; hear now how he has
required me.
Rejection is, when we defer a thing to some other time or place, or wholly
reject it as absurd and impertinent, and by no means to be admitted of; as, But
of Luculus I will speak in some other place: and I will speak so, as that my
speech shall not falsely accuse him, or yet derogate from his just praise.

And thus much concerning Elocution. As for Memory and Pronunciation, which are
the other two parts of Rhetoric, I purposely omit them, as being natural
endowments, which may be better improved by constant practice, than by any
precepts which can be given.

Laus Deo.
An Alphabetical Table in which the Tropes and Figures which are of a Greek
Original are interpreted and explained.
ALlegoria, (...), inversion or changing, when one thing is propounded in the
words, and another in the sense; it comes from (...) aliud, and (...), i. e.
(...) dico, to speak otherwise than we think. Anacoenosis, (...),
communication, it comes from (...) and (...) communico. Anadiplosis, (...),
redup ication; it is derived of (...) again a (...) to double. Anaphora, (...),
relation; it is derived from (...) to bring again, or to rehearse.
Anthypophora, (...), subjection; it comes from (...) to object or oppose a
contrary sentence. Antiptosis, (...), the putting of one case for another; it
is derived from (...) for, and (...), a case. Antithesis, (...), opposition,
set or placed against; it is derived from (...) contra, and (...) pono, to put
against. Aphaeresis, (...), a taking a way; it comes from (...), aufero.
Apocope, (...), abscissio, a cutting off; it comes from (...), abscindo.
Apodioxis, (...), rejection, or expulsion; it is derived from (...), rejicio,
to reject or expel. Apophasis, (...), negation or denying, it is derived from
(...), nego to deny. Aporia, (...), addubitatio doubting; it is derived from
(...), ambigo, dubito, animum pendeo, to be of a doubtful mind or not to know
what is best to be said or done. Aposiopesis, (...), reticentia a holding ones
peace; it is derived from (...) after and (...), obticeo to be silent.
Apostrophe, (...), aversio, a turning away; it is derived from (...) from, and
(...) verto to turn. Asyndeton, (...), inconjunctum disjoined; it is also
called (...), dissolutum; an oration in which the copulative particles are
omitted; it is derived from the privative particle (...) and (...) colligatus,
bound together, and that is derived from (...) ligo to bind. Auxesis, (...),
augmentum an increasing; it is derived from (...) (for which we now use (...))
because it does increase a matter or thing by amplification.
C.
Catachresis, (...), abusio, abuse, it comes from (...), abutor, to abuse, or
from the preposition (...), contra against, and (...) use. Climax, (...),
gradatio, gradation or climing by steps; it is derived from (...) acclino to
bend toward, or incline to.
D.
Diaeresis, (...), divisio, division, it is derived from (...), divido, to
divide; it is also called (...) dissolutio dissolution, from (...) dissolvo to
dissolve. Diaestole, (...), extention, or dilation, a figure whereby a
syllable, short by nature, is made long; it comes from (...) extendo, praet.
med. (...), and being compounded with the preposition (...).
E
Ecphonesis, (...), exclamation or crying out; it is derived from (...) exclamo
to cry out. Ecthlipsis, (...), elisio, a striking out; it comes from the verb
(...) elido. Ellipsis, (...), defectus, defect or want; it is derived from
(...), deficio, to lack, or want. Epanalepsis, (...), resumtio, a taking back;
it is derived from (...) after, (...) again, and (...), accipio, to take; from
whence comes (...) acceptio a taking. Epanados, (...), regressio, regression, a
turning back; derived from (...) again, and (...), ascensus, an ascending or
climing up; which is derived from (...) sursum upwards, and (...) a way.
Epanorthosis, (...), correctio, emendatio, correction or amending; derived from
(...) corrigo, to correct or amend. Epenthesis, (...), interpositio,
interposition, or putting in between; it comes from (...), interpono, to
interpose. Epiphonema, (...), acclamation, or a shooting out of the voice;
derived from (...), acclamo, to cry out or shoot forth the voice. Epistrophe,
(...), conversio, a conversion, or turning to the same sound; derived from
(...) prope near to, and (...) verto to turn or change. Epitrope, (...),
permissio, permission, derived from (...), permitto, to permit or grant.
Epizeuxis, (...), adjunctio, a joining together of the same word or sound,
derived from (...) conjungo, to join together. Erotesis, (...), interrogatio,
interrogation or questioning; derived from (...), interrogo to question.
G
Graecismus, (...), immutatio Graecorum, from (...) graecus, a certain King
from whom that Country was called Greece.
H
Hypallage, (...), immutatio, a changing; derived from (...), and (...) muto,
to change. Hyperbaton, (...), transgressio, transgression, or a passing over,
derived from (...), transgredior to pass over. Hyperbole, (...), superlatio, a
passing of measure, or bounds; derived from (...), supero to exceed. Hypophora,
(...), objectio, an objection; it is derived from (...), objicio, to object.
Hypotyposis, (...), evidentia, and illusstratio, illustration, when a thing is
so expressed in writing, that the figure thereof may seem to be delineated; it
is derived from (...), represento, to represent, to delineate by figure, or to
draw the lively effigies of a thing. Hysterologia, (...), dictiopraepostera, a
praeposterous speech, when that is spoken last which according to order ought
to have been first, it is otherwise called (...), postremum primum, the last
first; derived from (...) postremus the last or hindmost, and (...) verbum a
word or speech.
I
Ironia, (...), simulatio, irrisio, mocking or counterfeiting; from (...) dico,
from whence (...), simulator, which speaks otherwise than he thinks; and
hence (...), (...)staken for dissimulation, whereby one thing (...)s thought
and another spoken.
L
Logismus, (...), cogitatio, musing or thinking; it comes from (...) praet.
(...).
M
Meiosis, (...), imminutio, diminution or extenuation, it comes from (...),
minuo, to diminish. Metalepsis (...), transumptio, a taking from one to
another; it is derived from (...), transumo, to take of or from another.
Metaphora, (...), translation, it comes from (...) transfero to translate.
Metaplasmus, (...), transformation, or a changing from one shape to another; it
comes from (...), transformo, to transform. Metathesis, (...), transpositio,
transposition; it comes from (...), trans over or beyond, and (...) pono to
put. Meeter, (...), mensura, a measure or verse consisting of the measures of
co(...) feet, from (...) comes (...) and (...) and by taking away (...) it is
(...). Metonymia, (...), transnominatio, a change of names, it comes from
(...), which in composition signifies change, and (...) ^omen a name.
P
Paragoge, (...), productio, a making long; it comes from (...), produco, to
draw in length, to prolong. Paralipsis, (...), praeteritio an overpassing;
derived from (...), to pretermit or leave out. Parathesis, (...), appositio,
apposition or a putting of one thing to another; it is derived from (...)
appono. Parenthesis, (...), interposition, or an inserting between; derived
from (...) insero, to interpose or cast between. Paranomasia, (...),
agnomination or likeness of words; derived from (...) which in composition
signifies amiss, or with some alteration, and (...) nomen a name. Parrhesia,
(...), licentia, liberty or boldness of speaking, it is derived from (...), and
(...) license and liberty. Periphrasis, (...), circuml^cutio, a speak^^g of
many words when few may suffice, (...) circumloquor to utter that in many words
which may be spoke in few. Pleonasmus, (...), redundantia, superfluity; it is
derived from (...) redundo ^o abound superfluously. Polyptoton, (...), variatio
casuum, a ^hange of the termination or case, and it is ^erived from (...),
vary, variously, and (...) (...)adens falling or ending. Polysyndeton, (...),
vary et multipliciter conjunctum, diversely and many ways ^oyned together; it
is derived from (...) (...)multum very much, and (...), conjunctus ^oyned
together. Prolepsis, (...), the anticipation, or prevention of an objection; it
is derived from (...) prae before, (...) capio, to take, praet(...)s. 1. (...),
and thence (...), and with the praeposition (...). Prosapodosis, (...),
redditio, a giving again, it comes from (...), reddo to restore. Prosopopoeia,
(...), fictio personae, the feigning of a person, it is derived from (...),
persona, and (...) facio vel fingo to make or feign. Prosthesis, (...)
appositio, a putting of one letter to another, it is derived from (...) appono
to put or add unto.
R
Rhetorica, (...), Rhetoric; it is derived from (...), dico, (...) being out
of use, fut (...) praet. (...) Attice (...), praet. pas. (...) and thence comes
(...) and (...). Rhyme, (...), meeter or such a number as is in music; it is
derived from (...) by changing (...) into (...) and that comes from (...) traho
to draw or allure.
S
Symploce, (...), complexio, complicatio, an agreement of words in a sentence,
it is derived from (...), complico, connecto, to wrap or couple together.
Synaloepha, (...), vocalium commixtio, a mingling together of vowels, a
bringing two syllables into one; it is derived from (...) simulungo to anoint
together, metaphorically used for commisceo to mingle together, in unum
contrabo to contract in one. Synchoresis, (...), concessio, granting of an
argument; it is derived from (...) concedo togrant. Syncope, (...), concisio, a
cutting away, it is derived from (...) concido to cut in pieces. Synaeresis,
(...), contractio, a contraction, it comes from (...) in unum contraho to
contract into one. Synecdoche, (...), comprehension, derived from (...),
comprehendo vel un a excipio, to comprehend or take together. Synonymia, (...),
nominis communio, a pertaking together of a name, or diverse words signifying
one and the same thing; it is derived from (...) simul together and (...) nomen
a name or word. Systole, (...), correptio a shortning.
T
Tapinosis, (...), humiliatio submission, it comes from (...) humilem reddo, to
be humble, or to submit, Tmesis, (...), sectio, divisio, a section, a dividing;
it is derived from (...) seco to cut praet. pass. (...), from whence (...).
Z
Zeugma, (...), junctura, a joining or coupling together; it is derived from
(...) jungo to join or couple.
FINIS.

