News out of the West: OR, THE Character of a Mountebank.

BEING A DISCOURSE (...) Hodge Lether-Pelch, and Tym (...), Sir Harry-Hart-hole
their Landlord, and his Friend Sir Clement Council: Also of their Travels
from Taunton to LONDON, Their Arrival at their Physicians Palace.

The Description of it, His Sick and Brainsick followers, Person and Family,
WITH A full Relation of the Medicines he commonly administers. Their Operation
and Danger Represented by them.

ALSO, A Relation of their Abuses now suffered and fomented by Authority: With
a Remedy set down, to the Encouragement of Physicians, illustration of the
Honored Art, and general Good of the Re-publique.

BY A well willer to PHYSIC and CHIRVRGERIE, (...) Deplorer of the now too
Common (...) of them.

Printed in the year of Grace. M.D.C.XLVII.

The Argument.
HOdge-Lether-pelch, for some small pain in's thighs
Seeks, help, Tym Hob-nayle does the same for's eyes.
They trudge to London, where they hear of one
Famous for both to make them good; or none
Hodge gets two Crutches, a help which before
He had not: Tym one Eye out, the other sore.
In this sad plight Returning to their home,
Their hearty Landlord, bids them both welcome.
Merry Sir Henry Heart-whole, stays his Friend
Sir Clement Council, does his tale Commend
Unto his hearing: though loath (his affairs
Calling him thence) attentively he hears
The story of their Travels, which sets forth
Desperate Dangers, in some Scaenes of mirth.
Sir Henry Heart-whole and his friend Sir Clement,
The strange Abuses of these Times lament.
Discourse a remedy, and it commend
Unto Authority, and if that lend
A hand; there is thousands would be saved; now go:
Thrust out o'th World, cum Privilegio.
THE CHARACTER OF A Montebanck.
Sir Harry-Heart-hole the Landlord, and Sir Clement Council his Friend,
Hodge-Lether-pelch, and Tym-Hob-nayle. Sir Har. YOur occasions Sir I know* are
not so regent
But you may loyter one day more with me.
The mirth perhaps you will hear, may present something
To excuse your truant stay from your affairs
And somewhat benefit. From such course History
Is often Gathered sweet, and queint conclusions;
Which figure forth our Follies in a fayrer
Text, then the subtiller sort will give their Errors
And thereby prove Examples, to weane from us
The will's we have to stayne our pregnant Fancies
With some absurd escapes, which cannot pass
The General Censure without blemish*

Sir Clem. Sir!
I cannot expect such pieces from that Couple
You mentioned lately.

Harry. Come they are Miracles
Which in them have not ended.

Servant. Sir, your Tennants
Wayt your Commands.

Sir Harry. Oh that is well you cannot
Now think of any speed; go bid 'um enter*
Welcome tennants, what Hodge ar't Lame? And you Tym Blind too, How comes these
evils to you.


Hodge-Lether-pelch. -- By hab, nab Sir, as the Doctor Cures 'um all, Tym tell
how thou camst blind a' one Eye, like my Landlords old Dungill Cock.


Tym Hob-nayle. -- Marry, I took a long journey to put it out, e'ne up to
London, where che heard of one was parlous good at the business.


Hodge. And I Land lord, to change for these Crutches, good wholesome limbs,
and I ga' money to boot* but I hope Landlord, you will be still merciless to
us, and though we are not able to you any Knight Service in the Wars, Tym
holding his blindness in Capite, and my lamenesse is Copy hold-fast between
two Ashen stilts, and Beggary copied (in them) out to me which I must learn^
having alienated my bones into Crutches; yet we can do you Yeomans service at
the Powdring-tub, and shall never want stout Stomachs to maintain by tooth and
nail your hospitality, with all Comers* Therefore good Landlord be
merciless to us --


Tym. Mercy-foole, you Logger-head -- You spokes-man.


Hodg. I say merciless ye Jobber-noll; for if his Purse be full of money and
he gon's none, e'ut it full still ye Dolt? if he gon's all in it, eu't his
Purse penny-lesse? And is it not so we mercy in his heart ye Dunce? and
therefore mercylesse Landlord.


Sir Clem. Well disputed Hodge: I must be Sir, a suitor to you for them, go
on good Hodge Lether-pelch.


Hodg. But Landlord you will before this honest Gentleman, be merciless to us?


Sir Har. Doubt not Hodge, that I Will be harsh or cruel, and before this my
friend I Will take but half the Rent, and Tym shall pay no more.


Both. Now Landlord we shall pray for your limbs and Eyes, that Age may
neither put you into Crutches nor Spectacles but that you may see to go many a
mile to such charity.


Hodge. I must be spokes-man must I?


Sir Har. But Hodge, go on, you remember your Travels?


Hodg. Ch'ave cause I think, being Crossed with a pain in one thigh and to
cross my wife; c'he went cross the water, over the Bridge, and cross the
Country, the nyer way, and then c'he went cross another water, where there
were many wooden houses wit' Guns ah midst on it, lay cross one another, with
great wooden crosses one above another, upon beacons; and Flags a top of all,
as big as our Wake streamers, wi'red Crosses in um.


Sir Har. What means he Sir by these?


Sir Clem. The Ships in Thames, I think.


Tym. I* che called um Sheep, but che had another Faith, to go to heaven by;
I Am sure che looked like Oaken Castles in the water.


Sir Clem. Did any of them give fire to the Guns?


Hodg. Give Fire co' ye who the d'ile w'ud have it but themselves, and che sed
they sp ke well* marry 'twas in thunder: Then che asked him what language 'twas
che spoke, I Am sure 'twas we' breath, as if 't had bin out of a Furnace; --
Then che landed at Black-wall, -- Well Landlord, that is a nooke in the world,
tells nothing but lies; for che sed 'twas Black-wall, and as I Am a Cursend
Cripple che saw neither Black-wall, nor any thing 'r was black, but dirt, and
black-Men, eating a' black Puddings, and some a fleaing one of those Great
black-sheepe, (as they told us) for che pulled off the wool, skin and all.


Sir Cle. The Carpenters were unsheathing some ships sure?


Tym. I, I, Shearing che sed, if we w'ud a believed um in a dry Ditch 'twas, I
think they were clad in Budget-lether with the hair side inward.


Hodg. Then, che met with a Sea-Country-man, and che sed a w'ud lead's to a
Doctor sh'ud mends all, Then che went many a Cross way, till che thought che
had bin on's way as Tyms Eye is, quite out; Then che sed we must take a little
whirly gig, was not Tym, at a Cursned shore, call Dieks.


Sir Clem. 'Twas a Wherry at Dick-shore Hodge?


Hodg. But what heathen people are these to Curson such durty places? And the
Whirly-gig-man sed, a must have a Groat to carry us to Trig-stayres.


Tym. Then Hodge told him he was a Lazy harlot, to ask a Days toil at Plough
and Cart, for a little Pad-ling in the water with two Ovens-Peeles.


Hodg. And the currish rascal go me cross words, and sed a'wud lay me cross
the pate, if I did not the sooner get out o'ns wooden trough. Then my
Sea-Country man sed we will go by Land.


Tym. And Hodge sed farewell, c'hem glad to h'ear't and that che came not to
that purpose, to buy Land! C'he was not so rich or so thrifty.


Hodge. And the giglets laughed at me so much, as c'he had been clad in motley
with a muckender, that che began to suspect my self for a fool, but my
Sea-Country-man sed there was a Spurge-maker w'ud dou's good, then che past by
many a young trifle, every one with white flaggs, o truce before 'um, and
sitting at door, buying o black withered Plums and apples on a fellow, with a
three legged flasket on's head, that sed 'a had the Pip-in's mouth, I think
then che came to Rattle-crosse, and a little further, my Sea-Country-man,
poynted to 'a painted Shop: full o white pots, and sed there was the
Pot-carryer wu'd dou's good.


Tym. and Hodge went and make legs and Cursies to an ill-favored outlandish
Gentleman, in 'a Clay-coloured hayre-gowne, and a black long Vizard scrubing
o'ns arse, and my Sea-Country-man tolds'a was a Jew, and that 'a chatter'd
Ebrew: but 'a made mouths at Hodge, as if 'a had bin a May Game, then 'a go
Hodge his hand to kiss, and we'tother snatched away the Pome-water Hodge was
craunching to quench his thirst.


Hodg. Che called him Mr. Baboone, o'th Doctors Complexion, but that he e'ut so
like a dry-fat. Then out came a fellow with a culour in's nose, as if a' had
been smugg'd ore we red Oker, and che asked which o those two was the
Spurge-maker*


Tym. And the fellow with the Brick-stain'd face, go' Hodge with a Colt-staffe,
such a knock cross the Coxecombe, made him ree'le two or three Cross legs to
him, but had it not bin for our Sea-Country-man, we had bin swadled e'saith.


Hodg. Then che went many a Cross way called -- as you may see by Tym's
Chalke-booke, go' my Landlord your membrance book Tym -- and che came to
another Spurge-maker a depper fellow and a Saminer of Gudgeons that makes
lob-lolly, and spleces broken legs at Sea --.


Tym. Che sed 'a had a Pulpit on's house, made of an old Hogs-head and a what
wast Hodge a baudy filthy name t'had?


Sir. Cle. A Conventicle.


Hodg. And his name was the name of a weed c'have had it often e'my porridge:
what wast Tym.


Tym. They were Elenanders, and his the other name was --.


Hodg. Eat-um ye lob-cocke, and I had a mighty stomach to be dealing with him,
-- well Landlord, I passed so many Crosses that I left nere a Cross 'e my
pocket, and now I am come to be a cross to all my friends.


Sir Har. Well Tenants, your Sea-Country-man, as you term him, has done you
the honor, as to bring you safe through the trouble and dangerous passages (as
I read in your wooden journall) of Black-Wall, Lyme-house, Red-cliffe,
Shadwell, over the Rocks of Execution-Docke, by the Land-markes of Wapping* the
Cloudy Armitage, whereas you say you smel't nothing but Sulpher and Burley
vapor, and past, that Cursned place St. Katherines.


Tym. I, I, my Kates own name -- I think they were Cursned both at a Font, for
that en't so crooked but she is as Cross so God mend's all one, yet that is a
Saint, and my Kate's a Devil.


Sir Har. Well Tym, you are always busy with your sentences, to put hours to
the story; but Hodge proceed, being at the Doctors door do us the favor as to
enter.


Hodg. Nay 'troth surs, soft and fair, che must look about her first, But
looking up, Of My Conscience Tym, tho^ know what a wonderment, it was, that
the Doctors house should be covered with a Bishops flat cornerd Cap.


Tim. And Landlord, the measel Hodge said, it was a dangerous thing, for a
Doctors housetop, to wear a Bishops Cap, because Bishops are put down, and if
the City Matrums should take it as in contempt, and petition that his house
might be pulled down too, what a case w'ud the great measled Porke be in.


Sir Clem. Marry in none but his outside, for his Stye pulled down, 'a must ene
grunt in his natural place, in rubbish and among the dunghils, but go on, good
Ho^ge.


Hodg. Why then che looked upon the outside, and Tymm what said I to it?


Tym. Marry knavishly enough; Hodge said it looked as if it had bynn plastered
ore we Posset-Curd, which his Patients saved for him; with the Overplus, and a
little Pepper; he dyeted his Mad Wife, and his Man to save charges.


Hodge. I Tym, but thou have not told all; when I asked the man's boy over the
way that makes great Course brown sheets, hemmed about with black ropes; I
think for the huge Doctor to snort and scrub his skales off in, at midnight,
the Crack-rope, sed a had feed all the -- what did a call um Tym.


Tym. Old Beldames o'th Hospitals, to save their Curds on Physic days to
wether-boord his Palace.


Hodg. I* I, wether-boord so it was, and that he had caused three thousand
Possets to be made in 5 days, for the advantage of the Curds.


Tym. There was an old woman looked on it 'we Spectacles and said a' was a
prophene but cherly fellow to wether-boord his house we white Lamb-skinns, and
wished the French Rot might thaw his fat sides, and said, it was no marle her
husband could buy none to make gloves, when he must have the outside on's
kennell clad in'um.


Sir Har. What say you to this news my friend? Has it not relish? Dos it not
smacke in your fancy?


Sir Cle. Good Hodge Lether-Pelch go on.
I would not want one tittle of thy story
For Volumes of Tu quoques.

Hodg. You Coakses; why so Gentlemen?


Sir Cle. Prithee Hodge don't mistake me, Tu quoques I said.


Hodg. And we say we are not such beasts or Coaks'es, to be bought and sold in
Latin, or to be Coaks'es in any other language then our own natural speech.


Sir Har. Nay Hodge, what captious, go on I say, you had almost spoiled all.


Hod. Well Landlord in hope you will ever be an honest man, and be merciless to
us -- But looking a little lower, what said I Tym? Prithee turn over my
membrances in thy Chalk-booke.


Tym. First Hodge tel's what the old beggar sed* that with his tow wooden legs
waited like a Groome-porter at his door.


Hodg. The beggar laughing at the Posset Curd, said his house looked more like
a -- what wast Tym?


Tym. Faith, c'has forgot, c'ham such a loblivious measell, the can
under-com-sang* nothing but my bum -- what say you Gentlemen, when a hor^e has
to do with a Mare.


Sir Clem. Why 'a does leap her Tym.


Hodg. Udds niggs, Tym right, che sed his house looked like a Leaper, and che
sed it was all his Grannam le^t his Father as a Pattent to beg by, which
inheritance was left him in his tow wooden legs.


Tym. Now Hodge, thou may pull down the pride of thy eyes, and look a little
lower* what spye'st thou there Hodge-Lether-Pelch?


Hodg. Marry Tym Hob-nayle Gulleries and ball'd Cunies as they call'um.


Sir Har. How Hodge what wast? Galleries and bell Conyes?


Hodg. A path way in the air round about his Charnell-house; its like an old
churles Ruff in crinckle cranckles, daubed ore' we blew Starch, and stifned,
to purpose, but what said I to the beggar, Tym?


Tym. Like any arrant Cursned Carter living; Landlord, a told the beggar that
there were spokes for his knees in that Gullery and ready turned to his hand,
if his stumps flood in need of any fresh legs.


Hod. The Neighbors say, the great lump o tallow, whose outside looks like
the inside of a Cavalere-but, wast not so Tym?


Sir Cle. A Cavyare but, Hodge it was.


Hodg. That he is rolling up and down in that Gullery in a hot day to swelter
himself in the shade and the cool air, but Landlord, merciless Landlord
as you have faithfully promised me, I am now with my eyes betwixt the two
Logger-headed posts at his door, clad in blew-Jackets, like your good
Grandfathers old pow-der-beefe men, and they stand to it as stiffly as ift he
devil were within u'm.


Sir Har. Precious Pelch proceed.


Hodg. The Porch was strongly guarded with the blind and lame.


Sir Cle. How strongly guarded Hodge with such Watchmen?


Hodg. And Watch-woemen too Sir, or I Am a very shoobuckle, there was such a
strong sent among 'um, none durst approach u'm, they smelt like our old persons
6 holes in his arms, legs, and ankles; that he daily feeds we' dry Peace, and
Cole-wort leaves instead o Sallads, to keep low the French Gugawes in his
bones or the great blue blotches our Sextons wife has in both her shin-bones,
which she dawbes ore, we' Candles grease and white Chalk, and gives it a
nickname as she does her husband Nickles, and calls it an Atonement.


Tym. Puppy, it is an odd-sent she calls it.


Sir Clem. An Ointment, eu't it Hodge.


Hodg. I, I, an Appointment, but Landlord never a cup ^ Ale, I grow hoarse a
little.


Sir Har. You shall have much ado to wash your b^^^ down, some drink there.


Tym. Hold Hodge, thou drinkst like a horse.


Hodg. I may thank my merciless Landlord Tym, for che can taste no Malt in
the water, wn't carouse Tym.


Sir Cle. The Southern Air?
Has breathed a nimble finenesse Hodge into
Your home-spunn noddle, but good Pelch go on,
I thirst to hear the sequel.

Hodg. Do you thirst to drink o my Land lords Well too? He is very free of
his B^cket -- but having knocked, there appeared an old thing of whit-lether and
bads come in, where Tym, thou know what a rabble there was too?


Tym. I and a stench too Hodge, w'ud 'a poysned a Pole-cat, Landlord there was
complexions of all sorts, The old story in the Arras hangings has not half so
many, far worse then Jacobs and his twelve sons faces cro^ded together in old
painted cloth. But Hodge look back a little and tel's what thou saydst to the
two old Gentlewomen in ancient loose gowns and french-hoods that the Ca^rman
on a throne, brought softly thither in a black Calve^-ski^ study we^lether
windows, on wheels, with a pair 'a jades yoakt together, and a Pole, set
between 'um, that che asked whether they meant to run a Til't.


Tym. And a beggar woman said we' her whole brood o sons and daughters, at her
back and in her arms, that they were a pair of old Court-whoores, wast not
Tym?


Sir Clem. Courtiers Hodge Courtiers, sure.


Hodg. I Court whoores Gentleman, that had the Cricke in their thumbes, or
their bums, or gums, look Tym in thy scroule.


Tym, Crinck-ums ye dolt, and then the beggar said it was a French Commodity,
and that they paid dear for their Commodities, and now they hurryed to the
Doctors to be rid out, and wished the Doctor wud stew um in a tub like harlots,
that had nothing for her generation at her back, that stuncke o piss and
scraps -- what was the name o'th tub Hodge. --


Hodg. Why a tubb -- a tubb, faith c'have forgot, but it was Cursned in Holland
i am sure, A tub -- a cur-hellish tub -- is there ere such a tub in
Christendom Gentleman?


Sir Clem. A Cornelius tub there is.


Hodg. I, I, a Cadwallader tub it was, then che asked the old fellow* with the
whip, whether his jades did not understand their own natural speech of hoy, G
woe, ree but that a must carry such a tormentor in'^ hands for their thi^
pummel'd buttocks.


Tym. And che swore, che w'ud ^^^ell Hodge to purpose if 'a talked so but what
wast the (...) trap whoo^ed at Hodge?


Hodg. Why they sed the fellow in the tr^nke-^^se that drove um had brought's
horses to the Doctor, to be Cured of their lean Consumption, and sed, their
(...) had the (...), and that they were hide-bound, that their ribbs were like
hoopes, to keep in th^i^ guts, they had ^ rotten Cough* the snekup,
clubb-feere, blind eyes and the snevill.


Tym. But, O my Consci^nce Landlord c'he thought at first, all the red
Petty-coates in Taun on had bin tu^n'd into red wast-coates; every one had an
egg-ba^ket in her hand, with a long ill favored glass in it full o todge,
looke'd like grounds of Ale, and stu^cke like a Brewers sink, what wast they
called them Hodge?


Hodg. Curr-can alls wast not Tym?


Sir Clem. Vrinals you mean,


Hodg. I Sir you are a good 'Spositor, we block-head; shu^ spoil all else --
there was an old fellow looked as if he had bin stewed in Kitchin-stuffe, and 'a
had a belly like a Grannum we child, che sed a was hy-topsy-turvy, the deal
mend um, they ha, such names for 'um.


Sir Clem. You mean Hydroppicke.


Hodg. I, I, Hy trap-stick Landlord, and another, puffed and blowd, as if 'a had
bin broken-winded, or newly run up a hill, a' hawkt such butter-milke spawle
up, looked like the snout-ropings of my old yexing jade that has the Glaunders:
-- there were a great many slung in Crutches, and some that had the very same
cough our Priest is troubled with when he is out in's Sermon. -- There were
many pretty she parcels of the City in black Maskes, and ruffling in silks, to
know if they were we' child, or how they might be, the Doctor has one medicine
for um all, or he is belyed.


Tym. And others that made me weak stomack't, they had Scales on their
foreheads, looked like the half dried dirt o my Cart wheels, or Cow Dung
crusted in the Sun, and covered ore we'yellow Waspes and blew flesh-flies.


Hodg. And if ever there were need o painting, those Faces looked so pitifully
as if they begged for it.


Tym. But Landlord, passing that Golgotha, we were ushered by a thin fellow,
whose bare buttocks peept through his trunk breeches, into the presence of the
Gog and Magog, well furs 'a sat stradling four else wide, and looked like a
Giant that had bin knocked into crumples, with a great club.


Sir Clem. Now we may expect
The Monsters learned discourse; Sir, I have heard
A murmur of him amongst the common Rabble,
As if that Curses and more Charitable breath,
Had mixed to speak his name, indeed, a sound
Uncharitable enough, if an inbred goodness
Dwelt somewhat darkly in him, which the eye
That viewes at random could not guess, it there,
Yet in it self it would break into'th air,
And raise a harmony would please the ear,
Of the more knowing tribe; but when all mouths
That have discreet and modest owners must
Swell with a Language suitable to's actions,
Of pestilent relish, it must carry in it
A jealousy the stench that lives in's breast
Must be as murdering in the wiser thought
As are his mixtures to that wretched crew,
That dar^ assault his door to purchase them,
But on good Hodge and Tym.

Hodg. I marry Tym, here is a Gentleman w'ud tell a tale to purpose, as God
mends, 'a has spoke very wisely, do understand him Tym?


Tym. As much as thou do Hodge, but o my Conscience I know not what to make
on it.


Sir Har. Well Tenants you speak the truth, and that will shame the Devil.


Hodg. The Doctor you mean Land^ord, but the first word a^ spoke to us, a did
grunt out and we were feign to speak a whole bottle a hay, to scour his
throat cleerer.


Tym. 'A then sed we we are full o gross humors, and that we must take a
Sturgeon: but che told him c'had no skill in Fisherman-ship.


Hodg. Thou lie Owl, it was a St^rgation


Sir Clem. A Purgation sure, wast not?


Hodg. I, I, and the Pickrell, go my p^^se one first and emptyed it of eight
Groates, and a spick and span new towpence, the deal throttle his weasand
with it.


Tym. But what wast 'a go thee Hodge?


Hodg. The d'eale in a Powder, 'che sed it was the d'eales Grid-Iron and a
Scummer.


Sir Clem. How? Stay good Hodge. --


Hodg. I tell you 'che could not stay one minute when 'che had it in my paunch,
the very thought o'nt makes me clownish, 'che must go and untrusse a point,
and --


Sir Cle. Sir! I have read with some delight the hystory of simples,
But what this should be it is too difficult,
For me to guess at.

Tym. Faith Sir, the Simple was e'ne Lether-Pelch himself ten't worth your
anger to study for it.


Sir Clem. Wast not Tym, Dy^gredium and Scamonye.


Tym. O my Conscience Gentleman, you have bin a Doctor too, but you are nothing
like him.


Sir Clem. Prithee Tym describe him.


Tym. Describe him what is that?


Sir Clem. Paint him forth.


Tym. Oh is that all, then on a smoakt wall, with a little small-cole, I will
scratch out a great fat Devil though it look like a Bear, it is but your
worships scrowling under, This is a Devil, and there is nere a May Pole blade
in the Town but will understand it, without go'ng to our old Curate.


Sir Clem. Come Hodge, we must desire
Your wit in Figuring this piece, I know
That there is somewhat carries worth within thee,
And thy invention, come then lets survay
The Doctor and each Limb in its due color
Lay out, that when we have numbered all, we may
Wonder at's true Dimensions.

Hodg. Well though I could (when I had my limbs) better hold the Plough then a
Pensill, yet I will scrawle him out we my tongue and tell you what a bundle of
mortality he is -- did you ever see a Roman Nose in a Ballado Country love,
ene such a snout has he, dappled with pock-holes, and colored like Wainscot in
Ioyners varnish, with a pair of Sachell-cheekes o'th same complexion and
hony-comb'd like a course sive, a has a Chin that is mask't in sweat and
pox-scarres with here and there a Brisle stuck in spite on's Nose.


Tym. His Ioule is curled and tufted like a Negroes, and in the shape of a
Molehill, nitted we' Vermin as that is we' Pissemyres -- They say he is as
brazen-fac't as Pitts Cannons on Tower-wharfe, but I don't beleeve't the
Mungrell looks more like in countenance one of the old Iron Guns on Towerhill,
that lie in Ambush to cheat some Sea novice or other, as the Doctor does, with
the appearance of their greatness more then their service, and roar (as he
does in his own behalf) till they split and murder all about 'um.


Hodg. And Landlord, he is larded with Porkes-grease in the Brisket, and 'a has
a flank like an Ox he is buttockt like an Elephant, and Udder'd like a Cow,
'a has a pair of Pumpkinns instead of legs, and a foot as large as a
Bucking-beetle, with a paunch like a brewing-fat; A should be no Gentleman by his
arms, for they are almost buried in their own pits, and from thence there
reakes a borish stream, as rank as an old Gally-slaves, or the slymy Groynes
of a withered witch, 'a makes a noise when he walks as if 'a were threshing or
beating Hemp.


Sir Har. Did see his Wife Hodge?


Hodg. Che did see a bundle 'a carrion 'che called one, she looks like a
Bears whelpe, and he must lick her into shape 'ere she have any, the D'eale
send him a Stomach to it.


Tym. 'Che dances a Morice every Mid-sommer-Moone, we' the Queen a' Fayries,
and loves the Dog-starre abominably, and hopes to have whelps by him, 'che
says that Charles-wayn has eight wheels, and fears nothing more then that
she shall be hurryed in that Cart, to Bed-lame.


Hodg. And talks of a Pedigree, longer then ever was hammered out a'
South Wales, che swears Venus is her granchild, if she be, and like her, God
Scarce might as well a bin enammell'd of a Witch, and the Cuckold Pul-can might
a found somewhat else to a done, then to a bin angry.


Sir Clem. Gramercy Hodge, thou have honest smooth brows, the Feminine evils
are not enoculated 'on 'um.


Hodg. 'Che had some pimpling there 'o late.


Tym. Then che sed. V-bi-ther, was an arrant Whore-Master, and the man in the
Moon was his Baude, and that a had woed her, and sent Mercury, with a bottle
ons water, to sweep the Scales and dand-riffe from her Physiognomy, and
Pouch-mouth: and that is Aturne should be the next good thing a' w'ud present
her, that she might be Plannet struck, and bring forth another Sun, which
with A pottle Waterings might make the Stubble on her sweet Pugs chaps, grow a
little faster.


Sir Har. Well set out Tym: she is mad it seems?


Hodg. Mad co ye, che was wedded to the Doctor for the same purpose, and he
took her for better for worse, to the same end; well Landlord, she is a
notable Straw-lug-ger, and Vows the 12 Sines are her own proper goods, and
that she was delivered of Gemini at a Gossips feast; when the old midwife, had
it in Aries, which was a Sine then perboyl'd mumble-crust had a mighty mind to
'a bin Leo, and 'a roared like one, when Aquarius, had bin fitter for her then
the toss-pot.


Tym. Che sed her husbands Arms was Taurus, and that she was well skilled in
Harlotry, and that she had added gulls to 'um?


Sir Clem. Geules Geules.


Tym. We 3 singes more Gudgeons for Piss-us, and Capring-horne, which Fur-goe
to in-belly-^^it


Sir Clem. Embellesh it good Tym.


Hodg. A mad drab it is, and then suddenly cried out, and sed, che had a Scorpion
betwixt her legs, a Canker in her breast, and Rovers in her Thighs, that put
her to many flights, -- And so ran away from's.


Tym. Then came his Servingman, a fellow in motley that looked as if he had
not slept since the Conquest; he is a walking shadow that grumbles out yes, and
no, to all comers, sucks his paws and the wet nurses, come we' Pis-pots very
eagerly, 'a has a begging countenance, and a breath that stinks like a stone
Chamber Pot, surr'd white with age, and stale, or a Jurden that has escaped many
a scowring both ways, in an Inn.


Sir Har. But how did your Physic work Hodge?


Hodg. Work co ye, it played at Tennis e'my guts, I thought the Varlet, had
conjured a couple a Sawyers into my guts to Saw my puddings e pieces, or a
Smiths Vice and pincers, they did so gripe me.


Tym. 'A Roared out, and sed there was a Shambles in's arse a shit red gobbits,
and blood, as if it had powered through the sinke-hole of a slaughterhouse.


Hodg. Then 'a go me a Cord-an-all enough to a throtled a mangy-dog a black
drench of soote and bul's gall, w'ud a caused a lean spur-galld jade to 'a had
the Chyn-cough: well Landlord, I have heard of a cold sweat (at Plough and
Cart c'have had many a hot one) and che could a whistled it away with a little
Sully-bub; but a cold-sweat do you call it? It Is a medicine for a dead horse, it
made my head and my heart ache: it renc't my Maw e'faith: c'had Cricks and
Crampes, from my back to my toes: c'he thought a cold-sweat, w'ud a thrust me
out o'th world by neck and shoulders: if ever shepards wud scare a Nation o
Foxes from their Lambs, let them catch one and put him into a cold-sweat, and
send him among his tribe again, and if ever any come neere'um, i will be cut into
trypes and broyld o'th Coals: Why, che was wrung and twisted with it like a
course hempen-sheet out o'th cold water


Tym. And the malmsey nosed chap-fal'n jade, my Landlady sed 'a was a beast to
piss abed and bath in it, when poor Hodge he was in a cold sweat, and did
grinne at it, like the deaths head, set in a Jewel o mortality, ore the
Churchyard portall, c'he was faigne to wring his mothers milk out on's nose
to fetch him again.


Hodg. A cold sweat do ye call i^?


Sir Cle* You are mistaken Hodge,
T 'was not by order but by accident.

Hodg. How Sir, mistaken! Pray do you go and entreat him we' 8 shillings to put
you into a cold-sweat, you would part with all you have to be out on it; you may lay
your life on it, for it is as much as it is worth if you be once in it. -- Why? Man,
my bum stood where my belly was, and my nose was placed like a Hawks at Roost,
in the nape of my neck: my golls were writhed like Hoby-de-boodies, or the
arrantst Fayry innocent ever slaver'd.


Tym. By The Mass, che thought c'had lost Hodge, and the D'eale had left a
changeling, in's room, as God mends a did so squint and make mouths: and his
Oagles did so witter, c'he thought, that c'had, had a Morice-dancer in's
noddle, his joints did so twitch, and his chaps did so taber, c'he was ene
wishing for a nosegay, bells, and a blue handkercher.


Sir Har. Thou had Convulsion fits Hodge.


Hodg. Fits co ye? Che was fitted e'faith; but how fit so ere it was c'ham sure
they were Compulsions, -- But pray Sir! Go and buy a cold-sweat on him, make
your Will first; bespeake the Cakes and Ale, and take leave of all your
friends; forgive your Enemies, and especially your Butcher, the Doctor, and if
ever you be at Peace (when you are once in it,) till you are at Peace we' God,
I Will make a trough o my hide and serve the Hoggs in it, mistaken co ye?


Tym. Yes go, such a cold sweat as poor Hodge Lether-pelch had, i will warrant
you speed, you will make such speed, to be out on it, you may chance to break
your neck by it.


Hodg. Neck co ye, c'he thought the Doctors Hob-goblins bin wringing my neck
a pieces, che saw no body and yet che was pulled and hall'd, like a Traitor
o'th wrack, che talks of the nightmare, but che thought a thousand on 'um
had bin tearing my limbs asunder* Then che thought strangely that c'had bin in
a Cloud for c'had mists and Fegaries before my eyes, and capring little devils,
as if c'had bin at a Puppit-play.


Tym. Che wonders, so many will run the hazard to hang or drowned themselves,
when they may have some hope of heaven by a cold-sweat, more haste, and better
speed: if the Lord Major w'ud but send one Cart full of execution flesh to him,
and let him but kill 'um with a cold-sweat, it would so scare the cut-purses,
the markets w'ud be swept clear o'um for 7 years after.


Sir Har. I believe thee Hodge, and Newgate want much of its revenue, to the
making lean of the under Copper-nos'd Iaylors; the Hangman w'ud fall into a
deep Consumption by it, Long-lane want many a Tiburne bargain, and the
Brokers in Hounds-Ditch translate themselves into absolute Wolves, the more
ravenously to feed upon the innocent poor.


Hodg. O my Conscience Landlord, you a bin in a coldsweat too.


Sir Har. No Pelch, but thy tale has made me have a deep apprehension of it.


Hodg. A deep what do you called co ye, c'ham sure it had almost thrust me as
deep into the ground as c'ham long, c'he thinks if a Witch were put out o'th
World by a cold-sweat instead o burning: all the hellish brood w'ud be so
frighted, they w'ud deny their Covenant, bid defiance to the devil, fall to
Prayers and be converted again; but Tym take thy memerdrandums out o thy
pouch, and tel's what the man sed that bored the Elme-trees right-ore agon him.


Tym. Why che sed they were Pumpes you puppy: for the Abygale Lucy, Elizabeth,
Mary, plain Joane, Robert, Harry William and Ralph.


Hodg. I, I, Pumpes, and che sed they wore 'um out faster, then c'he c'ud make
'um and thou asked him Tym: what wast Tym?


Tym. Why, che asked him whether they were all rogues and whores he named that
came to the great fat Doctor or no?


Hodg. I, I, che sed, and laughed, and sed they were to pumpe 'um, and then we
sneakt away, and Tym said what a pair o rogues are we to endanger a Pumping.


Tym. It Was a merry Piper 'saith, and sed if there had bin a Pumpe ready we must
a gone to it too.


Sir Clem. Some Pumpes for ships they mean.


Hodg. A sed che had a Brother, w'ud set up a shed next door to the Doctor and
sell nothing but Crutches, Wooden legs, glasse-eyes, and trotter-bone Teeth,
and hoped to be as gross as an Alderman in Purse, and the Doctor in Carcass
in two Moons: but Landlord, nere a scrap of pudding, or mess o Bacon
porridge.


Sir Har. Yes, go in, Hodge and Tym: there is the carcass of a Goose and a stale
Wood-cock.


Hodg. I Will ha the carcass Tym 'cause it has no legs, but che hopes, it has
other gets Pynions then mine are.


Tym. What thy Crutches Hodge? And c'heele make an ass o the Woodcock.


Hodg. C'heele swing my self betwixt Heaven and Earth o my Crutches again to
London, and be Pumpe, if thou can make an Ass of a Wood-cock Tym: Though it
fall to your share, you will sooner make nothing on it Tym, if you have a good
stomach to it, but bones good Tym.


Sir Har. At my last being at London where J lodged
In a friends house, we had discourse about
This rank of people we call Mountebanks
Of whom that vast place does receive such swarms,
And of all Sexes, nay of Nations too,
Made out of all trades, (when misfortunes, either
Of Vice or Ignorance has beat them out
Of their own Countries, or their Manual Arts,
That it is a pity there is no Law nor power
Ordayn'd to bridle them.

Sir Clem. Oh Sir, did you know,
How th'venime of the times has bloch't the face
Of Justice, and made Virtue hang the head,
You w'ud deplore the miseries of this Country,
That more groan under these base burdens, then
The Sword or Pestilence, with all the Ruins
That wait on Heavens wrath or the brow of War,
If there be any loose piece that has lost
Himself in Cobling Shoes or botching Stockings
Straight he retires to Physic or Divinity,
And so dos mend, and patch himself again,
To underlay his fortunes with his Cosenage,
And botch himself up by hypocrisy,
Into a Pulpit Cassock.

Sir Har. Most ridiculous.
What has the breath of Englishmen infected,
The Air it can give life and being too
Such Mungrill Serpents?

Sir Clem. It Is most true, but wort
Not! An heroyick act to cleuse the Common
Wealth, of such dunghills, and in the hurly burly,
Never abuse the knowing pining Brain,
That sits half starved with riches in his Pate,
W'ud weigh the wealth of India down if valew'd
To their just worth, nay, pollish them, and set
Them as rich Jewels to the public eye,
And purchase to our Nation, the reverence
All foreign clymates owe to it in due debt,
W'ud it not leave unto Posterity?
A Chronicle, but of the date and year,
The fullness of all years would not wipe out,
Oh I could wake in such a noble passion
And give it breath but to dispute this cause,
Until the coldness of the grave had cast
The night and sleep it holds in its possession
Over my flesh and Spirit.

Sir Har. Twere a work
W'ud be eternal and as everlasting
In the great benefits it carries with it,
But how performed? That question dashes out
All Policies and not unworthily,
Since th'Law has shared a liberty to all
To live.

Sir Clem. So it be honestly, but what
Faith or credit can a base Imposture
Challenge unto himself, or by what Law,
Can he determine Physic, or Divinity
His own Inheritance? When in neither he
Is so far lettered, as to read the title
And branch the Etymology: all the right
He has unto those Sacred mysteries,
Is the contemned applauses of dry Nurs'es
Porters, and Carre-men; with a heap of Rubbish,
(Tumbled into a multitude) of that making
And some odd scriblings of a learned Jew,
On purpose called so, and reduced into
A dark dispensatory of Receipts,
Treasured in the harlot Library of their Noddles,
And what can this stuff, by a dangerous hand
(Rashly administered) promise but destruction,
To those that dare attempt their use?

Sir Harry. I see,
You have a smart sense of the abuse.

Sir Clem. And must,
Out of a Pious duty to my Country
Their common way of publishing their trumperies,
Under the Pye-ball'd title of elixers,
Makes Virtue such a bastar'd unto those
Barely conceive that truth they read on posts,
To bring them Cheese and Garlic; when they close
Their wise opinions (in the cursed trial)
That all the blessings of that noble mystery
Must be o'th same mould and mortal.

Sir Har. I confess, in these Relations go integrity:
And must lament the cause; yet I have known
Some eminent in Office an in Garb
(It seems more then in judgment) has proclaym'd
Great miracles of these Monsters. --

Sir Clem. And enforced
Their visits to their best friends, who have soon
Cursed them and their belief, in the sad conclusion,
But for a remedy?

Sir Har. It would wipe off the tears
The common Cheek is every day bedewed with,
And quit the score, before Heaven which they rashly
Swell to an account of murder of themselves
And nearest Allies, turn'e the gray Beard in Plush
(That Is Coacht and hurryed to some queint destruction.)
Into a wiser habit, that at least
He may in's wit seem suitable to's Clothes
And titles; though those gay Materials
Were left him by his Grandsire in his Will
Such silken guls there are, but for a remedy.

Sir Clem. Were not a piece of Piety next too
The quenching of infectious Heresy,
Might have a place and called the work of Heaven,
Thus to Reform these evils.

Sir Har. Pray discourse it.

Sir Clem. That none should dare.
To practice Physic but such as can give
A fair description of their knowledge in it
In some sound work of theirs; which would put many
True laborers into the Vineyard.

Sir Har. An excellent way, and those works. --

Sir Clem. Published by th'common purse.

Sir Har. I conceive you.
And thereby Physic would here only grow,
With its sweet odor and most glorious Tincture,
And set all Nations such fresh Copies of
The yet but dreamt of mystery, -- that they
Would next to their Devotions think upon
The honorable thanks they owe and must
Pay to this Northern Nursery.

Sir Clem. Then what
By the strick't hand of such Authority
(In the execution) durty heepes of Maggots,
Would be swept up together all the Dung-Carts
Must for a Month fo^sake the stifled kennels
And stinking dust tubs, to convey those Mountains,
Of more infectious carrion out o'th City,
The Gold-finders much change their hours and trade
And hurry out in the day those loathsome lakes,
And purchase by th'employment fields to lay
Their filth in; and not need, the common gist
To The necessary work.

Sir Harry. What Troops of Plush
Must trudge; and old chins fether'd white with Age,
With daggled Petty-coates that were lately spewed
Out of some Hospital; Tailors drabs, and whores,
Of a most impudent making: with some blasted
Copper-nos'd Crack-brain'd Medicine makers: what
A killing sunk, the allies w'ud be clens'd of
And the streets emptyed.

Sir Clem. Nay Sir! Some fine Pageants
That sit in the chair of Justice must then pack too,
And if the English want a murdering Army,
To shed among the Irish, that like famine
Would eat them up and make large Valleys but
One grave until they swelled up to the Mountains,
Let them but Muster these, and if they don't
Depopulate their Country in five Months,
Mauger their Boggs and Nutio; I Will be stewed
In Barrowes grease, and served to the Devils Table,
When he to the Pope Communicates a Morsel
At the Renewing of their league.

Sir Harry. Where would
Hodge, his Physician be then?

Sir Clem. In a Dung-Cart,
A Chariot that becomes him.

Sir Harry. Well Hodge what news now?

Hodg. A whole belly full. Tym sed c'had a weak stomach and if c'had not a
cantle o Cheese a two pounds, a Rye Loaf o six pence, and a black Jack, o
Sir a shad not believe a had a Woodcock in's belly.


Sir Clem. But what is worse
The Varlets with confronting impudence
Leaves on the bosom of Authority
Murder as it were by Patent, and makes poor,
The Hospital Charity, when it shares to numbers;
For what by the Benefactors, was judged sufficient.
To ease a Cities maimed: now'es too little
But for one Precinct.

Sir Harry. I pity the abuse.

Sir Clem. Is It not strange
The looseness of some Gentlewomans belly,
Waits on some ancient Lady, healed by accident,
Or bawdry, not by Art, or honest actions,
Should be sufficient warrant for these -- Mungrils
Half men, half Monsters to stand in defyance
Of a whole College, all Sage honest men,
As Reverent in their Art, as thei'r in years,
As white in all their undertakings, as
The curled Snow sits on their heads, and brows,
The true somenters of their noble mystery,
And rare examples to all Posterity.
In whose chaste bos^^e, our Progenitors
Planted a full power, to examine, and
Punish these Vultures, now by bribes and filth,
Corrupting the Re-publicke breast so much
That they Cu^ Privilegis act their b^senesse
In dangerous mixtures, and so* either fully
Eclipse their rights, or weaken those brave men,
They are of no use to the common Good,

Sir Har. What does the Law set down, against these abuses
In their restraint.

Sir Clem As they now interpret
The Law; it does support 'um and break down,
The ancient privileges we are planted in,
The Society of Physicians; and
Under pretense of Freedom to all people
In honest ways to make provision
For their own Families, and to keep out
Want: and other irksome Guests attending on it
They let in all, for Ruin.

Sir Har. Judge of the Law
And Ministers of it charitably.

Sir Clem. Sir,
They may as well admit a dabbled Barato^
Made out of a hobling Botcher by necessity
And Common quarrels, and dubd Solicitor^
By Fish-wives, and such tag-rag-squabling pieces
Into the Throne of Justice, and have borne
The Mace before him to their Courts, As be
The Champions of these Pisse-pot prodigies,
In consideration of their Golden sees:
And by a Power derived, I know n't from whence
Divest the College of those limits which
Our Predecessors gave them, and made Law
As high and equal, in such Cases, As
Their own professings?

Sir Har. Be not passionate,
Indeed, I cannot discern, how they can by
True sympathy, determine it, but as
The College may usurp unto themselves
A number, and, for their own private ends
Never admit beyond such scopes, which would
Make Physic barren, if from thence they only
Must issue, when, from other Countries, we
Are furnished with rich Jewels for the Common Good.

Sir Clem. And from thence flock many varnisht ore,
With title more then knowledge: being the purchase
Of their f^^ll purses, not their Brains; Their empty,
And sick of Inanition; neither do I
So fortify my self against all reason,
But if these fellows that profess so much
Are but endew'd with what is published of 'um
Why don't they publish some brave work of theirs
To be a Testament unto these minutes,
And after ages of their admired, and known
Worth in their Arts? W'ud it not clinch the mouth
Of all, and set them off full, and supported
By The general voice and hand? from all oppression?
W'ud it not put a Palsy into'th chaps,
(A dead one) of the common brute, and scandal?
That it should fall and trembl but to mention
One syllable of dishonor, if such worth
Could but appear out of'um.

Sir Harry. You speak reason.

Sir Clem. And if not, to force 'um
Into their proper channels for a livelihood,
Tinker to Tinkering, botcher to his botching.
Their Truls to scowring and their seventh he Bastard
To Weaving, Ditching, Delving and such Works
Nature did fit them Lymbes for, as big and monstrous
As Corineus, or his huge foe Colbrous,
That guard the Shreeves Courts, from flesh flies that swarm
Out of the Compters Ordnary, where there is
Diet and place more fit for such thrum'd Yeomen
Then that these times allow'um.

Sir Harry. Indeed Carts and Cages better suites.

Sir Clem. With their foul cosenage,
Then private Chambers and Coaches.

Hodg. Tym, I hope a' don't mean us.

Sir Clem. No honest Hodge thou sufferd'd
Under these blazing Commets that portend.
Nothing but death and slaughter when they shine
Brightest. -- But i will collect my self.

Sir Harry. Nobly uttered Sir,
There is no fraud or flattery in your words.
Well Tym, what was your Physic?

Tym. Why c'had first a Stir-up.

Sir Clem. A Sirrope Tym, a Sirrope.

Tym. I say, it was a stirrup, it so stirred up my Maw, che spewed up all c'had
eaten in five days, besides great gobbets of very worshipful fleame.


Sir Clem. How Worshipful?

Hodg. I, Right Worshipful and't please you, such as the Major a' Taunton
pleased to give his dog out on's own belly after supper, instead of a Posset.


Sir Clem. What wast called Tym.

Tym. Why, che called it an Ox-in meal and a Skillet on we simples.


Sir Clem. Oximel sciliticum simplex* it was Tym.


Tim. I, I, sir you must pardon my loblivion, such hard words they are.


Hodg. Then che gone him a Trough a trough, a Pellet beaten into powder.


Sir Clem. A Trosicke, honest Hodge, I must help your memory still.


Tym. I, I, sick, che remembers che made me as sick as a dog wee't, I wished
it in's tripes and a tenter hook in the middle ont.


Hodg. Che called it a Trough-sicke, of All-hands.


Sir Clem. All-Handul^s, Tym.


Tym. Dandle us co ye, che dandled my bum so, che c'ud scarce squat in six
days after.


Hodg. Then che go him a powder che sed it was a Trollop.


Sir Clem. Ye pose me to unfold this Riddle, a Trollop*


Hodg. It Was the powder of his old wifes-shin-bone, for o my Conscience she is
a Trollop.


Sir Clem. 'Twas called Iallop.


Tym. I, I, Gallop, che had it no sooner e'my maw, but it set spurs to my
sides, it did swinge me under the short Ribs, and did Gallop through my Guts as
if a troop o Horse had been Routed e' my crop; a noose choke him, che had a
Trooper out of my pocket for it.


Hodg. A sed che must have a rack of Mutton, to make broth, but a set Tym on
such a wrack, that che was feign to eat the Porridge, they w'ud a bin cold
else; but Landlord, merciless Landlord, as you have promised me before
sufficient witness; Tym had no more color in's face then J had, when you told
me you w'ud Rack my rent, merciless Landlord --.


Tym. Then che sed I must ha a Collar for mine eyes.


Hodge. A horse Collar 'twas, conjured into a little Glass: but Tym a sed your
Trollop-powder, w'ud spurge thy head but I think it powdered your Muggets, and
your Collar put you into choler I think, it made him stamp and stare like
one o your Roaring boys, my Landlady brought up a dozen of Cans and asked if the
Measell were mad to knock for so much Beer, when poor Tym had a Collar in's
eyes wrought as dangerously as a Halter almost.


Sir Clem. 'Twas called a Collerium?


Tym. I good Gentleman, a Colliers. Thumb che called it, as soon as che had
thrust it into my eyes, it made me blubber like a great-Cow-baby, and put one
quite out, che was e'ne bethinking my self of a Dog and a Bell, with a begging
piece of Scripture to a howling tone, That it is a long Night that never his
day, or blind Besses trade, of Repeating a chapter of John with her hands in
her placket, and churning of Pleas with her buttocks, and miscalling the
waggish striplings, that mocked and slockt about her.


Sir Clem. Enough good Tym, it grows late Sir Harry?


Hodg. The Song, the song, Landlord pray slay and heart.


Sir Har. By all means Hodge?


Hodge. It Is to a new tune Landlord, of old Thomas you cannot.

THE SONG.
1.
COme come away
Why make you any stay:
Me thinks you do not flock
To purchase these Elixers:
E'n faith I do not mock
But is your sweet-hearts quick Sirs?
Here Is Sirrope will devour
What ever's Threatened your.
2.
Do not smother
The truth, though sick o'th Mother,
Here Is in this little Pill
A Bawd will surely do it
Without the Midwife's skill
Let it but once come to it
And if that you are willing*
It will not blench at killing.
3.
Or has a touch
Of the Frenchman too much
Ceased on your scoling bones,
Or does your Grief nor spare
With midnights Gripes and Groans,
To Tanne the scalpe from hair:
Here Is in this Dulcie potion
A Surgeon's boy with Lotion.
4.
Come make trial,
Here Is in this little Vyoll
An Hospital of Cures,
There Is none that ever took't,
Now any pain endures,
Or after e' to forsook't:
It Is Physic for the Gout,
The Stone, and those look out.
5.
Here Is a Gelly
For the Hydropicke belly,
The Wind and water it
With power Conjures forth,
And Cures the Phrenzie sit,
It quickens the Dead birth:
It Cooles a babbling tongue,
And makes a Mid-wi^e young.
6.
Here is no fraud
In Doctor or in Bawd,
The troubles of this world
From persons of each Gender,
They sundenly have hurled
Till Doomesday, Peace they Render:
Fame no Account will have
Of them, but from the Grave.

Sir Har. Come it is Dinner time:
And Sir, I hope, this day I shall enjoy
Your company, to morrow morning choose
What early hour you please to take your journey
We will put down these merry Scaenes, with a
Fresh bowl of Suck, shall warm our appetites
Unto a competent meal of homely fare
I will not be denied.

Sir Clem. Sir you are
Too poorefull over me, and your Goodness does
Extend in bounty, beyond my deservings,
Your liberal table is not furnished more
With excellent Vyands, then your free, and noble
Heart is with honest wishes to your Friends;
Which end in fair performances, and Sir
That is the Crown of all, without which all
Hospitality were but vilde and Counterfeit.

Sir Har. No more -- nay Hodge and Tym you are my loving Guests too
The Doctor has dealt favorably with you
For though your journey, does return you shame,
A has left you so, The Blind may lead the Lame.

Epigrams.
1.
THus Hodge and Tym how course so e're they seem
In language, may, for truth be in esteem.
2.
In tatters, they, their Dialogue have sent
Abroad, but why? 'Cause truth still naked went.
3.
And though some may Conclude their tale but froth,
Beleev't they are a kin to Tom-tell-troth.
4.
But if they brand them, with Imposturie,
Tell'um from me they give themselves the lie.
Though course, in Tatters, and but froth, they may
Win, (without Lawyers, or fat bribes) the Day.
The End.

