NEWS from the Sessions House. THE Trial, Conviction, Condemnation, and
Execution OF POPERY, FOR High Treason; IN Betraying the Kingdom, and Conspiring
the Ruin, Subversion, and Death of the Protestant Religion. WITH He last
Speech and Confession at Tyburn.
A Commission of Oyer and Terminer, being issued forth for the Trial of Popery,
the Judges repaired to the Bench, and the Court being set, after Proclamation
made for silence, the Trial thus proceeded.

Clerk of the Crown. Jayler, set Popery to the Bar.

Popery, hold up thy hand, here thou stand Indicted by the name of Popery,
late of the City of Rome* in the Province of Babylon: not having the fear of
God before thine Eyes, but being moved by the instigation of the Devil, did
of thine own free will, voluntarily create. make, and devise several damnable
Principles, and Diabolical Practices contrary to the Word of God, pernicious to
mankind, and repugnant to human Society; and thou the said Popery to further
thy aforesaid devices, the duty of thy Allegiance not weighing, did, as a
false Traitor, against our Sacred and most Illustrious Prince, Counterfeit his
broad Seal, and thereby with Force and Arms, did Seal up his Majesty's Laws,
both Civil and Divine: and instead thereof did Command Obedience to thy
Devilish Intentions; and the aforementioned Popery, thoroughly to accomplish
thy aforesaid designs, did with Force and Arms aforesaid, Usurpatiously
endeavor to exalt thy self, in the said City of Rome, equal with God,
Blasphemously saying, thou could Pardon Sins, Damn, etc. And thou the said
Popery did with the Devil combine by his Assistance to allure, entice, and
enforce Kings, Queens, and Princes to retain thy Damnable Religion, to the
utter destruction of their faithful Subjects; and whereas many Royal hearted
Christians ejected, and opposed thy Erroneous Principles thou the said Popery
did Savagely and Inhumanely Invade their Nations, Assassinate Kings, Murdered
thousands, Burned their Cities, Robbed their Houses, against the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the Laws and
Statutes made, and provided in that Case. What say thou for thy self,
Popery? Art thou Guiley of these Treasons, Rebellions, Murders, etc. whereof
thou stand Indicted, or not Guilty?


Pop. Not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, How will thou be Tried?


Pop. By God, and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send the a good deliverance.


Cl. of Cr. Popery, these men that thou have here called and personally appear,
are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King, and you, upon Trial of your
Life and Death; if therefore you will Challenge them, or any of them, your time
is to speak, as they come to the Book to be Sworn; and before they are Sworn.
Crier, call Holy Scriptures.


Popery, My Lord, I except against him; there is a sufficient Gentleman stands
by, pray let him be put in his place.


L. C. J. What is his Name?


Pop. Good-works.


L. C. J. You must not be your own chuser, but that you may have as fair Trial
as can be, he shall be one.

No other being challenged, the Names of the Jury that were sworn, are as
follows; Righteousness, Evangelists, Sacraments, Good-works, Hope, Faith,
Charity, Protestantism, Impartiality, Judgment, Fathers, Mercy.



Cl. of Cr. Crier, Count these. Righteousness.


Crier. One, and so the rest.

Twelve good men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence.


Cl. of Cr. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yes, if any will give Evidence for our Sovereign Lord the King
against Popery, Prisoner at the Bar, let him come forth, and he shall be heard;
for the Prisoner stands at the Bar upon his deliverance.


Cl. of Cr. You Gentlemen of the Jury look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, and
hear his Cause; he stands Indicted by the name of Popery, late of the City of
Rome, in the Province of Babylon: upon his Indictment he has been Arraigned,
and there unto has pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon
God, and his Country; whose Country ye are; your Charge is to enquire whether
he be Guilty, in the manner and form that he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gent. of the Jury, Popery
stands here Indicted of Great and Heinous Crimes, yet not greater than has
been by him committed: it is not unknown to us that he is of the Race and
Progeny of Cain, and his Murders are greater than have been perpetrated by any
since the Creation of the world; that he might the more plausibly Commit his
Villainies, he has shaded himself under the serene Veil of Christianity; what
name so lovely as Jesus, yet whose operations so odious as Jesuits? he has
also styled himself with Istud nomen Blasphemiae, Universal; which he says he
derived Successively from Saint Peter, though it will puzzle his greatest Doctors
to prove that Peter was ever at Rome. Thus having strengthened himself in
Iniquity, Usurping over Kings, and Princes; bringing people and Nations into
Thraldom, and Slavery; thought Nature had given him a perpetual writ of Ease,
and made every part of the Christian world feel his Tyranny. But as the Jews,
who sold Christ for thirty pieces of Silver, came at last themselves to be sold
thirty for a penny; so shall he know that the Arm of Vengeance has been long
lifted up, that it may now fall down the heavier upon him. To prove the
Indictment, we might call many witnesses, but we shall call only some principal
ones; and first, Sir Naked Truth, who has been greatly persecuted by him.


Cl. of Cr. Crier, call Sir Naked Truth.


Crier. My Lord, here is the Gentleman, which was thrust out from being one of
the Jury, desires to know whether he may give Evidence against the Prisoner at
the Bar?


L. C. J. Who? Holy Scriptures.


Crier, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holy Scriptures, what can thou say against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Holy Script. My Lord, Popery, now Prisoner at the Bar, has broached many
damnable Heresies contrary to the word of God, and particularly that it is not
a Rule of Faith, but as a Nose of wax, to be turned which way the Church
pleases whereas the word of God says, that all Scripture is given by Divine
inspiration, yet he wickedly prefers his own Carnal Traditions before it, as
also his Principles are directly against the Ten Commandments: Against the
first, in making a God of the Bread in the Sacrament. Against the Second, in
bowing down thereunto. Aeainst the Third, by profane Swearing by God, and the
Saints. Against the Fourth, in preferring his Saints days, which are of his own
Institution, before the Sabbath, which is of Divine. Against the Fifth, in
declaring that Children of his Religion owe not Obedience to their Parents,
which are not of the same. Against the Sixth, in maintaining the lawfulness of
Robbing, Plundering and endeavoring to Ruin, by Firing Houses; or otherwise,
all those that are not of his Opinion. Against the Seventh, in setting up, and
allowing of common Stews, etc. Against the Eighth, in bloody and inhuman
Muthering, and Massacring of Protestants, under the Names of Heriticks, and
endeavoring to maintain the lawfulness thereof. Against the Ninth, in making
Leagues with Princes for his own advantage, and then breaking them, saying,
Oaths may not be kept with Hereticsts. Against the Tenth, in a greedy coveting
of Gold, he pretending to give out Pardons to Commit all manner of villainies
whatever. Besides my Lord, there is scarce one Commandment of the first Table
free from his innovations, nevertheless he is not ashamed to say that a man of
his Religion may keep all the Commandments, contrary to the word of God, which
says, that there is not a just man that lives and sins not, and also, that
if we say we have no sin we deceive our Selves, etc.


L.C.J. Sir Naked Truth, what say thou against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Sir N. T. My Lord in the year 110 Popery seeming as an Universal Deluge to
overspread the whole Christian World, I with Sir Constant Patience lived
privately at Lions in France: enjoying the glorious Gospel, with many others of
our honest Friends, and Neighbors; but Popery the Prisoner at the Bar there
found us, Massacred and Tortured many of us for confessing the cause of Christ:
put us to most Exquisite Torments, and exercised Savage Cruelties upon us: from
thence flying to Germany, passing through Flanders, we saw Popery preparing a
fire to burn several of our Adherents, which clave to Christ: on of our Friends
there suffering, I remember, before he went into the Fire, took two Stones in
his hands, saying, when I shall eat these two Stones, our Religion shall cease,
not before. When we were come to Germany we found no rest there, for Popery
pursued us thither, and he going through Bohemiah murdered many of the Peers
of that Realm. In Germany he commanded all to be killed, that were suspected,
saying, God knows who are his. From thence we fled into Spain, where we were
taken by Popery's bloody Inquisition, in this manner, a Messenger came to us,
and told us, that the Lord Inquisitors had something to say to us, and
therefore we must wait upon them: we being come, they enquired our names, and
sent us to Prison: we having entered the first Gate, the Jailer asked us,
whether we had a Knife about us, and under pretense to search for one, took
from us all our Jewels and Money, thereby left us nothing to help our selves;
then were we cast into a stinking Dungeon, where we continued Six Months, then
being brought forth, Popery, Prisoner at the Bar, endeavored by all means to
extort from us a Confession, which we not doing, he said we should be racked;
being brought to the Rack, Popery sitting on a Scaffold by the Rack, in came
our Tormentor, and we being stripped, had our hands bound with Cords; then they
tied us to the Pully, and fastening Weights to our Heels, they hoisted us up by
degrees; thus hanging in great Torture they had us accuse all we knew of our
Religion, which we denying, they racked all our Bones out of Joint, and then
sent us to Prison again, and at last dismissed us. From thence we fled into
England, but here was the like; and so we fled again into France, where we
lived quietly for some time, but at last Popery pursued us, and disguised with
a Vizard of Friendship invited us, with most of our Brethren, to a Marriage,
but being come, he murdered in one Night above 20000. From thence we fled to
Ireland, but Popery pursuing us thither, committed the most barbarous and
execrable Murders, Villainies, sparing neither Man, Woman, or Child, ripping up
Women with Child, ravishing chaste Matrons, drowning, putting to the Sword, etc.
many thousands of innocent Protestants; from thence we again fled into England,
where we were soon pursued, and though here he set not upon us so openly as
before, yet his will was to do us the most hurt: In the year 1666 he burned
down the famous City of London, and has not ceased to endeavor to perpetuate
his bloody Villainies; only by many special Providence of God he has been
hindered; for we certainly hear he would here quite extirpate us to the utmost
of his power: Nay I heard credibly, that he was resolved not to leave one drop
of Protestant Blood, and like his other Devilish Policy, could be glad to cast
these Treasonable Conspiracies on the innocent Protestants. My Lord, he is so
dangerous, and so wickedly subtle, that we live in daily hazard of our Lives,
and when he may destroy us all, God only knows, if timely course be not taken.


L. J. J. Sir Constant Patience, what can you say against the Prisoner at the
Bar?


Sir Con. Pat. My Lord, it would be too tedious for me to rehearse all that Sir
N. Truth has spoken, we were Companions together in all he has declared, and
I aver the truth of what he has spoken.


L. C. J. Are there any more Witnesses?


Cl. of Cr. Yes, my Lord, Light of Nature.


L. C. J. Let him come up What can thou say against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Li. of Na. My Lord, Popery did really combine with the Devil to promote his
Designs, and has been guilty of great Conjurations; I have seen him in the
VVoods in the shape of a Bore, he has also been a cruel Murderer; for I saw a
Pond of his cleansing, and thence taken out 60 Childrens Skulls, and it is
computed that in about 50 years time he has massacred 15 millions of
Protestants.


L. C. J. What say thou Popery? Thou art now admitted to speak for thy self?


Pop. My Lord, the first witness, that is suborned against me, is pretended
Holy Scriptures, which if I go to disprove, you will say that I speak against
Gods Word: Had I thought I should have had a Just Trial, I would have prepared
my witnesses, and made my defense. But how can I expect equity from those in my
adversity, which were always barking at me in my prosperity?


L. C. J. You shall not be suffered to scandalize the Kings Court of Judicature.

Then my Lord proceeded, and spoke as follows,

You Gent. of the Jury, you hear the Prisoner is indicted for contriving
Heresy, contrary to the Word of God; and to gain Proselytes thereunto, he
has been guilty of Treasons, Murders, and Blasphemies; the first part of the
Indictment has been largely confirmed by a Peer of this Realm, whose Name is
Holy Scriptures. And the second by two worthy Knights: Also we have had a
fourth witness, which as the other has fairly laid open his Villainies; and he
for his defense has only cast foul Aspersions upon the Justice of the Court,
his sins are great, and cry aloud for vengeance, and if Justice be not executed
against him, we may fear lest we be partakers with him of his plagues. The
Evidence is so clear, I think you need not withdraw.


Cl. of Cr. Gentlemen, are you agreed upon your Verdict?


Omnes. Yes.


Cl. of Cr. Who shall speak for you?


Omnes. The Foreman.


Cl. of Cr. Popery hold up thy hand: Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the
Prisoner at the Bar, how say ye, is he Guilty of the Treasons, Murders, etc.
whereof he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


Forem. Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Of all?


Forem. Yea of all.


Cl. of Cr. What Goods or Chattels?


Jury. He is made Rich by the Kings of the Earth.


Cl. of Cr. Crier make Proclamation.


Crier. O yes: My Lord, the King's Chief Justice, strictly charges and commands
all manner of Persons to keep silence whilst Sentence is pronuuncing against
the Prisoner at the Bar.


L. C. J. Popery, thou have delighted thy self to make Bonefires of the Saints,
and this thy Devilish Nature, if thou might live here for ever, thou would
still retain, and still act thy abominable Villainies, thou hardenest thy heart,
yea, and now would; if it lay in thy power, commit as bad on me, and every
one of us, as thou have done heretofore against our dear Friends. Therefore the
Sentence of the Court is; Thou shall go back to the place from whence thou
came, and from thence shall be slain, and cast into the Pit of Tophet, there
to be tormented day and night where the smoke of thy Torment shall ascend up
for ever, and ever, and all thy riches and pomp shall with thee be burnt with
fire, and as thou have filled to Gods Saints, they shall fill unto thee double.

Then a great shout and acclamation of Joy made, the Trumpet sounding, Babylon
is fallen, Babylon is fallen, the Court arose.


LICENSED, January 15. 1688/9.
LONDON, Printed by E. Webster, for J. Gibbs. 1689.


