THE UNREASONABLENESS OF A SEPARATION From the New Bishops: OR, A TREATISE OUT
OF Ecclesiastical History.

SHOWING, That although a Bishop was unjustly deprived, neither He nor the
Church ever made a Separation; if the Successor was not a Heretic.

Translated out of an ancient Greek Manuscript in the Public Library at
Oxford, by Humfrey Hody, B.D. Fellow of Wadham College.

LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S.
Paul's Church-yeard, MDCXCI.

Viro Summo, Sapientissimo, Sanctissimoque, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Domino
Dno JOHANNI, Divina Providentia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Totius Angliae
Primati and Metropolitano, ANTISTITI vere ORTHODOXO, Tractatum hunc contra
Schisma, Sincerissimo affectu, Animoque Pacis ac Tranquillitatis Ecclesiae
cupientissimo, e tenebris suis jam editum, Reverentia maxima, quaque per est
humilitate, Dicat consecratque HVMFREDVS HODIVS.

THE PREFACE.
THE Greek Manuscript, from which this Treatise is translated, is in that part
of the Public Library at Oxon, that is called the Baroccian; the CXLIId in
number, according to the order those Books are set in at present; where it may
be seen by any, that either out of Curiosity may desire satisfaction; or have
any Suspicion, that the whole may be an Imposture, or any part of it an
Interpolation. For as for the exactness and fidelity that has been used in this
English Interpretation, we appeal to the Original Greek; which is now in the
Press, and will speedily be published with a Latin Version.

It Is very likely that this at Oxford is the only Copy of this Book now
remaining in the World. And that it should be preserved till our Times, and yet
hitherto be overlooked; and at this very Juncture be taken notice of, and so
opportunely brought to light, seems to be more than a fortuitous Hit; it
appears to have something of (...) and a singular Providence in it. God grant,
it may have that good effect upon those unsatisfied persons of the Church of
England; which so many examples and authorities of Antiquity (that Antiquity,
which they profess to imitate, and pretend to allege) may give us reason to
expect. Surely no uncharitable aspersions of Timeserving, courting Preferment,
or the like, that might be cast upon any that should write now in this Cause,
can take place against this Author, so remote from the present Age and
Controversy.

It Is pity we cannot know, whom we are obliged to for this Excellent Tract.
There Is no Name prefixed before it; nor any Characters in it, that may lead us
to a probable conjecture about the Author. But for his Age, without question he
lived CCCC Years ago: Seeing that the last History he produces, is in the XII
Century; and the latest Author he cites, was in the beginning of the XIII. And
as to his Authority and Credit, though we need be less concerned about that,
because he relates every thing from the Testimonies of others; and much more
than is here said, may be easily made out from approved and authentic
Historians: yet He himself appears to have been no inconsiderable person, and,
I believe, no less than a Bishop.

That this Treatise was a Sermon, may be manifestly discovered from two
passages in the 18 (...), and, (...).
and 19 pages; where he addresses himself to his Auditor, and not his Reader.
And the bulk of it is agreeable to a Greek Homily. And that the Author lived
under the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Constantinople, will be granted without
difficulty; because he has confined himself to the Histories in the Succession
of those Patriarchs, and from his own words, page 22. That from five
Constantinopolitan Bishops the Ordinations of all the Clergy were conveyed down
to his time.

The occasion of composing our MS. seems to have been this. A Patriarch of
Constantinople (right or wrong) was deposed, and another preferred to the Sea.
Upon this some Friends and Dependants of the Deprived began to make a Party,
and stir up the people to a Schism: giving out, That the former was still their
genuine and Canonical Bishop; that it was sinful to have Communion with the
New one; and that all his Ordinations would be invalid. Whereupon our Author,
probably one of the Bishops that assisted at the New Patriarch's Consecration
(forty or fifty were often present on such occasions) one that had a tender
concern for the Peace of the Church, and was apprehensive of the sin and danger
of such a Separation, made this Historical Discourse to the People, as it is
credible, in the Cathedral Church of Sophia; wherein he has included all the
memorable and parallel examples, that had happened to that See within the space
of near a thousand years.

He allows those Advocates for a Separation all that they would have; he puts
the case with all the advantage on that side. Admit, that the deposed Bishop
was unjustly deprived; suppose, that the New one was uncanonically promoted:
even in these circumstances, if he was not a Heretic, neither the People nor
the ejected Patriarch himself ever refused Communion with him; the sufficience
of his Ordinations was never questioned by any Council; there was no Precedent
for Schism upon those accounts in all the History of the Church; the Concord
and Tranquillity and Prosperity of the Whole were of more consideration in
those Ages, than private Interest or hidden Resentment, or the more tempting
Pleasure of being Head of a Party.

God forbid, that the Case thus stated by our Author should be thought parallel
to that of our New Bishops; or that this Book should be now published, as if
they needed that kind of defense. But we propose and recommend our Treatise as
an Argumentation a fortiori. If in the cases of Unjust Deprivation and
Uncanonical Succession a Separation is without Example in Ecclesiastical Story;
how inexcusable will they be, that shall make Faction and Schism, where neither
of those hard circumstances can be found?

As to the Exception of S. Chrysostom's Case; which, it seems, could not be
comprehended in so short a Discourse, and was put off therefore by our Author
to a particular Disquisition; which, if ever it was published, is either lost
or yet undiscovered: We must confess there was something singular in the
misfortune of that great and popular Man. The Western Churches did a long time
refuse Communion with some Bishops; that out of envy and malignity, by sinister
interpretations and the falsest calumnies, deprived Him of the Sea, and the
Church of one of the best Prelates it ever had: Those men they justly detested,
as the actors and contrivers of a good Patriarch's ruin: for the (...). Pallad.
p. 80.
Emperor (the Civil Power) was blameless in a manner, and but passive in the
business.

Thus it was in the West at a distance, in which case the renouncing Communion
was only, as it were, a breaking off a Correspondence. But how were matters
carried nearer home? It Is well known, that most of the Eastern Bishops, though
they (...). Theod. C. 5. L. 34.
would not be accessory to that unjust Deprivation, however were not so far
transported as to make a Schism in the Church. But then the Populace of
Constantinople, they were so enraged at it, that they not only forsook, but
(like Recusants, or a Rabble?) set fire to the Church, which took hold also of
the (...). Socrat. VI. 8.
Parliament House, and laid it in ashes. But as that case is quite foreign to
this of our New Bishops; so was the Separation no less contrary to the Spirit
of S. Chrysostom.

That Good Man (as a Bishop that was then present, has related it) when he saw
he must be deposed, advised and charged the Bishops his Friends more than once;
Pallad. vita Chrysostom. p. 67. (...).
That as they loved Christ, none of them should leave his Church upon his
account: p. 69. (...).
That they must keep Communion with his Deposers, and not rend and divide the
Church. And he enjoined some Devout Women, that attended there, That Pall. p.
90. (...).
as they hoped to obtain mercy from God, they should pay the same Service and
Good Will to his Successor by a fair Election, that they had done to himself:
(...).
FOR THE CHURCH COULD NOT BE WITHOUT A BISHOP. How could he, if he had now been
alive, have more clearly and expressly given his opinion in our Case. If a man,
otherwise never so worthy, will acknowledge no duty to the Civil Magistrate,
which protects him; if he shall refuse to act in his Function; if he will not
be the Bishop, somebody else must be: For the Church cannot be without a
Bishop. This is not being deprived, but relinquishing; and a Successor does not
invade, but is placed in the Chair by the united Efficacy of Canons, Law, and
Necessity.

It Is supposed the Reader knows, that for several Ages the Greek Churches have
erroneously maintained, That Adoration is to be paid to the Images of our
Savior; and therefore needs not be offended at one or two passages in this
Treatise, to which it is now time to dismiss him.

Imprimatur.

Georgius Royse, R. R. in Christo P. ac Dno, Dno Johanni, Archiepisc. Cantuar.
a Sacr. Domest.
July 6th. 1691.
ERRATA.
Page 13. l. 10. read He Is constrained by. P. 19. l. 13. read, Syncellus or. P.
ibid. l. 16. read Nicolaus. P. 21. Marg. l. 7. read (...).

A TREATISE
Out of Ecclesiastical Histories, concerning such as at several times have been
promoted to the Patriar^hal See contrary to the Canons, the rightful
Patriarchs being deposed and yet living. Amongst whom we may observe, that not
one of those that were unjustly deposed, did ever separate himself from the
Communion of the Church upon the account of his being deposed; provided that
he, that was uncanonically promoted after him, was Orthodox. Excepting only
the Case of Chrysostom, which requires a particular Consideration.
THE great John Chrysostom, a most holy and excellent person, living within
the Jurisdiction of the Antiochian See, was ordained Deacon by Meletius
Patriarch of Antioch. This Meletius having formerly been made Bishop of
Sebastia by the Arians, and afterward translated to the Throne of Antioch by
the Suffrages both of the Arians and Orthodox, Eustathius [late Bishop of
Sebastia] being yet in banishment, was nevertheless because of his Orthodoxy
both accepted by and beneficial to the Church. Even the great Basil was
ordained Deacon by the said Meletius.

Now Chrysostom being called from Antioch, and seated upon the Throne of
Constantinople, was afterward unjustly deposed, and thrust out of the City:
and after him there was consecrated Arsacius, the Brother of Nectarius, who was
Patriarch there before Chrysostom. Add. *This Arsacius, because of his Brother
Nectarius's Jealousy toward him, had formerly sworn, that he would never
accept of the Sea of Constantinople. So the MS. which in this place is written
erroneously.
He held the Patriarchate 14 months, and, as cannot but be supposed, ordained
Presbyters, Bishops, and Deacons; none of whom were rejected by the Church.
After his death the Blessed Atticus was consecrated, Chrysostom, being yet
alive and in exile. He raised a Persecution against those that adhered to
Chrysostom: and possessing the Patriarchate 20 years, was approved by the
Church, both he himself, and those that he had ordained; no one being troubled
or called in question upon the account of his Ordination. These things are
delivered in the History of Socrates.

The words of the MS. are these. (...) Which in an uncommon acceptance of the
word (...) may be thus translated. Now they that had been ordained by Atticus,
ordained Sisinnius. For that Sisinnius, when Atticus died, the 10th of October,
was only a Presbyter, and was consecrated Patriarch the 28th of February
following; appears from Socrat. lib. VII. c. 26. See the Gr. and Lat. Edition.
From Atticus, Sisinnius, [who succeeded him] derived his Ordination; and by
Sisinnius Proclus was consecrated Bishop of Cyzicus. Now if you would be
certain that Atticus was owned and received by the Church; the divine
Celestine, Bishop of Rome, is a witness of that matter, who in an Epistle to
Nestorius, praises and owns both Atticus himself, and Sisinnius, who was
Patriarch after him; and ranks them as Patriarchs after Chrysostom. After
Sisinnius, Nestorius was placed in the Throne. And the Third General Council
did not narrowly examine into the promotions of those Patriarchs, or MS.
*(...), i. e. or those that were ordained by them, as before.
about their Ordinations: but only deposing the Heretic Nestorius, it received
and owned all those that had been made Priests or Bishops by Arsacius, Atticus,
and Sisinnius, and even by Nestorius too, provided that they professed the
Orthodox Faith, and confessed the Blessed Virgin to be (...), or the Mother of
God.

After the Council, Maximian was consecrated Patriarch by such as had received
their Ordinations from the aforesaid four Patriarchs. After him the Bl.
Proclus, who derived his Ordination from the same Hands, was advanced to that
Dignity. These things are related in the History of Zonaras.

Now the Bl. Proclus, and not only he, but likewise Maximian before him, and
Atticus, and Sisinnius, were received into Communion by S. Cyril. After
Proclus, by the same succession of Ordination, Flavianus obtained the
Patriarchate.

See now the Succession. MS. *(...). Which may be thus translated. They that
deposed Chrysostom, consecrated Arsacius; the same, and those consecrated by
Arsacius, Atticus; those by Arsacius and Atticus, Sisinnius; and those by
Sisinnius, Proclus.
They that deposed Chrysostom consecrated Arsacius; the same, together with
Arsacius, consecrated Atticus; Arsacius and Atticus, Sisinnius; and Sisinnius,
Proclus; who, as I said, held Church Communion with S. Cyril.

Observe moreover, that Severianus Bishop of Gabala, and Acacius Bishop of
Berrhea, who were the chief Authors of all the Calamities that befell
Chrysostom, being afterward Or, Discovered to Pope Innocent, MS. (...).
called in question by Pope Innonocent, were neither deposed nor reprehended by
him; the Pope leaving their punishment to God.

The Bl. Flavianus having condemned and deprived the Heretic Eutyches, the
Emperor Theodosius commanded Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria to inspect and
examine again into the matters between them. Dioscorus thereupon having called
a Council at Ephesus; the second of that place, judged, condemned, deposed and
murdered the B. Flavianus, contrary to all Ecclesiastical order; absolving
Eutyches, and consecrating Anatolius in Flavianus's room. You see that
Anatolius was consecrated contrary to the Canons, seeing it was by Dioscorus, a
Murderer and a Heretic, that espoused the Cause and the Heresy of Eutyches.
But observe further: Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, Basil Bishop of Seleucia,
MS. *(...) which is a mistake of the writer, and must be thus corrected. (...).
i. e. Basil Bp. of Seleucia in Isauria, and Photius Bp. of Tire See the Gr. and
Lat. Edit.
Photius Bishop of Isauria in Epirus, Eustathius Bishop of Berytus, Thalassius
Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, and, in a word, all that whole Council
concurred and acted with Dioscorus in the unjust ejectment of Flavianus, and
the unlawful Ordination of Anatolius in his place. Yet none of them were
rejected in the Fourth General Council of Chalcedon, only Eutyches and
Dioscorus, that persisted in their Heresy. For that Holy Synod concerned not
it self about the Ordinations of uncanonical and illegal Patriarchs, but only
required of every one the profession of the Orthodox Faith. Now that Anatolius
was promoted against the Canons, Pope Leo attests; writing thus concerning him
to the Emperor Marcian: That therefore he would make no inquiry about
Anatolius 's Consecration, because he professed the Orthodox Belief. These
things are written in the Acts of the Second Council concerning Flavianus.

In the Reign of the Emperor Anastasius, when the Heresy of the Acephali was
rife, the Emperor himself became addicted to it, and expelled out of the City
three Patriarchs; because they refused to embrace his false Opinion, and
anathematize the Fourth General Council, and communicate with Severus: the
first, So the MS. (...). An error of the Writer, for (...), as all Historians
call him.
Euthymius; the second, Macedonius, who succeeded him; (unlawfully indeed, but
because he was an assertour of the Catholic Belief, he was not rejected by the
Church, neither did Euthymius himself recede from his Communion) and the third,
Timotheus; who himself likewise was unlawfully promoted in the room of
Macedonius: who yet was not rejected by Macedonius, because he was a maintainer
of the true Faith. Nay, even the great Elias Bp. of Jerusalem, embraced the
Communion of all these three Patriarchs, when all were alive together; being
troubled indeed at the ejectment of him in possession, but receiving the
Successor also, because of his Orthodox Faith.

The same Emperor Anastasius deposed and banished the said B. Elias from the Sea of Jerusalem, because he would not come over to his Heretical Opinion, and
constituted John in his place: whom, because he publicly preached the Orthodox
Belief. contrary to the Emperor's Expectation, Elias in no wise rejected, but
continued in Communion with him. And Theodosius and Sabas, those Reverend
Fathers, the Heads and Chief of all the Monks of the Holy City, visiting and
relieving Elias in his exile, both loved him and communicated with him, as an
injured Patriarch; and yet they communicated with John too, (that sat then in
the Throne of Jerusalem,) as their Patriarch. And therefore the Names both of
John and Elias were written in the sacred Diptychs of Jerusalem, in these
words: May the memory of Elias and John be everlasting. These things are
written in the Written by Cyril of Scythopolis, c. 56, 57, etc. Cotelerii
Ecclesiae Graecae Monum. Tom. 111.
Life of the holy and great Sabas.

In the days of Athanasius the Great, Maximus the Confessor was Patriarch of
Jerusalem. Now when a Synod was called at Tire by the Emperor Constantine, to
consider of the matters relating to Athanasius; and laying false things to his
charge had Ms. *(...). i. e. had condemned him when he was absent: or, had
condemned him for not making his Appearance.
condemned and deposed him; Athanasius flies to Maximus at Jerusalem. Maximus
thereupon calls a private Synod, and repeals what was done by the Synod of Tire
against Athanasius, and restores him to his See, and establishes likewise the
Doctrine of the Homoousion. Upon that the Acacius.
Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine unjustly ejects Maximus, and sets up Cyril in
his room, one that was then the chief of the Arian Party; but afterward
becoming a Convert to the Homoousion (or Orthodox Faith,) he was willingly
received and allowed as Patriarch by the Church; and was styled, The great,
and, The holy Cyrill. And observe that even Maximus himself did not withdraw
from Cyrill's Communion; therefore both were acknowledged as Saints [( that is,
had their Names in the Diptychs of the Church)] as both Assertours of the same
Faith. These things are delivered in the Life of the great Athanasius.

In the Emperor Justinian's Reign, Eutychius of Amasia, being constituted
Patriarch of Constantinople, a Man holy and beloved of God, was unjustly
deposed and expelled the City, and John was preferred to the Sea. But Eutychius
did not upon that account separate himself from the Communion of John; and both
therefore were received by the Church.

In the same Emperor's time, Athimus Bp. of Trebisond was translated to the Sea of Constantinople. He being discovered to be an Heretic, was deposed by
Pope Agapetus; who set up in his place the most holy Menas: But his Ordinations
were allowed of, as valid.

Afterward, when the Heresy of the Monothelites spread it self, and four
Patriarchs successively, MS. (...). Which is corrupted, the true reading being,
(...) in stead of (...) i.e. Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter. See the Gr. and
Lat. Edition.
Sergius, Pyrhus, Paul and another, were of that Sect; and as it must needs be
supposed, ordained and consecrated many: Not one so ordained or consecrated,
provided he relinquished and anathematized his Heresy, was rejected by the
Church; but all were received by the sixth General Council, and by George,
Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Emperor Justinian, surnamed Rhinotmetus, coming the second time to the
Throne, deposed and banished unjustly the most holy Patriarch Callinicus, and
placed Cyrus a Recluse of Amastris in the Sea. Now observe, that Callinicus did
not separate himself from the Church and from Cyrus, upon the account of his
unjust deprivation: and that Cyrus, together with those he had ordained, were
received by the Church.

Artemius, otherwise named Anastasius, being advanced to the Imperial Throne,
So indeed the MS. (...), i. e. the Bishop of Constantinople being dead:
allowing (...) (which I do not remember to have read) to be for (...). But this
being not true in matter of fact, ( Zonaras Tom. 2. p. 98. (...)) I believe the
Author might write thus; (...), or, (...). i. e. ejecting the present Patriarch
out of the Sea.
upon the death of the Patriarch of Constantinople, constituted in his place
the most holy Germanus Bp. of Cyzicus.

Then Leo Isaurus obtaining the Empire, and furiously raging against the Sacred
Images, banishes the holy Germanus, and places Anastasius in his Throne.

Fifty six years after, the sixth General Council was called, which Tarasius
was President of, who had been consecrated Patriarch before the Council was
appointed; but whether by Bishops that were for or against Images, is
uncertain. And all that opposed the Adoration of Images, upon renouncing their
Heresy, were received by that Council.

Now in the time of this holy Tarasius there happened that which follows.
Constantine, then Emperor, after he had put away his Maria.
lawful Wife, and shut her up in a Nunnery, against her will, espoused
Theodote. MS. (...) i.e. One that was a Nun too. Theophanes and Zonaras call
her (...), Lady of the Bedchamber.
another, that had her self been a Nun; and so became, according to the express
Declaration of the Gospel, a manifest Adulterer. Upon this the Patriarch
Tarasius refusing to officiate in so unlawful a Marriage, Joseph, Ms. (...):
Which was the highest Ecclesiastical Office under the Patriarch.
the Steward of the Church, was so hardy as to perform the Office, and rendered
himself thereby obnoxious to deprivation. The Patriarch attempting to deprive
him, was deterred by the Emperor, who declared that, if Joseph was ejected, he
would set up the Heresy of the Iconomachi again; which forced the Patriarch to
receive him, though much against his will. But the Bl. Theodorus, Abbot of the
Monastery of Studium, withdrew himself from the Communion both of Church and
Emperor too: from the Emperor, as being Adulterer; from the Church; because
it received Joseph, the Confirmer of that adulterous Match: And upon that
account, he suffered a thousand Injuries from the Emperor. After this,
Constantine had his eyes put out; and his Mother Irene took the Government upon
her: She recalls the Bl. Theodorus, commends both him and Tarasius; the former,
for his prudence in his care for the Church; and the latter, for his exact
observance of Discipline. Then the Patriarch ejects Joseph, the cause of all
this Schism; and he and Theodorus are at unity again. After this, Irene is
deposed, and Nicephorus the MS. (...).
Treasurer usurps the Throne, and Tarasius dies, and the holy Patriarch
Nicephorus succeeds him: He constrains the Emperor to receive Joseph again,
whom Tarasius had deprived. Upon which Theodorus a second time withdraws from
the Church. A while after, that Emperor and his Son Stauracius dying, Michael
Curopalates gets the Scepter; and the Patriarch Nicephorus taking hold of that
opportunity deprives Joseph again, and so he and Theodorus are reconciled. But
those opprobrious invectives, that Theodorus during his banishment had used
against the holy Tarasius and Nicephorus, were by no means approved of by the
Church, So indeed the MS. (...) Perhaps our Author might use an innovated word,
(...), i. e. that those contumelious Aspersions proceeded from the bitterness
and vexation of his mind, occasioned by his great sufferings. So Demosth. Orat.
in Midiam, (...). Or even (...) may admit of that interpretation: seeing that
S. Chrysostom seems to use it for quarrels and discontents between Husband and
Wife, 17. Hom. ad 1 Cor. (...). Take which word you please, we may be certain
that this is our Author's meaning.
as proceeding from littleness of mind. For the holy Methodius, in his Epistle
to the Monks of Studium, has these words; If your Bl. Abbot had not retracted
what he spoke against the holy Tarasius and Nicephorus, he should not have been
Fellow-minister with us; we would not have received him into our Communion.
These things are found in the second Book of the holy Nicon, in one of the
Epistles of Methodius. The same holy Methodius, in his last Testament, which he
made at his death, makes this Ordinance concerning the Monks of Studium that
refused to join in Communion with the Catholic Church; If they repent and come
over to the Catholic Church, and renounce their Schism, let them be received
as barely Christians, but by no means be advanced to the Priesthood. Thus MS.
(...). i. e. in the Synodicon of the Church. By which is peculiarly understood
that Decree that was made against the Iconomachi by the Synod at Constantinople
under Michael and Theodora, A.D. 842. appointed to be read in the Greek
Churches every year upon the first Sunday in Lent.
in the Volume of Councils, which is read in the Church, as every body knows,
all those things that were spoken and written against the holy Patriarchs,
Tarasius and Nicephorus, are made an Anathema. And moreover, concerning the
same Affair of (Theodorus) Studites, this also is written, That the holy
Theodorus did not do well in separating himself from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, and the holy Patriarchs, Tarasius and Nicephorus; (...).
for they were then the Church. For if we cannot withdraw our selves from the
Communion of any ordinary Priest MS. (...). which may be thus interpreted; If
we may not separate from the Communion of any ordinary Priest, except it be for
Heresy. Agreeably to the first and last Paragraphs of this Tract.
, without the sin of Heresy; how much less may we separate from the Communion
of such holy, orthodox Patriarchs, the Luminaries of the World? And although
the holy Theodorus, now with God, was so far hurried away, as to make this
Schism; yet afterward he relinquisht it, and set himself right again, as the
holy Methodius manifests in the foresaid Epistle. And the saying of the Prophet
David was fulfilled in this holy Man, Though he fall, Psalm. 37. 24. The MS. has
here (...), inspead of (...).
he shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

After this, during the Reigns of Leo Armenius, Michael Traulus, and his Son
Theophilus, successively for the space of twenty six Years, there was not one
orthodox Patriarch; but all were of the Sect of the Iconomachi, and maintained
the Opinion of the Emperors. But after the death of Theophilus, his Wife the
blessed Theodora, together with a Synod, placed the holy Methodius in the Sea;
who was suceeded by the great Ignatius.

This whole Paragraph is thus in the MS. (...). Where, as such mistakes are too
frequent in ancient MSS. (...) is put instead of (...). So that the passage
must be read thus; (...), etc. Caesar in those ages was not a proper name, but
the Title of one of the highest Dignities of the Empire. Zonaras, Tom. 2. p.
161. (...) The same is said by Leo Grammaticus and Cedrenus, etc. So that this
passage ought to be translated thus; In the reign of Michael, Bardas the Caesar
was sharply reproved and excommunicated by Ignatius, because he lived
incestuously with his Daughter in Law. The Caesar having all the power in his
hands, and leading the King's facility and 'dissoluteness whither he pleased,
gets Ignatius to be ejected, and Photius set up in his place. All Historians
mention, that Michael minded nothing but his pleasure, leaving all serious
affairs to Bardas, his chief Minister of State.
Then Michael reigning with his Mother Theodora, was, together with her,
corrupted, and was therefore sharply reproved by the holy Ignatius, and
excluded the Communion of the Church: Caesar therefore, being able to do what
he pleased by his Imperial power, deposed and banished Ignatius, and
established Photius in his stead.

After this came Basilius Macedo to the Crown, and he presently deposes
Photius, and reestablishes Ignatius; but after the death of Ignatius, he again
restores Photius. Which indeed is a thing to be wondered at. For if Photius was
deposed as an Adulterer and Usurper of the Throne, how comes he again to be
promoted as innocent? But be it as it will, the Church however receives and
acknowledges and honors them both, because Orthodox: and thus she says (in her
Diptychs) May the memory of Ignatius, Photius, Stephanus, and Antonius, the
most holy Patriarchs, be everlasting: and whatsoever is spoken against
Ignatius, and Photius, and Stephanus, and Antonius, the most holy Patriarchs,
is an Anathema.

Now let the Hearer observe again, that even the holy Ignatius did not, because
he was unjustly thrust out of the Sea, either recede from the Communion of
Photius, or persuade the People to do so. For this is the scope and design of
all the Histories that are here produced, To show, that not one of all those
Patriarchs, that were unjustly and uncanonically thrust out of their proper
Sees, did ever withdraw himself from the Communion of his Successor, or
persuade the People to separate from the Church; but that both they and the
People continued in Communion, if so be their Successors were Orthodox.

After this, Leo, the Son of Basilius, being possessed of the Imperial Scepter,
deprived that orthodox Patriarch whom he found in the Sea, and promoted
Stephanus, his own Brother, in his room; one that was sound indeed in the
Faith, but nevertheless was made Patriarch contrary to the Canons. But no
Schism was made in the Church upon that account. For Stephanus likewise was
owned and received by her. So that thus she speaks (in her Diptychs) May the
memory of Ignatius, Photius and Stephanus, the most holy Patriarchs, be
everlasting.

The same Emperor Leo, surnamed the Philosopher, ejected the most rightful
Patriarch Nicolaus, a Man renowned for his Orthodoxy, out of the Sea; because
he refused to consent to his fourth Marriage; and opposed him earnestly in his
design of making it lawful to marry the fourth time; MS. (...) That is; and to
enact a general Allowance of it for the future: or perhaps thus, adding (...)
to bring his Son after him into the Administration of the Government. The Case
was this, Leo had buried three Wives without any Issue that lived; but had a
natural Son Constantine by one Zoe, his Concubine. Being willing therefore that
an heir of his body should succeed him, he marries this Zoe, to legitimate the
bastard Son. But the fourth Marriage had been declared by the Canons to be
downright Fornication. Leo therefore endeavored to have those Canons
superseded by a new Law, that should permit the fourth Marriage: Which the
Patriarch Nicephorus endeavored to obstruct, and forfeited his Dignity for it.
Or, it may be our Author wrote (...) i. e. to publish and promulgate it for
the future.
and yet to continue in government, though in his room he advanced Euthymius,
who was Syncellus's or Nicolaus's Assessor. Here observe again, that the
Patriarch Nocolaus did not separate himself from the Catholic Church or from
Euthymius, nor teach the People to do so; and that undoubtedly because
Euthymius was orthodox.

Nay, when after the decease of the Emperor Leo, his Brother Alexander, that
succeeded him, deposed Euthymius, and replaced Nicolaus, who was yet living, in
the Sea, yet the Ordinations of Euthymius were not rejected, seeing that they
were orthodox, and by an orthodox Patriarch. These things are written in the
History of Zonaras.

The Emperor Manuel very wrongfully ejected Cosmas Atticus the Patriarch, a Man
full of Piety and Goodness, and advanced another to his See. But Cosmas, though
highly resenting this injustice, did not however either himself break off from
the Communion of the Church, or incite the People to such a Schism. But he made
this denunciation; That the Empress should never have any male Issue; which
accordingly came to pass; for the Emp. Alexius was born of the second Wife
Mary, that that was descended from the Latins. Upon this imprecation of Cosmas,
MS. (...) Which probably is an Abbreviation of (...) and must be thus
translated, When one Stephanus, surnamed Contostephanus, that stood by. So Nic.
Choniates, page 52. (...) And Cinnamus, p. 55. (...).
Contostephanus of Scio, one of the Bystanders, out of zeal for the Empress,
pressed toward him, to strike him, but was stopped by some body. Let him alone,
says Cosmas, for he himself suddenly shall have a stroke from a stone; which
accordingly came to pass. For not long after Contostephanus was killed with the
blow of a Stone in the War at Corcyra. This is in the History of Choniates.

The Emperor Isaacius Angelus finding Basilius Camaterus in the Patriarchal
Chair, deposed him without any just cause, and promoted Nicetas, MS. (...). The
second Ecclesiastical Office under the Patriarch, next to the (...) mentioned
p. 12. of this Tract.
the Chaplain of the Church to the Sea. A year after, he deposes him too, upon
pretense of his simplicity and old age, and promotes Leontius, protesting that
the Blessed Virgin ((...)) appeared to him, and bid him prefer Leontius, who
was called (...) from that occasion. Soon after not liking this Leontius
neither, he again averrs the Blessed Virgin had appeared to him, and bid him
depose him too; which accordingly he does, and sets up Dositheus Bishop of
Jerusalem in his room. This giving general dissatisfaction, Dositheus also is
ejected, and Georgius Xiphilinus.
another put in his place. So in the space of nine years, that Isaacius reigned
he made five Patriarchs successively: By whom, as must needs be supposed, there
were many persons ordained. And from them the whole order of the Priesthood and
all the Church is brought down to our days. And it is a matter of admiration,
that in the reign of that Emperor, five Patriarchs succeeding one another, and
all alive together, should not separate from one another Communion; because
one was put in and another was put out, purely at the Emperor's pleasure.

To conclude all in a word; One thing only was required by the Church, that the
new Bishop should profess the same (Orthodox) Faith with the other that was
deposed; but as for other Complaints and Accusations, that ever and anon were
made upon such Promotions, except it were Heresy, she never made any strict
examination into them.

AN ABSTRACT OF
This TREATISE: Being an Account, in short, of such Patriarchs as at several
times have been unjustly deposed by the Emperors, yet did not separate
themselves from the Communion of their unlawful Successors, nor persuade the
People to do so, because the Successors were Orthodox.
IN Arcadius's Reign the great Chrysostom was unjustly deposed: his Successors
were Arsacius, and the divine Atticus.

In Theodosius Junior's time the holy Flavianus was deposed by the Heretic
Dioscorus: his Successor was Anatolius.

In Anastasius's Reign, MS. (...), read (...), as before.
Euthymius was deposed: his Successor was Macedonius; and his, Timotheus.

In the same Reign Elias, Bishop of Jerusalem, was deposed: his Successor was
John.

In the Reign of Constantine the Great, Maximius, Bishop of Jerusalem, was
deposed by the Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine: his Successor was Cyrill.

In the Reign of Justinian, Eutychius of Amasia, Patriarch of C. P. was
deposed: his Successor was John.

In the same Reign, Anthimus, once Bishop of Trebisond, then Patriarch of C. P.
was deposed: his Successor was the most holy Menas.

In the Reign of Justinianus Rhinotmetus, Callinicus was deposed: his Successor
was Cyrus, a Recluse of Amastris.

In the Reign of Michael, the Son of Theophilus, the great Ignatius was
deposed: his Successor was Photius.

In the Reign of Basilius Macedo, Photius, the Successor of Ignatius, was
deposed: he was succeeded by the foresaid Ignatius; and Ignatius again by him.

In the Reign of Leo the Philosopher, Photius was again deposed, upon some
false accusations which the Emperor brought against him: his Successor was
Stephanus the Emperor's Brother.

Under the same Emperor MS. (...), which may be interpreted Nicolaus, one of
the Privy Council.
Nicolaus the Mystical (Philosopher) was deposed: his Successor was Euthymius
the Syncellus.

In the Reign of Alexander the Brother of Leo, Euthymius the Successor of
Nicolaus was deposed, and Nicolaus again restored.

In the Emperor Manuel's Reign, Cosmas Atticus was deposed, and succeeded by
Theodosius.

In the Reign of Isaacius Angelus, Basilius Camaterus was deposed, and
succeeded by the Chaplain Nicetas Mundanes.

Under the same Emperor Nicetas was deposed, and succeeded by Leontius
Theotocites.

In the same Reign, Leontius Theotocites was deposed, and succeeded by
Dositheus B. of Jerusalem.

In the same Reign, Dositheus likewise was deposed, and succeeded by Georgius
Xiphilinus.

FINIS.

