

Also The Complete Cook (...)

THE QUEENS CLOSET OPENED.

Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery, Preserving and Candying, etc.

Which were presented unto the QUEEN

By the most Experienced Persons of the Times, many whereof were had in esteem,
when she pleased to descend to private Recreations.

Corrected and Reviewed, with many Additions: together with three exact Tables.

Vivit post funera Virtus.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

TO THE Ingenious and Courteous READER.
Reader,
IT being at first the general good which caused us to publish this useful and
complete Piece, we could not choose but for the same end give it a new Birth;
especially when we heard that we had so well attained what we sought, in regard
of the benefit which so many have received from these, which we shall now
rather call Experiments then Receipts, contained therein. In short, we may say
that it has had a general Reception, traveling up and down the Kingdoms, and
like the good Samaritane giving comfort to all it met; neither have we known of
any that have bought it, who have not testified their high Esteem thereof. And
indeed how should it otherwise be, knowing out of what Elaboratories it was
produced: Nor is it without its variety, here preserving the fruits of the
Earth with such a curious neatness, as if it would show, that though Summer
gave those pleasant fruits, yet that Art is able to make Winter richer then her
self: or if this this please not, teaching you to furnish the Tables of Princes
with such a Grandezza as befits them. But as for the Physical part, what can
be more noble then that which gives the rich such an opportunity of spending
upon good works, while they succor the poor, and give comfort to them in their
greatest distresses. If we have given it too narrow a praise, for too large an
Encomium, I am sure we cannot attribute to it, considering its true value; it
is not what we intended, though we are glad to see its own high deserts,
carrying it so much above the reach of a more then common repute. It Is true
there may be some faults, and those may justly cause us to be blamed: but now
we hope your Ingenuity will the rather forgive us and them, and with more
diligence seek to amend what is amiss, if not for our sakes, yet out of Charity
to a Work which is so charitable to your selves.

Farewell, W. M.

The Prescribers, and Approvers of most of these rare Receipts, their following
names are in several Pages of this Book inserted and annexed to their own
experienced Receipts.
KIng Edward the sixth Page 272 Queen Elizabeth 272 King Charles the First 30
Queen Mary 31 Lady Elizabeth daughter to King Charles the first 256 Dr.
Mayhern, Physician to the late King 180 Dr. Bates 186 Dr. King 284 Dr.
Mountford 290 Dr. Forster 176, 177 Dr. More 178 Dr. Butler 1, 2 293 Dr. Bassa,
an Italian 7, 8 Dr. Adrian Gilbert 11 Dr. Atkinson 17, 160 Dr. Goffe 121 Dr.
Stephens 21, 87, 140, 275 Dr. Price 24 Dr. Read 39 Dr. May 47 Dr. Blacksmith
55, 56, 83 Dr. Brasdale 59 Dr. Friar 55, 173 Dr. Atkins 65, 73, 74, 83 Dr.
Gifford 3 Dr. Twine 82, 288 Dr. Wetherborn 89 Dr. Lewkener 134, 154 Dr.
Eglestone 136 Dr. Soper 147 Mr. Stepkins Occulist 18, 130 Mr. Fenton Chyrur. 24
Mr. Francis Cox Chyrur. 66 Mr. Lumley Chyrur. 123 Mr. Thomas Potter Chyrur. 145
Mr. Phillips Apothecary 296 B. Lawd Archbishop of Canterbury 275 Bishop of
Worcester 19 Earl of Arundel CC. 3 Lord Treasurer 32 Lord Bacon Vic. of St.
Albans 281 Lord Vic. Conway CC. 99 Lord Spencer 283 Lord Sheffeld 62 Sir Walter
Raleigh 274 Sir Thomas Mayner 33 Sir Edward Terrel 40 Sir Edward Bolstward 72
Sir Edward Spencer 28 Sir Kenelm Digby 290 Mr. Justice Hutton 191 Countess of
Arundel 25, 49, 168 Countess of Worcester 69 Countess of Oxford 156 Countess of
Kent 274 Countess of Rutland CC. 109 Lady Mounteagle 141 Lady Abergany CC. 42
Lady Nevel 147, 163 Lady Spotswood 286 Lady Drury 44 Lady Gifford 299 Lady
Hobby 11 Lady Leonard 158 Lady Smith 159 Lady Goring 161, 162 Lady Mildmay 164
Lady Bray 167 Lady Dacres 168 Lady Thornborough 267 Lady Mallet 275 Mrs. Duke
114 Mrs. Covet 6 Mrs. Lee CC. 82 Mrs. Powel 166 Mrs. Jones 164 Mrs. Chance 165
Mrs. Shelly CC. 38 Mr. Edward Houghton 166 Mr. Lucarello 179 Mr. Elderton 170
Mr. Rodstone CC. 51 Mr. Ferene the Queens Perfumer 273
THE QUEEN'S CABINET OPENED: OR, The Pearl of Practice.
Accurate, Physical, and Chyrurgical Receipts.
Doctor Butler's Preservative against the Plague.
TAke Wood sorrel, and pick it from the stalk, and pound it very well in a
stone Mortar; then take to every pound of beaten Sorrel a pound of Sugar finely
beaten, and two ounces of Mithridate, beat them very well together, and put
them in pots for your use; take every morning before and after the infection
for some time together of this Conserve, as much as a Walnut.

Dr. Butlers Cordial Water.
Take Pimpernel, Carduus, Angelica, Scordium, Scabious, Dragon, and still these
severally in a Rose-still; and when you have a pint of the water of every of
these sorts of Herbs, then mingle all these together very well, and dissolve
in it half a pound of Venice Treacle, then still all these together, and mingle
the stronger water with the small, six spoonfuls of this water, made blood
warm, given to one sick of the Plague, drives all venom from the heart. It is
excellent, so used, for the Small Pox, or for any pestilent Fever.

Dr. Butlers Purging Ale.
Take of Sarsaparilla two ounces, of Polypody of the Oak, and Sena, of each
four ounces, Caraway-seed, and Aniseed, of each half an ounce, Liquorish two
ounces, Maidenhair, and Agrimony, of each one little handful, Scurvey half a
bushel; beat all these grossly, and put them into a course Canvas bag and hang
it into three gallons of strong Ale; when it is three days old drink it.

Dr. Giffords Amber Pills for a Consumption.
Take of Venice Turpentine one ounce washed, and six grains of the powder of
white Amber, mixed them together, and set them in a clean pot upon embers, and
let it not stand too hot; to try whether it be enough, take a drop, and let it
cool; if after it is cold it be stiff, and will not cleave to the finger, it is
enough: then take of the powders of Pearl, White Amber, and Coral, of each a
quantity, as a quarter of an ounce, of the inner bark of an Oak, a quarter of
an ounce of cinnamon, and nutmegs; of each as much, and three ounces of hard
white Sugar; make all these into a powder, and sees them, and put the pills
into them; before you take them, you must be well purged, after which you must
take three of the aforesaid Pills wrapped up in the powder, what else you will,
and in the morning take the yolk of a new laid Egg warmed a little, and put
into it as much of the powder as will lie on a shilling, and sup it off; let
this be used some time together, and there will be great benefit found by it.

To comfort the Heart and Spirits, and to suppress Melancholy.
Take of the juyces of Borage and Bugloss, of each one pint and a half, juice
of Pippins, or Queen Apples one pint, juice of Balm half a pint, clarify them,
then take Chochenel made into powder four drams; infuse it in the said juyces
being cold in an earthen pan for two days, stirring it often, then strain it,
and with four pound of powder Sugar, ^or two pound if you mean not to keep it
long) boil it to a syrrup, then take it off, and when it is almost cold, put to
it Diamargaritum Frigidum one dram and a half, Diambra four scruples. Take
thereof a spoonful or two for many mornings together, and when you awake in the
night, if there be cause; you may also add to some part of it Saffron to make
it more cordial, by putting some powder of Saffron in a linen clout tied up,
and so milking it out into the syrrup, let the substance thereof remain in the
cloth, and take thereof sometimes. Approved.

A Cordial Electuary for stuffing of the Stomach, or shortness of Breath.
Take a pint of the best Honey, set it on the fire and scum it clean, then put
to a bundle of hysop bruised small before you tie it up; let it boil well, till
the honey taste of the Hysop; then strain out the Honey very hard, and put to
it the powder of Angelica root, the weight of six pence, powder of Elicampane
root the weight of six pence, Ginger and Pepper, of each the weight of two
pence, L^quorish and Anniseed of each the weight of eight pence, all beaten
very small severally: put all these into the strained Honey, and let them boil
a little space, stirring them well together all the time, then take them from
the fire, and pour all into a clean gallypot, stirring it always till it be
through cold, and keep it close covered for your use. When any are troubled
with stuffing at the Stomach, or shortness of breath, let them take of this
Electuary with a bruised Liquorish stick, and they shall sensibly find much
good by it. This was Queen Elizabeth's Electuary for these infirmities.

Mr. Covets Medicine for the Palsy.
Take a pint of the strongest mustard, set it in an Oven for two or three
times, till it be as thick as a hasty pudding, the Oven must not be too hot to
burn it: then set it on a chafing dish of coals, till it be dry enough to make
into powder. Take half an ounce of Betony powder, and mix it with the said
powder, and sweeten it with Sugar Candy to your taste. Take of this every
morning for ten days. Approved.

A Receipt to help Digestion.
Take two quarts of small Ale, put to it red mints one handful, as much of red
Sage, a little Cinnamon; let it boil softly till half be wasted, sweeten it with
sugar to your taste, and drink thereof a draught morning and evening.

A singular Cordial.
Take two ounces of dried red Gillyflowers, and put them into a pottle of Sack,
put to it three ounces of fine Sugar in powder, and half a scruple of
Ambergreece in powder; put all these in a stone bottle, stop it close with a
strong cork, and shake it often. After it has stood ten days, pass it through a
Jelly bag, and give two or three spoonfuls of it for a great Cordial. This way
you may also make Lavander wine for the Palsy, and other Diseases.

Dr. Bassa an Italian, An approved Receipt to break the Stone in the Kidneys.
In the Month of May distill Cowdung, then take two live Hares, and strangle
them in their blood; then take the one of them, and put it into an earthen
vessel or pot, and cover it well with a mortar made of horse dung and hay, and
bake it in an Oven with household bread, and let it still in an Oven two or
three days, baking anew with any thing, until the Hare be baked or dried to
powder; then beat it well, and keep it for your use. The other Hare you must
flea, and take out the guts only; then distill all the rest, and keep this
water: then take at the new and full of the Moon, or any other time, three
mornings together as much of this Powder as will lie on six pence, with two
spoonfuls of each water, and it will break any stone in the Kidneys.

Dr. Basse's Remedy for a bloody Urine, or to break a Stone in the Bladder.
Take the distilled water of Saxifrage, Coriander, Parsley, and cod of broom
when they be green, the berries of white Thorn stilled when they be ripe; they
must be stamped stones and all, and then distilled: the green hulls of Walnuts
when they be ripe stilled, Raysins of the sun stilled; every one of these
waters must be stilled by it self. Then take an equal quantity of each, as a
pint of Aqua Spirita; put them all together, and still them in an ordinary
still, or in B. after scum the water nine or ten days: and take of this water
for ten or fifteen days, five or six spoonfuls a time in the morning fasting,
and use to take it after a day or two once in a month.

Syrup of Turnips.
First bake the Turnips in a pot with household bread, then press out the Liquor
between two platters; put a pint of this liquor to half a pint of Hysop water,
and as much brown Sugarcandy as will sweeten it; and boil it to the consistence
of a syrup. It is very good for a Cold or Consumption.

Syrup of Citron Peels.
Take the outermost fresh Peels of Citrons cut in small pieces, and pour on
them two quarts of water, then wring it through a cloth; put to the liquor one
pound of powder sugar, boil it to a syrup, and when it is sodden, put four
grains of Musk to it, dissolved in Damask rose water. This syrup cools not.
It defends from the Plague.

A Cordial Syrup to cleanse the blood, open Obstructions, prevent a
Consumption, etc.
Take Rosemary flowers, Betony, Clove-gilly-flowers, Borrage, Broom,
Cowslip-flowers, Red-rose-leaves, Melilot, Comfrey, Clary, Pimpinel flowers, of
each two ounces, red Currants four pounds: infuse all these into six quarts of
Claret Wine, put to it fourteen pounds of ripe Elder berries, make the Wine
scalding hot, then put in the Flowers, Currants, and Elder berries, cover the
pot, and paste it very close, set it in a kettle of warm water to infuse forty
eight hours, till the virtue of the ingredients be all drawn out, then press it
out hard, and put to every pint of the liquor one pound and three quarters of
powder Sugar, boil and scum it till you find the Syrup thick enough, when it
is cold bottle it, and keep it for your use. Take two spoonfuls in a morning,
and so much in the afternoon, fasting two hours after it.

A Medicine for a Dropsy approved by the Lady Hobby, who was cured her self by
it.
Take Carawayes, Smallage, Time, Hysop, Watercresses, Penniroyal, Nettle tops,
Calamint, Elecampane-roots, of each one little handful, Horse radish two
pounds, boil them in six quarts of running water, until half be consumed; then
strain it, boil it a new with a pottle of Canary Sack, Liquorish twelve ounces,
sweet Fennel-seed one ounce bruised, and a quarter of an ounce of Cumin-seed
bruised; boil all these above half an hour, then strain it, and keep it for
your use, nine spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and as much at three or four a
clock in the afternoon, use it for some time together. This the Lady Hobby
proved by her self.

Dr. Adrian Gilberts most Sovereign Cordial Water.
Take Spearmint, Broom-mint, Mother of Time, the Blossom tops of Garden Time,
red Penniroyal, Scabious, Celandine, Wood Sorrel, Wood Betony, Angelica leaves
and stalks, set Wall Leaves, Peony leaves, Egrimony, Tormentil, sweet
Marjoram, red Sage, Rue, Rossolis, Angelica roots, Elecampany roots, set Wall
Roots, green Peniroyal, Comfrey Blossoms and Leaves, Juniper Berries, of each a
pound, Balm, Carduus Benedictus, Dragon, Feaverfew, Wormwood, of each two
pounds; steep all these in the lees of strong pure venient Claret Wine for nine
days, every day twice turning them to mingle them well in the Lees, then
distill them in a Limbeck with a red clear head, with two pounds of shaved Hearts
horn, and Ivory twelve ounces; draw as long of it as you may in several pottle
glasses: the first is accounted the best and uncompounded, and the perfectest
against the Plague, spotted Fevers, small Pocks, ordinary Fevers, diverse
times experienced by my self, either to prevent, or in the time of these
sicknesses. If you will compound it because the water has an ill taste, then
take the first gallon of the water, and mix it with a pottle of the best Malaga
sack, and put into them three pounds of Raisins solis stoned, Figs one pound
and a half, the flowers of Clove-gilly-flowers, Cowslips and Marigolds, blue
Violets, of each two pounds, red Rose buds one pound, Ambergreece, Bezoar
stone, clarified Sugar, Aniseeds, Liquorish, and what else you please.

These are Adrian Gilberts Receipts, having had experience of them most
constantly sure. The uncompounded Water is the more excellent: and if in time
of infection one take two spoonfuls of it in good Bear or white Wine, he may
safely walk from danger by the leave of God. If any of the former diseases
attache any person, then he must take four ounces of the first water, and mix
therewith either the syrups of Violets, Clove-gilly-flowers, or Angelica, as
the disease is: one spoonful of the Syrup is sufficient for four ounces of the
water, so take it in three times.

For a swollen Face.
Take Oil of Elder and Plaintain-water, of each one ounce, beat them well
together, until they be exactly incorporated, and therewith anoint the tumefied
place twice or thrice in a day, until the swelling be chased away.

Cock water for a Consumption.
Take a running Cock, pull him alive, then kill him, cut him abroad by the
back, take out the entrails, and wipe him clean, then quarter him, and break
his bones; then put him into a Rose Water still, with a pottle of Sack,
Currants, and Raisins of the sun stoned, and Figs sliced, of each one pound,
Dates stoned and cut small half a pound, Rosemary flowers, Wild Time,
Spearmint, of each one handful, Organs or Wild Marjoram, Bugloss, pimpinel, of
each two handfuls, and a bottle of new milk from a red cow. Distill these with
a soft fire, put into the Receiver a quarter of a pound of brown Sugar Candy
beaten small, four grains of Ambergreece, forty grains of prepared pearl, and
half a book of leaf gold cut very small; you must mingle the strong water with
the small, and let the patient take two spoonfuls of it in the morning, and as
much at going to bed*

A precious Cordial for a sick body.
Take three spoonfuls of Mint water, and as much of Muskadine and Wormwood
water, two or three spoonfuls of fine Sugar, and two or three drops of Cinnamon
spirit; beat these well together with two or three spoonfuls of
Clove-gilly-flowers spirit, and give the Patient now and then one spoonful
thereof; especially when he or she goes to bed.

Wormwood Cakes good for a cold Stomach, and to help Digestion.
Take pure searced Sugar two ounces, and wet it with the Spirit of Wormwood,
then take a little Gum Tragiganth, and steep it all night in Rose water, then
take some of this and the wet sugar, and beat them together in an Alablaster
Mortar, till it come to a paste like dough, if you please put a little Musk to
it, then make it up in little cakes of the breadth of a groat or three pence;
lay them upon plates, and dry them gently in an Oven, and keep them in a dry
place for your use: and upon occasion hold one of them in your mouth to melt,
and swallow the dissolved juice thereof for the infirmities aforesaid.

To make water of Life.
Take Balm leaves and stalks, Burnet leaves and flowers, Rosemary, red Sage,
Taragon, Tormentil leaves, Rossolis, red Roses, Carnation, Hysop, Thyme, red
strings that grow upon Savory, red Fennel leaves and roots, red Mints, of each
one handful; bruise these herbs and put them in a great earthen pot, and pour
on them as much white Wine as will cover them, stop them close, and let them
steep for eight or nine days, then put to it Cinnamon, Ginger, Angelica seeds,
Cloves and Nutmegs, of each one ounce, a little Saffron, Sugar one pound,
Raisins Solis stoned one pound, Dates stoned and sliced half a pound, the loins
and legs of an old Coney, fleshy running Capon, the red flesh of the sinnews of
a leg of Mutton, four young Chickens, twelve Larks, the yolks of twelve Eggs, a
loaf of white bread cut in sops, and two or three ounces of Mithridate or
Treacle, and as much Bastard or Muscadine as will cover them all. Distill all
with a moderate fire, and keep the first and second waters by themselves; and
when there comes no more by distilling, put more Wine into the Pot upon the
same stuff, and distill it again, and you shall have another good water. This
water must be kept in a double glass close stopped very carefully: it is good
against many Infirmities, as the Dropsy, Palsy, Ague, Sweating, Spleen,
Worms, Yellow and Black Jaundies; it strengthens the Spirits, Brain, Heart,
Liver, and Stomach. Take two or three spoonfulss when need is by it self: or
with Ale, Beer, or Wine mingled with sugar.

Dr. Atkinsons excellent Perfume against the Plague.
Take Angelica roots, and dry them a very little in an Oven, or by the fire:
and then bruise them very soft, and lay them in Wine Vinegar to steep, being
close covered three or four days, and then heat a brick hot, and lay the same
thereon every morning: this is excellent to air the house or any clothes, or to
breath over in the morning fasting.

To make Saffron Water.
Take seven Quarts of white Wine, and infuse in it all night one ounce of
Saffron dried, and in the morning distill it in a Limbeck, or glass body with a
head, and put some white Sugar Candy finely beaten into the Receiver for it to
drop on.

Mr. Stepkins Water for the Eyes.
Take four ounces of white Rose water, and two drams of Tutia in powder, shake
them well together in a glass vial, and drop of it a little into the Eyes
evening and morning, it is very good for any hot Rheum.

A precious Water to revive the Spirits.
Take four gallons of strong Ale, five ounces of Aniseeds, Liquorish scraped
half a pound, sweet Mints, Angelica, Betony, Cowslip flowers Sage, and Rosemary
flowers, sweet Marjoram, of each three handfuls, Pelitory of the wall one
handful. After it is for two or three days, distill it in a Limbeck, and in
the water infuse one handful of the flowers aforesaid, Cinnamon and Fennel-seed,
of each half an ounce, Juniper berries bruised one dram, Red-rose buds, roasted
Apples, and Dates sliced and stoned, of each half a pound: distill it again,
and sweeten it with some Sugar Candy, and take of Ambergreece, Pearl, red
Coral, Hartshorn powdered, and leaf Gold, of each half a dram; put them into a
fine linen bag, and hang it by a thread in a glass.

The Bishop of Worcesters admirably curing Powder.
Take black tips of Crabs claws when the Sun enters into Cancer, which is every
year on the eleventh day of June; pick and wash them clean, and beat them into
fine powder, which finely searce, then take Musk and Civet, of each three
grains, Ambergreece twelve grains, rub them in the bottom of the Mortar, and
then beat them and the powder of the Claws together; then with a pound of this
powder mix one ounce of the magistery of Pearl. Then take ten skins of Adders
or Snakes, or Slow worm, cut them in pieces, and put them into a pipkin to a
pint and a half of Spring water, cover it close, and set it on a gentle fire to
simmer only, not to boil; for ten or twelve hours, in which time, it will be
turned into a Jelly, and therewith make the said powder into balls. If such
skins are not to be gotten, then take six ounces of shaved Hartshorn, and boil
it to a Jelly, and therewith make the said powder into balls; the horn must be
of a red Deer killed in August, when the moon is in Leo, for that is best. The
Dose is seven or eight grains in beer or wine.

To make Spirit of Castoreum.
Take Calamints four ounces, Orange peels two ounces, Nep half a handful,
Walnut blossoms half an ounce, Rosemary flowers, and tops of Sage, of each one
handful, Castoreum one ounce, white Wine one quart; distill them in a Limbeck.
This Water is good for swounding fits, weak stomachs, and rising of the Mother.

A Water for the Stone.
Take a quart of clean picked Strawberries, put them in a glass, pour on them a
quart of Aqua vitae, let them stand and steep; and take two or three spoonfuls
of it morning and evening with fine Sugar, or white Sugarcandy. It will keep
all the year. Approved.

To make Dr. Stephens Water.
Take a gallon of Claret wine or Sack, Cinnamon, Ginger, Grains of Paradise,
Gallingall, Nutmegs, Anniseed, and Fennel-seed, of each three drams, Sage,
Mint, red Roses, Pellitory of the Wall, Wild Marjoram, Rosemary, Wild Time,
Cammomile, Lavender, of each one handful: bruise the said spices small, cut and
bruise the Herbs, and put all into the Wine in a Limbeck, and after it has
stood twenty four hours, distill it gently, and keep the first water by it self,
and so the second.

For a Tetter.
Take water of red Tar, and wash it therewith. This is an approved remedy.

A special water for a Consumption.
Take a peck of garden shell Snails, wash them in small Beer, put them into a
great Iron dripping-pan, and set them on the hot fire of Charcoals, and keep
them constantly stirring till they make no noise at all; then with a knife and
cloth pick them out, and wipe them clean, then bruise them in a stone Mortar,
shells and all; then take a quart of Earth Worms, rip them up with a knife, and
scour them with Salt, and wash them clean, and beat them in the Mortar: then
take a large clean Brass pot to distill them in, put into it two handfulls of
Angelica, on them lay two handfuls of Celandine, a quart of Rosemary flowers,
of Betony and Agrimony, of each two handfuls; Bears-foot, Red dock leaves, the
bark of Barberries, and Wood Sorrel, of each one handful, Rice half a handful,
Funugreek and Turnerick, of each one ounce, Saffron dried and beaten into
powder the weight of six pence, Hartshorn and Cloves beaten, of each three
ounces; when all these are in the Pot, put the Snails and Worms upon them, and
then pour on them three gallon of strong Ale; then set on the Limbeck, and
paste it close with Rye dough, that no air come out or get in, and so let it
stand one and twenty hours, and distill it with a moderate fire, and receive
the several Quarts in several Glasses close stopped. The Patient must take every
morning fasting, and not sleep after it, two spoonfuls of the strongest water,
and four spoonfuls of the weakest at one time, fasting two hours after it.

Syrup of Pearmains good against Melancholy.
Take one pound of the juice of Pearmains, boil it with a soft fire till half
be consumed; then put it in a glass, and there let it stand till it be settled,
and put to it as much of the juice of the leaves and roots of Borage, Sugar
half a pound, sirup of Citrons three ounces, let them boil together to the
consistence of a sirup.

Tincture of Ambergreece.
Put into half a pint of pure spirit of Wine in a strong glass, Ambergreece one
ounce, Musk two drams, stop the glass close with a cork and bladder, and set it
in hot horse-dung twelve days; then pour off the spirit gently, and put as
much new spirit on, and do as before, and pour it off clean: after all this,
the Ambergreece will serve for ordinary uses. One drop of this Tincture will
perfume any thing; besides it is a great Cordial.

Dr. Price, and M^. Fenton the Chyrurgion, their excellent Medicine for the
Plague after Infection.
Take as soon as you find your self sick, as much Diascordium as the weight of
a shilling, with ten grains of the powder called Speciei de gemmis, well
mingled together; and straight after this let the party drink a good draught of
hot posset ale made with Carduus Benedictus, Sorrel, Scabiosa, and Scordium,
within eight hours after the first taking of it, the party must take the
Diascordium, and Posset again as aforesaid, and in like sort the third time
within eight hours after, but not above three times, nor the third time, if the
party mend, after the first or second taking. Doctor Price does commend much
thereof to be taken for the kind of cure for the Plague after one is infected:
and Mr. Fenton the excellent Chyrurgeon, who has much experience in the cure
of the Plague, does highly commend it as a thing in his own experience proved
very good. The use of a root called Sedour is to be chewed in the mouth, still
when one is in the company of such persons as are thought to be infected with
the contagition: this Root is to be bought at the Apothecaries.

A Drink for the Plague or Pestilent Fever, proved by the Countess of Arundel,
in the Year 1603.
Take a pint of Malmsey and burn it, and put thereto a spoonful of grains,
being bruised, and take four spoonfuls of the same in a porringer, and put
therein a spoonful of Jean Treacle, and give the Patient to drink as hot as he
can suffer it, and let him drink a draught of the Malmsey after it, and so
sweat: if he be vehemently infected, he will bring the Medicine up again; but
you must apply the same very often day and night till he brook it; for so long
as he does bring it up again, there is danger in him: but if he once brook it,
there is no doubt of his recovery by the Grace of God: provided then when the
party infected has taken the aforesaid Medi^cine and sweateth, if he bring it
up again, then you must give him the aforesaid quantity of Malmsey and grains,
but no treacle, for it will be too hot for him, being in a sweat. This Medicine
is proved, and the party has recovered, and the sheets have been found full of
blue marks, and no sore has come forth: this being taken in the beginning of
the sickness. Also this Medicine saved 38. Commons of Windsor the last great
Plague 1593. was proved upon many poor people, and they recovered.

A Syrup for a Cold.
Take Penniroyal half an ounce, raisins of the Sun stoned one ounce, half so
much Liquorish bruised, boil them in a pint of running water, till half be
consumed; then strain it out hard, and with sugar boil it to a pretty thick
Syrup, and take it with a liquorish stick: Often proved.

An excellent Receipt for a precious water.
Take a pottle of the second water of Aqua Composita, of Balm, Betony,
Pellitory of the Wall, sweet Marjoram, the flowers of Cowslip, Rosemary, and
Sage, of each one handful, the seeds of Annise, Caroway, Coriander, Fennil, and
Gromel, and Juniper berries, of each one spoonful, three or four Nutmegs,
Cinnamon one ounce, two or three large Mace; bruise all these, and let them lie
ten days in steep in the Aqua Composita; set the glass in the Sun, and stir it
well every morning, then strain it, and put to it three quarters of a pound of
fine Sugar, one grain of Ambergreese, and two grains of Musk.

To make an excellent Syrup of Citrons or Lemons without fire.
Take Citrons, or Lemons, as many as you will, pare off their rindes, then
slice them very thin; then put into a silver, or glass basin, a thick lay of
fine sugar, and upon that the slices of Citrons or Lemons, and lay after lay of
sugar, and the other, till the basin be near full, let it stand all night
covered with a paper, the next day pour of the Liquor into a glass through a
Tiffany strainer; be sure you put sugar enough to them at the first, and it
will keep a whole year good, if it be set well up.

A Salve for the eyes, made by Sir Edward Spencer.
Take new Hogs greese tried and clarified two ounces, steep it six hours in red
Rose water, after wash it in the best white Wine, wherein Lapis Calaminaris
has been twelve times quenched: it will take a pottle of white Wine, for the
Lapis Calaminaris will waste it by often quenching, a piece of the Lapis as big
as a Turkey Egg will serve; when the grease is well washed, add to it one
ounce of Lapis Tutia prepared, of Lapis Hematites well washed, two scruples,
Aloes Succotrina, twelve grains, Pearl four grains; all these must be prepared
and made into fine powder, put to it some red Fennel water, and make it into a
Salve. If the eyes be very ill, put into each corner of them as much as a pins
head of this Salve; and if the eyes be exceeding sore, anoint therewith only
the Eyelids. As the Salve dries, put to it red Fennel water to keep it moist.

For the Small Pox or Measles.
Take an ounce of Treacle, half an ounce of set Wall cut small, a penni-worth
of Saffron ground small; mix them, and take thereof in a morning upon a knives
point as much as you can take up at twice or thrice, three mornings together.

A very good Glyster for the wind.
Take Mallow leaves, Cammomile, Mercury, Pelitory of the Wall, Mugwort, and
Penniroyal, of each a small handful, Melilot and Cammomile flowers, of each
half a handful, of the seeds of Annise, Caroway, Cummin and Fennel, of each one
quarter of an ounce, Bay Berries, and Juniper berries, of each three drams;
boil all these in three pints of clear posset ale to twelve ounces, and use it
warm.

The Kings Medicine for the Plague.
Take a little handful of Herb-grace, as much of Sage, the like quantity of
Elder leaves, as much of red Bramble-leaves, stamp them altogether, and strain
them through a fair linen cloth, with a quart of white wine, and a quantity of
white wine Vinegar, and a quantity of white Ginger, and mingle all together;
after the first day you shall be safe four and twenty days: after the ninth
day a whole year by the grace of God; and if it fortune that one be stricken
with the Plague before he has drunk the Medicine, then take the aforesaid with
a spoonful of Scabiosa, and a spoonful of Betony water, and a quantity of fine
Treacle, and put them together, and cause the Patient to drink it, and it will
put out all Venom: and if it fortune that the botch appear, take the leaves of
red Brambles, Elder leaves, and mustard seed, stamp them together, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will draw out all the Venom,
and the person shall be whole by the Grace of God.

A Medicine for the Plague that the Lord Major had from the Queen.
Take of Sage, Elder, and red Bramble leaves, of each one little handful; stamp
and strain them together through a cloth with a quart of White Wine, then take
a quantity of white wine vinegar, and mingle all these together, and drink
thereof morning and night a spoonful at a time nine days together, and you
shall be whole. There is no Medicine more excellent then this, when the sore
does appear, then to take a Cock Chick and Pullet; and let the Rump be bare,
and hold the Rump of the said Chick to the sore, and it will gape and labor
for life, and in the end dye; then take another, and the third, and so long as
any one do dye: for when the poison is quite drawn out, the Chick will live,
the sore presently will assuage, and the party recover. Mr. Winlour proved this
upon one of his own Children; the thirteenth Chick dyed, the fourteenth lived,
and the party cured.

Lord Treasurers Receipt for an Ague.
Take a quantity of Plantain, shred it and double distill it, and take six or
eight spoonfuls of the Water, with as much Borage-water, with a little Sugar,
and one Nutmeg; and drink it warm in the cold fit, by Gods help it will cure
you.

For Rheum in the Eyes.
Take one spoonful of Commin-seed finely beaten, and boil it in Verjuyce till
half be consumed, put to it some course wheat bran, and boil it till it be dry,
then put it in a small linen bag, and lay it to the nape of the neck so hot as
you can endure it, and it will draw the Rhume away.

To break the Stone, and bring away the Gravel.
Take the inner bark of red Filberd-tree, and shave a good handful of it, and
take as much Saxifrage, and steep them in a quart of Ale or white Wine, and
drink a good draught thereof nine mornings together fasting.

A cordial Water in the time of Infection, by Sir Thomas Mayner.
Take the juice of green Walnuts shells and all two pound, the juyces of Balm,
Carduus Benedictus, and Marigolds, of each three pounds, roots of great Docks
half a pound, Butchers broom roots and all, three quarters of a pound, Angelica
and Masterwort, of each three ounces, Scordium leaves two handfuls, Treacle
Venice and Mithridate, of each four ounces, Canary Wine three pints, juice of
Lemons one pint. digest these in a glass body two days close stopped, then put
on a glass head, and distill it, and when it is half distilled, strain that
which is left in the glass through a linen cloth, and distill it till it grow
thick as honey, which put into a Gally pot, and give some of it in the time of
Infection on a knifes point. The distilled water is also good for the same
purpose.

China broth for a Consumption.
Take an ounce of China root chipped thin, and steep it in three pints of water
all night on embers covered, the next day take a Cock chicken deplumed and
exenterated, and put in its belly Agrimony, Maidenhair, of each half a handful,
Raisins of the Sun stoned one good handful, and as much French barley; boil all
these in a pip^in close covered on a gentle fire for six or seven hours, let it
stand till it be cold, strain it, or let it run through a Hypocras bag* and
keep it in a glass for your use. Take a good draught of it in the morning, and
at four a clock in the afternoon.

A comfortable Bag for the Stomach.
Take Balm, Wormwood, Rosemary, Spearmints, sweet Marjoram, Winter savory, of
each half a handful, dry them between two dishes on a chafing dish of coals,
sprinkling them often with good Vinegar; when they are well dried, put to them
some crumbs of bread, Cloves, Cinnamon, and Nutmeg beaten to powder; put them in
a fine linen bag, quilt it, and lay it warm to the stomach.

To increase Woman's Milk.
Bruise Fennel seed, and boil them in Barley water, and let the Woman drink
thereof often.

To expel Wind.
Take a handful of Groundswel stripped downwards, as much of sage, and a
quarter of a pound of currants, boil these in a pint of Ale, and drink it.

For the Piles*
Take white Lead finely scraped one dram, burnt Alum two drams, temper them
with hogs lard and plantain-water, and therewith anoint the grieved place.

For a Thrush, or Canker in the Mouth.
Take two spoonfuls of clarified honey, and put a piece of Alum between red
hot tongs, and hold it till it drop into the Honey, and therewith dress the
mouth often, until it be perfectly cured.

A green Ointment good for Bruises, Swellings, and Wrenches in Man, Horse, or
other Beast.
Take six pound of May Butter unsalced, Oil Olive one quart, Barrowsgrease four
pound, Rosin, and Turpentine, of each one pound, Frankincense half a pound:
then take these following Herbs, of each one handful: Balm, Smallege, Lovage,
Red Sage, Lavander, Cotton, Marjoram, Rosemary, Mallows, Cammomile, Plaintain,
Alheal, Chickweed, Rue, Parsley, Comfrey, Laurel leaves, Birch leaves,
Longwort, English Tobacco, Groundswel, Woundwort, Agrimony, Briony, Carduus
Benedictus, Betony, Adders Tongue, Saint John's Wort; pick all these, wash them
clean, and strain the water clean from them. These herbs must be gathered
after Sun rising. Stamp them very small in a stone Mortar, then beat the Rosin
and Frankincense to powder, and melt them alone; then put in the Oil, Butter,
and Hogs grease, and when all is well melted, put in the Herbs, and let them
boil half a quarter of an hour: then take it off the fire, and scum it very
clean a quarter of an hour, and when it is off the fire, put in the Turpentine,
and two ounces of Verdigreese, stir it well, on else it will run over, and so
stir it till it leave boiling; then put it in an earthen pot, which stop very
close with a cloth, and a board on the top, and set in an Horse Dunghill one
and twenty days; and take it out and put it into a Kettle, and let it boil a
little, taking heed that it boil not over: then strain it through a course
cloth, and put to it half a pound of Oil of Spike, and cover the pot close
till you use it. When you have any occasion to use it, warm it a little for a
cold cause, and anoint the place grieved. Mix this Oil with the like quantity
of the Oil of Bays, when it is for a Melander in a Horse, or a dry Itch in a
Horse or Mare; then take Quicksilver, and beat it often with fasting spittle,
till it be killed and look black, and take a quart of Comfrey to the quantity
of Quicksilver, to which put thrice so much of the said Oil; beat all well
together, and use it. For a man it must be well chafed in the Palm of the hand
three or four times. If you use it for a Horse, put to it Brimstone finely
beaten, and work it altogether, as aforesaid.

An excellent Sear-cloth for a Wound, Bruise, or Ache.
Take a pint of Oil Olive, four ounces of Unguentum Populeon, the Oils of
Cammomile and Roses, of each one ounce, Virgins Wax three ounces, Red Lead in
powder eight ounces; boil these together, continually stirring them, till they
will stick to a cloth, which is enough, then wet your clothes in them, and hang
them up to dry. The best time to make it is in March.

Dr Reads Perfume to smell against the Plague.
First take half a pint of red Rose water, and put thereto the quanity of a
hazle Nut of Venice Treacle or Mithridate, stirring them together till they be
well infused, then put thereto a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon broken into
small pieces, and bruised in a Mortar, twelve cloves bruised, the quantity of
an hazle Nut of Angelica root sliced very thin, as much of Setwal roots sliced,
three or four spoonfuls of White Wine Vinegar; so put them altogether in a
glass, and stop it very close, and shake it two or three times a day together,
so keep it to your use; when you wet the sponge, shake the glass: in the Winter
you may put to it three or four spoonfuls of Cinnamon water or Sack.

A Perfume against the Plague.
Diverse good Physicians opinions are, that to burn Tar every morning in a
chafing dish of coals is most excellent against the Plague; also put in a
little Wine Vinegar to the Tar. It is most excellent and approved.

Sir Edward Tertiles Salve, called the chief of all Salves.
Take Rosin eight ounces, Virgins Wax and Frankincense, of each four ounces,
Mastick one ounce, Hearts Suet four ounces, Camphire two drams; beat the Rosin,
Mastick, and Frankincense in a Mortar together to fine powder; then melt the
Rosin and Wax together, then put in the powders: and when they are well melted,
strain it through a cloth into a pottle of White Wine, and boil it together,
till it be somewhat thick; then let it cool, and put in the Camphire and four
ounces of Venice Turpentine drop by drop lest it clumper, stirring it
continually, then make it up into Rolls, and do with it to the pleasure of God,
and health of man.

The Virtues and use of it.
1. It is good for all Wounds and Sores, old or new, in any place. 2. It
cleanses all Festers in the flesh, and heals more in nine days, then other
salves cure in a month. 3. It suffers no dead flesh to engender, or abide
where it comes. 4. It cures the Headache, rubbing the Temples therewith. 5.
It cures a salt fleam Face. 6. It helps Sinnews that grow stiff, or spring
with labor, or wax dry for want of blood. 7. It draws out rusty Iron,
Arrow-heads, Stubs, Splints, Thorns, or whatsoever is fixed in the flesh or
wound. 8. It cures the biting of a mad Dog, or pricking of any venomous
creature. 9. It cures all Felons, or white flaws. 10. It is good for all
festering Cankers. 11. It helps all Aches of the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys,
Back, Sides, Arms, or Legs. 12. It cures Biles, Blanes, Botches, Impostumes,
Swellings, and Tumors in any part of the body. 13. it helps all aches and
pains of the Genitors in man or woman. 14. It cures Scabs, Itch, Wrenches,
Sprains, Strains, Gouts, Palsies, Dropsies, and waters between the flesh and
skin. 15. It heals the Hemorrhoides, or Piles in man or woman. 16. It cures
the bloody Flux, if the belly be anointed therewith. 17. Make a Sear-cloth
thereof to heal all the abovesaid Maladies, with very many other, which for
brevity sake are omitted.
A Restorative Broth.
Take a young Cock or Capon, flea it, and cut it in four quarters, take out the
bones and chop the flesh somewhat small, put it into an earthen pot of three
quarts with a close cover, and pour on it a quart of good red wine, and a pint
of red Rose Water, and put to one handful of Currants, ten Dates stoned and cut
small, of Rosemary flowers or leaves, and Borage, of each half a handful, then
close on the cover of the pot very fast, and set the said pot in a big brass
pot of water, and let it boil five or six hours, taking heed that the water in
the brass pot get not into the other pot: when it is well boiled, let it cool
leasurely in the brass pot, and then bruise all with a ladle, and strain out
the liquor, whereof take morning and evening four or five spoonfuls blood warm.

For the Piles.
Take one spoonful of white dogs turd, as much white Frankincense, and twenty
four grains of Alloes, beat them fine and searce them, then take one spoonful
of honey, the yolk of an egg, and as much oil of Roses as will make it to an
ointment, mingle them well together, and anoint the grieved place; if the sore
be inward, wet a Tent of lint in the ointment, and put it into the Fundament,
and spread some of the ointments on a cloth, and put that on it. This is a
present remedy.

For a sore Throat.
Mingle burnt Alum, the yolk of an Egg, powder of white Dogs turd, and some
Honey together; tie a clout on the end of a stick wet in this mixture, and
therewith rub the throat: or mix white Dogs turd and Honey, spread it on sheeps
leather, and apply it to the Throat.

To void Phlegm from the Head, Lungs, or Stomach.
Mix Pelitory roots and Mustard together, and hold it in the mouth, and it will
draw out much Phlegm from the Head; but if you boil Pelitory roots, Hysop and
Mustard in Wine and Vinegar, and gargle the Throat with it, it will cleanse the
Lungs and Stomach perfectly.

The Lady Drury's Medicine for the Cholick, Proved.
Take a turfe of green Grass, and lay it to the Navil, and let it lie till you
find ease, the green side must be laid next to the belly.

A Medicine for one thick of Hearing. Proved.
Take the Garden Dasie-roots, and make juice thereof, and lay the worst side of
the head low upon the bolster, and drop three or four drops thereof into the
better Ear; this do three or four days together.

An excellent drink for the Stone.
Take Sussafras and Sussaparilla, of each two ounces shaved small, China root
and Tormentil roots, of each one ounce sliced small, Liquorish half a pound
beaten, Anniseed four ounces bruised; steep all these in three gallons of
running water for twelve hours, then put to them these simples following,
picked and washed, viz. Columbine, Lady mantle, Marsh Mallow, and Moulear-roots
slit, Herb Robert, Ribwort, Sanible, Scabious, Agrimony, Coltsfoot and Betony,
of each two handfuls; boil all these together on a soft fire, till one gallon
be consumed, then strain it out, and keep the liquor in a glass close stopped,
then take all what remains in the strainer; put it into the pot again, and pour
thereon two gallons of running water, and boil them till half the Liquor be
consumed, then strain it out, and put both liquors together, set them on the
fire, and put a quart of White Wine to it, and let it boil a while gently and
scum it clean, then take it off the fire, and put to it half an ounce of
Rhubarb slit, and two ounces of good Sena leaves, and stir them well together,
and cover the pot close to keep in the heat, and let it stand all night, and in
the morning stir it well, and cover it again, and so let it stand four days.
Take of this Liquor in the morning fasting, four a clock in the afternoon, and
after supper at bed time; at each time the quantity of six ounces, and so used
it must be till you feel ease.

To preserve a Woman with Child from miscarrying.
Put a few Cloves and Cinnamon, with a spring of Baulm and Rosemary into a pint
of Claret Wine, and burn it altogether, then beat the yolks of six new laid
eggs, and put them into the Wine on the fire, then take the Cock-treading of
twelve eggs, and the white of one egg, and beat them to an Oil; take off the
white froth from it, and put this Oil into the Wine, and brew all well together
with as much powder sugar as will make it of an indifferent sweetness: whereof
let the said woman take four spoonfuls at a time, when she feels any pain to
begin in her back or belly.

To make Childrens Teeth come without Pain. Proved.
Take the head of a hare boild or roasted, and with the brains thereof mingle
honey and butter, and therewith anoint the childs gums as often as you please.

Dr. Mays Juice of Liquorish to stay Rheum and preserve the Lungs.
Take six little handfuls of the tops of Hysop, Rosemary flowers one little
handful, of the leaves of Coltsfoot, four little handfuls, stamp and take the
juice of them, and put to it a pint of Hysop-water, or running water; unto all
these put four ounces of Liquorish, finely beaten and searsed, then set it on
the fire, and boil it till it be as thick as cream, then strain it through a
fine strainer, and set it again to the fire, and stir it continually till it
boil, and put into it boiling four ounces of Yellow Sugarcandy; let it boil
till it rise from the bottom, which stirring, and when you may handle it, make
it up in Cakes and Roles as you please.

To kill a Felon quickly.
Take a little Rue and Sage, stamp them small, put to it Oil of the white of an
Egg, and a little Honey, and lay it to the sore.

A Remedy for the pain in the Stomach.
Take a pottle of white Wine, eight ounces of Currants, and four ounces of
Elicampane-roots sliced, a sprig of Marjoram and Spearmint; boil all these
together till the Currants be soft, adding to it one spoonful of sweet
Fennel-seed bruised. Drink of the liquor every morning fasting, at four a Clock
in the afternoon, and when you go to bed the quantity of six spoonfuls. While
you drink this, apply to your stomach one spoonful of Conserve of Roses, two
penniworth of Mithridate, Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each one spoonful,
and a penniworth of Saffron, mix these together with Rose Water and Wine
Vinegar, and put them in a Linen Bag, and warm it, and lay it to the Stomach.

To cure Diseases without taking any thing at the Mouth.
Take one pound of Aloes Hepatica, Myrrh four ounces, both beaten very fine,
Aqua vitae and Rose Water, of each one pint; after one nights infusion distill
them in Sand twenty four hours very softly, and in the end make a great fire,
and there will come a Balsome, wherewith if you rub the Stomach with a warm
cloth dipped therein, it will purge Phlegm and Choler, and all Worms which
infect the brain, and breed the Falling sickness, it expels corrupruptions,
of the Stomach, it helps digestion and appetite, it expurgeth all dross in the
bottom of the Stomach, it cures the Gout being mixed and well beaten with Aqua
Vitae, and applied warm to the Gouty place, and left long on it.

To break the Stone.
Take Cammock roots, dry them in an Oven, beat them to powder, searse it and
put as much thereof as will lie on a groat into half a pint of White Wine, half
a sliced Lemon, a top or two of Rosemary, and some Sugar, let them lie in steep
all night, in the morning stir them well together, and drink it off, and walk
thereupon a good while. Use this three or four mornings together, and it will
make the Stone break, and void away in gravel: but if the Kidneys be ulcerated,
then use the Medicine following, viz.

To help Vlceration in the Kidneys.
Take two drams of China-root sliced small, Golden Rod, Maidenhair, Paul's
Betony, Mousear, Agrimony, Comfrey, Scabious, Bugle, red Bramble leaves,
Pelitory of the Wall, Marsh Mallows, and Plantain, of each half a handful, then
take one spoonful of French Barley, a stick of Liquorish sliced small, one
handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned; boil all these softly in a pottle of
running water to a quart, then take it from the fire, and put to it two ounces
of Conserve of red Roses, stir them together, and let it run through a fine
cloth, and keep it close stopped in a glass, and drink thereof bloodwarm every
morning and evening twelve spoonfuls at a time, for two, three, or four weeks,
more or less, as you see occasion, and find ease or pain.

A Special Medicine for one that cannot swallow, although no inward Medicine
can be taken for it.
Take the soiling of a Dog that is hard and white, powder it, and mingle it
well with English Honey, spread it thick upon a linen cloth, and hold it to
the fire, and lay it all over the Throat down to the Channel bone, use fresh
morning and evening, bind it hard to, and by Gods grace it will help.

To draw up the Uvula.
Take a new laid Egg, and roste it till it be blue, and then crush it between a
cloth, and lay it to the crown of the head, and once in twelve hours lay new
till it be drawn up.

A Purge for Children or Old men.
Take one spoonful of Spirit of Tartar prepared, with Sugarcandy and Rose
water, put it in a little broth, and give it either of them; it purges gently,
it comforts the heart, and expels Phlegm and Melancholy.

For a Noli me tangere.
Take the Herb called Turnsol, cut it in small pieces, and put it in a bottle,
and pour so much Aqua vitae on it as will cover it four fingers, stop the
bottle, and set it in the Sun ten days, and in the night in the Chimney
corner, but not too near the fire; then pour of the Aqua vitae, and keep it
close, then calcine the dregs remaining in the bottle between two calcining
pots well luted, which will be done in a day, then put the calcined ashes into
the said Aqua vitae, and they will all dissolve. Keep this as a great Treasure,
and give one spoonful thereof to the party fasting, in white Wine, and wet a
cloth in the said Liquor, and bind it on the sore place, and without fail it
will dry it up It helps also those that are troubled with the Gravel and
Stone, given as aforesaid with white Wine: and it is very excellent for those
that have the Dropsy, Palsy, or are taken with a Quartane Ague.

To make the Face fair, and for a stinking Breath.
Take the flowers of Rosemary, and seethe them in white Wine, with which wash
your face; if you drink thereof, it will make you have a sweet breath.

For heat in the Face, redness and shining of the Nose.
Take a fair linen cloth, and in the morning lay it over the grass, and draw
it over till it be wet with dew, then wring it out into a fair dish, and wet
the face therewith as often as you please: as you wet it let it dry in. May dew
is the best.

An excellent Oil to take away the Heat and Shining of the Nose.
Take twelve ounces of Gourd-seed, crackle them, and take out the kernels, peel
off the skin, and blanch six ounces of bitter Almonds, and make an Oil of them,
and anoint the place grieved therewith: you must always take as much of the
Gourd-seed as of the Almonds; use it often.

For Heat or Pimples in the Face
Take the Liverwort that grows in the Well, stamp and strain it, and put the
juice into Cream, and so anoint your face as long as you will, and it will help
you. Proved. Also the juice of Liverwort drunk in beer warm, is good for the
heat of the Liver.

To take away Hair.
Take the shells of fifty two Eggs, beat them small, and still them with a good
fire, and with the water anoint your self where you would have the hair off: Or
else Cats Dung that is hard and dried, beaten to powder, and tempered with
strong vinegar, and anointed on the place.

Dr. Friars Receipt for sweating in the face.
Take a little handful of Penniroyal, and as much Cinquefoil, and seethe them
in white Wine or Vinegar; if you take Vinegar, put a little to it when it is
sodden; this done you must hold your head over it, and cast a sheet over your
head and keep in the air close as long as you can endure it, and so ten or
twelve times a day.

An approved Medicine taught by Dr. Blacksmith for the Cough.
Take the roots of Folefoot, and dry them in an Oven, and powder them, then
heat a Tile red hot, and strew it thereupon, then set the bottom of a tunnel
upon it, and let the patient receive the same morning and evening.

An approved Medicine for the same, by Doctor Blacksmith.
Take a pint of Hysop-water, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar Candy, a
spoonful of Anniseed bruised* and a small stick of Liquorish sliced and
bruised, put them together, and let them stand all night, boil it a quarter of
an hour upon a fire: then strain, and take of it two or three spoonfuls at a
time warm; you may take it at any time, best at night when you go to bed, or in
the morning.

For the Kidneys swlon with cold, or other Accident.
Take the Oils of Roses and Quinces, of each two drams, and warm them in a
saucer or porringer, and anoint the place therewith against the fire, lest you
take cold in the doing of it.

A Vomit for an Ague.
Take blue Lilly-roots sliced small and bruised, and steep it in as much
Vinegar as will cover them, and when the Patient feels his fit coming, let him
drink a draught of it in Ale, and keep him very warm while it works.

A restorative Bag for a cold or windy Stomach.
Take Rose leaves, Rosemary tops, and flowers, red Mints, and Borage flowers,
of each one handful, warm them in a platter on a chasing-dish of coals, and
ever as you stir it, sprinkle it with Sack and Rose water; and when it is as
hot as can be, put it in a cloth or silk bag, and lay it to the bottom of the
Stomach, as hot as can be endured, and keep your self from studying or musing,
and it will comfort very much.

A Drink for cold Rhumes or Phlegms.
Take the Roots of Fennel, Comfrey, Parsley, and Liverwort, Hart's-tongue,
Mousear, Horehound, Sandrake, Maidenhair, Chinquefoil, Hysop, Bugloss, and
Violet leaves, of each one handful, wash and dry them very clean, Raisins of
the Sun eight ounces, Anniseeds four drams, Liquorish two drams,
Elecampane-root two drams, half a pint of Barley washed and bruised; boil these
in a pottle of fair water, until half the liquor be consumed, strain it, and
put to it one quart of White or Renish Wine, and one ounce of Sugarcandy, and
boil it again till half be consumed take it from the fire, and when it is cold
put it into a clean glass, and drink thereof every morning and evening a
draught first and last, and by Gods grace it will make you well and sound*
Approved.

For Rhume in the Throat.
Make a Cap of brown paper, perfume it with Frankincense, and apply it hot to
the head, then take the hard Eggs, and lay them hot to the Nape of the Neck,
and anoint the Throat with Oils of Rice and sweet Almonds, and lay your self to
sweat and after sweating, mix Mell Rosarum, Syrup of Mulberries, Plantain water
together; and gargle the throat therewith. In want of the said Syrup use
Woodbin water.

A Remedy for the Stone.
Take a quart of Milk, Ale, and white Wine, of each four ounces, make them into
a clear Posset drink, the curd taken off; to which put Parsley-roots, Mallow
leaves, and Pellitory of the wall, of each one handful, Watercresses one
handful and a half, all small shred, two sprigs of Time, and Liquorish one
ounce bruised, boil all together to the consumption of a quart, and take a
draught thereof in the morning, or at any time before meat, sweetened with
sugar to your taste.

A Broth for the Cough of the Lungs devised by Dr. Brasdale, Dr. Atkinson, and
Dr. Friar for the Lord Treasurer.
Take one paper of the prepared China Roots, and steep it in six pints of fair
water three hours, then boil it unto three pints in an earthen pipkin, then
boil a Chicken, and one ounce of French Barley together in a Pipkin six or
seven Walmes, and scum it, then put away the water, and put the Barley and the
Chick to the China, with the China in the paper a little green Endive, twenty
Raisins of the Sun stoned, a little crust of Bread, and a little Mace, boil
them together unto a pint and half, strain it, and let the party drink every
day two draughts thereof, one in the morning fasting, and another at four a
clock in the afternoon: use it as often as you see cause.

For a Burning or Scalding.
Take Alehoof one handful, the yolk of an Egg, and some fair water, stamp them,
and strain it, and therewith wash the grieved place till the fire be out.

Or boil some Alehoof and Sheeps Suet together with Sheeps Dung and Plantain
leaves, till they come to a salve, and apply it.

To P^^cure Sleep.
^ruise a handful of Anniseeds, and steep them in red Rose Water, and make it
up in little bags, and bind one of them to each Nostril, and it will cause
sleep.

To sharpen a sick man's Appetite, and to restore his Taste.
Take Wood or Garden Sorrel one handful, and boil it in a pint of white wine
vinegar till it be very tender, strain it out, and put to it Sugar two ounces,
and boil it to a Syrup, and let the Patient take of it at any time.

A comfortable Juleb for a Fever.
Take Barley-water and White Wine, of each one pint, Whey one quart, put to it
two ounces of Conserve of Barberries, and the juices of two Lemons, and two
Oranges. This will cool and open the body and comfort it. If the Fever be
extreme hot, take two white salt Herrings, slit them down the back, and bind
them to the soles of the feet for twelve hours. In want of Herrings, take two
Pigeons cut open, and so apply them.

A Receipt of the Right Honorable the Lord Sheffield, for the Cough of the
Lungs.
Take of the distilled water of sweet Horehound one pint, and add thereto to
make a syrup three quarters of a pound of fine white Sugarcandy finely beaten,
mix these well together, and set them upon a quick Charocal fire, then take
some of the best English Liquorish, clean scraped and sliced, and put into it,
and let it boil in the said Syrup; and when it seems half boiled, take three
grains of Ambergreece reasonable well bruised, and put it into the Syrup, and
let it boil altogether, but let any scum that rises upon it be taken away
before: you must have a care that it boil not with much heat by often cooling
some of it with a spoon; when it comes to a little thickness, being cold, it is
boiled sufficiently, else will it be all candy and not syrup, while it is hot
it must be strained through a fine cloth that is clean, before it be put in a
glass.

For a Cough or stuffing in the Stomach.
Take Hysop water one pint, Muscadine one quart, four races of Ginger, and as
much liquorish sliced, two penniworth of Sugercandy in powder, put all into a
glass, and stop it close, and shake them well together, and let it intermix
twenty four hours, and drink thereof morning and evening.

A Plaster for the Cholick.
Take Cammomile, Rue, Sage, and Wormwood, of each one handful, Wheaten bran
half a handful, cut the herbs small, and boil all in good Vinegar till the
Vinegar be consumed, then put it into a linen bag, and lay it to the pained
place as hot as can be endured, and when it is cold warm it again, and use it
daily till you be well.

For the Rising of the Mother.
Take Columbine-seed, and Parsnipseed, of each three spoonfuls; beat them to
fine powder, and boil them in a a quart of Ale to a pint, seething with it one
handful of Sage cut small, strain it, and drink it off warm every morning and
evening; especially when you feel pain. And take two ounces of Galbanum, spread
it upon a cloth, and lay it upon the woman's Navil.

A Drink for the Dropsy.
Take Polopodie of the Oak six ounces, Guajacum one ounce, the Bark of Guajacum
three ounces, Sassafras four ounces, Sena six ounces, Anniseed three ounces,
Epithymum, Stechados, of each half an ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned, eight
ounces, Hermodactyles, three ounces, Agarick, Rhubarb, China root, of each half
an ounce, Liquorish four ounces; put all these to sleep a whole night in two
gallons of Ale, and six quarts of strong Wine, in the morning boil them two
hours and a half, the pot being close stopped, then strain it being cold, and
give the Patient thereof three times a day, half a pint at a time, viz. at six
in the morning, and at nine after that, and at three in the afternoon. Boil the
remnant in the strainer in strong Ale as before, and drink this second liquour
at meals as often as you will. You must keep a drying diet of roast meat every
day, and sup betimes, but drink no other liquors whatsoever but these two.

For a Tympany or Water in ones Body, and for the fullness of the Stomach.
Take red Fennil and still it, and take thereof in the morning fasting a
spoonful or two, and in the evening or any time of the day, when you fell your
self not well: by Gods Grace this will help you.

For a Stich in the Side, proved.
Take a pretty quantity of Oats, and boil them in Sack, till they have dried up
the sack, and then put them in a cloth, and lay it as hot as you can endure it
to your side, and this will help.

A Receipt of Herbs that are to be boiled in Broth, according to Dr. Atkins
opinion.
Take Tamarisk, Lettice, Borrage, Bugloss, Rosemary tops, sweet Marjoram, Time,
Succory, Parsley, and Fennil* of each a pretty quantity, and when the body is
costive, leave out some herbs, and put in only Tamarisk, Borage, Bugloss,
Lettice, Succory, Parsley, Fennil, Betony.

Another by Mr. Francis Cox.
Take the Roots of Sparagus and Eringoes, of each three or four, cut off the
length of a finger, and sliced, Maidenhair, Tamarisk, Hart's-tongue, of ^^ch
like much, Betony twice as much as any of the rest, bind these and the roots
together, take also large whole mace two or three flakes, a quarter of a Nutmeg
quartered; take then a young Cock, dress him, and slice him, and cut his flesh
and so boil him until he be sod all to pieces, but let not the Herbs boil too
long in the broth, but when theyhave given a pretty ta^^e to it, take them out,
and let the rest boil till the Chick be all in pieces; then beat the Flesh of
him with Dates in a stone Mortar, and strain it with the liquor, until you have
all the taste thereof in the liquor, then clarify this broth with whites of
Eggs as you do a Jelly, and then use it; this broth will strengthen the back,
and have respect to the Spleen.

A Preservative against the Plague.
Take one handful of Roses, Betony, and small Fellon, two handfulls of
Scabious, of Dragon, Sage, Sorrel, Rue, Bramble leaves, and Elder leaves, of
each one handful, Bole-Armoniack as big as an apple, Saffron the weight of
eight pence, yellow Sanders one ounce, Sugarcandy two ounces, all beaten into
powder; distill these together, take three spoonfuls thereof, and of Treacle or
Mithridate the quantity of a bean, and mingle it with the water, and drink
thereof when you are faint.

Oxymel Compositum,
Take pure Honey a pottle, white Wine Vinegar a pint and a half, five Parsley,
five Fennel, five Smallige roots the pith taken out, the roots of Knacholm two
ounces, Sparagus one ounce, Smallage seed four ounces, shred the roots, and
bruise the seeds, and steep them in three quarts of Conduit water for four and
twenty hours, and after boil it all to one quart, strain it, and add the Honey
clarified and boil it therein, then put to the Vinegar, and let it boil gently
to the thickness of a Syrup, one spoonful whereof taken every morning fasting
cutteth and divides all gross humors, it purges the Liver, Spleen, Reins,
and opens all obstructions, it moves Urine, and provokes sweat.

A Purging Dyet-drink, the Proportion for four Gallons.
Take Sarsaparilla four ounces, Sena six ounces, Polypodie of the Oak six
ounces, Rhubarb twelve drams, Sassafras roots two ounces, Agarick one ounce,
Sea-Scurvey-grass a peck, Fennel, Caroway and Anniseed, of each half an ounce,
Cloves and Ginger, of each one ounce, wild Radish, and white Flower de Luce
roots, of each two ounces, Watercresses, and Brook-lime, of each eight
handfuls, slice such of these as are to be sliced, and beat those that are to
be beaten in a Mortar, and put them in a Canvas bag, and let it stand eight
days in a Rundlet of four gallons of ten shillings Beer, a little lower then
the middle of the Beer, and so tun it. Take thereof in the Spring and Fall
three or four days together in manner following, every morning at six a clock
fasting, take half a pint cold, and use some exercise after it till you be
warm, and fast till nine a clock; then take such another draught, and fast one
hour after it, then take some thin warm broth, and keep a good diet at meals,
eating no Sallads or Phlegmatic meats; after dinner at three a clock take
thereof another half pint, thus do for three or four days in the same manner.
This will purge gently, clear the blood and inward parts, and prevent diseases.
If you please you may put to the abovesaid ingredients two handfuls of
Maidenhair.

The Countess of Worcesters Medicine for the Green Sickness. Approved.
Take a pint of Malsey, and 2 handfuls of Currants clean washed, and put them
together, also take a little Wormwood, and a little crop or two of red Mint,
either green or dried, and lay it in the Malmsey over night, and in the morning
eat a spoonful or two of the Currants fasting, and walk after it, eating nothing
in an hour; use this twelve days together, and if you shall see cause, also
take Wormwood and warm it between two Tyles, and put it in a cloth, and lay to
the stomach when you go to bed, and so fresh every night. Proved by the Lady
Worcester.

A Diet Drink for a Fistula, or for a Body full of gross Humors.
Take Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, the Wood and Bark of Oak root, of each four
ounces cut small, Agrimony, Coltsfoot, Scabious, of each four handfuls, Marsh
Mallow Roots half a handful, Betony, Ladies Mantle, Sinacle, Columbine roots,
of each one handful, shred the Herbs and Roots small, and boil them all in
three gallon; of Spring water, or two gallons, then strain them through a
Cullender, and put thereto one gallon of clear water, and boil it to a gallon
and an half, and strain it again till all the moisture be out; put thereto a
pottle of good white Wine, and a pint and a half of good Honey, and boil it
softly, scum it very clean, take it off the fire, and put to six drams of
Rhubarb sliced small, and two ounces of Sena, and keep it in a stone vessel
close covered, and drink thereof at five a clock in the morning, and at four a
clock in the afternoon till half of it be wasted; afterward let the Patient
drink thereof every morning a draught, and dress the Fistula with the green
salve, and this will cure it.

When this Drink is made as abovesaid, let it stand three days, only shaking
it together twice or thrice a day. It is fit to be drunk at three days end. In
the time of taking it, all fish, white meats, fruit, wine, anger and passion
must be avoided.

For one that has no speech in Sickness.
Take the juice of Sage, or Pimpernel, and put it in the Patients mouth, and by
the grace of God it shall make him speak.

A Water good for Lightness of the Head, and the aforesaid.
Take the flowers of single White Primroses, and still them, and drink of the
water, and that is good for the lightness of the head; and for bringing of the
speech again, mingle therewith the like quantity of Rosemary-flower water, and
Cowslip-water, and the same will restore the speech again.

Sir Edward Boustwards precious Ointment for Aches in the Bones or Sinews that
come of cold Causes.
Take Wormwood, red sage, the green and tender leaves and buds of Bays and of
Rue, of each one pound; chop them and beat them in a mortar very small, put to
them Mutton Suet well picked from the skins one pound and an half, and beat all
well together, and put to them a pint and a half of good Oyl-Olive, or
Neatsfoot Oil, mix them all well together in an earthen pot, and set them in a
warm Oven five hours: then take it out and strain it, and keep the Ointment in
an Earthen Pot, anoint the grieved therewith well by the fire, and cover the
place with black wool unwashed.

Dr. Atkins. An excellent Medicine for the Jaundies.
Take of Rhubarb finely sliced the weight of a shilling, Red Dock Roots sliced
the weight of three shillings, one Nutmeg bruised grossly, and put them i^ a
bottle of new beer, or any beer, the bottle being three quarts, or a pottle,
let it be close stopped for three days, or two at least, and then begin to
give him to drink thereof every morning a draught next his heart, and about
five a clock in the afternoon, drink this till his stool come yellow; if his
body be loose with it, give him but only in the morning: if he will not take
this, give him two spoonfuls of the sirup of Succory, with Rhubarb one morning,
and every day after give him the weight of six pence of the powder after
written in drink, or broth, or alebery next his heart for a week together.

Dr. Atkins. Powder.
Take Earthworms and slit them, and wash them with white Wine, then dry them
in an Oven, and powder them, and put to every shilling weight of their Powder,
a groat weight of Ivory, and as much of Hartshorn scraped, and mingle them
together, boil in his broth Parsley Roots and Fennil Roots, and a little
Nutmeg; if he will not take this, give him every morning two spoonfuls of
Oxymel Compositum alone, or in Beer, or else burn some Juniper, and take one
ounce of the ashes, and put in an Hypocras bag, with a quarter of a Nutmeg
beaten, and run a pint of Rhenish Wine or white Wine through it four or five
times, and let him every morning drink a draught of the Wine with Sugar.

An approved Medicine for the Yellow Jaundies.
Take the peels of Barberries, and scrape off the outside of it, and take the
inner peel of them, a quarter as much as one may hold in their hand, a small
Reasin of Turmerick grated very small, four or five blades of English Saffron
to be dried and beaten very small, then put all together, and boil in a pint of
milk or posset drink, until it be very bitter, then strain it, and drink every
morning fasting, and at night when you go to bed nine days together, and by
the grace of God it will help you; or else you may lay it asteep in strong Ale
or Beer twenty four hours, and then drink a quantity of it, as you should the
other; and if it be bitter, you may put a little sugar to sweeten it.

To make Oil of Excester.
Take Sage two handfuls, one of Time, one of the wild Vine, two of Hysop, one
of Saint John's Wort, two of Bay leaves, one of Goose-grass, two of Rosemary,
one of Letterwood, two of Penniroyal, two of Cammomile, two of Lavender, two of
White Lillies, two of Dragon leaves, two of Rue, two of Wormwood, two of Mints,
one of Sweet Marjoram, one of Pellitory of Spain, one of Feaverfew, one of
Angelica, one of Betony, stamp well these herbs, and put them into a great
pottage pot, and boil them in two quarts of running water till the water be
consumed, then put to it two quarts of Cowslip flowers that have been steeped
in Oil Olive four weeks, and have been kept in the Sun all that time, and two
quarts of White Wine, and also two quarts of Oil Olive, boil them together one
or two hours, till you think it almost dry, then strain in the Oil from the
herbs, and put it into a glass, and blow the uppermost of the Oil into the
glass, for the very bottom is not so good.

A Medicine for the Worms.
Take a little fresh Butter and Honey, melt it, and anoint therewith the child
from the Stomach to the Navil, then take powder of Mirrhe, and strew it upon
the place so anointed, cover it with a brown paper, and bind a cloth over it,
and so anoint the child three nights one after another. This Mirrhe is also
good to swallow in a morning for shortness of breath, and to chew it in the
mouth for Rhumes.

A Powder for the wind in the Body.
Take Anniseed, Caroway-seed, Jet, Ambergreese, red Coral, dried Lemon or
Orange peels, new laid Egg shells dried. Dates stones, pillings of Goose-horns,
of Capons and Pigeons, dried Horse radish-roots, of each half a scruple in fine
powder well mixed, and take half a scruple thereof every morning in a spoonful
of Beer or white Wine.

To make Oil of Eggs.
Take twelve yolks of eggs, and put them in a pot over the fire, and let them
stand till you perceive them to grow black, then put them in a press, and press
out the oil. This oil is good for all manner of burnings and scaldings
whatsoever.

To make Oil of Mustard seed.
Take two pounds of Mustard seed, and four pounds of Oil Olive, grind them
together, and let them so stand nine days, and then stir it well, and keep in
boxes. This Oil is good for the Palsy, Gout, Itch, etc.

To make Oil of Fennel.
Take a good quantity of Fennel, and put it between two iron Plates, and make
them very hot in the fire, then press out the liquor. This Oil will keep a
great while: it is good for the Tissick, and for Burnings or Scaldings.

To make Oil of Rue.
Cut Rue leaves small, and put them into a pot with some Oil Olive, and let
them stand twelve days, then boil them till they be wasted to the third part,
then strain it, and keep it close. This Oil is good to keep away all causes of
Pestilences in man, woman, or child.

To make Oil of Cammomile.
Stamp a good quantity of Cammomile flowers in a Mortar, put them in a pot with
some Oil Olive, and let them stand twelve days, then boil it a little on the
fire, then take it off, and press it out hard, and put the juice into glasses,
and put to them more Cammomile flowers stamped small, and let them stand for
your use.

A Sovereign Medicine for a Fistula.
Take pure Rosin one pound, Sheep Suet the bigness of a great Egg or somewhat
more in Winter, and set them on a fire in a pot, till it be ready to boil, then
pour it in a pan of cold water, and work it with your hands rubbed with butter
till it become so small as packthred* scrape it on a cloth, and spread it thin,
then cut it out small and narrow, and when you use it, roll it up small like
tents.

The Powder.
Take an Ox-horn, and steep it nine days in water, shift every day into fresh
water; then take it out, and fill it full of black Soap, and fry it over the
fire in a Drying Pan, and the horn will melt away and burn to powder; dip the
end of ten tents in this powder.

The Water.
Take Alum and white Copperas, of each half a pound, beat them into fine
powder, and mix them well together, and put them in an earthen pot, and let
them boil on a soft fire till they be hard, and will boil no longer, then beat
them to powder. Two spoonfuls will make a gallon of water, and one spoonful
will make a pottle, but let the water seethe first; then take it off, and at
first sprinkle a little of the powder lest it flame up, and after the rest wet
a fair cloth, and dress the sore twice a day. If green Copperas be used, two
pound must be put to one pound of Alum. When the sore is dressed, it must be
tented as aforesaid if need require, and lay on a cloth still wet in the said
water. As the water comes hot from the fire, put in one spoonful of the said
powder by degrees.

A special Medicine for a Looseness.
Burn three Nutmegs to ashes in the flame of a wax candle, and when they are
thoroughly burnt, rub them to powder, and mix it with the like quantity of Bean
flower and Cinnamon finely beaten and searsed, then make up into a paste with
the white of an Egg, and a little red Wine; and make the paste into small round
pills fit for swallowing, and dry them hard in a clean fire, and when you take
them, drink a little red wine after it.

For an Vncomb, or sore Finger.
Shred one handful of Smallage very small, and put to it one spoonful of Honey,
the yolk of an Egg, and a little Wheat flower to make it thick, then spread it
on a cloth, and lay it to the sore twice a day.

For the same in young Children, or any other in the beginning.
Take Celandine, and bruise it well between your hands, and bind to your
Navil, and the soles of your feet, hang it once in twenty four hours till they
be well.

A Medicine for the Purples proved.
Take Purple Silk, and shred it as small as you can, and put it into a spoon,
and put a little Ale or Beer unto it lukewarm, and so take it, and drink after
it a little; and so do five mornings together, and fast an hour after it.

Dr. Twines Almond Milk.
Take a pot of water when it is boiled, and stood to be clear, then boil
therein Violet leaves, Strawberries the whole herb with the root, of each a
pretty handful, Sorrel a good root all well washed, a crust of white bread,
raisins of the Sun stoned two ounces, boil all these from a pottle to a quart,
and with fifty Almonds blanched, and thirty Pompion Kernels, all well beaten,
draw an Almond Milk, sweetened with good ^ugar to your liking, and drink a good
draught thereof morning and evening toward the quantity of a pint.

Dr. Blacksmiths Almond Milk.
Take of the roots of Ruscus Gramen, Sparagus, and Succory, each three drams,
Barley prepared half a handful, of the leaves of Mallows, Violets, five leaved
Grass, Strawberries, Borage, Bugloss, Maidenhair, of each half a handful,
sliced Liquorish two drams: boil all these in three pints of fair running water
to a quart or less: then take the weight of a French Crown of the Kernels of
each of the three cold seeds, and beat them with a few Almonds, and white
Rose Water and Sugar, and make Almond Milk.

Dr. Atkins excellen^t Receipt of Almond Milk to cool and cleanse the Kidneys.
Take a pint and a quarter of Barley-water, and in that boil Althea, Iringus,
Gramen and Sparagus Roots, each a French Crowns weight, Strawberries, and five
leaved Grass, both Leaves and Roots, each a few, boil them till the
Barley-water be but a pint, then strain out the Barley-water, and take a French
Crowns weight a piece of the four cold seeds, and peel off the husks, then beat
the seeds with the Almonds, and strain them forth together with the
Barley-water, and put to it a little Rose water and Sugar, and make it an
Almond Milk.

A Receipt for the Stone.
Take a gallon of new Milk, Wild Time, Sassafras, Pellitory of the Wall,
Philipendula roots, Saxifrage, of each one handful, Parsley leaves two
handfuls, three or four Radish-roots, and as many Parsley roots, Anniseeds one
ounce, cut and slit the roots, bruise the herbs and seeds, and put them to
infuse in the milk a whole night, the next morning distill it in a Rose
distiliatory. Take ten or twelve spoonfuls of the water, and as much White or
Rhenish Wine, a little Sugar, and a sliced Nutmeg. It is very good every full
and change of the Moon to take morning and evening, to prevent sickness* and at
any time if need require.

For the green sickness.
Take Aloes and Rhubarb, of each four ounces finely beaten and searsed,
prepared Steel four drams; mix these together with Claret Wine, and make them
into twenty seven pills, and take every morning in three of them, using
exercise till all be gone, and drink after them at each time a glass of Claret
wine.

For any sore Breasts or Paps.
Take a pottle of running water, Sage two good handfuls small minced, and a
quantity of Oatmeal-greats small beaten; boil all these to the thickness of
white bread dough, but let it not burn to; then put to it three spoonfuls of
honey, and a little saffron, stir it well together, and boil it to a quart
somewhat stiff. This Pultess will break and heal it soon, and draw away the
pain without breaking. It will cure any sore Breast or Pap, if it be not a
Canker or Fistula.

A Syrrup lasting many years, good for Swounding and Faintness of Heart, it
comfort the weak Brain and Sinews, it may be used as much as half a nut at
once at your pleasure.
Take Borage, Bugloss, white Endive, one little handful, of Rosemary-flowers,
Time, Hysop, Winter Savory, of each one little handful; break these between
your hands, and seethe them in three quarts of water to three pints, then
strain it, and put to it a pint of good Malmsey, one ounce of whole Cloves,
powder of cinnamon half an ounce, powder of Ginger a quarter of an ounce, one
Nutmeg in powder, Sugar half a pound or more, let them seethe upon a soft fire,
well stirred for burning to, until it come to the thickness of Honey: then take
it up, and let it cool, and put it in pots or glasses at your pleasure.
Prescribed by Dr. Twine.

An approved Medicine for a woman in Labor to make, come, and prove safe
deliverance
Take powder of Cinnamon one dram, powder of Amber half a dram finely beaten,
mingle it with eight spoonfuls of Claret Wine, and so let her drink it.

To know how much Bezar Stone must be taken when one is heart sick.
Take Bezer Stone the weight of three Barley corns, or five at a time, once in
six or ten hours, and give it in a spoon with Carduus, Bean-water, Borage, or
Bugloss, Ale or Beer.

Doctor Stevens excellent water, wherewith he cured many Diseases following.
Take one gallon of Gascoign Wine, Ginger, Gallingal, Cammomil, Nutmegs, Grains
of Paradise, Cloves, Anniseeds, Caroway seeds, of each one dram, then take
Sage, Mint, red Roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Penniroyal, Montanum,
Cammomil, Babin, Hart's-tongue, Lavender, Avance, of each a handful, bray the
spices small, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse times; then
still it in a Limbeck, and keep the first by it self, for it is best; then will
there come a second water which is good, but not so good as the first, for it
is fainter. The virtues of this water is, to comfort the Vital Spirit greatly,
and preserve the youth of man or woman, and helps the inward diseases that come
of cold, helps the shaking of the Palsy, and cures contractions of Sinnews,
it strengthens the Marrow in the bones, it helps the conception of Women
that are barren, it kills Worms in the body, and cures the cold Gout, and
Toothache, and it helps the Stone in the bladder, and the pain in the Reins
of the Back, and will make one seem young a long time; one spoonful of this
Aqua vitae shall do more good to a man that is sick, then four spoonfuls of any
other; and this Aqua vitae shall be better if it stand in the Sun all Summer
long.

For the Falling Sickness.
Take half a peck of Peony roots, cleanse, rub, wash, and stamp them, and as
you stamp them, put in Sherry Sack, let them be beaten very small, and then put
to them a pottle of Sherry Sack; stir all well together, and let it stand close
covered twenty four hours, then pour of the clearest into bottles, and take
thereof a little draught every change of the Moon, for three mornings, one
morning after another.

A Pultess to break a Bile or Imposthume.
Take Sorrel one handful, twelve Figs quartered, half a pint of Sorrel juice;
boil and break these together till it be very tender, and put to it some Wheat
flower, and when it is well boiled, put to it a good piece of butter, and lay
it warm to the place twice a day, till it be drawn enough.

A Remedy for Worms in Children.
Take one spoonful of juice of Lemons, powdered Saffron half a scruple, and a
little Sugar; and give this same quantity to the Patient three mornings
together.

For Worms. Dr. Wetherborn.
Take Rhubarb one dram, Wormwood half a dram, Corralline one scruple, Currants
one good handful, beat them all to a Conserve, and mix it with Syrup of
Violets, to an Electuary, and give a child the quantity of a Walnut thereof
every other morning fasting.

An Ointment to heal any Bruise or Wound.
Take Sage, Self-heal, Smallage, Sothernwood, Plantain, Time, Ribwort, Rue,
Parsley, Marigold leaves, Mercury Wormwood, Betony, Scabious, Valerian,
Comfrey, Lions-tongue, Buck-horn, of each one handful; wash them clean, and put
them into a Sieve to drain all night, and when they are dry, chop them very
small, and put to them two pounds of unwashed Butter well beaten, then boil it
till half be consumed, then strain it into the pot you mean to keep it in. It
is also good for swollen Breasts. May is the best time to make it in.

For a Bruise in a Woman's Breast that is hard swollen.
Take Wood-lice, and dry them between papers before the fire, and make them
into fine powder, whereof take as much as will lie on a three pence in a
spoonful of Grout Ale: do thus first and last for three weeks together, and
after you may take twice a week, till you find the Breast well. But you must
be sure to keep a white Cotton fried in Goose grease to it constantly, though
you leave taking the said powder, until you find the breast cured. This has
cured breasts that should have been cut off.

A Medicine for a child that cannot hold his or her Water.
Take the Navil string of a child which is ready to fall from him, dry it and
beat it to powder, and give it to the patient child Male or Female in two
spoonfuls of small Beer to drink fasting in the morning.

A. R. C.
Shred two handfulls of Rosemary flowers, and boil them in a quarter of a pint
of Aqua vitae a little together. At n^ght when you go to bed, and in the
morning you must have two little pieces of white Cotton, and take some of this
liquor, and set it on the embers in a dish, and put in one of the pieces of
Cotton, and when it is hot, wring out the liquor, and lay it to the grief. Do
thus three times evening and morning, keeping the last piece of Cotton to the
grief all night; and so all day.

An Electuary for the Liver.
Take Cichory roots, wash and rub them very dry in a cloth, then slit them and
take out their pith, and cut them in small pieces; of these roots thus ordered
take eight ounces, and beat them small in a Mortar, and put to them two ounces
of currants well washed and dry rubbed in a cloth, and beat them well together,
put one ounce of the best grated Rhubarb, and half a pound of double refined
Sugar, beaten to powder, and beat all well together in the Mortar to the
consistence of a well formed Electuary, and keep it in a galley-pot for your
use close covered. Take as much thereof as a Walnut in the morning fasting, and
as much at four a clock in the afternoon.

A Purging Ale for the Liver.
Take Scurvy Grass six handfuls, Brooklime, Watercresses, of each three
handfuls, Agrimony, Speed-wel, Liverwort, of each two handfuls, Fennel and
Parsley roots, of each three ounces, Horseradish two ounces, Monks Rhubarb one
pound as well picked, washed and bruised; then put to them Sena five ounces*
Polypody of the Oak four ounces, Nutmegs bruised two ounces, Fennel-seed
bruised one ounce; Liquorish slit and bruised two ounces, Sassafras cut small
three ounces: put all these in a bag or boulter, and hang it in five or six
gallons of second Ale, and after five days infusion, drink thereof half a pint
every morning fasting, and walk upon it.

A Medicine for the Stone.
Take the Pulp of Cassia Fistula newly drawn, one ounce and a half, Rhubarb in
powder, one dram and a half, Venice Turpentine seven drams, Liquorish half a
dram, Species of Diatragacanthum Frigidum, one scruple, mix them well together
with a sufficient quantity of Marsh Mallows, and take thereof in the morning
fasting the quantity of a Walnut, and drink after it a good draught of posset
drink; use it three mornings at every new Moon.

For the Whites and Heats in the Back.
Take three or four Nutmegs, and put them into the middle of a brown loaf, set
it in an Oven, and when it is baked take out the Nutmegs, and every morning for
nine days one after another, beat the white of a new laid Egg to water, then
put to it of Plantain and red Rose water, of each four spoonfuls, and grate
into it some of the said Nutmegs, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, and drink
it off.

Syrup of Ale for the same Disease.
Take a gallon of new Ale wort of the first tunning, and hang it over the clear
fire in an Iron Pot, and scum it till no more will rise, and when it is boiled
to a pint take it off, and put it into an earthen pot with a cover, and take a
little thereof on a Pen-knifes point every morning and evening.

An excellent artificial Balsam.
Take Conduit-water and Oil Olive, of each one quart, Turpentine four ounces,
liquid Storax six ounces; put them in a Basin, and let them stand together all
night: the next day melt half a pound of Beeswax on the fire, and put to it
Rosemary, Bays, and sweet Marjoram, of each one handful shred small, and also
Dragons Blood; and Mummey, of each one oun^^ made small, and let them boil in
the wax a while: then put into the Basin Oil of Saint John's Wort and
rose water, of each two ounces, and boil it together a little more, then put in
some natural Balsam and red Sanders pulverised, and let it boil a little, then
strain it into a basin, and when it is cold make a hole in it with a knife to
let out the water, and so dissolve it on the fire, and put it up for your use

The Virtues and Operations of this Balsam are.
1. It is good to cure any wound inward; if inward, squirt it in, or apply it
with a tent: if outward, anoint the place.

2. It heals any burning or scalding, bruise or cut, being therewith
anointed, and a linen cloth or lint dipped therein laid to the place warm.

3. It takes away any pain or grief, that comes of cold and moisture in the
bones or sinews, anointing the place grieved with this Oil heated, and a warm
cloth laid on it.

4. It cures the headache, only anointing the temples and nostrils therewith.

5. It is good for the Wind Cholick, or Stitch in the sides, applied thereunto
warm with hot clothes four mornings together every morning a quarter of an
ounce.

And many other cures it does, etc.

To make the Green Ointment.
Take Rue and Sage, of each one pound, Bay leaves and Wormwood, of each half a
pound, Melilot, the Herb and Flowers of Cammomile, Spike, Rosemary, red Rose
leaves, Saint John's wort, and Dill, of each one handful, chop them first very
small, then stamp them, and put thereto the like weight of Sheeps Suet chopped
very small, and stamp them all in a stone Mortar to one substance, that all be
green and no Suet appear. Then put it into a large earthen pan, and pour on it
five pints of pure and sweet Oil Olive, and work them together with your hands
to one substance; then cover the pan with paste close, that no air enter, and
let it stand seven days, then open it and put it in a fresh pan, and set it on
a soft fire always stirring it till the herbs begin to grow parched, then
strain it into a fresh pan, to which put the Oils of Roses, Cammomile, white
Lillies, Spike and Violets, of each one ounce, stir them well together, and
keep it in a glass close stopped for your use.

An Electuary for the passion of the Heart.
Take Damask Roses half blown, cut off their whites, and stamp them very fine,
and strain out the Juice very strong, moisten it in the stamping with a little
Damask Rose Water, then put thereto fine powder Sugar, and boil it gently to a
thin Syrup; then take the powders of Amber, Pearl, and Rubies, of each half a
dram, Ambergreece one scruple, and mingle them with the said sirup, till it be
somewhat thick, and take a little thereof on a knifes point morning and evening.

A Drink for a hot Fever.
Take Spring Water and red Rose Water, of each one pint and a half, the juice
of three Lemons, and white Sugar Candy one ounce, and mix them together, and
give the Patient thereof six or eight spoonfuls at a time often in a day and
night, until the unnatural heat be extinguished.

For the Cholick.
Take equal portions of Honey and Wine, put them on a fire, and put thereto
ground Wheat-meal, and a pretty quantity of bruised Cummin-seeds, and as much
Sorrel, boil all together for a pretty while, then put them into a linen bag,
and apply it to the belly as a plaster. Or take a pretty bundle of Time, and
boil it with a little slice of Ginger in a pint of Malmsey till the third part
be wasted, and drink thereof as warm as you can.

For stopping of the Urine.
Take the shells of quick Snails, wash them and dry them clean, and beat them
into fine powder; whereof take a pretty quantity in White Wine, or thin broth.

For the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take a pottle of new Ale, and as much Renish Wine, and put into it two whole
Lemons sliced with the peels and all, and put to them one Nutmeg beaten, and
two handfuls of Scurveygrass beaten and strained into the Ale, and half a
penniworth of grains of Paradise bruised; put all together in a little stand
with a cover, and after three days drink of it with a taste. It is also good
against the wind Cholick, proceeding from the Stone.

To make Hair grow thick.
Take three spoonfuls of Honey, and a good handful of Vine sprigs that twist
like Wire, and beat them well, and strain their juice into the Honey, and
anoint the bald places therewith.

For the Rhume, or Cough in the Stomach.
Take a pint of Malmsey or Muscadine, and boil it in five ounces of Sugarcandy
till it come to a Syrup, and in the latter end of the boiling put to it five
spoonfuls of Horehound distilled water, and so suck it from a Liquorish stick
bruised at the end. Use this only to bed-ward.

For the Sciatica.
Take a pound of yellow Wax, six spoonfuls of the juice of Marjoram, and red
Sage, two spoonfuls of the juice of Onions, of Anniseeds, Cloves, Frankincense,
Mace, and Nutmegs, of each one penniworth, and as much Turpentine; boil these
together to the consistence of a Salve, and so apply it.

For the Piles.
Roste quick Snails in their shells, pick out their meat with a pin, and beat
them in a Mortar with some powder of Pepper to a Salve; then take the dried
roots of Pilewort in powder, and strew it thin on the Plaster, and apply it as
hot as you can suffer it.

To Procure sleep.
Chop Cammomile and crumbs of brown bread small, and boil them with White Wine
Vinegar; stir it well and spread it on a cloth, and bind it to the soles of
the feet as hot as you can suffer it. You may add to it dried red Rose leaves,
or red Rose cakes with some red Rose water, and let it heat till it be thick,
and bind some of it to the Temples, and some to the Soles of the feet.

A good Purge.
Take Diacatholicon and Syrup of Roses Laxative, of each one ounce, mix them
well together in a penny pot of white Wine, and drink it warm early in the
morning. This purges Choler, Phlegm, and all manner of watery humors.

For a Fellon in a Joint.
Dry Bay salt, and beat it into powder, and mix it with the yolk of an Egg, and
apply it to the grieved place in the beginning, before the Fellon be broken:
but if it be first broken, then take the juice of Groundsel, the yolk of an
Egg, a little Honey, and Rye flower, mix them well together, and so apply it.

To heal a fresh Wound with speed.
Take the leaves of Columdine Nettles, Plantain, Ribwort, wild Tarras,
Wormwood, red Roses, Betony, Violets, of each one handful; wash them clean, and
beat them well with the White of an Egg, and strain out the juice through a
cloth, to which juice put the quantity of two Walnuts of Honey, and half an
ounce of Frankincense; stir them well together, and put it in a box, and use it
plaster wise. Or take Rosin, Wax, fresh Butter, Barrows grease well tried, of
each a little quantity, oil them well, and put it into a basin of cold water,
and work it with your hands into little rolls, spread it on a cloth, and apply
it. If the wound be deep, tent it with lint.

For the pricking of a Needle or Thorn.
Take boulted Wheat Flour, and temper it with red Wine, boil them together to
the thickness of a Salve; and lay it on so hot as you can suffer it. This will
open the hole, draw out the filth and ease the pain.

For to kill a Corn.
Take of the bigness of a Walnut of Ale yeast that is hard and sticks to the
tub side, put to it a little dried salt finely powdered; work them well
together, and put it in a close box, make a plaster of some of it, and bind
it to the Corn.

For Bruises, Swellings, broken Bones.
Take Brooklime, Chickweed, Mallows, Smallage, Groundsel, of each one handful,
stamp them with a little Sheeps tallow Swines grease, and Copin, put thereto
wine dregs, and a little Wheat bran; stir them well together over the fire till
they be hot, so apply it to the place grieved.

For Burning or Scalding.
Take Goose dung, and the middle bark of an Elder tree, fry them in May butter,
strain them, and therewith anoint the burnt or scalded place.

To help Deafness.
Take a piece of Rye dough the bigness of an Egg, and of that fashion, bake it
dry in an Oven, cut off the end, and with a knife cut out the paste and make it
hollow, then put into it a little Aqua Composita, and stir it; and so hot as
you can endure it, apply it to the deaf ear till it be cold, you must keep your
head very warm. If both ears be grieved, make two of them, and use those three
times.

For the Cholick.
Take half a sheet of white paper, anoint it all over with Oil Olive, and strew
thereon gross pepper, and so lay it to the belly from the navil downward.

For the yellow Jaundies.
Take Pimpinel, Groundsel, Sheebroom, with the tops, of each one handful, boil
them in a quart of Ale till half be consumed, then divide it into three
draughts, and take it morning and evening.

For the Bloody Flux.
Take Bean flower, mingle it with Malmsey, and make a paste thereof, and bake
it in an Oven like a Cake, but not too hard, and lay it upon the Navil of the
belly as hot as can be suffered, and wet it over with Malmsey, and keep it
warm. It will help in three days.

A Drink to drive the Plague from the Heart.
Take a great Onion, cut off the top of it, and take out so much of the Core as
the bigness of a Walnut, which hole fill up with Treacle, put on the top again,
and wrap the Onion in a piece of brown or gray paper, roste it thoroughly, and
peel it, and trim it finely, and put it in a clean linen cloth, and strain it
hard into three Porringers, and drink the juice so strained out: for it has
been found most excellent by often proof, not only for the expulsion of the
Plague, but also for the eradicating of all Poison and Venom.

The only Receipt against the Plague.
Take three pints of Muscadine, and boil therein a handful of Sage, and a
handful of Rue, until a pint be wasted, then strain it, and set it on the fire
again, then put thereto a penniworth of long Pepper, half an ounce of Nutmegs
all beaten together; then let it boil a little, and put thereto three
penniworth of Treacle, and a quarter of the best Angelica water you can get:
keep this as your life above all worldly Treasure. Take of it always warm both
morning and evening a spoonful or two, if you be already infected, and sweat
thereupon, if not, a spoonful in the morning, and half a spoonful at evening in
all the Plague time, under God trust to this, for there was neither Man, Woman,
nor Child, by this deceived.

This is not only for the Common Plague, which is called the Sickness; but for
the Small Pox, Measles, and Surfeits, and diverse other Diseases.

A good Almond Milk for the bloody Flux.
Take Mutton and boil it in fair water, and scum it very clean, then put to it
a handful of Borage leaves, as much Prunes, some Cinnamon and whole Mace, the
upper crust of a Manchet; boil all these well till their strength be gone into
the broth, then strain it through a Cullender, then take Jordan Almonds, and
parch them as you do Pease, and let them boil two or three Walms, then strain
them through a cloth, and season it well with Sugar, and a little Salt, and let
the Patient drink thereof at all times of the day. It is very Medicinal.

To take Fish by Angling.
Take Assa Fetida, Camphire, Aqua vitae and Oil Olive, bray them together till
they come to a soft Ointment, then box it, and anoint your baits therewith.

For an Ache or Swelling.
Take Oatmeal, Sheeps Suet, and black Soap, of each four ounces, boil them in
water till they be thick, make a plaster of it, and apply it to the grieved
place hot.

For a Childs Navil that comes out with much crying.
Take Wax as it comes from the Beehive, let it not be altered, but only
strained from the Honey, then melt some of it in a Sawcer, and dip some black
Sheeps Wool in it, and bind it to the Navil.

For Women's sore Paps or Breasts.
Take Bean flowers two handfuls, Wheaten Bran, and powder of Fenugreek, of each
one handful, one pound of white Wine Vinegar, three spoonfuls of Honey, three
yolks of Eggs; boil all till they be very thick, and lay it warm to the Breast.
This will both break and heal it. Crush out the matter when you change the
Plaster. Or take Oil of Roses, Bean flower, and the yolk of an Egg with a
little. Vinegar, set it on the fire till it be lukewarm and no more, then with
a feather anoint the sore places.

For an Ague in Women's Breasts.
Take the leaves of Hemlock, fry them in sweet Butter, and as hot as may be
suffered apply it to the Breasts, and lay a warm white Cotton on it, and in
short time it will drive the Ague out of them.

To draw Rhume from the Eyes back into the Neck*
Take twenty Catharides, cut off their heads and wings, and beat their bodies
into small powder, which put in a little linen bag, and steep it all night in
Aqua vitae or Vinegar, and lay it to the Nape of the neck, and it will draw
some blisters, which clip off, and apply to them an Ivy or Cabbidge leaf, and
it will draw the Rhume from the Eyes. Or roste an Egg hard, cut it in half and
take out the yolk, and fill either side with beaten Cummin-seed, and apply it
hot to the Nape of the Neck.

For a Canker in the mouth.
Take a pint of strong Vinegar, Roach Alum the bigness of a Walnut, as much
English Honey as will sweeten it, and boil it in a skillet, put it up in a
close stopped glass, warm a little of it in a Sawcer, and therewith wash the
mouth often, and lay some lint wet in the same warm liquor upon the places.

To make a sweet Breath.
Take the dried flowers and tops of Rosemary, Sugarcandy, Cloves, Mace, and
Cinnamon, of each a like quantity dried and beaten into fine powder; then take a
new laid Egg, and put of the powder into the Egg, and sup it off fasting in a
morning; do so seven days one after another, and it will sweeten the breath.

For an old sore Leg.
Take the whitest hard Soap you can get, scrape a quantity thereof into a
Sawcer, put to it some Deer suet, and boil them on the fire, then spread it on
a clean linen cloth, and lay it to the sore morning and evening, and in a
short time it will heal.

For a Stitch in the Side.
Take a piece of white leavened bread, and toste it on both sides, then spread
one side thereof with the best Treacle you can get, and cover it with a fine
linen cloth, and so lay it to the grieved place.

A most excellent Salve for a Wound.
Take a good quantity of the tops of Maiden or unset Hysop, shred them small,
and beat them very small in a Mortar; then take Oil Olive and clarified Honey,
of each one spoonful, put thereto half a handful of Wheat flower, compound them
together cold, and make it up into a fine Salve, which use to the purpose
aforesaid.

A Pultess to ripen any Bile or Impostume.
Take a Lilly root and roste it in the Embers in a brown paper; then take Figs
and pound them small, and Fenugreek, and Linseed, of each a like quantity: when
the Lilly root is roasted, pound it very well, then boil all therein new Milk
from the Cow, till it be so thick that a spoon may stand upright in it, and
stir it always in the boiling, and put to it some barrows grease, and apply it
to the place grieved.

To increase Women's Milk.
Take Fennel seeds bruised, and boil them well in Barley water, whereof let wet
Nurses and Suckling Women drink very often, in Winter warm, in Summer cold; and
let them beware of drinking much strong Beer Ale, or Wine, for they are hot,
and great driers up of Milk; and so are all Spices, and to much Salt or salt
meat.

To keep Iron from Rusting.
Take Lead filed very small, and put so much Oil Olive upon it, as will cover
it in a pot, then make your Iron very clean first, and anoint the Iron with the
said Oil, after it has stood nine days, and it will never rust.

To make Golden Color without Gold.
Take the juice of Saffron flowers, when they are fresh on the ground, but if
you cannot get them, then take Saffron dried and powdered, and put to it Yellow
and Glistering Auripigment, that is scaly, and with the Gall of a Hare, or Pike
fish, which is better, mix them together; then put them in a glass Vial close
stopped, which set in a warm Dunghill for certain days, then take it out, and
keep it for your use.

To make Golden Letters without Gold.
Take Auripigment one ounce, fine Crystal one ounce, beat them to powder
severally; then mix them, and then temper them with the whites of eggs, and so
write with it.

To make Silver Letters without Silver.
Take Tin one ounce, Quicksilver two ounces, melt them together, then beat them
well with Gum water, and so write with it.

To make the Face Fair.
Take fresh Bean blossoms, and distill them in a Limbeck, and with the water
wash your face.

A wound Drink.
Take Southernwood, Wormwood, Bugle, Mugwort, White bottle, Sanicle, Plantane,
Dandelion, Chinquefoil, Ribwort, Wood Betony, Clary roots, Avens called Herb
Bennet, Hawthorn buds, Agrimony, Oak leaves and buds, Bramble buds, wild
Angelica, Mints, Scabious, Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, Comfrey, of each
twenty handfuls; gather them in May, and dry them in a room without much fire,
turn them often, that they may not become musty; and when they are dry, put
them up in Canvas bags severally. Then take of these several* herbs so dried,
of each three handfuls, and put them into two quarts of running water, and one
quart of white Wine, boil them to three pints, strain the liquor from the
herbs, and put thereto one pint of Honey, which boil again, taking away the
froth, then strain it, and keep it in a glass bottle close stopped, and take
thereof in the morning fasting, and at night last, two or three spoonfuls at
one time. This water will not continue good above three or or four weeks at the
most. It cures old sores, green wounds, Impostumes, Fistulas, and stencheth
bleeding. Tent no wound, but search and cleanse it in a tent, and cover the
place with a clean cloth. During the cure, the Patient must keep a spare diet,
and abstain from Wine and strong Drink.

For Worms in Children.
Take three pound of Prunes, Sena one ounce and a half, sweet Fennel-seed one
ounce and a half, Rhubarb half an ounce; tie all these in a bag with a stone to
it, and put them into a great quantity of water, then put the Prunes on the
top, and let it stew six or* seven hours, till the liquor be even with the
Prunes; so drink of the liquor two or three spoonfuls, and eat of the Prunes in
the morning fasting, and at four a clock in the afternoon.

A Green Salve.
Take one pound of Butter, Beeswax five ounces, Rosin one pound and a half,
Frankincense four ounces, Oil of Bays two ounces, Deer suet one ounce and a
half, Verdigreese one ounce and a half, boil the butter a little, then boil the
Wax in it, and stir it now and then, take it off the fire, put in the Oil of
Bays, set it on the fire again, then put in the Deer suet, and let it boil one
walm, for if it have more it will turn black, and when it is off the fire, put
in the Verdigreese powdered, then strain it into pots, and keep it for your use.

A Receipt for the Kings Evil, Fistula, sore Breasts, Legs, or other sores.
Take Samnil, Agrimony, Avens, wild Bugle, red Dandelion, Wood Betony,
Ribwort, Wild Clary roots and leaves, Mugwort, Plantain, Wormwood and Bugle
beaten and bruised, of each two handfuls, boil them in six quarts of White Wine
until their virtue be extracted very softly, then with your hand squeeze all
the juice out of them into the Wine, then strain the liquor out, and set it on
the fire, and clarify it with so much Honey as will make it dainty, pleasant,
and not sharp; then let it boil a little more, and when it is cold, put it in
bottles close stopped, and it will last a year, whereof give the Patient six
spoonfuls at a time, in the morning fasting, and at four a clock in the
afternoon.

To ease Women's Childe-bed throws that are taken with cold a week or two after
their Delivery.
Take one or two spoonfuls of Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, either in
Posset drink, or in a Caudle warm morning and evening it will help.

For Women's swounding fits after delivery of Child.
Take the powder of White Amber as much as will lie on a three pence, and give
it in Mace Ale warm.

An approved Medicine to speed a Woman's Delivery in difficult Travel, and to
send out the after-burthen safely.
Take Cinnamon two drams and a half, one dram and a half of white Amber, Myrrh
two scruples, Castoreum one scruple, Borax half a scruple, Saffron five grains,
powder and mix them, whereof give one dram at a time in white Wine and Sugar,
and sweat after it. This has been often tried with much good success.

An approved Medicine for the Megrum.
Take one spoonful and a half of the white of an Egg beaten very clear, White
Wine Vinegar one spoonful, of Pepper and Frankincense, of each two drams
powdered, and one spoonful of Honey, mix them with so much Wheat flour as will
make it into paste, whereof make two plasters, and lay them to the temples of
the head, and change it duly every morning and evening.

For to ease Head pain.
Take red Rose leaves dried, mix them with Wheat flowers, Vinegar, Oil of
Roses, and some Housleek, boil them till they be thick, spread it on a linen
cloth, and lay it to the Forehead and Temples, and it will ease the pain.

To cure a Sheck Dog that has the Mangie.
Take four ounces of Tar, mix it with some^fresh greese, so as it may run; then
put to it some Brimstone powder half a spoonful of Gun powder powdered, and two
spoonfuls of Honey, mix them well, and therewith anoint the Dog; in the Summer
time tie him in the hot Sun, that the ointment may soke into him, in the Winter
time lay him on thick fresh Hay, and there keep him that the heat of his body
may heat and melt it. Thrice dressing will cure him.

Dr. Goffes Receipt to preserve a Woman with child from miscarrying, and
abortion.
Take a fillet of Beef half roasted hot from the fire, then take half a pint of
Muscadine, Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Grains of Paradise and
Nutmegs, of each half a dram, and make thereof a Sauce, then divide the Beef
into two p^eces, and wet them in the Sauce, and bind the one piece to the
bottom of the woman's belly, and the other to the reins of the back, as hot as
may be suffered, and keep them on twenty four hours at the least, and longer if
need be thereof.

For any pain in the Stomach.
Cut a piece of new Scarlet in the shape of a Heart, put it in a pewter dish,
and wet it with the strongest Cinnamon, or Wormwood water, then set it on a
Chafing Dish of Coals, and cover it close, and when it is dry, wet it again,
which do so often, until the sent of the hot water be strong in it, and lay it
very hot to the Stomach, and renew it once or twice in a week.

For the Wind in the Veins.
Take powder of Liquorish, Caroway-seed, and Sugarcandy beaten small, of each
an equal quantity to your taste, to which put Rhubarb in powder, a third part
or more, with as much Cream of Tartar pulverised; put it in a box, and keep it
in your pocket, and eat as much of it as will lie on a six pence, twice or
thrice in a day for a week together, This will gently purge you, cool the
blood, and expel the Wind out of the Veins. This has helped those that have
not been able to go.

An excellent Sear-cloth for a Bruise, Strain, or Wound.
Take one pint of Oil Olive, Red Lead eight ounces, Virgins Wax four ounces,
Ointment of Populeon four ounces, the Oils of Roses and Cammomile, of each one
ounce; set the Oil on the fire, then melt the Wax in it, then put in the
Populeon and Oils, and when all are molten, put in the red lead, stir them well
together, and let it boil till it be black, then dip in your clothes, and apply
them to the places ill-affected.

Mr. Lumley, Chyrurgeon. His Pippin drink for a Consumption.
Take the thick paring of six pippins, boil them in three pints of Spring Water
to a quart, then sweeten it with Sugarcandy, whereof drink the quantity of a
Wine glass when you go to bed. In a Fever it is very good with a little Syrup
of Lemons.

An approved Medicine for the Spleen.
Drink for three mornings together pure Whey, as it comes naturally from the
Curd: the first morning two pints, the second morning three pints, the third
morning four pints. The best exercise after it is gentle riding,

A rare Balsam.
Take Venice Turpentine one pound, wash it four times with fair water, and as
many times in Damask Rose water, till it be as white as snow, then take an
earthen pot of a gallon, make a hole in the bottom of it, which stop with a
cork and a rag, and tie a string about the cork, into which pot put five pints
of pure Oil Olive, and three pints of Spring water, boil this half a quarter of
an hour, then melt eight ounces of yellow Wax in a skillet, which put to the
Turpentine in the pot, take it off the fire, and stir them together with a
spoon, till they be well^mingled, then pluck the cork out of the earthen pot,
and let out all the water in a platter, and the Oil and the Turpentine into the
Wax in a large Basin, and set them over the fire stirring them well, then pour
all out into a large earthen pan, and when it is through cold, melt it again on
the fire, so that it will slip out, then pour out the water in the bottom, and
melt it again on the fire* stirring all well together, and so put it up into
Galli-pots for your use, and you have a most excellent Balsam made by
decoction, whose effects follow.

The Virtues of it.
1. It is good for any inward wound squirted warm into it, and outwardly to it
on fine Lint, and anointing the place. It also preserves the wound from
inflammation and putrefaction.

2. It heals any bruise or cut being first anointed therewith, and then a piece
of lint dipped in it, and laid to the place.

3. It cures all burnings and scaldings.

4. It helps the Headache, anointing the Nostrils and Temples therewith.

5. It expels the wind Cholick, or stitch in the side, being anointed and
applied four mornings with warm cloths, and every morning bathing it before the
fire a quarter of an hour.

6. It helps a Surfeit, taking one ounce thereof in warm Sack.

7. It preserves from the Plague, only by anointing the Lip and Nostrils
therewith before the party goes abroad in the morning.

8. It is good against Cancers and Worms, applied as before for a cut.

9. It helps digestion and keeps from Vermin, if the Navil or Stomach be
anointed therewith, before the party goes to bed.

The Operator that made it, healed himself being sorely scalded.

To cure the Rickets in Children. Approved.
Take a quart of new Milk, put into it one handful of Sanicle, boil it half
away, and give it to the Patient Child to drink in the morning for a
breakfast, and let it not eat any thing for an hour or two after it; and at
night take a quart of Milk, and one handful of red Mints, boil it half away as
before, and let the Child eat it last at night. This continue for a month, or
longer, as occasion is. This quantity of Milk so made will serve for twice.

An Unguent to anoint the Ricketted Childs Breast.
Take fresh butter, Sanicle, red Mints, of each one pound, stamp the Herbs very
small, then mix it with the butter to a perfect Unguent, and therewith anoint
the childs breast every morning and evening before the fire; you must anoint
it from arm to arm, that it may open the breast, and also anoint the gullet
bones, that they may open, for in this disease they will seem to close.

To anoint the Ricketted Childs Limbs, and to recover it in a short time,
though the Child be so lame, as to go upon Crutches.
Take a peck of Garden Snails, and bruise them, put them into a course Canvas
Bag, and hang it up, and set a dish under it to receive the liquor that
droppeth from them, wherewith anoint the Child in every Joint which you
perceive to be weak before the fire every morning and evening. This I have
known made a Child that was extreme weak to go alone, using it only a weeks
time.

A Plaster for an Ague.
Take strong Leaf Tobacco six drams, Currants a small handful, and as much Bores
Grease as will make it into a salve, by beating and stamping together in a
Mortar of stone; when it is beaten to a salve, take two pieces of sheeps
leather, and spread the salve an inch thick on both of them; and lay them upon
the veins of both wrists twenty four hours before the fit comes. This will
cure either a quartane or Tertian Ague.

A dainty cecling Drink for a hot Fever.
Take French Barley one ounce, boil it first in a quart of fair water a good
while, then shift it, and boil it in another quart of water a good while, shift
it again, and boil it in a pottle of running Spring water to a quart, then take
two ounces of sweet Almonds, lay them to soak all night; then stamp and strain
them into the last Barley-water; put to it four spoonfuls of Damask Rose Water,
the juice of one Lemon, and with Sugar sweeten it to your taste, drink of this
often in the night, or when you are dry or hot.

To clear the Stomach, and comfort it.
Take a pint of Sherry Sack, put in it two ounces of Jean Treacle, and four
ounces of white Sugarcandy, boil them into a Syrup with a soft fire, and take
one spoonful in the morning fasting.

A Plaster for the same.
Take a red Rose Cake, and toste the upper side of it at the fire, stick it
thick full of Cloves, and dip it in a little quantity of Aqua vitae and white
Wine Vinegar warmed very hot in a Chafing Dish of coals, lay it to the Stomach
as hot as can be suffered, and bind it fast on all night.

For a Rupture.
Take a sheet of Cap Paper, wet it in water, and fold it so wet, and lay it
upon the Rupture, the party lying upon his back, but close up the Rupture first
with your fingers, and so bind it down unti^ it be dry, and then it will hold
and grow with the flesh, you may wear a Truss upon it if you will.

To procure speedy Deliverance to a Woman in Labor with Child.
Take a pint of Ale, and boil it, and put to it a Woman's Milk to make a Posset
of it, and let the Woman in Travel drink it; this has procured easy and
speedy Deliverance to diverse Women in Childe-birth.

To cure a great Flux or Looseness of the Belly.
Take a hard Egg, and peel off the shell, and put the smaller end of it hot to
the Fundament or Arse-hole, and when that is cold, take another such hot,
fresh, hard, and peeled Egg, and apply it as aforesaid.

For to strengthen weak Eyes. Mr. Stepkins
Take one pint of red Rose water, Sugarcandy one ounce, Lapis Tutia two drams,
both finely pulverised, put them into the Rose water, and stir them well
together, and after it has stood twenty four hours, wet a bit of new clean
sponge in the said water, and wash the sore eyes therewith lying backward, and
when the water is almost spent, put into the glass more red Rose Water.

A rare Oil, or St. John's Wort.
Take a quart of Oil Olive, one pint of White Wine, two handfuls of Saint
John's Wort stripped, seeds and all, bruise them, and put them into the Oil, and
put to it Oil of Turpentine two ounces; put all into a great double glass close
stopped, and set in the Sun ten days; then put the glass, with all that is in
it, into a Kettle of Water, with some hay or straw in the bottom, and let the
water boil gently for ten or twelve hours, then strain the Herbs from the Oil,
into which Oil put as much fresh Saint John's Wort and seeds bruised, and let it
stand ten days more in the sun: this Oil will be then of a deep red color,
and will last seven years; it is good to heal any wound, the venomous bitings
of Dogs or Serpents, and for Sprains.

A Glyster for a hot Fever.
Take one handful of French Barley, boil it a while in water till it be red,
then pour off the water, and put the Barley into a quart of running water, with
Mallow and Strawberry leaves, of each one handful, a few dried Cammomile
flowers, and a spoonful of Anniseeds bruised; then boil it half away, and
strain it out, put to the liquor a sawcer of Oil Olive, and four ounces of
brown Sugar, with four spoonsuls of Syrup of Violets, use it something more
then lukewarm.

An excellent Drink to keeps ones Mouth moist.
Take of Rosemary, Cinquefoil, and a stick of Liquorish bruised, seethe them in
a quart of fair water till half be consumed, then strain it from the Herbs,
and put in Sugarcandy, and let it seethe a while again, and then take it off
the fire, and let the Patient drink thereof cold or lu^e-warm.

To stay Vomiting.
Seethe a good quantity of Cloves in Ale very well, that it may be strong of
the Cloves, then sweeten it with Sugar, and drink it warm.

An excellent Receipt for Swounding, and bringing quickly to Life.
Take of the common round black Pepper, and bruise it a little, and take half a
sheet of white paper, and fold it up together, and between every fold strew
some of the same, and burn the one end thereof in the fire, and hold it to the
Nostrils, it is very good.

Against Fainting.
Take Amber and scrape it, and put it in a spoonful of hot broth, and take it
in the morning fasting, or at other time when you find your self faint, and
fast an hour after.

Dr. Lukeners Medicine to strengthen the Back.
Take a pottle of fair water, and a Cock Chicken, then take three French Crowns
weight of Sassafras, as much of China wood, one dram of orango roots, one dram
of Marsh Mallow roots, scrape and cut all these in small pieces, and put them
in a close Pipkin, and paste it fast, that no air come out; and let it stand
twenty four hours upon the fire and stew, but never boil; then open the pipkin,
and put in one French Crowns weight of Fennil-seed, and red Rose leaves,
Borage, Bugloss, and Rosemary flowers, of each a small quantity, of Prunes and
Raisins of the Sun, each a handful, the bottom of a Manchet, boil all these
together very well till it come to a pretty thick broth, then strain it, and
let the Patient take of this a reasonable draught at eight in the morning, and
at four in the afternoon three days together.

To hold Urine.
Take the Claws of a Goat, and burn them to powder, and let the sick use hereof
in their pottage a sooonful at once, it will help them.

To stay Looseness.
Take Sage, and dry it on the fire between two dishes, and then put it in a
linen bag, and sit upon it as hot as you can suffer it, and continue it till
you find ease.

A singular Medicine that the marks of the Small Pocks be not seen.
Take a fat piece of Beef being througly powdered, and boil it a great while,
then take a good quantity of the fattest broth, and strain it, and put thereto
a quantity of red Rose water, and beat them well together a good while, and
when the pocks begin to itch, anoint two or three times a day herewith till
they be clean gone, and when the party is thoroughly well, let them take the
broth of lean powdered Beef, and mingle it with white Wine, and so let them
wash their Face therewith, and it shall bring it to smoothness and color, as
it was before; in any wise keep not the throat nor face too hot.

To dry up the Small Pocks.
Take half a pint of new cream, and as much Saffron as will make it of a deep
Saffron color, and boil together half a quarter of an hour, and keep it in a
glass, and when the Pocks begin to wheal, warm some of the Ointment in a
Sawcer, and anoint them with a feather twice a day till they be dried up.

Dr. Eaglestones Cure for the Small Pocks or Measles.
Take a quart of Ale or Beer, and seethe it in a skillet, and put thereto a
good handful of Fennel, and six or seven Figs scraped, and cut in pieces, two
good spoonfuls of Anniseeds, and a little Saffron, put all these to the drink,
and let them seethe together till the liquor be more then half consumed, and in
the (...) of Bores grease half an ounce, of Sheeps suet two ounces, of
Neat-foot Oil two ounces, of Plantane and Rose water each two drams, of Spike
water one dram, of Dragon water half an ounce, as much of Borage water, and Dr.
Stevens water, two Nutmegs, twelve Cloves, and some Mace of the best, beat them
small together, and put them into a pot, and boil it over a soft fire, until
it become a Salve; then chafe the place where the party is grieved as hot as he
may suffer, and then spread it on a fine linen cloth, and lay it upon the
place six or eight days.

The Countess of Mounteagles excellent Medicine for the Cramp. Proved
Take a handful of the Herb called Perriwinkle, some of it bears a blew
flower, and some white, and also take a good handful of Rosemary tops, put them
into a Pewter dish, and set them upon coals, dry them and turn them very often,
and when they are very hot, lay them upon the place that is so taken with the
Cramp, and bind a cloth upon them, when you go to bed, and this will help you,
take it in the morning, and lay fresh at night.

A Posset Drink for one that is Heart sick to remove it thence, though it be
the Plague.
Take Ale and make Posset Drink thereof, and clarify it, then take Pimpernel,
and seethe in it till it be strong of it, and drink often thereof.

Remedies against the Falling Sickness.
Take Powder of Hartshorn, drink it with Wine, it helps that disease: so do
Ravens Eggs taken with the juice of Wild Rue, and the juice of Misletoe.

To avoid Phlegm.
Take clarified Posset Drink, and put thereto sweet butter, the yolk of an Egg,
and a little small Ginger, Hysop, red Mints and Sugar; let these seethe all
together, and drink thereof first and last as warm as you can suffer it.

A very good means to stay a Looseness that happens in Childe-bed.
First in the water you mean to use, quench a gad of Steel sundry times, then
take the inward barks of the Sloe, of the Bramble, and of the young Oak, of
each a like quantity, and so much as will suffice according to the liquor you
intend to make; if you use three pints of water, a pretty handful of each bark
will serve finely scraped; when they are well boiled, that one pint is wasted,
strain your liquor, and make it into Almond Milk, with unblanched Almonds
finely grown, then with well boiled Ivy thicken your Milk, and other Rice
broth, and season it with Sugar and Cinnamon finely beaten, let the party
forbear drink as much as may be, and eat thereof once in two or three hours, a
little at once, as her stomach will serve. If she have any gripe in her belly,
I wish this to be used, which I know to be singular good for any stoppage by
sudden cold in Childebed. Gather a great deal of Cammomile, and heat it well
between two Chargers upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and when the moisture of the
Herb is somewhat spent, strew in a handful of bruised Cummin-seed* and sprinkle
it now and then with a little Malmsey, and so being a little dryish, put it
into a thin bag, and apply it to the belly as hot as may be suffered, and as it
cools, warm it again, till she have ease: instead of Malmsey you may use
Muscadine. This has been many times proved.

For a Knock or Bruise in the Face.
Take a piece of brown paper, and wet it in beer, and lay it where the knock
is, and as it begins to dry, lay on fresh a good while together.

For a Wen.
Take Stone Lime and put it into water, till it have done boiling, then take a
quantity of it, and mix it with some barrel Soap, laying them both on a cloth,
let it be applied to it, and it will eat away the Wen.

Mr. Potter Chyrurgeon. His Cure for a man that is bursten.
Take the roots of baked Fern, and the Roots of Elecampane, of each a like
quantity, wash and pare them clean, cut them as small as you can, and stamp
them in a Mortr as fine as you can, and temper it with Oil of Bay, and two
spoonfuls of Oil of Exceter, and when you have made the Salve, spread it upon
his Cod to his Belly, and lay the Plaster upon the hole, and remove it every
two days, and then use another space of ten days, you must use another Salve
or Plaster as follows. Take a quarter of a pound of (...) and the white of
three or four Eggs and temper them together; and when they are well tempered,
put in two spoonfuls of Pescolion, temper all these together, and use the same
as you did the former salve: when you take off the Plaster, you must lay fine
clothes under the bolster of the Truss, until you think the skin be grown.

A medicine to destroy Warts.
Take Radish Root, and shred it thin, and put it in a pewter dish, and cast
salt upon it, and cover it with another dish, and shake the slices up and down,
and then take a piece thereof, and rub the Warts therewith, then throw away
that, and use another, so three or four times in a day.

To take away Corns.
Take Hogs Grease that is not tried, and beat it with a Pestle, and spread it
upon a piece of white Cotton on the rugged side, and bind it on the Corns,
dressing it once or twice a day, and it will wear them away.

To take away Freckles or Morphew.
Take four spoonfuls of May dew, and one spoonful of the Oil of Tartar, mingle
them together, and wash the places where the freckles be, and let it dry of it
self, it will clear the skin, and take away all foul spots.

rise, about some four times, then take Barberries, and take the outside Rind
of them, and beat them into very fine powder, and take every morning and
evening, and drink either a draught of the said Water, or small Beer after it:
continue this, and it will cure you.

For an Ague congealed, or fallen into a Woman's Breast.
Take a quantity of stone Honey, and the rustiest Bacon you can get, Smallage,
Alexander, red Cole, Marigolds with black seeds of Groundsel, Plantane, and
Sage, of each a quantity; put all these in a mortar and stamp them as small as
you can, then lay the Salve upon a piece of white Leather, and to the place
where you would have the Breast break; the Plaster must be spread upon the
rough side of the leather.

An approved Medicine by the Lady Bray for the Ague falling into any part of
the Body.
Take of Parsley one little handful, Smallage and Hemlock of each as much, chop
them small, then stamp them and put thereto a quantity of Barrows grease, and
stamp them all together, then boil them a good space, stirring it continually
until it wax green, then strain it, and when you use thereof, take some in a
sawcer, and anoint the place with a feather against the fire.

The Lady Arundels especial Remedy for the Stone, Back, or Stomach, or to make
a Woman Conceive.
Take the roots of Sea-holly, (it grows by the Sea side, like little Trees of
half a yard long, some name them Eringoes) and make it in Syrup, and eat of it
in the morning fasting, and at four a clock in the afternoon, and before you
take it, take some gentle Pills, but once in the beginning.

The Lady Dacres Medicine proved, for the Stone and Stranguary.
Take black Bramble-berries when they be red, Ivie-berries, the inner ^pith of
Ashen Keys, Eglantine-berries, the Nut Keys, the roots of Filipendula, of all
these a little, Acrons, and the stones of sloes, of each a like quantity, but
not so much of either of these as half of any of the other, dry all these in
platters in an Oven, till they will be beaten to powder, then take Cromel-seed,
Anniseed, Saxifrage, Alexanders, Parsley, Corianders, Fennil-seeds, the seeds
of each of these the like quantity of the first, and dried in like sort, then
beat all together in the like sort to fine powder, then take Liquorish fair
scraped the best you can get, as much in quantity as all these, and beat it
fine, and mingle it with the powder, and keep it close from the wind, and so
use it morning and evening with Posset Ale, with Time of the Mount boiled in
it, make your Posset drink with white Wine, or other drink, and when you eat
any pottage or other broth, put some of the powder in it if you be sore pained,
and if you have any Stone, it will come away in shivers, and if it do so when
you drink, your water is clear, take this drink following, and it will leave no
corruption or uncleanness in the bladder.

The Drink.
Take Rosemary and wild Time, and seethe them in running water with as much
Sugar as will make it sweet; boil it from a quart to a pint, use the quantity
of the Herbs to your discretion, so that it may savor of them well, and use it
nine mornings, six or seven spoonfuls at a time.

Mr. Eldertons Medicine for the extremity of the Chollick and Stone.
Take Ashen Keys, and dry them in an oven, take out the Kernels from the Husks,
beat them into powder, and searse them fine, and keep it; then take Eglantine
berries, dry and beat them as the other, then take of them with a feather, then
searse it as above, take Houseleek, dry and searse it as the other, take a
little quantity of the three powders, and put them together, take Anniseeds,
and Liquorish, of each a little quantity dry them severally and powder them*
being fine searsed, put them with the other three powders, a little quantity of
both, and take a spoonful of these powders or less, and mingle all together,
and put into it three or four spoonfuls of white Wine or Ale, and drink it in
the morning, fasting one hour after it: thus drink it once in six days, or
else when you are grieved, and you shall never find pain of the Cholick nor
Stone. The seed of great Nettles must be beaten to powder, and mixed with them,
and it will be better.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye far gone.
Take the Marrow of a Goose-wing, and mingle the powder of ginger therewith,
dress the eye therewith two or three times a day.

A Medicine for the Eye Aching, or Redness thereof.
Take a vial glass, and fill it full of fair running water, and put into it
fine Sanguis Draconis, the quantity of a Hazle Nut, it will help the Eye.

For sore Eyes that come from hot humors.
Take Elder leaves, and chase between your hands, and lay it to the Nape of the
neck.

For the Pin and Web in the Eye, so it be taken before the sight be quite
extinct.
Take a little handful of three leaved grass, that has the sign of the Moon in
it, as much roots and leaves of Dasies, and seven or eight corns of Bay Salt,
beat all these together, then strain them through a cloth, and take two new
laid Eggs, and beat the whites of them a good while, then let them stand a
quarter of an hour, and then take off the froth clean, and take the clear of
the whites, as much as the quantity of the juice of the said Herbs, then take
the quantity of two Hazle Nuts of English Honey and stir them together, then
let the party be laid upright, and drop three drops with a feather into the
Eye, and lie still a good while after: this must be used at least twice a day.

For red Eyes, Pearl, Pin, or Web.
Take Verjuyce that is made of Grapes, and put it morning and evening into the
sore Eyes; some will put a little Salt with it.

Dr. Friars excellent Remedy for Heat and Pimples in the Face.
Take of Plantain leaves four little handfuls, and of Mallows or Tansey one
little handful, of Cinquefoil half a little handful, and as much of Strawberry
leaves, there must be this quantity of every sort; when they are picked clean,
then take a pottle of New Milk hot from the Cow, and put it in a still with the
same herbs until it be dropped a quart, then let it drop no more; you may keep
it a whole year in a glass, when you use it wet a cloth in some of it, and wash
your face at night in bed, and often in the day: the best time to still it is
in May.

For Heat or Scurf in the Face.
Take a Pint of Cream, as thick as can be scummed, then take of cammomil one
little handful pick, wash, and shred it very small, then put it into the cream,
and let it boil very softly till it comes to an Oil, never stirring it after
the putting in the herbs at first, but scum it clean when you see the Oil come
to the top; then let it boil a little faster, and then strain it through a fine
linen cloth, and then anoint the face therewith.

A very good Medicine for a Tetter.
Take red Dock roots, wash them, scrape them, and cut them into slices, and lay
them in white Wine Vinegar a night or a day, and then use it to the place
grieved, washing the place with the root, and the liquor many times.

To skin the rawness of a Woman's Nipple.
Take a Deers foot, and take the marrow thereof, and anoint the nipple
therewith.

To dry up Milk in a Woman's Breast.
Take a quantity of Aqua vitae, and a quantity of sweet Butter, melt and temper
them together, and anoint the Breast therewith, laying a brown paper betwixt
them, and so do as often as the paper dries, till the Milk be dried up: this
is also good to keep the Ague out of the Breast.

To make a woman have a nipple that has none, and would give suck
Take a Wicker Bottle that has a little mouth, and fill it full of hot water,
and stop it close til the bottle be through hot, then let out the water, and
set the mouth of the bottle close to the Nipple; as long as there is any heat
in the bottle it will cleave fast.

To heal the Nipple of a Woman's Breast.
Take a quantity of Cream, and put it into the juice of Valerian stamped and
strained, and as much of the juice of seagreen used in like sort, boil all
these together till it come to be as Butter; then take it, and put it into a
box, and anoint the Nipple therewith three or four times a day, and lay a
Walnut shell, or some other hollow thing over it to keep the clothes from it
till it be whole, or else make a Posset Ale of Alom, and lay the curd to the
Nipple warm, till the child does suck, and then lay on again.

A Medicine for Worms in young Children.
Take a Plaster of white Leather or brown paper, and spread it with Honey,
warm it a little against the fire, but first strew some of the best Aloes
Succotrinae thereon, then lay it all over the Stomach of the Child warm; the
like plaster is to be laid on the Childs Navil at the same time; if you have
no Honey, mix the juice of Plantain, and lay it on the leather.

Dr. Forsters Infusion purging Choler.
Take Damask Roses two ounces, or Rhubarb two drams and a half, of Spikenard
one scruple, of Orcin one scruple, cut all small, and infuse in a quart of
clarified whey all night, in the morning strain gently, and put to it one ounce
of Syrup of Roses, or Syrup of Violets.

Dr. Fosters Infusion purging Melancholy.
Take Fumitory, Epithymum, flowers or leaves of Borage and Bugloss, of each a
good half handful, Polypody of the Oak one ounce, Sena half an ounce,
Fennil-seed two drams, Whey three pints; infuse and boil to a quart, whereunto
add two ounces of Syrup of Roses solutive; the dose is half a pound, you may
quicken a draught with a dram of Electuary of Roses.

An opening purging Julip, and cooling for Choler and hot Humors.
Take of Barley two little handfuls, of Savory with the roots, Maidenhair,
Liverwort, Sorrel, each half a good handful, of roots of Grass, of Fennil, each
half an ounce, of the four cold seeds each two drams, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Succory water unto sixteen ounces, in which infuse half an ounce of
Sena Tamarindes, and Polypody, of each three drams, Jalap and Hermodactils, of
each two drams, Fennil-seed, Anniseed, and Liquorish, of each one dram, Currants
bruised half an ounce, of Borage, Bugloss, and Rosemary flowers, of each one
dram; infuse these warm, then boil them until five ounces of the Succory Water
be consumed, then strain it, and add the expression of four scruples of
Rhubarb infused in three ounces of Manna, and syrup of roses one ounce, of the
Christals of Tartar one dram, mingle them: the Dose is four or five ounces
every morning.

Doctor Mores Powder, or grossly prepared Drug to be taken in mornings, and
after Meals, to mend Concoction, comfort the Brain, break Wind, and make sweet
Breath.
Take Liquorish cut small, Anniseed Comfits with one skin of Sugar, of each two
ounces, sweet Fennil seed Comfits with one skin of Sugar, Corianders prepared,
and Caroway-seed of each one ounce, of white Ginger, Cinnamon, Calamus
Aromaticus, and Nutmegs, of each one ounce cut very small, of the Lozenges of
Aromaticum Rosatum, of Manus Christies* with Chymica, Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves,
and Lozenges of D^ambra cut into small pieces, each half an ounce, to be taken
about a spoonful at the time aforesaid.

Lucatello's Balsam admirable for all Wounds.
Take Venice Turpentine one pound, Oil Olive three pints, Sack six spoonfuls,
yellow Wax one pound, natural Balsam half an ounce, Oil of Saint John's Wort,
red Sanders powdered, of each one ounce, wash the Venice Turpentine three times
in red Rose Water; then slice the Wax thin, and set it on the fire in a big
Skillet, and when it is well molten, put the Turpentine to it, and stir them
well together till they boil a little, take it off the fire, and let it cool
till the next day, then cut it into thick slices, and pour all the water out of
it, then set it on the fire again, and when it is molten, stir it well, and put
it into the aforesaid Oils, Sack, Balsam and Sanders, and stir them well
together that they may incorporate, then ^et it boil again for a short space,
take it off the fire, and stir it well for the space of two hours, that it may
become thick, and when it is cold, put it up in several Gallipots, and when you
use it, apply it tented into a deep and hollow wound, if it be only a slit
cut, anoint the wound with it, and bind it fast on with the cloth.

A Purge by Dr. Mayhern.
Take of the best Sena six drams, of Rhubarb two drams, Cream of Tart^r half a
dram, of sweet Fennil-seed as much, and a little Cinnamon; infuse all these one
night in half a pint of white Wine, in the morning let it boil one walm or two,
strain it, and put of the best Manna an ounce, dissolve it over the fire, then
strain it again, then put to it an ounce of Salatine syrup of Roses; so drink
it, fast two hours after from meat, and drink and sleep, and then drink nothing
but thin broth.

An approved Medicine to beautify the Face, or to take away Pimples or Heat in
the Face.
Take a fair earthen Pipkin, and put into it a pottle of clean running water,
and an ounce of white Mercury beaten to white powder, then set it on the fire,
and let it boil until one half be consumed, and keep it close covered saving
when you stir it, then take the whites of six new laid eggs beaten half an hour
or more, and put it into the liquor, after it is taken from the fire, you must
put in also the juice of Lemons being very good, and half a pint of new Milk,
and a quarter of a pound of bitter Almonds blanched and beaten with half a pint
of Damask Rose Water; strain all these together through a strainer, and let it
stand three weeks before you use it, and I will warrant you fair, etc.

An excellent water for the Eyes that are red or full of Rhume.
Take young Hazle Nuts when they are so soft, that you may thrust a pin through
them, still them in a Rose still, Husks, Shells and all, and with the water
wash your eyes.

To cure a Wound though the Patient be never so far off.
Take a quart of pure Spring water, and put into it some Roman Vitriol, and let
it dissolve, then if you have any blood of the wound either in linen or
woollen, or silk, put the cloth so blooded in the water, and rub the cloth once
a day, and if the wound be not mortal, the blood will out, if it be, it will
not. Let the patient keep his Wound clean, washing it with white Wine; when
ever you wash the cloth, the party wounded shall sensibly find ease: let the
cloth be constantly in the water.

To make Oil of Swallows.
Take swallows as many as you can get, ten or twelve at the least, and put them
quick into a Mortar, and put to them Lavender, Cotton, Spike, Cammomil,
Knot-grass, Ribwort, Balm Valerian, Rosemary tops, Woodbine tops, strings of
Vines, French Mallows, the tops of Alehoof, Strawberry strings, Tutsane,
Plantain, Walnut leaves, tops of young Bays, Hysop, Violet leaves, Sage of
virtue, fine Roman Wormwood, Brooklime, Smallage, Mother of Time, of each of
these a handful, two of Cammomil, and two of red Roses, beat all these
together, and put thereto a quart of Neats-foot Oil, or May Butter, stamp them
all together, and beat them with one or two ounces of Cloves, and put them all
together in an earthen pot, stop it very close with a piece of dough round
about, so close that no air can come out; set them nine days in a cellar, and
then take them out, and boil them six or eight hours on the fire, or else in a
pan of water; but first open your pot, and put in half a pound of Wax, white or
yellow, whether you will, and a pint of Sallet Oil, and strain them through a
Canvas cloth.

To make Lead Plaster.
Take two pound and four ounces of the best and greenest Sallet Oil, with a
pound of good red Lead, and a pound of white Lead, beat them well into dust,
then take twelve Ounces of Castle-Sope, incorporate all these well together in
a well glassed and great earthen pot, that the Soap may come upwards, set it on
a small fire of coals the space of one hour and a half, always stirring it
with an iron ball, or round Pommil: then make your fire somewhat bigger until
it be the color of Oil, then drop a little on the board, and if it cleave
neither to your finger nor the board, then it is enough; then take the clothes
and make them into what breadth or size you please in Searcloth, let not your
cloth be course, but of a reasonable new Holland, and when you have dipped
them, then rub them with a Slick-stone, it will last two years, and the elder
the better, as long as it will stick it is good.

The virtues of the Leaden Plaster.
1. If it be laid to the Stomach, it provokes appetite, and takes away any
grief in the same. 2. If laid to the belly, it is a present remedy for the
ache. 3. If laid to the Reins of the back, it cures and heals the Bloody
Flux, the running of the Reins, heat in the Liver, or weakness of the Back. 4.
It^ heals all bruises and Swellings, it takes away aches, it breaks
Fellons, Pushes, and other Impostumes, and heals them. 5. It draws out any
running Humor without breaking of the skin, and being applied to the
Fundament, it heals any disease there growing. 6. The same laid to the head
is good for the eyes. 7. The same laid to the Belly of a Woman, provokes the
Terms, and makes apt for Conception.
For the Stone and Gravel.
Take and dry the roots of red Nettles, make them into powder, and drink a
spoonful of the powder in a draught of white Wine something warm, and it will
break the Stone, though it be never so great, with speed, use it every day
until the Stone and Gravel be all broken and consumed. A thing of small price,
and great virtue.

A drink to purge the body, being very good for them that have the Scurvey, or
are inclined to it.
Take a pottle of fine running water, and a pint of Rhennish Wine for a young
body, and for any elder, take a quart, set it on the fire, put into it three or
four slices of Horse Radish, a great handful of Water Cresses, and a handful of
Brooklime, both a little bruised, slice in two or three Oranges, outsides and
insides, let them boil all together better then half an hour, then have ready a
greater quantity of scurvey-grass bruised, or a pint of the juice of
Scurvy Grass ready strained, and put into the liquor, and set over the fire
again, then there will arise a curd, which being taken off, put it into the
drink when it is cold, three or four Lemons more, or less as best pleases the
taste, sweeten it with Sugar, and drink a Wine draught in the morning, and at
four a clock in the afternoon, and then walk and use some exercise after it.
The party that has the scurvy, and whose legs are much swelled, may put into
the drink some Juniper berries bruised, half an ounce, or thereabouts.

Dr. Bates his Medicine against a Consumption.
Take Liverwort two handfuls, Succory six, Endiffe, Borage, Coltsfoot, of each
six handfuls, shred these finely, put them in a gallon of new Milk, let them
steep all night, in the morning distill them in a glass still, then take three
spoonfuls of red Rose Water, three spoonfuls of this water; with half a pint of
red Cows Milk, and as much Sugar of Roses as will sweeten it.

To make Gascony Powder.
Take the black tips of Crabs claws, gotten when the Sun is in Cancer, pick out
from within them all the fish, beat them to as fine a powder as you can, then
searse it through a very fine searse, take an ounce of this powder, and put to
it half an ounce of the Magestical of Pearl, and as much of the Magestical of
Coral, mix them well together, then put a little Rose Water in a glass, in
which you must hang a little Saffron in a bag, and a little Musk and Ambergrece
in another; let them hang in Rose Water two or three days, till the virtue of
them be gone into the water, then put your powder either into a Silver
Porringer, or a white earthen one, and put as much of the Rose Water as will
moisten your powder, then dry it in the Porringer by a gentle fire, and so wet
your powder three or four times, and as often dry it, after this make a Gelly
as follows.

Take a Viper alive in May or June, cut off his head and tail, above the Navil
pull off his skin, and with a clean cloth rub it dry, and so you may hang them
up, and take two of those skins, and slice them small with a little Hartshorn;
and make a Gelly of them, you need not make much, then when your powder is dry,
wet it three or four times with this Gelly, and as often dry it, and at last
put no more Gelly then will moisten the powder, then make it up in balls as big
and as little as you please, and dry them in a stove; and so keep them all the
year.

Take of this powder twelve or fourteen grains, either dry, or in a spoonful of
small beer, in which there is a little Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers.

Certain Plasters and their Uses.
1. Emplast. Deminum two pound; it is good for all kind of bruises, or biles,
or old sores, etc.

2. Emplast. Mellilot two pound; it is good for all sorts of green* Wounds or
bruises or swellings, or to breed flesh being wanting.

3. Diapalma two pound; it is a very fine drying Plaster, and a good defensive
to defend wounds from Inflammation, etc.

4. Oxicroceum four ounces; it is an extraordinary good warming Plaster for
broken bones, or any cold cause, etc.

Certain Ointments, and their use.
1. Vnguentum Dalthea one half pound; it is good to assuage pain, dissolve
swellings or hardness.

2. Vnguentum Populeon; it is a great cooling Ointment for fire, or any great
inflammation, or any burning.

3. Vnguentum Album six ounces; a fine cooling skinning Ointment to mix with
others, etc.

4. Vnguentum Nervinum four ounces; it is good for all cold causes of the
Sinnews or Joints.

5. Vnguentum Tutiae two ounces, good for watring sore Eyes.

6. Vnguentum Basilicon seven ounces, good to fill hollow Ulcers with flesh,
and apply a Plaster on the top of it.

7. Balsam two ounces good for all sorts of green wounds, being put in warm.

A receipt of the Oil of St. John's Wort.
Take a quart of the best white Wine, infuse therein picked flowers of Saint
John's Wort, then stow those flowers very dry, and put in more into the same
Wine, infuse them again, so long that the Wine be very strong and red colored
with the Saint John's Wort, then strain out the Wine clear from the flowers, put
thereto a pint of the best Sallet Oil, a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon
bruised, a quarter of Cloves bruised, one race of very good Ginger sliced, one
good handful of the yellow flowers of Saint John's Wort picked very clean; boil
all these on a very soft fire, till the Wine be all evaporated, when it is
almost boiled, put in one good spoonful of pure Oil of Turpentine, let that
boil in it a little; so keep it for your use, the elder the better.

A QUEENS DELIGHT: OR, THE ART OF Preserving, Conserving, and Candying; As
also, A right Knowledge of making PERFUMES, and Distilling the most Excellent
Waters.

Never before Published.

Printed by R. Wood, for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1660.

A QUEENS DELIGHT; OF Conserves, and Preserves, Candying and D^stilling Waters.
To preserve white Pear-plums or green.
TAke the Plums, and cut the stalk off, and wipe them, then take the just
weight of them (...) Sugar, then put them in a skillet of water, and let them
stand in and scald, being close covered till they be tender, they must not
seethe, when they be soft, lay them in a dish, and cover them with a cloth, and
stew some of the sugar in the glass bottom, and put in the Plums, strewing the
Sugar over till all be in, then let them stand all night, the next day put them
in a pan, and let them boil apace, keeping them clean scummed, and when your
Plums look clear, your syrup will gelly, and they are enough. If your plums be
ripe, peel off the skins before you put them in the glass; they will be the
better and clearer a great deal to dry, if you will take the Plums white; if
green, do them with the rines on.

To preserve Grapes.
Take Grapes when they be almost through ripe, and cut the stalks off, and
stone them in the side, and as fast as you can stone them, strew sugar on them;
you must take to every pound of Grapes three quarters of a pound of Sugar, then
take some of the sower Grapes, and wring the juice of them, and put to every
pound of Grapes two spoonfulls of juice, then set them on the fire, and st^ll
lift up the pan and shake it round, for fear of burning to, then set them on
again, and when the Sugar is melted, boil them as fast as you can possibly, and
when they look very clear, and the syrup some what thick, they are enough.

To preserve Quinces white.
Take a pair and coar them, and to every pound of your equal weights in Sugar
and Quince, take a wine pint of water; put them together, and boil them as fast
as you can uncovered; and this way you may also preserve pipins white as you do
Quinces.

To preserve Resp^ss.
Take a pound of Respass, a pound of fine Sugar, a quarter of a pint of the
juice of Respass, strew the sugar under and above the respass, sprinkle the
juice all on them, set them on a clear fire, let them boil as soft as is
possible, till the syrup will gelly, then take them off, let them stand till
they be cold, then put them in a glass. After this manner is the best way.

To preserve Pippins.
Take fair Pippins, and boil them in fair water till they be somewhat tender;
then take them out, and peel off the skins, and put them into a fair earthen
pot, and cover them till they be cold, then make the Syrup with fair Water and
Sugar, seethe it, and scum it very clean, then being almost cold, put in your
Pippins, so boil them softly together, put in as much rine of Oranges as you
think will taste them, if you have no Orange take whole Cinnamon and Cloves, so
boil them high enough to keep them all the year.

To preserve Fruits green.
Take Pippins, Apricocks, Pearplums, or Peaches when they be green, scald them
in hot water, and peel them or scrape them, put them into another water not so
hot as the first, then boil them very tender, take the weight of them in Sugar,
put to it as much water as will make a Syrup to cover them; then boil them
something leasurely, and take them up, then boil the Syrup till it be somewhat
thick, that it will batten on a dish side, and when they are cold, put them
together.

To preserve Oranges and Lemons the best way.
Take and boil them as for paste, then take as much Sugar as they weigh, and
put to it as much water as will cover them by making a Syrup, then boil them
very leasurely till they be clear, then take them up, and boil the Syrup till
it batten on the dish side, and when they are cold put them up, etc.

An approved conserve for a Cough or Consumption of the Lungs.
Take a pound of Elecampane roots, draw out the pith, and boil them in two
waters till they be soft, when it is cold put to it the like quantity of the
pap of roasted Pippins, and three times their weight of brown Sugarcandy beaten
to powder; stamp these in a Mortar to a Conserve, whereof take every morning
fasting as much as a Walnut for a week or fortnight together, and afterward
but three times a week. Approved.

To make a conserve of any of these Frnits.
When you have boiled your paste as follows, ready to fashion on the
pie-plate, put it up into Gallipots, and never dry it, and this is all the
difference between Conserves. And so you may make Conserves of any Fruits, this
for all hard fruits, as Quinces, Pippins, Oranges and Lemons.

To dry any fruits after they are preserved, or Candy them.
Take Pippins, Pears or Plums, and wash them out in warm water from the syrup
they are preserved in, strew them over with searsed sugar, as you would do
flower upon fish to fry them; set them in a broad earthen pan, that they may
lie one by one; then set them in a warm oven or stove to dry. If you will candy
them withal, you must strew on sugar three or four times in the drying.

To preserve Artichocks young, green Walnuts and Lemons, and the Elecampane
roots, or any bitter thing.
Take any of these, and boil them tender, and shift them in their boiling six
or seven times to take away their bitterness, out of one hot water into
another, then put a quart of Salt unto them, then take them up and dry them
with a fair cloth, the^ put them into as much clarified (...) as will cover
them, then let the^ boil a walm or two, and so let them (...) soaking in the
Sugar til the next (...), then take them up, and boil the Sugar a little higher
by it self, and when they are cold put them up.

Let you^ green Walnuts be pricked full of holes with a great pin* and let them
not be long in one water, for that will make them look black; being boiled
tender, stick two or three Cloves in each of them.

(...) Elecampane roots, being (...), and shifted in their boil^ (...) times,
then dry them (...) ^loth, and so boil them as i^ above written, take half so
much more then it does weigh, because it is bitter, etc.

To Preserve Quinces white or red.
Take the Quinces, and coar them, and pare them, those that you will have
white, put them into a pale of water two or three hours, then take as much
Sugar as they weigh, put to it as much water as will make a Syrup to cover
them, then boil your Syrup a little while, then put your Quinces in, and boil
them as fast as you can, till they be tender and clear, then take them up, and
boil the Syrup a little higher by it self, and being cold put them up. And if
you will have them red, put them raw into Sugar, and boil them leasurely close
covered till they be red, and put them not into cold water.

To Preserve Grapes.
Take the Clusters, and stone them as you do Barberries, then take a little
more Sugar then they weigh, put to it as much Apple water as will make a Syrup
to cover them, then boil them as you do Cherries, as fast as you can, till the
Syrup be thick, and being cold pot it. Thus may you preserve Barberries or
English currants, or any kind of Berries.

To preserve Pippins, Apricocks, Pear-plums, and Peaches when they are ripe.
Take Pippins and pare them, bore a hole through them, and put them into a pale
of water, then take as much Sugar as they do weigh, and put it to as much water
as will make a Syrup to cover them, and boil them as fast as you can, so that
you keep them from breaking, until they be tender, that you may prick a rush
through them: let them be a soaking till they be almost cold, then put them up.

Your Apricocks and Peaches must be stoned, and not pared, but the Pear-plums
must not be stoned nor pared. Then take a little more Sugar then they weigh,
then take as much Apple-water and Sugar as will make a syrup for them, then
boil them as you do your Pippins, and pot them as you do the Pippins likewise,
etc.

To preserve Pippins, Apricocks, Pearplums, or Peaches green.
Take you Pippins green and quoddle them in fair water, but let the water boil
first before you put them in, and you must shift them in two hot waters before
they will be tender, then pull off the skin from them, and so case them in so
much clarified sugar as will cover them, and so boil them as fast as you can,
keeping them from breaking, then take them up, and boil the syrup until it be
as thick as for Quiddony; then pot them, and pour the sirup into them before
they be cold.

Take your Apricocks and pear-plums, and boil them tender, then take as much
sugar as they do weigh, and take as much water as will make the syrup, take
your green Peaches before they be stoned, and thrust a pin through them, and
then make a strong water of ashes, and cast them into the hot standing lie to
take off the fur from them, then wash them in three or four waters warm, so
then put them into so much clarified sugar as will candy them; so boil them,
and put them up, etc.

To dry Pippins or Pears without Sugar.
Take Pippins or Pears and prick them full of holes with a bodkin, and lay them
in sweet wort three or four days, then lay them on a sieves bottom till they
be dry in an Oven, but a drying heat. This you may do to any tender Plum.

To make Syrup of Clove gilly-flowers.
Take a quart of water, half a bushel of Flowers, cut off the whites, and with
a Sieve sift away the seeds, bruise them a little; let your water be boiled,
and a little cold again, then put in your Flowers, and let them stand close
covered twenty four hours; you may put in but half the flowrs at a time, the
strength will come out the better; to that liquor put in three pound of Sugar,
let it lie in all night, next day boil it in a Gallipot, set it in a pot of
water, and there let it boil till all the Sugar be melted, and the Syrup be
pretty thick, then take it out, and let it stand in that till it be through
cold, then glass it.

To make Syrup of Hysop for Colds.
Take a handful of Hysop, of Figs, Raisins, Dates, of each an ounce, of
Collipint half an handful, French Barley one ounce, boil therein three pints of
fair water to a quart, strain it and clarify it with two whites of Eggs, then
put in two pound of fine Sugar, and boil it to a syrup.

To make Orange water.
Take a pottle of the best Malligo Sack, and put in as many of the peels of
Oranges as will go in, cut the white clean off, let them steep twenty four
hours; still them in a glass still, and let the water run into the receiver
upon fine Sugar Candy; you may still it in an ordinary still.

To dry Cherries.
Take a pound of sugar, dissolve it in thin fair water, when it is boiled a
little while, put in your Cherries after they are stoned, four pound to one
pound of Sugar, let them lie in the Sugar three days, then take them out of
the Syrup and lay them on sieves one by one, and set them before the Sun upon
stools, turn them every day, else they will mould when they look of a dark red
color, and are dry, then put them up. And so you may do any manner of fruit.
In the Sun is the best drying of them; put into the syrup some juice of Rasps.

To make Juice of Liquorish.
Take English Liquorish, and stamp it very clean, bruise it with a hammer, and
cut it in small pieces; to a pound of Liquorish thus bruised, put a quart of
Hysop water, let them soak together in an earthen pot a day and a night, then
pull the Liquorish into small pieces, and lay it in soak again two days more;
then strain out the Liquorish, and boil the liquor a good while. Stir it often;
then put in half a pound of Sugar Candy, or Loaf Sugar finely beaten, four
grains of Musk, as much Ambergreece, bruise them small with a little Sugar;
then boil them together till it be good and thick, still have a care you burn
it not; then put it out in glass plates, and make it into round rolls, and set
it in a drying place till it be stiff, that you may work it into rolls to be
cut as big as Barley corns, and so lay them on a place again: If it be needful
strew on the place a little Sugar to prevent thickning; so dry them still if
there be need, and if they should be too dry, the heat of the fire will soften
them again.

A perfume for Clothes, Gloves.
Take of Linet two grains, of Musk three, of Ambergreese four, and the oil of
Bems a pretty quantity; grind them all upon a Marble stone fit for that
purpose; then with a brush or sponge rake them over, and it will sweeten them
very well; your Gloves or Jerkins must first be washed in old red Rose Water,
and when they are a most dry, stretch them forth smooth, and lay on the
perfumes.

To make Almond Biscuit.
Take the whites of four new laid Eggs, and two yolks, then beat it well for an
hour together, then have in readiness a quarter of a pound of the best Almonds
blanched in cold water, and beat them very small with Bosewart for fear of
Oyling; then have a pound of the best Loaf Sugar finely beaten, beat that in
the Eggs a while, then put in your Almonds, and five or six spoonfuls of the
finest flower, and so bake them together upon paper or plates, you may have a
little fine sugar in a piece of tiffany to dust them over as they be in the
Oven, so bake them as you do Biscuit.

To make Conserve of Roses boiled.
Take a quart of Red rose water, a quart of fair water, boil in the water a
pound of red Rose leaves, the whites cut off, the leaves must be boiled very
tender; then take three pound of Sugar, and put to it a pound at a time, and
let it boil a little between every pound, so put it up in your pots.

To make Conserves of Roses unboiled.
Take a pound of red Rose leaves, the whites cut off, stamp them very fine,
take a pound of Sugar, and beat in with the Roses, and put it in a pot, and
cover it with leather, and set it in a cool place.

To dry Apricocks.
First stone them, then weigh them, take the weight of them in double refined
Sugar, make the Syrup with so much water as will wet them, and boil it up so
high, that a drop being dropped on a Plate it will slip clean off, when it is
cold; then put in your Apricocks being pared, whilst your Syrup is hot, but it
must not be taken off the fire before you put them in, then turn them in the
Syrup often, then let them stand three quarters of an hour; then take them out
of the Syrup, and tie them up in Tiffanies, one in a Tiffany or more, as they
be in bigness, and whilst you are tying them up, set the Syrup on the fire to
heat, but not to boil, then put your Apricocks into the Syrup, and set them on
a quick fire, and let them boil as fast as you can, skim them clean, and when
they look clear, take them from the fire, and let them lie in the Syrup till
the next day, then set them on the fire to heat, but not to boil; then set them
by till the next day, and lay them upon a clean Sieve to drain, and when they
are well drained, take them out of the Tiffanies, and so dry them in a stove,
or better in the Sun with glasses over them, to keep them from the dust.

To make Quinces for Pies.
Wipe the Quinces, and put them into a little vessel of small beer when it has
done working; stop them close that no air can get in, and this will keep them
fair all the year, and good.

The best way to break sweet Powder.
Take of Orrice one pound, Calamus a quarter of a pound, Benjamin one half
pound, Storax half a pound, Civet a quarter of an ounce, Cloves a quarter of a
pound, Musk one half ounce, oil of Orange flowers one ounce, Lignum Aloes one
ounce, Rosewood a quarter of a pound, Ambergreese a quarter of an ounce. To
every pound of Roses put a pound of Powder; the bag must be of Taffaty, or else
the powder will run through.

To make excellent Perfumes.
Take a quarter of a pound of Damask Rose-buds cut clean from the Whites, stamp
them very small, put to them a good spoonful of Damask Rose Water, so let them
stand close stopped all night, then take one ounce and a quarter of Benjamin
finely beaten, and also searsed, (if you will) twenty grains of Civit, and ten
grains of Musk; mingle these with the Roses, beating them well together, then
make it up in little Cakes between Rose leaves, and dry them between sheets of
paper.

To make a very good Pomatum.
Take the fat of a young Dog one pound, it must be killed well, that the blood
settle not into the fat, then let the outer skin be taken off before it be
opened, lest any of the hair come to the fat, then take all the fat from the
inside, and as soon as you take it off fling it into Conduit-water; and if you
see the second skin be clear, peel it, and water it with the other; be sure it
cools not out of the water: you must not let any of the flesh remain on it, for
then the Pomatum will not keep. To one pound of this fat take two pound of
Lambs caul, and put it to the other in the water, and when you see it is cold,
drain it from the water in a Napkin, and break it in little pieces with your
fingers, and take out all the little veins; then take eight ounces of oil of
Tartar, and put in that first, stirring it well together, then put it into a
Gallon of Conduit-water, and let it stand till night; shift this with so much
Oil and Water, morning and evening seven days together, and be sure you shift
it constantly; and the day before you mean to melt it wring it hard by a little
at a time, and be sure the Oil and water be all out of it, wring the water well
out of it with a Napkin every time you shift it; then put in three pints of
Rose Water; let it stand close covered twelve hours, then wring out that, and
put in a pint of fresh Rose Water into a high Gallipot with the feces; then tie
it close up, and set it in a pot of water, and let it boil two hours, then take
it out, and strain it into an earthen pan, let it stand till it is cold; then
cut a hole in it, and let out the water, then scrape away the bottom, and dry
it with a cloth, and dry the pan; melt it in a chafing dish of coals, or in the
Gallipots; beat it so long, till it look very white and shining; then with your
hand fling it in fine Cakes upon white paper, and let it lie till it be cold,
then put it into Gallipots. This will be very good for two or three years.

To make Raisin Wine.
Take two pound of Raisins of the Sun shred, a pound of good powdered Sugar,
the juice of two Lemons, one pill, put these in an earthen pot with a top, then
take two gallons of water, let it boil half an hour, then take it hot from the
fire, and put it into the pot, and cover it close for three or four days,
stirring it twice a day, being strained, put it into bottles, and stop it very
close, in a fortnight or three weeks it may be drunk; you may put in Cloves,
Gilly-flowers, or Cowslips, as the time of the year is when you make it; and
when you have drawn this from the Raisins, and bottled it up, heat two quarts
of water more put it to the Ingredients, and let it stand as aforesaid. This
will be good, but smaller then the other, the water must be boiled as the other.

To make Rasberry Wine.
Take a Gallon of good Rhennish Wine, put into it as much Rasberries very ripe
as will make it strong, put it in an earthen pot, and let it stand two days,
then pour your Wine from your Rasberries, and put into every bottle two ounces
of Sugar. Stop it up, and keep it by you.

The best way to preserve Cherries.
Take the best Cherries you can get, and cut the stalks something short, then
for every pound of these Cherries take two pound of other Cherries, and put
them of their stalks and stones, put to them ten spoonfuls of fair water, and
then set them on the fire to boil very fast till you see that the color of the
syrup be like pale claret Wine, then take it off the fire, and drain them from
the Cherries into a pan to preserve in. Take to every pound of cherries a
quarter of sugar, of which take half, and dissolve it with the cherry-water
drained from the Cherries, and keep them boiling very fast till they will gelly
in a spoon, and as you see the syrup thin, take off the sugar that you kept
finely beaten, and put it to the Cherries in the boiling; the faster they boil,
the better they will be preserved, and let them stand in a pan till they be
almost cold.

A Tincture of Ambergreese.
Take Ambergreese one ounce, Musk two drams, spirit of Wine half a pint, or as
much as will cover the Ingredients two or three fingers breadth, put all into a
glass, stop it close with a cork and bladder; set it in Horse dung ten or
twelve days, then pour off gently the Spirit of Wine, and keep it in a Glass
close stopped, then put more spirit of Wine on the Ambergreece, and do as before;
then pour it off, after all this the Ambergreese will serve for ordinary uses.
A drop of this will perfume any thing, and in Cordials it is very good.

To make Vsquebath the best way.
Take two quarts of the best Aqua vitae, four ounces of scraped liquorish, and
half a pound of sliced Raisins of the Sun, Anniseeds four ounces, Dates and
Figs, of each half a pound sliced Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Ginger, of each half an
ounce: put these to the Aqua vitae, stop it very close, and set it in a cold
place ten days, stirring it twice a day with a stick, then strain or sweeten
it with Sugareandy; after it is strained* let it stand till it be clear, then
put into the glass Musk and Ambergreece; two grains is sufficient for this
quantity.

To preserve Cherries with a quarter of their weight in Sugar.
four pound of Cherries, one pound of Sugar, beat your Sugar and strew a little
in the bottom of your skillet, then pull off the stalks and stones of your
Cherries, and cut them cross the bottom with a knife; let the juice of the
Cherries run upon the Sugar; for there must be no other liquor but the juice of
the Cherries; cover your Cherries over with one half of your Sugar, boil them
very quick; when they are half boi^ed, but in the remainder of your Sugar; when
they are almost enough, put in the rest of the Sugar; you must let them boil
till they part in sunder like Marmalade, stirring them continually, so put them
up hot into your warm Marmalade glasses.

To make Gelly of Pippins.
Take pippins, and pare them, and quarter them, and put as much water to them
as will cover them, and let them boil till all the virtue of the Pippins are
out; then strain them, and take to a pint of that liquor a pound of Sugar, and
cut long threads of Orange peels, and boil in it, then take a Lemon, and pare^^
and slice it very thin, and boil it (...) ten or quor a little thin; take them
out, and lay them in the bottom of your glass, and when it is boiled to a
gelly, pour it on the Lemons in the glass. You must boil the Oranges in two or
three waters before you boil it in the gelly.

To make Apricock Cakes.
Take the fairest Apricocks you can get, and parboil them very tender, then
take off the pulp and their weight of Sugar, and boil the Sugar and Apricocks
together very fast; stir them ever lest they burn to, and when you can see the
bottom of the Skillet it is enough, then put them into Cards sowed round, and
dust them with fine Sugar, and when they are cold stone them, then turn them,
and fill them up with some more of the same stuff; but you must let them stand
for three or four days before you turn them off the first place; and when you
find they begin to candy, take them out of the Cards, dust them with Sugar
again; so do even when you turn them.

To Preserve Barberries the best way.
First stone them and weigh them, half a pound of sugar to half a pound of
them* then pare them and slice them into that liquour, take the weight of it in
sugar; then take as many Rasberries as will ^^^lour it, and strain them into
the liq^^^ then put in the sugar, boil it as fast as you can, then skim it till
it be very clear* then put in your Barberries, and (...) Sugar you weighed, and
so let them boil till the skin be fully risen up, then take them off, and skin
them very clean, and put them up.

To make Lozenges of red Roses.
Boil your Sugar to Sugar again, then put in your Red Roses being fi^ely
beaten, and made moist with the Juice of a Lemmon, let it not boil after the
Roses are in, but pour it upon a Pye-plate, and cut it into what form you
please.

To make Chips of Quinces.
First scald them very well, then slice them into a Dish, and pour a Candy
syrup to them scalding hot, and let them stand all night, then lay them on
plates, and searse sugar on them, and turn them every day, and scrape more
sugar on them till they be dry. If you would have them look clear, heat them in
syrup, but not to boil.

To make Sugar of Wormwood, Mint, Anniseed, or any other of that kind.
Take double refined Sugar, and do but wet it in fair water, or Rose Water, and
boil it to a Candy, when it is almost boiled take it off, and stir it till it
be cold; then drop in three or four drops of the Oils of whatsoever you will
make, and stir it well; then drop it on a board, being before ^ifted with Sugar.

To make Syrup of Lemons or Citrons.
Pare off all the rindes, then slice your Lemons very thin, and lay a lare of
Sugar finely beaten, and a lare of Lemons in a silver Basin till you have
fitted it, or as much as you mean to make, and so let it stand all night; the
next day pour off the liquor that runs from it into a glass through a Tiffany
strainer. Be sure you put Sugar enough to them at the first, and it will keep a
year good, if it be set up well.

To make Jumbals of Apricocks or Quinces.
Take Apricocks or Quinces, and quoddle them tender, then take their Pulp and
dry it in a dish over a Cha^ing-dish of coals, and set it in a stove for a day
or two; then beat it in a stone Mortar, putting in as much Sugar as will make a
stiff paste; then color it with Saunders, Cochinele or blew Starch, and make
it up in what color you please, roll them with battle-doors into long pieces,
and tie them up in knots, and so dry them.

To make Cherry-water.
Take nine pound of Cherries, pull out the stones and stalks, break them with
your hand, and put them into nine pints of Claret Wine, take nine ounces of
Cinnamon, and three Nutmegs, bruise them, and put them into this, then take of
Rosemary and Balm, of each half a handful, of sweet Marjoram a quarter of an
handful; put all these with the aforenamed into an earthen pot well leaded; so
let them stand to infuse twenty four hours, stirring it once in four or five
hours; so distill it in a Limbeck, keeping the strongest water by it self, put
some Sugar finely beaten into your glasses. If your first water be too strong,
put some of the second to it as you use it. If you please you may tie some
Musk, and Ambergreese in a rag, and hang it by a thread in your glass.

To make Orange Cakes.
Take Oranges and pare them as thin as you can, then take out the meats clean,
and put them in water; let them lie about an hour, shift the water, and boil
them very tender in three or four waters then put them up, and dry them on a
cloth: mince them as small as you can, then put them into a dish, and squeeze
all the juice of the meat into them, and let them stand till the next day, take
to every pound of these a pound and a quarter of double refined Sugar. Boil it
with a spoonful of water at the bottom to keep it from burning till it be
Sugar again; then put in your Oranges, and let them stand and dry on the fire,
but not boil; then put them on glass plates, and put them in a stove, the next
day make them into Cakes, and so dry them as fast as you can.

To preserve Oranges the French way.
Take twelve of the fairest Oranges and best colored, and if you can get them
with smooth skins they are the better, and lay them in Conduit water six days,
and nights, shifting them into fresh water morning and evening; then boil them
very tender, and with a knife pare them very thin, rub them with salt, when you
have so done, core them with a coring Iron, taking out the meat and seeds; then
rub them with a dry cloth till they be clean, and to every pound of Oranges a
pound and half of Sugar, and to a pound of sugar a pint of water; then mingle
your sugar and water well together in a large skillet or pan; beat the whites
of three Eggs, and put that into it, then set it on the fire, and let it boil
till it rises, and strain it through a Napkin; then set it on the fire again,
and let it boil till the syrup be thick, then put in yonr Oranges, and make
them seethe as fast as you can, now and then putting in a piece of fine loaf
sugar the bigness of a Walnut, when they have boiled near an hour, put into
them a pint of Apple water: then boil them apace, and half a pint of White
Wine, this should be put in before the Apple water, when your Oranges are very
clear, and your sirup so thick that it will gelly, (which you may know by
setting them to cool in a spoon) when they are ready to be taken off from the
fire; then put in the juice of eight lemons warm into them, then put them into
an earthen pan, and so let them stand till they be cold, then put every Orange
in a several glass or pot; if you do but six Oranges at a time, it is the
better.

To preserve green Plum*
The greatest (...) Plum is the best, which will (...) in the midst of July,
gather them about that time, or later, as they grow in bigness, but you must
not suffer them to turn yellow, for then they never be of good color; being
gathered, lay them in water for the space of 12. hours, and when you gather
them, wipe them with a clean linen cloth, and cut off a little of the stalks
of every one; then set two skillets of water on the fire, and when one is
scalding hot put in your Plums, and take them from the fire, and cover them,
and let them rest for the space of a quarter of an hour; then take them up, and
when your other skillet of water does boil, put them into it; let them but stay
in it a very little while, and so let the other skillet of water, wherein they
were first boiled, be set to the fire again, and make it to boil, and put in
you plums as before, and then you shall see them rivet over, and yet your Plums
very whole; then while they be hot, you must with your knife scrape away the
riveting; then take to every pound of Plums a pound and two ounces of Sugar
finely beaten, then set a pan with a little fair water on the fire, and when it
boils, put in your Plums, and let them seethe half a quarter of an hour till
you see the color wax green, then set them off the fire a quarter of an hour,
and take a handful of Sugar that is weighed, and strew it in the bottom of the
pan wherein you will preserve, and so put in your Plums one by one, drawing the
liquor from them, and cast the rest of your Sugar on them; then set the pan on
a moderate fire, letting them boil continually but very softly, and in three
quarters of an hour they will be ready, as you may perceive by the greenness of
your Plums, and thickness of your Syrup, which if they be boiled enough, will
gelly when it is cold; then take up your plums, and put them into a Gallipot,
but boil your Syrup a little longer, then strain it into some vessel, and being
blood-warm, pour it upon your Plums, but stop not the pot before they be cold.
Note also you must preserve them in such a pan, as they may lie one by another,
and turn of themselves; and when they have been five or six days in the Syrup,
that the Syrup grow thin, you may boil it again with a little Sugar, but put it
not to your Plums till they be cold. They must have three scaldings, and one
boiling.

To dry Plums.
Take three quarters of a pound of sugar to a pound of black Pear-plums, or
Damsins, slit the Plums in the crest, lay a lay of sugar with a lay of Plums,
and let them stand all night; if you stone the Plums, fill up the place with
sugar, then boil them but gently till they be very tender, without breaking the
skins; take them into an earthen or silver dish, and boil your syrup afterward
for a gelly, then pour it in your Plums scalding hot, and let them stand two or
three days, then let them be put to the Oven after you draw your bread, so
often until your syrrup be dried up, and when you think they are almost dry,
lay them in a sieve, and pour some scalding water on them, which will run
through the Sieve, and set them in an Oven afterward to dry.

To preserve Cherries the best way, bigger then they grow naturally, etc.
Take a pound of the smallest Cherries, and boil them tender in a pint of fair
water, then strain the liquor from the substance, then take two pound of good
Cherries, and put them in a preserving pan with a lay of Cherries, and a lay of
sugar: then pour the syrup of the other Cherries about them, and so let them
boil as fast as you can with a quick fire, that the syrup may boil over them,
and when your syrup is thick and of good color, then take them up, and let
them stand a cooling by partitions one from another, and being cold you may pot
them up.

To preserve Damsins, red Plums or black.
Take your Plums newly gathered, and take a little more sugar then they do
weigh, then put to it as much water as will cover them; then boil your syrup a
little while, and so let it cool, then put in your Damsins or Plumbs, then boil
them leasurely in a pot of seething water till they be tender, then being
almost cold pot them up.

To dry Pippins or Pears.
Take your Pippins, Pears, Apri^^^ks, pare them, and lay them in a broad
earthen pan one by one, and so roll them in searsed Sugar as you flower fried
fish; put them in an oven as hot as for manchet, and so take them out, and turn
them as long as the oven is hot; when the oven is of a drying heat, lay them
upon a paper, and dry them on the bottom of a Sieve; so you may do the least
plum that is.

To dry Pippins or Pears another way.
Take Pippins or Pears, and lay them in an earthen pan one by one, and when
they be baked plump and not broken, then take them out, and lay them up, and
lay them upon a paper, then lay them on a Sieves bottom, and dry them as you
did before.

To dry Apricocks tender.
Take the ripest of the Apricocks, pare them, put them into a silver or earthen
skillet, and to a pound of Apricocks put three quarters of a pound of Sugar,
set your Apricocks over your fire; stirring them till they come to a pulp, and
set the Sugar in another skillet by boiling it up to a good height, then take
all the Apricocks, and stir them round till they be well mingled, then let it
stand till it be something cold and thick, then put it into Cards, being cut of
the fashion of an Apricock, and laid upon glass plates; fill the Cards half
full, then set them in your Stove; but when you find they are so dry that they
are ready to turn, then provide as much of your pulp as you had before, and to
put to every one a stove when they are turned, (which you must have said
before) and pour the rest of the pulp upon them, so set them into your stove,
turning them till they be dry.

To dry Plums.
Take a pound of Sugar to a pound of Plums, pare them, scald your Plums, then
lay your Plums upon a sieve till the water be drained from them, boil your
Sugar to a Candy height, and then put your Plums in whilst your Syrup is hot,
so warm them every morning for a week, then take them out, and put them into
your stove and dry them.

To dry Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks, pare and stone them, then weigh half a pound of sugar to
a pound of Apricocks, then take half that sugar, and make a thin sirup, and
when it boileth, put in the Apricocks, then scald them in that sirup; then take
them off the fire, and let them stand all night in that Syrup, in the morning
take them out of that syrup, and make another syrup with the other half of the
sugar, then put them in, and preserve them till they look clear; but be sure
you do not do them so much as those you keep preserved without drying; then
take them out of that syrup, and lay them on a piece of plate till they* be
cold; then take a skillet of fair water, and when the water boils take your
Apricocks one after another in a spoon, and dip them in the water first on one
side, and then on the other; not letting them go out of the spoon: you must do
it very quick, then put them on a piece of a plate, and dry them in a stove,
turning them every day; you must be sure that your Stove or Cubboard where you
dry them, the heat of it be renewed three times a day with a temperate drying
heat until they be something dry, then afterward turn once as you see cause.

Conserves of Violets the Italian manner.
Take the leaves of blew Violets separated from their stalks and greens, beat
them very well in a stone Mortar, with twice their weight of Sugar, and reserve
them for your use in a glass vessel.

The Virtue.
The heat of Choler it does mitigate, extinguisheth thirst, asswageth the
belly, and helps the Throat of hot hurts, sharp droppings, and dryness, and
procures rest. It will keep one year.

Conserves of red Roses the Italian manner.
Take fresh red Roses not quite ripe, beat them in a stone Mortar, mix them
with double their weight of Sugar, and put them in a glass close stopped, being
not full, let them remain before you use them three months, stirring of them
once a day.

The Virtue.
The Stomach, Heart, and Bowels it cools, and hindered vapors, the spiting
of blood and corruption for the most part (being cold) it helps. It will keep
many years.

Conserve of Borage Flowers after the Italian Manner.
Take fresh Borage flowers cleansed well from their heads four ounces, fine
Sugar twelve ounces, beat them well together in a stone Mortar, and keep them
in a vessel well placed.

The virtues are the same with Bugloss flowers.

Conserve of Rosemary flowers after the Italian manner.
Take new Rosemary Flowers one pound, of white Sugar one pound; so beat them
together in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, keep it in a Gallipot, or
vessel of earth well glassed, or in one of hard stone. It may be preserved for
one year or two.

The Virtues.
It comfort the Heart, the Stomach, the brain, and all the nervous parts of
the Body.

Conserve of Betony after the Italian way.
Betony new and tender one pound, the best Sugar three pound, beat them very
small in a stone Mortar, let the Sugar be boiled with two pound of Betony-water
to the consistence of a syrup, at length mix them together by little and little
over a small fire, and make a Conserve, which keep in a glass.

The Virtues.
It helps the cold pains of the Head, purges the Stomach and Womb; it
helps stoniness of the Reins, and furthereth Conception.

Conserve of Sage.
Take new flowers of Sage one pound, Sugar one pound; so beat them together
very small in a Marble Mortar, put them in a vessel well glassed and steeped,
set them in the Sun, stir them daily; it will last one year.

The Virtues,
It is good in all cold hurts of the brain, it refreshes the Stomach, it
opens obstructions, and takes away superfluous and hurtful humors from the
Stomach.

Conserve of the Flower of Lavander.
Take the flowers being new, so many as you please, and beat them with three
times their weight of white sugar, after the same manner as Rosemary flowers;
they will keep one year.

The Virtues.
The Brain, the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Womb it makes warm, and is good in
the Suffocation of the Womb, hardness of the Spleen, and for the Apoplex.

Conserve of Marjoram.
The Conserve is prepared as Betony; it keeps a year.

The Virtues.
It is good against the coldness, moistness of the Brain, and Stomach, and it
strengthens the Vital Spirits.

Conserve of Piony after the Italian way.
In the Spring take of the Flowers fresh half a pound, Sugar one pound, beat
them together in a good stone mortar, then put them in a glass, and set them in
the sun for three Months, stirring them daily with a wooden Spathula.

The Virtues.
It is good against the Falling Sickness, and giddiness of the Head, it
cleanses the Reins and Bladder.

Touching Candies, as follows.
To Candy Rosemary flowers in the Sun.
TAke Gum-Dragon, and steep it in Rose Water, then take the Rosemary flowers,
good colored, and well picked, and wet them in the water that your Gum Dragon
is steeped in, then take them out, and lay them upon a Paper, and strew fine
Sugar over them; this do in the hot Sun, turning them, and strewing Sugar on
them, till they are candied, and so keep them for your use.

To make Sugar of Roses.
Take the deepest colored red Roses, pick them, cut of the white bottoms, and
dry your red leaves in an Oven, till they be as dry as possible, then beat them
to powder and searse them, then take half a pound of sugar beaten fine, put it
into your pan with as much fair water as will wet it; then set it in a
chafing dish of coals, and let it boil till it be Sugar again; then put as much
powder of roses that will make it look very red, stir them well together, and
when it is almost cold, put it into pales, and when it is thoroughly cold, take
them off, and put them in boxes.

To Candy Pippins, Pears, Apricocks, or Plums.
Take any of these fruits being pared, and strew upon them, as you do flower
upon frying fish; then lay them on a board in a Pewter dish, so put them into
an Oven as hot as for Manchet; as the liquor comes from them, pour forth, turn
them, and strew more Sugar on them, and sprinkle Rose water on them, thus
turning and sugaring of them three or four times, till they be almost dry, then
lay them on a Lettice Wire, or on the bottom of a sieve in a warm oven, after
the bread is drawn out, till they be full dry: so you may keep them all the
year.

To Candy or Clear Rockandy flowers.
Take spices, and boil them in a syrup of sugar, then put in the flowers, boil
them till they be stiff; when you spread them on a paper, lay them on round
Wiers in an earthen pan, then take as much hard sugar as will fill your pan,
and as much water as will melt the sugar, that is half a pint to every pound;
then beat a dozen spoonfuls of fair water, and the white of an Egg in a basin,
with a Birchin rod till it come to a froth, when your Sugar is all melted and
boiled, put the froth of the Egg in the hot sirup, and as it rises, drop in a
little cold water; so let it boil a little while, then scum it, then boil it to
a candy height, that is, when you may draw it in small threads between your
finger and your thumb: then pour forth all your syrup that will run from it in
your pan, then set it a drying one hour or two, which done, pick up the wiers,
and take off the flowers, and lay them on papers, and so dry them.

To Candy Spanish flowers.
Take the Blossoms of diverse sorts of flowers, and make a syrup of water and
sugar, and boil it very thick, then put in your Blossoms, and stir them in
their boiling, till it turn to sugar again, then stir them with the back of a
spoon, till the Sugar fall from it; so may you keep them for Sallets all the
year.

To Candy Grapes, Cherries or Barberries.
Take any of these fruits, and strew fine sifted sugar on them, as you do
flower on frying fish, lay them on a lettice of wier in a deep earthen pan, and
put them into an Oven as hot as for Manchet, then take them out, and turn them
and sugar them again, and sprinkle a little Rose Water on them, pour the syrup
forth as it comes from them, thus turning and sugaring them till they be almost
dry, then take them out of the earthen pan, and lay them on a lettice of wier
upon two billets of wood in a warm Oven, after the bread is drawn, till they be
dry and well candied.

To Candy Suckets of Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and Angelica.
Take, and boil them in fair water tender, and shift them in three boilings,
six or seven times, to take away their bitterness, then put them into as much
sugar as will cover them, and so let them boil a walm or two, then take them
out, and dry them in a warm oven as hot as Manchet, and being dry, boil the
sugar to a Candy height, and so cast your Oranges into the hot sugar, and take
them out again suddenly, and then lay them upon a lettice of wier on the bottom
of a sieve in a warm oven after the bread is drawn, still warming the Oven till
it be dry, and they will be well candied.

To Candy the Orange roots
Take the Orange roots being well and tenderly boiled, petch them and peel
them, and wash them out of two or three waters; then dry them well with a fair
cloth, then pot them together two or three in a knot, then put them into as
much clarified Sugar as will cover, and so let them boil leasurely, turning
them until you see the Sugar drunk up into the Root; then shaking them in the
Basin to sunder the knots; and when they wax dry, take them up suddenly, and
lay them on sheets of white Paper, and so dry them before the fire an hour or
two, and they will be well candied.

Candy Orange Peels after the Italian way.
Take Orange peels so often steeped in cold water, as you think convenient for
their bitterness, then dry them gently, and candy them with some convenient
syrrup made with Sugar; some that are more grown, take away that spongious
white under the yellow peels, others do both together.

The Virtues,
They corroborate the Stomach and Heart.

To Candy Citrons after the Spanish way.
Take Citron Peels so large as you please, the inner part being taken away, let
them be steeped in a clear lay of water and ashes for nine days, and shift
them the fifth day, afterward wash them in fair water, till the bitterness be
taken away, and that they grow sweet, then let them be boiled in fair water
till they grow soft, the watery part being taken away, let them be steeped in a
vessel of stone twenty four hours, with a Julip made of white Sugar, and three
parts water, after let them be boiled upon a gentle fire, to candness of
Penidies or Paste; being taken out of that, let them be put in a glass vessel,
one by one, with the Julip of Roses made somewhat hard, or with sugar; some do
add Amber and Musk to them.

The Virtues.
It comfort the Stomach and Heart, it helps concoction.

Candied Cherries the Italian wy.
Take Cherries before they are full ripe, the stones taken out, put clarified
Sugar boiled to a height, then pour it on them.

Chicory Roots candied the Italian way.
Take Chicory new and green, the outward Bark being taken away, then before
they be candied, let them be cut in several parts, and gently boiled, that no
bitterness may remain, then set them in the air placed severally, and put Sugar
to them boiled to a height.

Touching Marmalets, and Quiddony, as follows.
To make Marmalet of Damsins.
TAke two quarts of Damsins that be through ripe, and pare off the skins of
three pints of them, then put them into an earthen pipkin, those with the skins
undermost; then set the pipkin into a pot of seething water, and let the water
seethe apace until the Damsins be tender. Cover the pipkin close, that no
water gets into them; and when they are tender, put them out into an earthen
pan, and take out all the stones and skins, then weigh them, and take the
weight with hard Sugar, then break the Sugar fine, and put it into the Damsins,
then set it on the fire, and make it boil apace till it will come from the
bottom of the skillet, then take it up, and put it into a glass, but scum it
clear in the boiling.

To make white Marmalet of Quinces.
Take unpared Quinces, and boil them whole in fair water, peel them and take
all the pap from the coar, to every pound thereof add three quarters of a
pound of Sugar, boil it well till it come well from the pans bottom, then put
it into boxes.

To make Marmalet of any tender Plum.
Take your Plums, and boil them between two dishes on a Chafing Dish of coals,
then strain it, and take as much Sugar as the Pulp do weigh, and put to it as
much Rose Water, and fair water as will melt it, that is, half a pint of water
to a pound of Sugar, and so boil it to a Candy height, then put the pulp into
hot Sugar, with the pap of a roasted apple. In like manner you must put roasted
Apples to make Paste Royal of it, or else it will be tough in the drying.

To make Orange Marmalet.
Take Oranges, pare them as thin as you can, boil them in four several waters,
let them be very soft before you take them out, then take two quarts of
Spring Water, put thereto twenty Pippins pared, quartered and coared, let them
boil till all the virtue be out; take heed they do not lose the color; then
strain them, put to every pint of water a pound of Sugar, boil it almost to a
Candy height, then take out all the meat out of the Oranges, slice the peel in
long slits as thin as you can, then put in your peel with the juice of two
Lemmons, and one half Orange, then boil it to a Candy.

To make Quiddony of Pippins, of Ruby, or any Amber color.
Take Pippins, and cut them in quarters, and pare them, and boil them with as
much fair water as will cover them, till they be tender, and sunk into the
water, then strain all the liquor from the Pulp, then take a pint of that
liquor and half a pound of Sugar, and boil it till it be a quaking gelly on the
back of a spoon; so then pour it on your moulds, being taken out of fair water;
then being cold, turn them on a wet trencher, and so slide them into the boxes,
and if you would have it ruddy color, then boil it leasurely close covered,
till it be as red as Claret Wine, so may you conceive, the difference is in the
boiling of it; remember to boil your Quinces in Apple-water as you do your
Plums.

To make Quiddony of all kinds of Plums
Take your Apple-water, and boil the Plums in it till it be red as Claret Wine,
and when you have made it strong of the Plums, put to every pint half a pound
of Sugar, and so boil it till a drop of it hang on the back of a spoon like a
quaking gelly. If you will have it of an Amber color, then boil it with a
quick fire, that is all the difference of the coloring of it.

To make Marmalet of Oranges, or Orange Cakes, etc.
Take the yellowest and fairest Oranges, and water them three days, shifting
the water twice a day, pare them as thin as you possible can, boil them in a
Water changed five or six times, until the bitterness of the Orange be boiled
out; those that you preserve, must be cut in halves, but those for Marmalet
must be boiled whole, let them be very tender, and slice them very thin on a
Trencher, taking out the seeds and long strings, and with a Knife make it as
fine as the Pap of an Apple; then weigh your Pap of Oranges, and to a pound of
it, take a pound and half of Sugar: then you must have Pippins boiled ready in
a Skillet of fair water, and take the Pap of them made fine on a Trencher, and
the strings taken out, (but take not half so much Pippins as Oranges) then take
the weight of it in Sugar, and mix it both together in a silver or earthen
Dish; and set it on the coals to dry the water out of it, (as you do with
Quince Marmalet) when your Sugar is Candy height, put in your stuff, and boil
it till you think it stiff enough stirring it continually: if you please you
may put in a little Musk in it.

Touching Pastrey and Pasties.
To make Sugar Cakes.
TAke three pound of the finest Wheat Flower, one pound of fine Sugar, Cloves
and Mace of each one ounce finely searsed, two pound of Butter, a little Rose
water, knead and mould this very well together, melt your Butter as you put it
in; then mould it with your hand forth upon a board, cut them round with a
glass, then lay them on papers, and set them in an Oven, be sure your Oven be
not too hot, so let them stand till they be colored enough.

To make clear Cakes of Plums.
Take Plums of any sorts, Raspiss are the best, put them in a stone Jug, into a
pot of seething water, and when they are dissolved, strain them together
through a fair cloth, and take to a pint of that a pound of sugar, put to as
much color as will melt it, and boil to a Candy height; boil the liquor
likewise in another Posnet, then put them seething hot together, and so boil a
little while stirring them together, then put them into glasses, and set them
in an Oven or Stove in a drying heat, let them stand so two or three weeks, and
never be cold, removing them from one warm place to another, they will turn in
a week; beware you set them not too hot, for they will be tough; so every day
turn them till they be dry; they will be very clear.

To make Paste of Oranges and Lemons.
Take your Oranges well colored, boil them tender in water, changing them six
or seven times in the boiling, put into the first water one handful of Salt,
and then beat them in a wooden Bowl with a wooden pestle, and then strain them
through a piece of Cushion Canvas, then take somewhat more then the weight of
them in sugar, then boil it, dry and fashion it as you please.

To make Rasberry Cakes.
Take Rasberries, and put them into a Gallipot, cover them close, and set them
into a skillet of water, and let them boil till they are all to mash, then rub
them through a strainer of Cushion Canvas, put the liquor into a silver basin,
and set it upon a very quick fire; and put into it one handful or two of whole
Rasberries, according to the quantity of your liquor: and as you shall like to
have seeds in your paste. Thus let it boil very fast till it be thick, and
continually stir, lest it burn; then take two silver dis^es that are of a
weight, and put them into your scales, in the one put the Raspis stuff, and in
the other double refined Sugar finely beaten, as much as the weight of Raspiss
stuff; then put as much water to the Sugar as will melt it, set it upon the
fire, and let it boil till it be very high candied, then take it from the fire,
and put your Raspis stuff into it; and when your Sugar and Rasberries are very
well mixed together, and the Sugar well melted from about the dish, (which if it
will not do from the fire, set it on again) but let it not boil in any case;
when it is pretty cool, lay it by spoonfuls in plates, and put it into your
stuff, keeping temperate fire to it twice a day till it be candied that will
turn them, join two of the pieces together, to make the cake the thicker.

To make Paste of Genoa Citrons.
Take Citrons, and boil them in their skins then scrape all the pulp from the
coar, strain it through a piece of Cushion Canvas, take twice the weight of the
Pulp in Sugar, put to it twice as much water as will melt it, that is half a
pint to every pound of Sugar, boil it to a candy height^; dry the Pulp upon a
Chafing dish of Coals, then put the Syrup and the Pulp hot together, boil it
with stirring until it will lie upon a Pie-plate, set it in a warm stone Oven
upon two Billets of wood, from the heat of the Oven, all one night, in the
morning turn it, and set it in the like heat again, so turn it every day till
it be dry.

To make a French Tart.
Take a quartern of Almonds or thereabouts, and peel them, then beat them in a
Mortar, take the white of the breast of a cold Capon, and take so much Lard as
twice the quantity of the Capon, and so much Butter, or rather more, and half a
Marrow-bone, and if the bone be little then all the Marrow, with the juice of
one Lemon; beat them all together in a Mortar very well, then put in one half
pound of loaf sugar grated, then take a good piece of Citron, cut it in small
pieces, and half a quarter of Pistanius, mingle all these together, take some
flower, and the yolks of two or three Eggs, and some sweet Butter, and work it
with cold water.

To make Cakes of Pear-plums.
Take to a pound of the clear, or the Pulp, a pound of Sugar, and boil it to a
Sugar again, then break it as small as you can, and put in the clear, when your
sugar is well melted in it, and almost cold, put it in glass plates, and set
them into your stove as fast as you can, with coals under them, and so twice a
day whilst they be dry enough to cut; if you make them of the clear, you must
make Paste of Apples to lay upon them, you must scald them, and beat them very
well, and so use them as you do your Plums, and then you may put them into what
fashion you please.

To make Cakes, viz.
Take a pound of sugar finely beaten, four yolks of Eggs, two whites, one half
pound of Butter washed in Rose water, six spoonfuls of sweet Cream warmed, one
pound of Currants well picked, as much flower as will make it up, mingle them
well together, make them into Cakes, bake them in an Oven; almost as hot as for
manchet, half an hour will bake them.

To make a Cake the way of the Royal Princess, the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to
King CHARLES the first.
Take half a peck of Flower, half a pint of Rose Water, a pint of Ale-yeast, a
pint of cream, boil it, a pound and a an half of Butter, six Eggs, (leave out
the whites) four pound of Currants, one half pound of Sugar, one Nutmeg, and a
little Salt, work it very well, and let it stand half an hour by the fire, and
then work it again, and then make it up, and let it stand an hour and a half in
the Oven; let not your Oven be too hot.

To make Paste of Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks, and pare them, and stone them, then boil them tender
betwixt two dishes on a Chafing Dish of coals; then being cold, lay it forth on
a white sheet of paper; then take as much Sugar as it does weigh, and boil it
to a Candy height, with as much Rose Water and fair water as will melt the
Sugar; then put the Pulp into the Sugar, and so let it boil till it be as thick
as for Marmalet, now and then stirring of it; then fashion it upon a pieplate
like to half Apricocks, and the next day close the half Apricocks to the other,
and when they are dry, they will be as clear as Amber, and eat much better then
Apricocks it self.

To make Paste of Pippins like leaves, and some like Plums, with their stones
and Stalks in them.
Take Pippins pared and coared, and cut in pieces, and boiled tender, so strain
them, and take as much Sugar as the Pulp does weigh, and boil it to a Candy
height, with as much Rose Water and fair water as will melt it, then put the
pulp into the hot Sugar, and let it boil until it be as thick as Marmalet;
then fashion it on a pie-plate, like Oaken leaves, and some like half plums,
the next day close the half hlums together; and if you please you may put the
stones and stalks in them, and dry them in an Oven, and if you will have them
look green, make the paste when Pippins are green; and if you will have them
look red, put a little Conserves of Barberries in the Paste, and if you will
keep any of it all the year, you m^st make it as thin as Tart stuff, and put it
in Gallipots.

To make Paste of Elecampane roots, an excellent remedy for the Cough of the
Lungs.
Take the youngest Elecampane roots, and boil them reasonably tender; then pith
them and peel them, and so beat it in a Mortar, then take twice as much sugar
as the Pulp does weigh, and so boil it to a Candy height, with as much
rose water as will melt it; then put the Pulp into the sugar with the Pap of a
roasted Apple, then let it boil till it be thick, then drop it on a Pie-plate,
and so dry it in a Oven till it be dry.

To make Paste of flowers of the color of Marble, tasting of natural flowers.
Take every sort of pleasing flowers, as Violets, Cowslips, Gilly-flowers,
Roses or Marigolds, and beat them in a Mortar, each flower by it self with
sugar, till the sugar become the color of the flower, then put a little Gum
Dragon steept in water into it, and beat it into a perfect paste; and when you
have half a dozen colors, every flower will take of his nature, then roll the
paste therein, and lay one piece upon another, in mingling sort, so roll your
Paste in small rowls, as big and as long as your finger, then cut it off the
bigness of a small nut, overthwart, and so roll them thin, that you may see a
knife through them, so dry them before the fire till they be dry.

To make Paste of Rasberries or English Currants.
Take any of the Frails, and boil them tender on a Chafing Dish of coals
betwixt two dishes and strain them, with the pap of a roasted Apple, then take
as much Sugar as the Pulp does weigh, and boil to a Candy height with as much
Rose Water as will melt it: then put the Pulp into the hot Sugar, and let it
boil leasurely till you see it as thick as Marmalet, then fashion it on a
Pie-plate, and put it into the Oven with two billets of wood, that the place
touch not the bottom, and so let them dry leasurely till they be dry.

To make Naples Biscuit.
Take of the same stuff the Mackaroons are made of, and put to it an ounce of
pineapple seeds, in a quarter of a pound of stuff, for that is all the
difference between the Mackaroons and the Naples Biscuit.

To make Italian Biskets.
Take a quarter of a pound of searsed Sugar, and beat it in an Alablaster
Mortar with the white of an Egg, and a little Gum Dragon steept in rose water,
to bring it to a perfect paste, then mould it up with a little Anniseed and a
grain of Musk; then make it up like Dutch bread, and bake it on a pie-plate in
a warm Oven, till they rise somewhat high and white, take them out, but handle
them not till they be thoroughly dry and cold.

To make Prince Biskets.
Take a pound of searsed Sugar, and a pound of fine flower, eight Eggs with two
of the reddest yolks taken out, and so beat together one whole hour, then take
you Coffins, and indoice them over with Butter very thin, then to it put an
ounce of Anniseeds fine dusted, and when you are ready to fill your Coffins,
put in the Anniseeds, and so bake it in an Oven as hot as for Manchet.

To make Marchpane to Ice and Gild, and garnish it according to Art.
Take Almonds, and blanch them out of seething water, and beat them till they
come to a fine Paste in a stone Mortar, then take fine searsed Sugar, and so
beat it all together till it come to a perfect paste, putting in now and then a
spoonful of Rose Water, to keep it from Oyling; then cover your March-pane
with a sheet of paper as big as a Charger, then cut it round by that charger,
and set an edge about it as about a Tart, then bottom it with Wafers, then bake
it in an Oven, or in a Baking-pan, and when it is hard and dry, take it out of
the Oven, and Ice it with Rose Water and Sugar, and the white of an Egg, being
as thick as Butter and spreead it over thin with two or three feathers; and
then put it into the Oven again, and when you see it rise high and white, take
it out again and garnish it with some pretty conceit, and stick some long
Comfits upright in it, so gild it, then strew Biskets and Carawayes on it. If
your Marchpane be oily in beating, then put to it as much rose water as will
make it almost as thin as to Ice.

Lorenges.
Take Blossoms of Flowers, and beat them in a bowl-dish, and put them in as
much clarified sugar as may come to the color of the cover, then boil them
with stirring, till it is come to sugar again; then beat it fine, and searse
it, and so work it up to paste with a little Gum Dragon, steep it in
Rose Water, then print it with your mould, and being dry, keep it up.

To make Walnuts artificial.
Take searsed Sugar, and Cinnamon, of quantity alike, work it up with a little
Gum Dragon, steep it in Rose Water, and print it in a mould made like a
Walnut-shell, then take white sugar plates, print it in a mould made like a
Walnut kernel, so when they are both dry, close them up together with a little
Gum Dragon betwixt, and they will dry as they lie.

To make Collops like Bacon of Marchpane.
Take some of your Marchpane Paste, and work it in red Saunders till it be red;
then roll a broad sheet of white Paste, and the sheet of red Paste, three of
the white, and four of the red, and so one upon another in mingled sorts, every
red between, then cut it overthwart, till it look like Collops of Bacon, then
dry it.

To make artificial Fruits.
Take a Mould made of Alablaster, three yolks, and tie two pieces together, and
lay them in water an hour, and take as much sugar as will fill up your mould,
and boil it in a Manus Christi, then pour it into your mould suddenly, and clap
on the lid, round it about with your hand, and it will be whole and hollow,
then color it with what color you please, half red, or half yellow, and you
may yellow it with a little Saffron steept in water.

Touching Preserves and Pomanders.
To make an excellent Perfume to burn between two Rose-leaves.
TAke an ounce of Juniper, an ounce of Storax, half a dozen drops of the water
of Cloves, six grains of Musk, a little Gum Dragon steept in water, and beat
all this to paste, then roll it in little pieces as big as you please, then put
them betwixt two Rose-leaves, and so dry them in a dish in an Oven, and being
so dried, they will burn with a most pleasant smell.

To make Pomander.
Take an ounce of Benjamin, an ounce of Storax, and an ounce of Laudanum, heat
a Mortar very hot, and beat all these Gums to a perfect paste; in beating of
it, put in six grains of Musk, four grains of Sivet; when you have beaten all
this to a fine paste with your hands with Rose Water, roll it round betwixt
your hands, and make holes in the beads, and so string them while they be hot.

To make an Ipswich Water.
Take a pound of fine white Castle Soap, shave it thin in a pint of Rose Water,
and let it stand two or three days; then pour all the water from it, and put
to it half a pint of fresh water, and so let it stand one whole day, then pour
out that, and put half a pint more, and let it stand a night more, then put to
it half an ounce of powder called sweet Marjoram, a quarter of an ounce of
powder of winter Savory, two or three drops of the Oil of Spike, and the Oil of
Cloves, three grains of Musk; and as much Ambergreese; work all these together
in a fair Mortar, with the powder of an Almond Cake dried, and beaten as small
as fine Flower, so roll it round in your hands in Rosewater.

To make a sweet Smell.
Take the Maste of a sweet Apple tree, being gathered betwixt the two
Lady-dayes, and put to it a quarter of Damask Rose Water, and dry it in a dish
in an Oven; wet it in drying two or three times with Rose Water, then put to it
an ounce of Benjamin, an ounce of Storax Calamintae; these Gums being beaten to
powder, with a few leaves of Roses, then you may put what cost of Smells you
will bestow, as much Civet or Ambergreese, and beat it all together in a
Pomander or a Bracelet.

Touching Wine.
To make Hypocras.
TAke four gallons of Claret Wine, eight ounces of Cinnamon, three Oranges, of
Ginger, Cloves, and Nutmegs a small quantity, Sugar six pound, three sprigs of
Rosemary, bruise all the spices somewhat small, and so put them into the Wine,
and keep them close stopped, and often shaked together a day or two, then let
it run through a gelly bag twice or thrice with a quart of new milk.

The Lady Thornburghs Syrup of Elders.
Take Elder-berries when they be red, bruise them in a stone Mortar, strain the
juice, and boil it to a consumption of almost half, scum it very clear, take it
off the fire whilst it is hot, put in sugar to the thickness of a Syrup; put
it no more on the fire, when it is cold, put it into Glasses, not filling them
to the top, for it will work like Beer.

This cleanses the stomach and spleen, and takes away all obstructions of the
Liver, by taking the quantity of a spoonful in a morning, and fasting a short
time after it.

To make Gelly of Raspis the best way.
Take the Raspis, and set them over the fire in a Posnet, and gather out the
thin Juice, the bottom of the skillet being cooled with fair water, and strain
it with a fine strainer, and when you have as much as you will, then weight it
with Sugar, and boil them till they come to a Gelly, which you may perceive by
drawing your finger on the back of the spoon.

To dry Fox Skins.
Take your she Fox Skins, nail them upon a board as strait as you can, then
brush them as clean as you can, then take Aqua Fortis, and put into it a six
pence, and still put in more as long as it will dissolve it, then wash your
skin over with this water, and set it to dry in the Sun; and when it is dry,
wash it over with the spirits of wine; this must be done in hottest time of
summer.

Choice Secrets made known.
To make true Majestery of Pearl.
DIssolve two or three ounces of fine seed Pearl in distilled Vinegar, and when
it is perfectly dissolved, and all taken up, pour the Vinegar into a clean
glass Basin; then drop some few drops of Oil of Tartar upon it, and it will
cast down the Pearl into fine powder, then pour the Vinegar clean off softly,
then put to the Pearl clear Conduit or Spring water; pour that off, and do so
often until the taste of the Vinegar and Tartar be clean gone, then dry the
powder of Pearl upon warm embers, and keep it for your use.

How to make Hair grow.
Take half a pound of Aqua Mellis in the Spring time of the year, warm a little
of it every morning when you rise, in a Sawcer, and tie a little sponge to a
fine box comb, and dip it in the water, and therewith moisten the roots of the
Hair, in combing it, and it will grow long, thick, and curled in a very short
time.

To write Letters of secrets, that they cannot be read without the directions
following.
Take fine Alum, beat it small, and put a reasonable quantity of it into
water, then write with the said water.

The work cannot be read, but by steeping your paper into fair running water.

You may likewise write with Vinegar, or the juice of Lemon or Onion; if you
would read the same, you must hold it before the fire.

How to keep Wine from sowering.
Tie a piece of very salt Bacon on the inside of your barrel, so as it touch
not the Wine, which will preserve Wine from sowering.

To take out spots of Greese or Oil.
Take bones of sheeps feet, burn them almost to ashes, then bruise them to
powder, and put of it on the spot, and lay it in the sun when it shines
hottest, when the powder becomes black, lay on fresh in the place till it fetch
out the spots, which will be done in a very short time.

To make hair grow black, though any color.
Take a little Aqua Fortis, put therein a groat or six pence, as to the
quantity of the aforesaid water, then set both to dissolve before the fire,
then dip a small sponge in the said water, and wet your beard or hair
therewith, but touch not the skin.

King Edwards Perfume.
Take twelve spoonfulls of right red Rose Water, the weight of six pence in
fine powder of Sugar, and boil it on hot Embers and Coals softly, and the house
will smell as though it were full of Roses; but you must burn the sweet Cipress
wood before, to take away the gross air.

Queen Elizabeth's Perfume.
Take eight spoonfulls of Compound water, the weight of two pence in fine
powder of sugar, and boil it on hot Embers and Coals softly, and half an ounce
of sweet Marjoram dried in the Sun, the weight of two pence of the powder of
Benjamin. This Perfume is very sweet, and good for the time.

Mr. Ferene of the New Exchange, Perfumer to the Queen, his rare Dentifrice, so
much approved of at Court.
First take eight ounces of Irios roots, also four ounces of Pomistone, and
eight ounces of Cutel bone, also eight ounces of mother of Pearl, and eight
ounces of Corral, and a pound of brown sugar candy, and a pound of Brick if you
desire to make them red; but he did oftener make them white, and then instead of
the Brick did take a pound of fine Alablaster; all this being thoroughly beaten,
and sifted through a fine searse, the powder is then ready prepared to make up
in a paste, which must be done as follows.

To make the said Powder into Paste.
Take a little Gum Dragant, and lay it in steep twelve hours, in Orange flower
water or Damask Rose Water, and when it is dissolved, take the sweet Gu^^ and
grind it on a Marble-stone wi^^ the aforesaid powder, and mixing some crumbs of
white bread, it will come into a Paste, the which you may make Dentifrices, of
what shape or fashion you please, but long rolls is the most commodious for
your use.

The Receipt of the Lady Kents powder, presented by her Ladyship to the Queen.
Take white Amber, Crabs eyes, red Corral, Hartshorn and Pearl, all prepared
several, of each a like proportion, tear and mingle them, then take Hartshorn
gelly, that has some Saffron put into a bag, dissolve into it while the gelly
is warm, then let the gelly cool, and therewith make a paste of the powders,
which being made up into little balls, you must dry gently by the fire side.
Pearl is prepared by dissolving it with the juice of Lemons, Amber prepared by
beating it to powder; so also Crab's-eyes and Corral, Hartshorn prepared by
burning it in the fire, and taking the shires of it especially, the pith wholly
rejected.

A Cordial Water of Sir Walter Raleigh.
Take a gallon of Strawberries, and put them into a pint of Aqua vitae, let
them stand so four or five days, strain them gently out, and sweeten the water
as you please with fine Sugar; or else with perfume.

The Lady Malets Cordial Water.
Take a pound of fine Sugar beaten, and put to it a quart of running water,
pour it three or four times through a bag; then put a pint of Damask
Rose Water, which you must always pour still through the bag, then four
penniworth of Angelica water, four pence in Clove-water, four pence of Rosa
solis, one pint of Cinnamon Water, or three pints and half of Aqua vitae, as
you find it in taste; put all these together three or four times through the
bag or strainer, and then take half an ounce of good Muskallis, and cut them
grossly, and put them into a glass, and fill them with the water, etc.

A Sovereign Water of Dr. Stephens, which he long times used, wherewith he did
many Cures; he kept it secretly till a little before his Death, and then he
gave it to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in writing, being as follows,
viz.
Take a Gallon of good Gascoine Wine, and take Ginger. Gallingale, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Cloves, Grains, Ani-seeds, Fennil-seed, of every of them a dram, then
take Caraway-seed, of red Mints, Roses, Thime, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary,
wild Thime, Camomil, the leaves, if you cannot get the flowers, of small
Lavender, of each a handful, then bray the spices small, and bray the Herbs,
and put all into the Wine, and let it stand so twelve hours, stirring it diverse
times, then still it in a Limbeck, and keep the first water, for i^ is best,
then put the second water by it self, for it is good, but not of such virtues,
etc.

The Virtues of this Water.
It comforts the Spirits Vital, and helps all inward Diseases that come of
cold, it is good against the shaking of the Palsy; it cures the Contraction of
the Sinnews, helps the conception of women if they be barren, it kills the
Worms in the Belly and Stomach; it cures the cold Dropsy, and helps the Stone
in the Bladder, and in the Reins of the back; it helps shortly the stinking
breath, and whosoever uses this water morning and evening, (and not too often)
it preserves him in good liking, and will make him seem young very long, and
comfort nature marvellously; with this water did Dr. Stephens preserve his
life, till extreme age would not let him go or stand; and he continued five
years, when all the Physicians judged he would not live a year longer, nor did
he use any other Medicine but this, etc.

A Plague Water to be taken one spoonful every four hours with one sweat every
time.
Take Scabious, Betony, Pimpernel, and Turmentine roots, of each a pound, steep
these all night in three gallons of strong Beer, and distill them all in a
Limbeck, and when you use it, take a spoonful thereof every four hours, and
sweat well after it, draw two quarts of water, if your Beer be strong, and
mingle them both together.

Poppy Water.
Take four pound of the Flower of Poppies well picked and sifted, steep them all
night in three Gallons of Ale that is strong, and still it in a Limbeck; you
may draw two quarts, the one will be strong, and the other will be small, etc.

A Water for a Cons^mption, or for a Brain that is weak.
Take Cream (or new milk) and Claret Wine, of each three pints, of Violet
flowers, Bugloss and Borage flowers, of each a spoonful, Comfrey, Knotgrass,
and Plantain, of these half a handful, three or four Pome-waters sliced, a
stick of Liquorish, some Pompion seeds and strings; put to this a Cock that
has been chased and beaten before he was killed, dress it as to boil, and
parboil it until there be no blood in it; then put them in a pot, and set them
over your Limbeck, and the soft fire; draw out a pottle of water, then put your
water in a Pipkin over a charcoal fire, and boil it awhile, dissolve therein
six ounces of white Sugar Candy, and two penny weight of Saffron; when it is
cold strain it into a glass, and let the Patient drink three or four spoonfulls
three or four times a day blood-warm; your Cock must be cut into small pieces,
and the bones broken, and in case the flowers and herbs are hard to come by, a
spoonful of their stilled waters are to be used.

Another for the same.
Take a pottle of good Milk, one pint of Muscadine, half a pint of red
Rose Water, a penny manchet sliced thin, two handfuls of Raisins of the sun
stoned, a quarter of a pound of fine sugar, sixteen Eggs beaten* mix all these
together, then distill them in a common still with a soft fire, then let the
Patient drink three or four spoonfuls at a time bloodwarm, being sweetened with
Manus Christi made with Corral and Pearl; when your things are all in the
Still, strew four ounces of Cinnamon beaten: this water is good to put into
broth, etc.

A good Stomach Water.
Take a quart of Aqua Composita, or Aqua vitae, (the smaller) and put into it
one handful of Cowslip flowers, a good handful of Rosemary flowers, sweet
Marjoram, a little Pellitory of the Wall, a little Betony and Balm, of each a
little handful, Cinnamon half an ounce, Nutmegs a dram, Anniseeds, Coriander
seeds, Caroway seeds, Gromelseeds, Juniper berries, of each a dram, bruise the
spice and seed, and put them into Aqua Composita, or Aqua vitae, with your
Herbs together, and put into them a pound of very fine sugar, stir them well
together, and put them into a glass, and let it stand in the Sun nine days,
and stir it every day; two or three Dates, and a little race of Ginger sliced
into it will make it the better, especially against wind, etc.

A Bag of Purging Ale.
Take of Agrimony, Speedwell, Liverwort, Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, of each a
handful, of Monk, of Rhubarb and red Madder, of each half a pound of
Horse-Radishes three ounces, Liquorish two ounces, Sassafrage four ounces, Sena
seven ounces, sweet Fennil-seeds two drams, Nutmegs four: pick and wash your
herbs and roots, and bruise them in a Mortar, and put them in a bag made of a
Bolter* and so hang them in three galons of middle ale, and let it work in the
Ale, and after three days you may drink it as you see occasion, etc.

The Ale of Health and Strength, by Visc^unt St. Albans.
Take Sassafras wood half an ounce, Sarsaparilla three ounces, white Saunders
one ounce, Chamapition an ounce, China root half an ounce, Mace a quarter of an
ounce, Chamapition an ounce, cut the wood as thin as may be with a knife into
small pieces, and bruise them in a Mortar; put to them these sorts of Herbs,
(viz.) Cowslip Flowers, Roman Wormwood, of each a handful, of Sage, Rosemary,
Betony, Mugwort, Balm and sweet Marjoram, of each half a handful, of Hops; boil
all these in six gallons of Ale till it come to four, then put the wood and
herbs into six gallons of Ale of the second wort, and boil it till it come to
four, let it run from the dregs, and put your Ale together, and run it as you
do other purging Ale, etc.

A water excellent good against the Plague.
Take three pints of Malmsey, or Muscadine, of Sage and Rue, of each one
handful, boil them together gently to one pint, then strain it and set it on
the fire again, and put to it one penniworth of Long Pepper, Ginger four drams,
Nutmegs two drams, all beaten together, then let it boil a little, take it off
the fire, and while it is very hot, dissolve therein six penniwoth of
Methridate, and three penniworth of Venice Treacle, and when it is almost cold
put to it a pint of strong Angelica water, or so much Aqua vitae, and so keep
it in a glass close stopped.

A Cordial Cherry-water.
Take a pottle of Aqua vitae, two ounces of ripe Cherries stoned, Sugar one
pound, twenty four Cloves, one stick of Cinnamon, three spoonfuls of Aniseeds
bruised, let these stand in the Aqua vitae fifteen days, and when the watet
has fully drawn out the Tincture, pour it off into another glass for your use,
which keep close stopped, the Spice and the Cherries you may keep, for they are
very good for wind in the Stomach.

The Lord Spencers Cherry-water.
Take a pottle of new Sack, four pound of through ripe Cherries stoned, put
them into an earthen pot, to which put an ounce of Cinnamon, Saffron unbruised
one dram, tops of Balm, Rosemary or their flowers, of each one handful, let
them stand close covered twenty four hours, now and then stirring them; then
put them into a cold Still, to which put of beaten Amber two drams, Coriander
seed one ounce, Alkerms one dram, and distill it leasurely, and when it is
fully distilled, put to it twenty grains of Musk. This is an excellent
Cordial, good for Faintings and Swoundings, for the Crudities of the Stomach,
Wind and swelling of the Bowels, and diverse other evil Symptoms in the Body
of Men and Women,

The Herbs to be distilled for Vsquebath.
Take Agrimony, Fumitory, Betony, Bugloss, Wormwood, Hart's-tongue, Carduus
Benedictus, Rosemary, Angelica, Tormentil, of each of these for every gallon of
Ale one handful, Anniseeds and Liquorice well bruised half a pound. Still all
these together, and when it is stilled, you must infuse Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace,
Liquorish, Dates, and Raisms of the Sun, and sugar what quantity you please.
The infusion must be till the color please you.

Dr. Kings way to make Mead.
Take five quarts and a pint of Water, and warm it, then put one quart of
Honey to every gallon of Liquor, one Lemon, and a quarter of an ounce of
Nutmegs; it must boil till the scum rise black, that you will have it quickly
ready to drink, squeeze into it a Lemon when you tun it. It must be cold before
you tun it up.

To make Syrup of Rasberries.
Take nine quarts of Rasberries, clean picked, and gathered in a dry day, and
put to them four quarts of good Sack, into an earthen pot, then paste it up
very close, and set it in a Cellar for ten days, then distill it in a Glass or
Rosestill, then take more Sack and put in Rasberries to it, then when it has
taken out all the color of the Raspiss, strain it out, and put in some fine
Sugar to your taste, and set it on the fire, keeping it continually stirring
till the scum does rise; then take it off the fire, let it not boil, skim it
very clean, and when it is cold put it to your distilled Raspis; but color it
no more then to make it a pale Claret Wine. This put into bottles or Glasses
stopped very close.

To make Lemon Water.
Take twelve of the fairest Lemons, slice them, and put them into two pints of
White Wine, and put to them Cinnamon two drams, Gallingale two drams, of Rose
leaves, Borage and Bugloss flowers, of each one handful, of yellow Saunders
one dram; steep all these together twelve hours, then distill them gently in a
Glass Still until you have distilled one pint and an half of the Water, and
then add to it three ounces of Sugar, one grain of Ambergreese, and you will
have a most pleasing cleansing Cordial water for many uses.

To make Gilly-flower Wine.
Take two ounces of dried Gilly-flowers, and put them into a pottle of Sack,
and beat three ounces of Sugarcandy, or fine Sugar, and grind some
Ambergreece, and put it in the bottle and shake it often, then run it through a
gelly bag, and give it for a great Cordial after a weeks standing or more. You
make Lavander Wine as you do this.

The Lady Spotswood Stomach water.
Take white Wine one pottle, Rosemary and Cowslip flowers, of each one handful*
as much Betony leaves, Cinnamon and Cloves grossly beaten, of both one ounce;
steep all these three days, stirring it often; then put to it Mithridate four
ounces, and stir it together, and distill it in an ordinary Still.

Water of Time for the passion of the heart.
Take a quart of white Wine, and a pint of Sack, steep in it as much broad
Thime as it will wet, put to it of Galingale and Calamus Aromaticus, of each
one ounce, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, and grains of Paradise two drams, steep these
all night, the next morning distill it in an ordinary Still, drink it warm with
sugar.

A Receipt to make damnable Hum.
Take species de Gemmis, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Laetificans
Galeni, of each four drams, Loaf Sugar beaten to powder half a pound, small
Aqua vitae three pints, strong Angelica water one pint; mix all these together,
and when you have drunk it to the Dregs, you may fill it up again with the same
quantity of waters. The same powders will serve twice, and after twice using
it, it must be made new again.

An admirable Water for sore Eyes.
Take Lapis Tutiae, Aloes Hepatica, fine hard Sugar, of each three drams, beat
them very small, and put them into a Glass of three pints, to which put red
Rose Water and white Wine, of each one pint; set the Glass in the Sun, in the
Month of July, for the whole Month, shaking it twice in a day for all that
while; then use it as follows, put one drop thereof into the Eye in the
evening, when the party is in bed, and one drop in the morning an hour before
the Patient rises: Continue the use of it till the Eyes be well. The older the
Water, the better it is. Most approved.

A Snail Water for weak Children, and old People.
Take a pottle of Snails, and wash them well in two or three waters, and then
in small Beer, bruise them she^ and all, then put them into a gallon (...) red
Cowes Milk, red Rose leaves dried, the whites cut off, Rosemary, sweet
Marjoram, of each one handful, and so distill them in a cold still, and let it
drop upon powder of white Sugarcandy in the receiver; drink of it first and
last, and at four a clock in the afternoon, a Wine glass full at a time.

Clary water for the Back, Stomach, etc.
Take three gallons of midling Beer, put it in a great brass Pot of four
gallons, and put to it ten handfuls of Clarey gathered in a dry day, Raisins of
the Sun stoned three pounds, Anniseeds, and Liquorish, of each four ounces, the
whites and shells of twenty four eggs, or half so many, if there be not so much
need in the back, the shells small, and mix them with the whites, (...) the
bottoms of three white l^^ves, put into the receiver one pound of white
Sugarcandy, or so much fine loaf Sugar beaten small, and distill it through a
Limbeck, keep it close, and be seldom without it* for it re^^eth very much the
stomach and heart, ^trengtheneth the back, procures Appetite and Digestion,
drives away Melancholy, sadness and heaviness of the heart, etc.

Dr. Montfords Cordial Water.
Take Angelica leaves twelve handfuls, six leaves of Carduus Benedictus, Balm
and Sage, of each five handfuls, the seeds of Angelica and sweet Fennil, of
each five ounces bruised, scraped and bruised Liquorish twelve ounces,
Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamoscus dulcis, of each six drams; the Herbs being cut
small, the seeds and Liquorish bruised, infuse them into two gallons of Canary
Sack for twenty four hours, then distill it with a gentle fire, and draw off
only five pints of the spirits; which mix with one pound of the best Sugar
dissolved into a Syrup in half a pint of pure red Rose Water.

Aqua mirabilis, Sir Kenelm Digby's way.
Take Cubebs, Gallingale, (...), Mellilot flowers, Cloves, (...) Ginger,
Cinnamon, of each one (...) bruised small, juice of Celandine (...) pint, juice
of Spearmint half a (...) juice of Balm half a pint, Sugar one pound, flower of
Cowslips, Rosemary, Borage, Bugloss, Marigolds, of each two drams, the best
Sack three pints, strong Angelica water one pint, red Rose Water half a pint,
bruise the spices and flowers, and steep them in the Sack and juyces one night,
the next morning distill it in an ordinary or glass still, and first lay
Hart's-tongue leaves in the bottom of the Still.

The Virtues of the precedent water.
This Water* preserves the Lungs without grievances, and helps them; being
wounded, it suffers not the blood to putrify, but multiplieth the same; this
water suffers not the heart to burn, nor melancholy, nor the (...) to be
lifted up above nature; it expels the Rhume, preserves the Stomach,
conserveth Youth, and procures a good color* it preserves Memory, it
destr^yeth the Palsy; if this be given to one a (...) a spoonful of it
reviveth him; in (...) use one spoonful a week fasting, in the winter two
spoonfuls.

A Water for fainting of the Heart.
Take Bugloss and red Rose Water, of each one pint, Milk half a pint, Anniseeds
and Cinnamon grossly bruised, of each half an ounce, Maidenhair two handfuls,
Hearts tongue one handful, both shred, mix all together, and distill it in an
ordinary still, drink of it morning and evening with a little sugar.

A Surfeit Water.
Take half a bushel of red Corn Poppy, put it into a large dish, cover it with
brown paper, and lay another d^sh upon it, set it in an Oven after brown bread
is baked diverse times till it be dry, which put into a pottle of good Aqua
vitae, to which put Raisins of the sun stoned half a pound, six figs sliced,
three Nutmegs sliced, two flakes of Mace bruised, two races of Ginger sl^ced,
one stick of Cinnamon bruised, Liquorish sliced one ounce, Anniseed,
Fennill-seed, and Cardamums bruised, of each one dram; put all these into
abroad glass body, and lay first some Poppy in the bottom, then some of the
other Ingredients, then Poppy again, and so till the glass be full; then put
in the Aqua vitae, and let it infuse till it be strong of the spices, and very
red with the Poppy, close covered, of the which take two or three spoonfulls
upon a Surfeit, and when all the liquor is spent, put more Aqua vitae to it,
and it will have the same effect the second time, but no more after.

D. Butlers Cordial Water against Melancholy, etc. Most approved.
Take the flowers of Cowslips, Marigolds, Pinks, Glove-gilly-flowers, single
stock Gilly-flowers, of each four handfulls, the flowers of Rosemary, and
Damask Roses, of each three handfulls, Borage and Bugloss flowers, and Balm
leaves, of each two (...); put them in a quart of Canary Wine into a great
Bottle or jugg close stopped, with a Cork, sometimes stirring the flowers and
wine together, adding to (...) Anniseeds bruised one dram, two ^utmegs sliced,
English Saffron two penniworth; after some time infusion, distill them in a
cold Still with a hot fire, hanging at the Nose of the Still Ambergreese and
Musk, of each one grain: then to the distilled water pat White Sugar candy
finely beaten six ounces, and put the glass wherein they are into hot water for
one hour. Take of this water at one time three spoonfuls thrice a week, or when
you are ill, it cures all melancholy fumes, and infinitely comforts the
spirits.

The admirable and most famous Snail Water.
Take a peck of garden shell Snails, wash them well in small Beer, and put them
in an hot Oven till they have done making a noise, then take them out, and wipe
them well from the green froth that is upon them, and bruise them shells and
all in a stone Mortar, then take a quart of earth worms, scowre them with salt,
slit them and wash them well with water from their filth, and in a stone Mortar
beat them to pieces, then lay in the bottom of your distilled pot Angelica two
handfuls, and two handfulls of Celandine upon them, to which put two quarts of
Rosemary flowers, Bears foot, Agrimony, red Dock Roots, Bark of Barberries,
Betony, wood sorrel, of each two handfuls, Rue one handful; then lay the Snails
and Worms on the top of the Herbs and Flowers, then pour on three Gallons of
the strongest Ale, and let it stand all night, in the morning put in three
ounces of Cloves beaten, six penniworth of beaten Saffron, and on the top of
them six ounces of shaved Hartshorn, then set on the Limbeck, and close it
with paste, and so receive the water by pints, which will be nine in all, the
first is the strongest, whereof take in the morning two spoonfuls in four
spoonfuls of small Beer, and the like in the afternoon; you must keep a good
Diet and use moderate ^^ercise to warm the blood.

This Water is good (...) Obstructions whatsoever. It (...) a Consumation and
Dropsy, the stopping of the Stomach and Liver. It may be (...) with Milk for
weak people and (...), with Hart's-tongue and Elecam^ane.

A singular Mint Water.
Take a still full of Mints, put Balm and Penniroyal, of each one good handful;
steep them in Sack, or Lees of Sack twenty four hours, stop it close, and stir
it now and then: Distill it in an ordinary still with a very quick fire, and
keep the still with wet clothes, put into the Receiver as much sugar as will
sweeten it, and so double distill it.

Distillings.
A most excellent Aqua Coelestis taught by Mr. Philips Apothecary.
TAke of Cinnamon one dram, Ginger half a dram, the three sorts of Saunders, of
each of them three quarters of an ounce. Mace and Cubebs of each of them one
dram, Cardamon the bigger and lesser, of each three drams, Setwell-roots half
an ounce, Anniseed, Fennil-seed, Basil-seed, of each two drams, Angelica roots,
Gillyflowers, Thime, Calamint, Liquorish, Calamus, Masterwort, Penniroyal,
Mint, Mother of Thime, Marjoram, of each two drams, red Rose-seed, the flowers
of Sage and Betony, of each a dram and a half, Cloves, Galingal, Nutmegs, of
each two drams, the flowers of Stechados, Rosemary, Borage, and Bugloss
flowers, of each a dram and half, Citron Rindes three drams; bruise them all,
and put in their Cordial Powders, Diamber Arom^^^cam, Diamuscum, Diachoden, the
spices made with Pearl, of each three drams; infuse all these in twelve pints
of Aqua vitae, in a glass close stopped for fifteen days* often shaking it,
then let it be put in a ^^^^beck close stopped, and let it (...) disti^^ed
gently; when you have (...) in a cloth, two drams of (...) ^alf a dram of
Ambergreese, and (...) twelve grains of gold, and so (...) it to your use.

Hypocras taught by Dr. Twine for Wind in the Stomach.
Take Pepper, Grains, Ginger, of each half an ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mace, of each one ounce grossly beaten, Rosemary, Agrimony, both shred, of each
a few crops, red rose leaves a pretty quantity, as an indifferent gripe, a
pound of Sugar beaten; lay these to steep in a gallon of good Rhennish or White
Wine in a close vessel, stirring it two or three times a day the space of three
or four days together, then strain it through an Hypocras strainer, and drink
a draught of it before meat half an hour, and sometimes after to help digestion.

Marigold flowers distilled, good for the pain of the Head.
Take Marigold flowers, and distill them, then take a fine cloth and wet (...)
the aforesaid distilled water, and so lay it to the forehead of the Patient,
and being so applied, let him sleep if he can: this with Gods help will cease
the pain.

A water good for Sun-burning.
Take water drawn off the Vine dropping, the flowers of white Thorn,
Bean-flowers, Water Lilly-flowers, Garden Lilly-flowers, Elder-flowers, and
Tansie flowers, Althea flowers, the whites of Eggs, French Barley.

The Lady Giffords Cordial Water.
Take four quarts of A^^a Vitae, Borrage and Poppy-water* (...) each a pint,
two pound of Sugar-(...), one pound of figs sliced, one pound of Raisins of the
Sun stoned, (...) handfuls of red Roses clipped and dried, one handful of red
Mint, half a handful of Rosemary, as much of Hysop, a few Cloves; put all these
in a great double Glass close stopped, and set it in the Sun three months, and
so (...).

A Water for one pensive and very sick, to comfort the Heart very excellent.
Take a good spoonful of Manus Christi beaten very small into powder, then take
a quarter of a pound of very fine sugar, and beat it small, and six spoonfuls
of Cinnamon water, and put to it, and ten spoonfuls of red Rose Water, mingle
all these together, and put them in a dish, and set them over a soft fire five
or six walms, and so let it be put into a glass, and let the party drink
thereof a spoonful or two, as he shall see cause.

To perfume Water.
Take Malmsey or any kind of sweet water, then take Lavander, Spike, sweet
Marjoram, Balm, Orange peels, Thime, Basil, Cloves, Bay leaves, Woodbine
flowers, red and white Roses, and still them all together.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
AChes to take away 38, 41, 72, 108, 110, 153, 156, 157, 184 Abortion to
prevent 121 Afterbirth to bring away 159, 160 Ague of all sorts to cure 16,
32, 52 57, 127, 161 Ague in women's breast 110, 167 Ale to purge most excellent
2, 280, 281 Ambergreese tincture to make, and (...) Amber pills for a
Consumption 3. Appetite to help ^^* ^84 Appoplex to cure 236 Aqua mirabilis to
(...) 290 Almond milk to (...) 82, 83, 108
B.
BIting of (...) S^^ke 154 (...) cool 94, 95 (...) str^ngthen 66, 135, 184,
191, ^89 (...) most excellent, with its use 95 123, 125 ^elly-ake to cure 184
Belly hard to dissolve 155 Biles and Botches to cure 81 89, 112, 152 188 Blood
to cleanse 10, 148, 161 Biting of a mad Dog 41, 152, 154 Bloody flux to help,
42, 106, 108, 130, 184 Bleeding at Nose to stanch 163 Bladder to cleanse 169,
237 Bones out of joint to set 104, 153, 189 Breaths shortness to remedy 5
Breath stinking to cure 53, 111, 196, 276 Brain to strengthen 17, 86, 178, 196,
236 Burning to help 60, 77, 78, 95, 104, 125, 149, 162, 189 Breasts sore to
cure 85, 90, 91, 109, 110, 117, 147 Bruises to cure 36, 38 90, 104, 122, 125
144, 156, 184, 188 Bursten to remedy 145 Balsam Luccatelloes to make, and its
Virtues 179 Bag restorative for the stomach 57
C.
CAnker to cure 36, 41, 152 Cock water 14 Cancer to prevent and cure 36, 110,
125 China broth in a Consumption 34 Choler to purge 49, 102, 176, 177, 233
Child to bring again when born 159, 160 Consumption to cure 3, 9, 10, 14 22,
34, 42, 123, 186, 299, 278, 279, 295 Cold to help 27 88, 164 206 Cough to take
away 55, 56* 59, 62, 63, 100, 164 Conception to help 88, 168, 184, 235, 276
Costiveness to remove 159 Chollick to cure 44, 63, 96, 99, 105, 125, 166, 170
Corns to take away 104, 146 Cramp to cure 141 Cordials most excellent 7, 14,
274, 275, 285, 290 Cordial water 2 Conserves of all sorts to make, and their
Virtues 234, 235, 236 Mrs. Chance her Purge 165 Cordial waters for the sick
D.
DRink for the Scurvy Diet Drink for a Eisi^la 70 Diet Drink for one that has
no speech in sickness 71 Deakness to help 45, 105, 162 Dead flesh to prevent
152 Dig^stion to procure, 6, 15, 50, 125, 196, 244 Dr^psie to cure, 11, 16, 42,
52, 64, 276, 295 ^^seases cured without taking any thing at the mouth 49 Drink
for Rhume and Phlegm 57 Drink for a hot Fever 98, 128 Drink to keep the mouth
moist 132
E.
ELectuary for the stomach 5 Electury for the poison of the heart, 98 Eyes sore
to cure 28, 147, 148, 189, 288 Eyes full of Rhume 18, 32, 110, 181 Eyes weak to
strengthen 130, 184 Eyes having a Pin or Web 171, 172 Eyes redness to take away
171, 173, 181
F.
FAce sweld to assuage 13 Faces redness and pimples to cure 41 53, 54, 55, 173,
180 Face bruised 144 Face fair to make 115, 180 Faintness to take away 86, 133,
283, 291 Falling Sickness to cure 49, 88, 142, 237 Fevers all sorts to remove
2, 12, 25, 61 98, 128, 132 Festers in the flesh to cure 41 Fellons to cure 41,
48, 102, 184 Fire to take out 189 Fistula to cure 70, 79, 117, 152, Finger sore
to heal 81 Flux or Looseness to stay 130 Freckles to take away 146 Fish to take
by angling 108
G.
G^scony Powder to make 187 Gout to cure 42, 50, 77 88, 140, 56 Golden color
without Gold to make 114 Green sickness to cure 69, 85 Gravel to cleanse 185
Glisters for a hot Fever 132 Glisters for the Wind, 30, 160.
H.
HAir to grow thick 100, 270 Hair to take away 55 Hardness to dissolve 189
Heart to cheer 52, 87, 235 Head lightness in Sickness 72 Headache to cure 41,
96, 120, 125, 235 Heads breaking out in Children 148 Hearts passion to take
away. 98, 287 Heart-burn to cure 291 Hearing 4^ Herbs boild in Broth 65, 1^^
Humors watery to purge ^^, 184 Humors hot to cool ^^
I.
JAundies black and yellow to cure 16, 73, 74, 105 (...) to cure 42, 89, 112,
152, 184 (...) to prevent 189 (...) to heat 188 (...) to keep from rust 113
Itch to cure 32, 77 Juice of Liquorsh to make 307 Julip for a Fever 61
K.
KIdneys ulceration to cure 50 Kidneys swollen to take away 56 Kidneys to cool
and cleanse 83 Kings Evil to cure 117
L.
LAbor in women to help 86, 119, 130 Letters of Secrets how to write 270
Letters of gold to make without gold 114 Letters of silver to make without
silver, ib. Liver to strengthen and cool 17, 68, 92, 93, 184, 268, 295
Looseness to help 80, 143 Lungs to cleanse 44, 47, 59, 62, 291 Lumly's drink
for a Consumption 123
M.
MAngie in a Dog to cure 120 Mead to make 284 Measles to cure 29, 107, 236
Melancholy to suppress 4, 23, 52, 164, 165, 177, 291, 293 Memory to preserve
291 Megrum to cure 119 Milk in women to increase 35, 113 Milk to dry up 174
Miscarriage in women to prevent 46, 121 Mothers rising to prevent 20, 63 Mouth
to keep moist 132 Morphew to take away 146
N.
NAvels coming out to help 109 Nipple to skin when raw 174, 175 Nipple to make
when none 175 Noses shining to cure 53 Noses redness to cure 54 Noli me tangere
52
O.
OBstructions 10, 68, 236, 268, 295 Ointment for a hard belly 155 Oil of
Excester to make 75, 156 Oil of Mustard Seed, and its use 77 Oil of Eggs 75 Oil
for a shining Nose 54 Oil of Fennel, and its use 77 Oil of Rue to make, and its
use ^^ Oil of Cammomil to make, and its use ib. Oil of St. John's Wort to make
131, 190 Oil of Swallows to make 182 Ointment grow to ^ake 36, 97. 117, 158
Ointments and (...) uses 189 (...) to make 67
P.
(...) to cure 6, 16, 42, 52; 77, 88, 276, 291 Paracelsus Plaster to make, and
Virtues 150, 152 Plaster called Leaden Plaster to make, and use 183, 184, 188
Plaster for the Stomach 129 Pains to assuage 153, 189 Phlegm to void 44, 49*
52, 57, 68, 102, 142 Plague to prevent and cure 2, 9, 12, 17, 24, 25, 30, 31,
33, 39, 40, 67, 78, 106, 107, 125, 142, 277, 281 Piles to cure 36, 42, 43, 101,
184 Powder of the Lady Kents 187, 274 Powder most excellent to make 19, 74
Small pox, excellent remedies 2, 12, 29, 107 And to prevent pitting 135, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140 And to prevent Infection 140 Pricking with a needle or thorn
103 Purge for a Quartain Ague 161 Purging Ale 2 Purge for Children or old men
52 Pimples in the face 54 Pomatum to make 312 Purging Drink most excellent 68
Purge of Dr. Mayherne 180 Purples to cure 82 Pushes to break and heal 184 Pain
in the stomach 121 Pills for a Consumption 3
R.
REins to purge 68, 88, 237, 276 Rest to procure 233 Rhume to stay 32, 47, 57,
58, 100, 291 Rickets to cure 126, 127 Rupture to cure 129 Running of the Reins
to cure 184 Restorative broth 42
S.
SAffron water to make 18 Scabs to dry up 42 Sciatica to cure 101, 156 Salve
the chiefest, and its virtues 41 Scurvy to cure 149, 185 Scalding to cure 60,
77, 78, 95, 104, 125 149, 162 Shingles to cure 153 Sinews to strengthen 86, 88,
95, 152, 189 276 Stinging of an Adder or Wasp. 154 Stepkins Water for the Eyes
18 Syrup of Ale for the Whit^ 95 Syrup for swounding and the Brain 86 Syrup of
Cordinal 10 Syrup for a Cold 27 Syrup of T^^^ips to make, and use 9, 19 Syrup
of Citron peels to make 9; 28 S^^up of Pearmains to make 23 Syrup of Lemons to
make 28 ^yrup of Hysop to make 206 Syrup of Gilly-flowers 205 Skin to bring 189
Silver Letters without silver to make 114 Serpents bitings to cure 131 Sleep to
procure 60, 101 Snail water to make, and its virtues 294 Spitting of Blood of
remedy 234 Sprains to cure 131 Speech in Sickness to move 71, 72 Splinters and
thorns to draw forth 41 Spirits to revive 18, 88, 276, 293 Spleen distempers to
rectify 16, 41, 66, 68, 123, 164, 165, 236, 268, 291 Sounding fits to cure 20,
86, 133, 283 Sounding fits after Childe-birth 118 Sores of all sorts to cure
111, 117, 152, 188 Stopping of the Stomach 5. 49, 63, 168, 161, 235, 236, 268
Stomach cold to warm 15, 17, 35 Stomach hot to cool 234 Stomach week to
strengthen 20, 57, 121, 128, 179, 283, 286, 295 Stone in the Kidneys to cure 7,
8, 99 Spirit of Castoreum 20 Stone in the Bladder 8, 21, 33, 45, 48* 50, 52,
59* 84, 88, 94, 163, 166* 168, 170, 185, 191, 376* Stone in the Kidneyes 57
Strangury to help 168, 191 Strains to remedy 122 Stitches to cure 65, 96, 112,
125 Sweating to prevent 16 Sweating to provoke 67 Swallow to help 51 Swelling
to swage 36, 42, 104, 108, 157, 184, 188, 189 Surfeits to cure 107, 125, 292
T.
TAste to restore 61 Terril's Salve 40 Tetter to cure 22, 174 Terms to provoke
184 Teeth to make come without pain 47 Teeth to preserve 192 Toothache to cure
88, 192 Thorns to draw out 41 Throws after birth to ease 118 Thrush in the
mouth to remedy 3^ Throat sore to cure 44, 233 Tumors to allay 42 Tissick to
help 77 Timpany to remedy 65 Tincture of Amber greese 24
V.
VEnom to drive from the heart 2 Ulcers to fill with flesh 189 Vomiting to stay
133 V^ine sharp to cure 162 Urine to provoke 68 99 Uvula to draw up 52 Vomit
for an Ague 57
W.
WAter for an Ague 161 Water to hold 91 Water very precious 18, 27 Dr. Stephens
his Water 18, 21 Whites and heat in the back 94, 95 Water Cordial 8 Wormwood
Cakes 15 Water of Life 16 Warts to take away 145 Wen to cure 144 Wind to expel
30, 35, 77, 86, 122. 125, 160, 196, 282, 283 Worms to kill and avoid 16, 49,
76, 88, 89, 116, 123, 176, 276 Wounds to heal 38, 41, 90, 95, 103, 112, 115,
122, 125, 131, 152, 163, 179, 181, 188, 189, 36, 42 Wrench to cure 18 Women
with Child to preserve them from Abortion 121 Woman in labor a medicine for
safe deliverance 86
Y.
YOuth to preserve 88 279, 291
FINIS.
The Table to a QUEENS DELIGHT.
A.
A Pricocks to preserve when they are green Page 204 Apricocks to preserve when
they are ripe 203 Apricocks to dry 210, 232 Apricock Cakes 213 Apricocks to
make of them Jumbals 222 Artichokes to preserve 201 Almond Biscuit to make 208
Ale purging a bag 280 Ale strengthening and healthful by Sir J. Bacon. 281 Aqua
Mirabilis Sir Kenelm Digbie's way 290 Aqua Mirabilis the virtues 291
Ambergreese the Tincture 216
B.
BArberries the best way to preserve them 220
C.
CHerries to preserve them bigger then they grow naturally 228 Cherries the
ordinary way of preserving them 245 Cherries to preserve them with a quarter of
their weight in Sugar 217 Cakes to make 255 Cakes to make after the manner of
the Princess, the Lady Elizabeth Daughter to King Charles the first 257 Cakes
of Plums 258 Cakes of Rasberries 252 Cakes of Sugar to make 250 Collops to
make, like Bacon, of Mars^^pane 263 Clove-gilly-flowers to make a Syrup of them
203 Conserve for a Cough, or a Consumption 199 Conserve f^r any Fruits 200
Conserve of Roses boild 209 Conserve of Roses unboild 210 Conserve of Red Roses
after the Italian manner, with the virtues 233 Conserve of Violets after the
Italian manner, with the virtues. 233 Conserve of Borage after the Italian
manner, with the virtues 234 Conserve of Rosemary after the Italian manner,
with the virtues 234 Conserve of Betony after the Italian manner, with the
virtues 235 Conserve of sage 235 Conserve of the Flowers of Lavander 236
Conserve of Marjoram, with the Virtues 236 Conserve of Piony after the Italian
manner, with the virtues 237 Candy Cherries 241 Candy Cherries the Italian way
244 Candy Oranges 241 Candy Orange Ro^ts 242 Candy Orange Peels after the
Italian manner, with the virtues 243 Candy Lemons 241 Candy Citrons 241 Candy
Citrons after the Spanish way 243 Candy Rosemary flowers in the sun 237 Candy
Pippins 239 Candy Pears 239 Candy Apric^cks 239 Candy Plums 239 Candy Rockandy
flowers 239 Candy Spanish flowers 240 Candy Grapes 241 Candy Barberries 241
Candy Suckets 241 Candy Angelica 241 Candy Chycory r^ots after the Italian
manner, with the virtues 244
D.
DAmsins to preserve them 299 Dentifrice by Mr. Ferene of the New Exchange,
Perfumer to the Queen, highly approved of at the Court 273 Distilled Marigold
flowers 298
ELecampane to preserve 201
F.
FRuits to preserve green 198 Fruits to dry after they are preserved to candy
them 200 Fruits artificial 263 Fox skins to dry 268 French Tart to make 254
G.
GRapes to preserve 196, 202
H.
HYpocras made by Dr. Twine for the Wind in the Stomach 298 Hair to make it
grow 270 Hair to make it black, though of any other color. 271
I.
ITalian Biscuit to make 260 Jelly of Pippins to make 218 Jelly of Raspis to
make 268 Ipswich balls to make 265 Juice of Liquorish to make 207
K.
COuntess of Kent's Powder, the true Receipt of it as she presented it to the
Queen for her private use 274
L.
LEmons to preserve 199 Letters so to write them, that they cannot be read
without the directions 270 L^zenges to make of red Roses 220, 202
M.
MArchpane to Ice and Gild, and garnish it according to Art 261 Magistery of
Pearl to make it 269 Mead of Dr. Kings making 234 Marigold flowers distilled
298 Marmalet of Damsins 245 Marmalet of Oranges 247, 249 Marmalet of Orange
Cakes 249 Marmalet of tender Plums 246 Marmalet of Quinces ibid.
N.
NAples Biscuit to make 260
O.
ORanges to preserve the French way 224 Orange and Lemons to preserve 199
Orange Cakes. 262
P.
PEar-plums green to preserve them 204 Pear-plums to preserve them when they
are ripe 203 Plums black or red to preserve 229 Plums green to preserve 225
Plums to ary them 228, 231 Pears to dry without Sugar, and otherwise 205 229,
230 Pippins to preserve them 198 Pippins to preserve them when they are green
204 Pippins to preserve them when they are ripe 203 Pippins to dry them 229,
230 Pippins to dry them without sugar 205 Pippins to make a Gelly of them 218
Peaches to preserve when they are green 204 Peaches to preserve when they are
ripe 203 Pomatum to make 212 Prince Biscuit to make 261 Powder sweet the best
way to break it 211 Powder of the Countess of Kent, the truest Receipt of it,
as she presented it to the Queen for her private use 274 Perfume of King Edward
the sixth 272 Perfume of Queen Elizabeth 272 Perfume to make 212 Perfume for
cloth and gloves 208 Perfume to burn it betwixt two Roseleaves 264 Perfume
water to make it 300 Pomanders to make 265 Paste of Oranges and Lemons 251
Paste of Genoa Citrons 253 Paste of Apricocks 256 Paste of Pippins like leaves,
and some like Plums, with their Stones and Stalks in them. 257 Paste of
Elecampane roots 258 Paste of flowers of the color of Marmalet, tasting of
natural flowers 258 Paste of Rasberries and English Currants 259
Q.
QVinces to preserve them white 197 Quinces to preserve them white or red. 203
Quinces to order them for Pies 211 Quinces to make Chips of them 221 Quinces to
make Jumbals of them 222 Quiddony of Pippins, of Ruby, or any other
Amber^solour 24^ Quiddony of all kinds of Plums 248
R.
REspas to preserve 197 Receipt for to make damnable Hum 287
S.
SWeet Smell 267 Spots of grease or oil to take them out 271 Sugar Cakes to
make 250 Sugar of Wine to make 221 Sugar of Wormwood to make 221 Sugar of
Anniseeds to make 221 Sugar of Roses to make 298 Syrup of Clove-gilly-flowers
205 Syrup of Hysop water 206 Syrup of Lemons 221 Syrup of Citrons 221 Syrup of
Elders by the Lady Thornburgh 267 Syrup of Rasberries 284
U.
USquebath the best way to make it 217 Vsquebath, Herbs to be distilled for it
283
W.
WIne of Raisins to make 214 Wine of Rasberries to make 215 Wine of
Gilly-flowers to make 286 Wine of Hypocras 167 Wine to keep it from sowering
171 Walnuts to preserve them 201 Walnuts artificial to make them 263 Water by
the Lady Spotswood 286 Water Cordial by the Lady Mallet 275 Water of Cherries
by the Lady Spencer 283 Water by the Lady Gifford 299 Aqua mirabilis by Sir
Kenelm Digby 290 Aqua Celestis by Mr. Philips Apothecary 296 Water Cordial
against Melancholy by D. Butler 293 Water Cordial by Dr. Mumford 290 Water
Cordial by Sir Walter Raleigh 274 Water of a most Sovereign use made by D.
Stephens, which a little before his death he presented to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the virtues of it 275, 276 Water for the Eyes 288 Water for weak
children 288 Water for a weak back and stomach 289 Water for the Plague 277,
281 Water for pensive and very sick persons 300 Water for a Consumption or weak
Brain 278, 279 Water for the stomach 279 Water for sun-burning 299 Water for a
Surfeit 292 Water for the swimming of the heart 291 Water of Time for the
passion of the heart 287 Water of Cherries 282 Water Cordial of Cherries 282
Water of Lemons 285 Water of Oranges 206 Water perfumed 300 Water of Poppy 277
Water of Mint 296 Water of Marigold flowers 298 Water of Snails 294
FINIS.

