GEOMETRICAL TRIGONOMETRY. OR The explanation of such GEOMETRICAL PROBLEMS As
are most useful and necessary, either for the construction of the CANONS of
TRIANGLES. Or for the solution of them. Together with The Proportions
themselves suitable unto every Case both in plain and Spherical Triangles,
those in Spherical being deduced from the Lord Nepeirs Catholic or Universal
proposition. By J. NEWTON M. A.

LONDON, Printed for George Hurlock, at Magnus Church-corner, and Thomas
Pierrepont, at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

TO THE READER
MAthematical Sciences in their full latitude do comprehend all Arts and
Sciences whatsoever, but in a more strict sense, those only are esteemed such,
which do belong to the Doctrine of Quantity, and amongst these this of
Triangles is not of least concernment, of which though many have written and
that excellently, yet still there may be something added, at least by way of
explanation, if not some matter absolutely new. What we have here puplished is
intended for beginners only, in which we have endeavored after brevity and
perspicuity both, in the construction of the Canon of natural sines, Tangents
and Secants first, and then the Axioms, and Problems for the solution of all
Triangles, both plain and Spherical, either by those natural numbers, or by the
Logarith. of them, and in the solution of plain Triangles by logarithmetical
numbers, sometimes the logarithmes of a Decimal fraction is required, for the
finding whereof having given no direction in our Preface to those Tables, we
have (though somewhat out of place) inserted it her.

A fraction whether Vulgar or Decimal being given to find the logarithme
thereof.

That the way and method here propounded may be the better conceived, the
proper charecteristique to the logar of any integer or whole number must be
considered, and the characteristique of the log arithmes of all numbers, under
10, is 0, of all numbers hetween 10 and 100 is 1, between 100 and 1000 is 2,
and so forward, nor will there, as I couceive, be any inconvenience, if 10 be
the characteristique of the logarithme of any digit, and 11 the
characteristique of all numbers between 10 and 100, and 12 the characteristique
of all numbers between 100 and 1000, and so forward; and yet if this shall be
supposed, the characteristique of a number that is but one place beneath unity
shall be 9, if it be two places beneath unity it shall be, 8 etc.

Thus the Log. of 5 will be 10.698970

The Log. of 5 tenths will be 9.698970

The Log. of 05 hundreds will be 8.698970

And upon this ground to find the Log. of a vulgar fraction, you must subtract
the logarithme of the denominator from the logarithme of the numerator, and
what remains shall be the logarithme of the vulgar fraction given.

Example, let 6/12 be the vulgar fraction given, Logar. 6 the Nume^ator is
0.778151 Logar. 12 the Denominator is 1.079181 There difference 9.698970
is the log. of 6/12 the fraction propounded.

And thus the logarithme of any fraction, or the decimal fraction answering to
any logarithme, may be as easily found, as by any directions hitherto given,
and in their use are much more ready, as will be manifest by the Example
following.

If 6 tenths of an ounce of Gold cost.95 hundreds of a pound sterling, what
shall.07 hundreds of an ounce of the same gold cost. Answer is 1108. Logar. 6
tenths is 9.778151 Logar. 95 hundreds is 9.977724 Logar. 07 hundreds is
8.845098 1.8822822 Adswer 1108 9^044671


To resolve this question, you must add the Logarithmes of the second and
third terms together, and from their sum subtract the first, what remains
will be the logar. of the fourth proportional required, the characteristique of
which fourth proportional does by inspection show, whether it be the logarithme
of a fraction or not, there is but one difficulty in this way of working which
is to substract a greater number from a less, in which if you will but borrow
from a supposed figure as we do from a real, and set down the difference that
difficulty is also av^ided, as in the first Example. Though I can subtract 1
out of 1 yet I cannot subtract 8 out of 5, but borrowing one from the next
figure, I can subtract 8 out of 15 and there will remain 7, and so proceeding
till you come the characteristique the remainer will be found in the ordinary
way, but the characteristigue of the upper number being a cipher, and that of
the lower an unite I cannot subtract 1 from 0, but supposing an unite to be
beyond the cipher I can subtract 1 from 10 and there will remainer 9, the like
is to be done in other cases, which I must leave to the consideration of the
Ingenious Reader, here being no room for to explaim my self.

JOHN NEWTON.

An explication of the Symbols.
= Equal to + More - Less x Drawn into Proportionality Z The Sum X The
Difference s Sine cs Cosine t Tangent ct Co-angent R. ang. Right angle 2 R.
ang. Two right angles q. Square.
CHAP. I.
Definitions Geometrical.
OF things Mathematical there are two principal kinds Number, and Magnitude,
and each of these has his proper science.

2 The science of Number is Arithmetic, and the science of Magnitude is
commonly called Geometry; but may more properly be termed Magethelogia as
comprehending all Magnitudes whatsoever, whereas Geometry, by the very
Etymology of the word does seem to confine, this science to Land measuring
only.

3 Of this Magethelogia, Geometry or science of Magnitudes, we will set down
such grounds and principles, as are necessary to be known, for the better
understanding of that which follows, presuming that the Reader hereof has
already gotten some competent knowledge in Arithmetic.

4 Concerning then this science of Magnitudes, two things are to be considered.
1 The several heads to which all Magnitudes may be referred. 2 The terms and
limits of those Magnitudes.

5 All magnitudes are either lines planes, or solids, and do participate of
one or more of these dimensions, length, breadth, and thickness.

6 A line is a supposed length, or a thing extending it self in length, without
breadth, or thickness: whether it be, a right line or a crooked, and may be
divided into parts in respect oft^ length, but admits no other division as
the line AB.



7 The ends or limits of a line are points as having his beginning from a
point, and ending in a point; and therefore a point has neither part nor
quantity. As the points at A and B are the ends of the afore-saidline AB, and
no parts thereof.

8 A plain or superficies is the second kind of magnitude, to which belongs
two dimensions length, and breadth, but not thickness.

As the end, limits, or bounds of a line are points confining the line: So
lines are the limits bounds and ends enclosing a superficies, as in the figure
A BCD, the plain or superficies thereof is enclosed with the four lines AB, BD,
DC, CA, which are the extremes or limits thereof.



9 A body or solid is the third kind of magnitude, and has three dimensions,
length, breadth, and thickness. And as a point is the limit or term of a line,
and a line the limit or term of a superficies, So likewise a superficies is the
end and limit of a body or solid, and represents to the eye the shape or
figure thereof.

10 A Figure is that which is contained under one or many limits, under one
bound or limit, is comprehended a Circle, and all other figures under many.

11 A Circle is a figure contained under one round line, which is the
circumference thereof: Thus the round line CBDE is called the circumference of
that Circle.

12 The center of a Circle is the point which is in the midst thereof, from
which point all right lines drawn to the circumference are equal to one
another: As in the following figure, the lines AB, AC, and AD, are equal.

13 The Diameter of a Circle, is a right line drawn through the center thereof,
and ending at the circumference on the other side, dividing the circle into two
equal parts.

As the lines CAD and BAE, are either of them the Diameter of the Circle CBDE,
because that either of them does pass through the Center A, and divides the
Circle into two equal parts.

14 The Semidiameter of a circle is half the Diameter, and is contained
between the center, and one side of the Circle. As the lines AB, AC, AD, and
AE, are either of them the Semidiameter of the Circle CBDE.



15 A Semicircle is the one half of a circle drawn upon his Diameter, and is
contained by the half circumference and the Diameter. As the Semicircle CBD is
half the Circle CBDE and drawn upon the Diameter CAD.

16 A quadrant is the fourth part of a Circle, and is contained between the
Semidiameter of the circle, and a line drawn perpendicular unto the Diameter of
the same circle from the center thereof, dividing the Semicircle into two equal
parts, of the which parts the one is the quadrant or fourth part of the circle.
Thus from the center A the perpendicular AB being raised perpendicularly upon
the Diameter CAD, divides the Semicircle CBD into the two equal parts CFB and
FGD each of which is a Quadrant or fourth part of the circle CBDE.

17 A Segment or portion of a circle, is a figure contained under a right line,
and a part of the circumference of a circle, either greater or lesser then a
Semicircle. As in the former figure FBGH is a Segment or part of the circle
CBDE, contained under the right line FHG, less then the Semicircle CBD.

And by the application of the several lines or terms of a superficies one to
another, are made parallels, angles, and many sided figures.

18 A parallel line, is a line drawn by the side of another line, in such sort
that they may be equi-distant in all places, and of such there are two sorts,
the right lined parallel, and the circular parallel.

19 Right lined parallels are two right lines equidistant in all places one
from another, which being drawn to an infinite length would never meet or
concur. As the right lines FHG and CAD in the annexed Diagram.

20 A Circular parallel is a circle drawn within or without another circle,
upon the same center, as you may plainly see by the two circles CFGD, and ABHE
which are both drawn upon the same center K, and are therefore parallel to one
another.

21 An angle is the meeting of two lines in any sort, so as they both make not
one line: as the two lines AB and AC incline the one to the other and touch one
another in the point A, in which point is made the angle BAC. Where note, that
an angle is for the most part described by three letters of which the second or
middle letter represents the angular point. Thus in the angle BAC the letter
A represents the angular point.

If the lines which contains the angle be right lines, it is called a right
lined angle: As the angle BAC.

A crooked line angle, is that which is contained of crooked lines, as the
angle DEF.

And a mixed angle, is that which is contained both of a right and a crooked
line, as the angle GHI.

22 All angles are either right or oblique.

23 A right angle is an angle contained between two right lines, drawn
perpendicular to one another. Thus the angle. ABC is a right angle, because the
right line AB is perpendicular to the right line CD and the contrary.

24 An oblique angle, is an angle contained between to right lines not
perpendicular to one another: as the angle CBE or EBD, the one whereof [viz.]
EBD is acute or less then a right angle, and the other [viz.] CBE is obtuse or
more then a right, and are the complements of each other to a Semicircle.

25 The measure of an angle is the arch of a circle described on the angular
point, and intercepted between the two sides of the angle.



Thus in the annexed Diagram, the arch AB is the measure of the angle AEB, and
that the quantity thereof may be the better known.

26 Every circle is supposed to be divided into 360 parts or degrees. every degr.
into 60 min. or 100 parts, etc. Therefore a Semicircle as the arch ACD is 180
degrees. a quadrant or fourth part of a Circle, as the arch ABC is 90 degrees.

27 Complements of arches are either in reference to a quadrant or a
Semicircle, the complement of an arch or angle to a quadrant is so much as the
arch given wants of a quadrant or 90 degrees. as if the arch AB be 60 degrees. the
complement thereof to a quadrant is the arch BC 30.

In like manner, the complement of an arch or angle to a Semicircle, is so much
as the arch or angle given wants of a Semicircle; as if the arch BED be 120
degrees, the complement thereof is the arch AB 60 degrees.

28 When a right line falling upon two right lines does make on one and the
same side, and two inward angles. less the two right, the right lines being
produced will at length concur in that part in which the two inward angles are
less then two right. As in the figure, the right line AB falling upon the right
lines CD and OF makes the angles CGH and GHE together less then two right
angles, if therefore the lines CD and OF be produced from C and E they will at
last concur.

29 Many sided figures are such as are made of three, four, or more lines,
though for distinction sake those only are so called which are contained under
five lines or terms at the leas*.

In this Treatise we have to do with such only as are contained under three
lines or sides, and these are therefore called Triangles, for the better
understanding whereof we will here set down some necessary and fundamental
Propositions of Geometry.

CHAP. II.
Propositions Geometrical.
1. Prop. If two sides of one Triangle be equal to two sides of another, and
the angle comprehended by the equal sides equal, the third side or base of the
one shall be equal to the base of the other, and the remaining angles of the
one, equal to the remaining angles of the other.



Demonst. In the Triangles CBH and FED make CB = FE and BH = ED and ang. CB =
FED, then shall CH = FD, For if CG = FD, the angle CBG = FED, but CBH = FED by
construction, therefore CH = FD, ang. C = F, and the angle H = D as was to be
proved.

2 Prop. If a Triangle have two equal sides the angles at the base are also
equal to one another, and the contrary.



Demonst. In the Triangle ABC let AB = AC, and let AB be extended to D and AE =
AD, and draw the lines BE and DC, now then because AD = AE and AB = AC and the
angle A common to the Triangle ADC and ABE, the base BE = DC the angle D = E
and ABE = ang. ACD by the former prop. and therefore ang. DCB = EBC and being
taken from the equal angles ABE and ACD, there shall remain the angle ABC = ACB
as was to be proved.

3 Prop. If two right lines do cut through one another, the angles opposite to
one another are equal.

Demonst. Ang. ACB + BCD = 2 right ang. 24 of the first, ang. ACB + ACE = 2
right, and ang. ABC common, therefore ang. BCD = ACE as was to be proved.



4 If the side of a Triangle be extended the outward angle shall be greater
then any one of the inward opposite angles.

Demonst. In the Triangle ABC let AC be bisected in F and FG= FB, then is ang.
AFG = BFC by the 3 prop. and BC = AG by the first hereof, as also, ang. GAF =
FCB and therefore ang. EAC greater then ACB as was to be proved.

5 Prop. In all Triangles, the greatest sides subtend the greatest angles, and
the lesser sides, the lesser angles.



Demonst. In the Triangle ABC (...) BD = BC and draw DC, then (...) BDC = BCD,
and ang. BDC ^^eater then DAC by the 4th hereof. ^^^refore ang. ACB greater
then BAC (...) to be proved.

6 If a right line drawn through two other right lines, do make the alternate
angles equal, then are those two right lines parallel.

Demonst. Let ang. AGH = GHD and then if AB and CD be not parallel they will at
length concur (suppose at K) by the 28 of the first, and the angle GHD
greater then AGH by the fourth hereof, the which is contrary to the
proposition, if therefore the alternate angles be equal, the lines being
extended shall not concur, and are therefore parallel, by the 19th of the
first, as was to be proved.

7 If a right line drawn through two other right lines, shall make the outward
angle of the one, equal to the inward angle of the other on the same side, or
both the inward angles equal to two right, then are those two right lines
parallel.

Demonst. Ang. AGE = BGH by the third hereof, and ang. AGE = GHC by the
proposition, therefore BGH = GHC and AB parallel to CD by the last afore-going.

Again, ang. AGE+AGH= 2 R. ang. by 24 first, and AGH+ GHC = 2 R. ang. by the
proposition, therefore AGE = GHC and AB parallel to CD as before.

18 If one right line cut through two parallel right lines, the angl^s opposite
to one another are equal.

Demonst. Ang. AGH+BGH= 2 R. ang. and ang. CHG+GHD = 2 R. ang. by the 24 of the
first, therefore, ang. CHG = BGH, for if BGH be greates CHG ang. CHG+ AGH - 2
R. ang. and AB not parallel to CD by the 28 of the first, which is contrary to
the proposition, and therefore AB being parallel to CD, ang. AGH = GHD as was
to be proved.

19 If the side of a Triangle be continued, the outward angle made by the
continuation, is equal to the inward opposite angles, and three inward angles
are together equal to two right.

Demonst. Let CD be parallel to AB then shall ang. BAC = ACD and ang. ABC = DCE
by the last afore-going, and therefore ang. ACE =ABC+BAC.



Again, ang. ACB+ACE = 2 R. by the 24th of the first, and the angle ACE =
ABC+BAC, therefore ang. ACB+BAC+ABC = 2 R. ang. as was to be proved.

10. If two equal parallel lines be joined together with two other right lines,
those other lines are equal and also parallel.

Demonst. Ang. VXW = XWY and VX parallel WY by the proposition, and XW common
to both, therefore VW = XY by the first hereof, and also parallel by the 7th
hereof, as was to be proved.



11 In all Paralellograms, the angles and sides that are opposite to one
another are equal, and the Diamet^r or Diagonal divides the same into two
equal parts.

Demonst. In the preceding Diagram ang. VWX = YXW, and angle XWY = VXW by the
8th hereof, and XW common to both the Triangles VXW and YXW, therefore the
other ang. and sides are also equal by the first hereof, and the paralellogram
VY is divided into two equal parts by the diagonal XW as was to be proved.

12 All paralellograms and Triangles standing upon the same or equal base, and
between two parallel lines (that is having the same common height) are equal.

Demonst. The two paralellograms NL and NO stand upon the same base KN, and
between the two parallel lines KR and LP. The side KL= NM and KO = NP by the
11th hereof: and the Triangle KOL= NPM. From these two take the common Trian.
MIO and there will remain the quadrilateral figure LKIM =NIOP to which if you
add the common Triangle KIN the paralellogram LN = NO.

Again upon the equal bases KN and QR do stand the paralellograms LN and PQ
which let be connected by the lines KO and NP being parallel by the 10th
hereof, and include the paralellogram NO = NL as was proved before, and may in
like manner be proved to be equal to QP* therefore NL = QP, and what is said of
Paralellograms is also true of Triangles they being the halves of
paralellograms.

COROLLARY.
In a rectangular paralellogram, the Area is found by multiplying the unequal
sides together, and any Obliquangular paralellogram is equal to a Rectangular
one made upon the same base and altitude, the Area thereof is therefore found
by multiplying the base by its altitude which is the other side of the
Rectangular paralellogram, the same is to be understood of there halves being
Triangles.

13. Paralellograms and Triangles having the same common height are in
proportion as there bases.

Demonst. Let the paralellograms AM and GW stand between the parallel lines BW
and AC, and have for there equal and common height the perpendicular PC and by
the corallary of the 12th hereof CP x AE = AM and PC x GC = GW, therefore PC x
AE, PC x GC AE, GC, and also AM, GW, AE, GC, as was to be proved.



14. In all plane Triangles, if a line be drawn parallel to any of the sides,
the intersegment of the other sides are proportional.

Demonst. In the Triangle MWQ is drawn the line IH parallel to MQ, and the
Triangles IHM = HIQ by the 12th hereof, and by the last afore-going, Triangle
WIH. HIQ. WH, HQ. Triangle WIH. HIQ WI. IM, therefore WH* HQ WI, IM as was to
be demonstrated.

15 Equiangled Triangles have there sides which contain or subtend equal Angles
proportional, and the contrary.

Them. Let the Triangles ABC and CED be equiangled, and let their bases AC and
CD make one line, and extend the sides AB and DE till they meet in F, now
because ang. BAC = ECD and ang. BCA = EDC the sides AB and CE are parallel by
the 7th hereof, and also the sides BC and ED which being extended make the
paralellogram CBFE in which BF = CE and BC = FE by the 11th hereof, it
follows, by the last afore-going.

AB. BF (= CE) AC, CD, and also AC, CD OF, DE.

And DC, CA BF, AB as was to be proved.

16. In all paralellograms the supplements or fillings which stand upon the
Diameter are eequal.

Demonst. The Diameter or diagonal BD bi-secteth the paralello^rams AC; HK and
GE by the 11th hereof, and the Triangle ABD = BCD from which taking Triang. FGD
= FED as also the Triang. BHF = BKF there will remain the paralellogram HG =
FC as was to be proved.

17 If four right lines be proportional, the Rectangled figure made of the two
means, is equal to the Rectangled figure made of the two extremes.

Demonst. In the preceding Diagram, the Triangles GFD and BHF are like, because
the ang. BFH = FDG and H = G by the 7th hereof, and therefore BH. HF FG. GD by
the 15th hereof, and the Rectangle FC = BH x GD and the rectangle HG = HF x FG
by the last aforegoing as was to be proved. The like may be said of three
proportionals taking the mean twice.

18 In a plain rightangled Triangle a perpendicular let fall from the right
angle upon the side subtending the same, divides the Triangle into two
triangles both like to the whole, and to one another.

Demonst. The Triangle ABD is like to the Triangle ABC, because B and D are
right, and A common to both: and the Triangles ABC and BDC are like, because B
and D are right and C common to both, and therefore the Triangles BCD and BAD
are like, as was to be proved.



19 In all right angled plain Triangles the sides including the right angle
are equal in power to the third side.

Demonst. In the precding Diagram the Triangles ABC, ABD, and BCD are like, by
the last aforegoing, therefore AC, AB AB, AD, and AC, CB, CB, BD, and AC x CD +
AC x AD = ACq.

And ABq + CBq = AC x CD + AC x AD, therefore ABq + CBq = ACq, as was to be
proved.

20 If a right line being divided into two equal parts shall be continued at
pleasure, the rightangled figure made of the line continued, and the line of
continuation, with the square of one of the bi-segments, is equal to a square
made of one of the bi-segments, and the line of continuation.

Demonst. Let PQ be bisected in C and continued to N and let QC = OI = LI then
the square OL + MP = NCq for FO = OC or IP and MC common to both, therefore NP
x MN + QCq = NCq as was to be proved.



21 To divide a right line given by extreme and mean proportion, that is, that
the right angled figures made of the whole line and one part shall be equal to
the square of the other part.

Demonst. If the right line QP = QB be bi-sected in C and a line drawn from C
to B, and the line NC = CB and MN = NQ, the rectangled figure made of BQ x BO =
OQq for by the last aforegoing MP + QCq = NCq, or BCq. And BQq + QCq = BCq by
the 19 hereof.

Therefore BQq = NP x MN and OP being common to MP and BP, it follows that MQ
= BA as was to be proved.

22 If a plain Triangle be inscrihed in a circle the angles opposite to the
circumference, are half as much as that part of the circumference which is
opposite to the angles.

Demonst. In the Triangle EBD, ang. EDB = EBD by the second hereof, and ang.
AEB equal to both by the 9th hereof, the arch AB is the measure of the angle
AEB, by the 25th of the first, therefore the arch AB is the double measure of
the angle ADB as was to be proved.

1 Consectary.
If the side of a plain Triangle inscribed in a Circle be the Diameter, the
angle opposite to that side is a right angle. As the angle ABD opposite to the
diameter AD.



2 Consectary.
If diverse right lined Triangles, be inscribed in the same segment of a circle
upon one base, the angles in the circumference are equal. As the Triang. ABD
and ACD being inscribed in the same segment of the circle ABCD and upon the
same base AD, have their angles at B and D falling in the circumference equal.

23 If a quadrilateral figure be inscribed in a Circle, the angles thereof
which are opposite to one another, are together equal to two right angles.

Demonst. Ang. CDB = CAB and BDA = BCA by the last aforegoing, therefore ang.
CDA = BCA + BAC and ABC + BAC + BCA = 2 R. ang. by the 9th hereof, and
therefore ang. ABC + ADC = 2 R. ang. as was to be proved.

24 If in a quadrilateral figure inscribed in a circle, there be drawn two
Diagonal lines, the rectangle under the Diagonals, is equal to the two
rectangles under the opposite sides:

Demonst. Let ang. DAE = CAB by construction, then shall ang. DAC = EAB and
ang. ACD = ABE because the arch A D is the double measure to them both and
therefore the triangles. ADC and AEB are like.

Again ang. ADB = ACB because the arch AB is the double measure to them both
and ang. DAE = CAB by construction, and the Triang. AED and ABC like,
therefore, AC, CB AD, DE.



And AC, CD AB, BE.

Therefore AC x DE = CB x AD.

And also AC x BE = CD x AB

And AC x DE + AC x BE = AC x DB. Therefore AC x DB = CB x AD + CD x AB as was
to be proved.

CHAP. III.
Of the Construction of the Canon of Triangles.
THat the Proportions which the parts of a Triangle have one to another may be
certain, the arches of circles (by which the angles of all Triangles, and of
Spherical Triangles the sides are also measured) must be first reduced into
right lines, by defining the quantity of right lines, as they are applied to
the arches of a circle.

2 Right lines are applied to the arches of a circle three ways, viz. either
as they are drawn within the circle, without the circle, or as they are drawn
through it.

3 Right lines within the circle are Chords and sines.

4 A Chord or subtense is a right line inscribed in a ci^cle, dividing the
whole circle into two segments: and in like manner subtending both the
segments: as the right line CK divides the circle GEDK into the two segments
CEGK and CDK, and subtendeth both the segments, that is, the right line CK is
the chord of the arch CGK, and also the chord of the arch CDK.

5 A Sine is a right line in a semicircle falling perpendicular from the term
of an arch.

6 A Sine is either right or versed.

7 A right Sine is a right line in a Semicircle, which from the term of an arch
is perpendicular to the diameter, dividing the Semicircle into two segments,
and in like manner referred to both: Thus the right line CA is the sine of the
arch CD less then a quadrant, and also the sine of the arch CEG greater then a
quadrant, and hence instead of the obtuse angle GBC, we take the acute angle
CBA the complement thereof to a Semicircle, and so our Canon of Triangles does
never exceed 90 degrees.

8 A right sine is either Sinus totus, that is, the Radius or whole Sine, as
the right line EB: or Sinus simpliciter the first sine, or a sine less then
Radius, as AC or AB, the one whereof is always the complement of the other to
90 degrees, we usually call them sine and cosine.

9 A Versed sine is a right line in a Semicircle perpendicular to the right
Sine of the same arch; Thus A D is the versed sine of the arch CD and GBA is
the versed sine of the arch GEC the complement of CD.

10 Right lines without the Circle whose quantity we are to define, are such as
touch the circle, and are called Tangents.

11 A Tangent is a right line which touching the circle without, is
perpendicular from the end of the diameter to the Radius, continued through the
term of that arch of which it is the Tangent: Thus the right line FD is the
Tangent of the arch CD.

12 Right lines drawn through the circle, whose quantity we are to define are
such as cut the circle and are called Secants.

13 The Secant of an arch, is a right line drawn through the term of an arch,
to the Tangent line of the same arch: and thus the right line BF is the Secant
of the arch CD: as also of the arch CEG the complement thereof to a Semicircle.

14 A Canon of Triangles then is that which contains the Sines, Tangents, and
Secants of all degrees and parts of degrees in a quadrant, according to a
certain diameter, or measure of a circle assumed: The construction whereof
follows, and first of the Sines.

15 The right Sines as they are to be considered in order to their construction
are either Primary or Secondary.

16 The Primary Sines are those by which the rest are found: And thus the
Radius or whole sine is the first primary sine, and is equal to the side of a
six-angled figure inscribed in a Circle.

Demonst. AC = AB by the work, and ang. C = B by the second of the second
hereof, and BC the measure of the angle at A is 60 degr. and the angles A, B,
C, are together equal to two right angles, and therefore ang. A = C or B and BC
= AC or AB as was to be proved.

Consectary.
The Radius of a circle being given, the sine of 30 degrees. is also given, for by
this proposition, the Radius of a circle is the subtense of 60 degrees. and the
half thereof is the sine of 30, and therefore the Radius AB, or BC being
1000.0000 the sine of 30 degrees. is 500.0000.

17 The other primary sines are the sines of 60.18 and 12 degrees. being the half
of the subtenses of 120. 36 and 24 degr. and may be found by the problems
following.

18 The right sine of an arch and the right sine of its complement, are in
power equal to Radius.

Demonst. In the first diagram of this chapter, AC is the sine of CD, and AB
the sine of CE the complement thereof, which with the Radius BC make the
right-angled Triangle ABC, therefore ABq + ACq = BCq by the 19 of the second,
as was to be proved.

And hence the sine of 60 degrees. may thus be found, let the sine of 30 degrees. AC be
500.0000 the square whereof 250.00000 being subtracted from the square of BC
Radius, the remainer is 750.00000 the square of AB, whose square root is
8660254 the sine of 60 degrees.

19 The subtense of 36 degrees. is the side of a Dec-angle inscribed in a circle,
or the greater segment of a Hexagon divided into extreme and mean proportion.

Demonst. Let DG = DA and EG bisect the ang. AGD = DAG by the second of the
second, and the angle DGE = ADG because AGD half the complement of ADG (36
degrees.) to a Semicircle is bi-sected by the right line EG = DE by the second of
the second, and the angle AEG = EGD + EDG, and therefore AEG = EAG = AGD and EG
= AG by the second of the second, and the Triangles ADG and EAG like, therefore
AD, AG = ED AG AE, and so AD the side of a Hexagon is divided into extreme and
mean propo^tion, and ED the greater segment equal to AG the side of a
dec-angle, as was to be proved.

Corsectary.
The side of a Hexagon being given, the side of a Dec-angle or subtense of 36
degr. is also given, for by the second of the second the Semi-radius being
deducted from the square root of the squares of Radius, and the half Radius
added together, the remainer is 6180339 the subtense of 36 degrees.

20 The subtense of 24 degrees. is the side of a Quin-decangle, or the difference
between the subtenses of 60 and 36 degrees. and may be found by the 24 of the
second.

Demonst. Let AC be the subtense of 60 degrees. AB 36, then is BC 24 the
difference, BD the complement of AB and CD the complement of AC and AD the
diameter. And AC x BD = AB x CD + BC x AD therefore AC x BD - AB x CD = AD x
BC, and AD x BC being divided by AD the diameter, the quotient is BC the
subtense of 24 degrees.

21 Having thus found the primary sines, the secondary sines as the sines of 6
d^g 3 degrees. 1 d. 50 cent. 0 degrees. 75 centesm^s, and 0 d. 01 centesme may be found
from them, and all the other sines, to every degree, and part of a degree in
the quadrant.

22 The right sine and versed sine of an arch are together equal in power to
the subtense of the same arch.

Demonst. The right sine CF and the versed sine FE with the subtense EC do
make a right angled Triangle, and therefore FCq + FEq = ECq by the 19 of the
second, as was to be proved,

Consectary.
The right sine and versed sine of an arch being given, the sine of half that
arch is also given, for EH the EC is the sine of ED the half of the arch EDC.

23 The right sine of an arch is a mean proprotional between the Semi-radius,
and the versed sine of the double arch.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram the Triangles EHA and ECF are like, because
ang. F = EHA and E common to both, therefore

AE, EC EH, OF or AE. EC AE: EC that is, AE, EC = EH EH, OF as was to be proved.

1 Consectary.
Therefore by this or the former proposition, the fine and sine complement of
an arch being given, the sine of half that arch is also given, I say the sine
complement, because the versed sine is found, by deducting it from Radius; Thus
FA the sine of BC being deducted from AE Radius the remainer is FE the versed
sine of EDC and AE x OF = EHq whose root is EH or the sine of ED.

24 The rectangle of the sine and sine complement of an arch is equal to the
rect^ngle of half the Radius, and the sine of the double arch.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram, EH is the sine of ED and HA the cosine
thereof, and CF is the sine of EDC the double arch, the Triangle HAE and EFC
are like, as before.

And AE, EC HA, CF And AE, EH = EC HA CE And the rectangle of AH x HE = AE x CF
as was to be proved.

25 By these Propositions the sine of 12 degrees. being given the sines and sin^s
complem^nts of these arches 6 degrees. 3 degrees. 1 degrees. 50 cent. 0 degrees. 75 cent. etc.
were found to be as follows. Degrees. parts Sines Co-sines. 6.00 10452.846^2
99452.18953 3.00 5233.59562 99862.95347 1.50 2617.691^3 99965.73249 0.75
1308.95955 99991.43^75 0.375 654.49379 99997.85816 0.1875 327.24865 99999.46453

And from the sine of 0 degrees. 1875 parts, the sine of 10 centesmes may be found,
in this manner.

As, 0 degrees. 1875 Is to the sine thereof 327.14865 So is 0 degrees. 10 centesmes. To
the sine thereof 174.53261 Therefore the sine of 0d. 5 cent. 87.26930 The sine
of 0d. 01 cent. is 17.43326 And the Cosine thereof is 99999.99847
Which being given the rest of the Table of sines may be ea^^ly made by this
proposition following.

26 Three equi-different arches being propounded, the rectangle made of the
cosine of the common difference and the double sine of the mean arch, is equal
to the R^ctangle made of the Radius, and the sum of the sines of the two
extreme arches.

Demonst. Let the three equi-different arches be ED, EC, and EB, whose common
difference is BC o^ CD the arch OF = DE, therefore the arch BEF = 2 CE, and B^
= 2 C^ the sine of CE and GF = BD the double measure of the ang. GBF = BAC and
the ang. BNA and BHF right, therefore the Triang. ABN and BFH like AB, AN BF,
BH the sum of BM and BK the sines of the extreme arches, therefore AN x BF = AB
x BH which was to be proved.

Consectary.
The sines of ED, and EC with the cosine of CD or BC being given, the sine of
EB is also given, for if from BH the sum of BM and DK you deduct MH = DK the
remainer is BM the sine of BE, for illustration sake we have added these
examples following.

1 Example.
ED 5 cent. and EC 10 centesmes being given to find BM the sine of EB 15
centesmes.

As the Radius AB 10000.0000 To AN the cos. BC 5 viz. 9999.9962 So BF the doub.
of LC 10 349.0650 To BH = BM + DK 349.0659 From which subt. MH = DK 5 cent.
87.2663 Rests the sine of 0d 15 cent. BM 261.7987
2 Example.
ED 0 degrees. 10 cent.

EC 0 degrees. 15 cent. given, to find EB 0 degrees. 20

As the Radius AB 10000.0000 To cos. BC 5 cent. viz. AN 9999.9962 So the double
of LC 15 cen. viz BF. 523.5974 To BH = BM + DK 523.5976 Subt. MH = DK 10 cent.
174.5326 Rest sine 0 degrees. 20 cent. BM. 349.0650
3 Example.
Let EB 0 d. 25 cent. be inquired. There being given ED 0 degrees. 15 cent. EC 0
degrees. 20 cent.

As the Radius AB 90 10000.0000 To Cos. BC viz. s AN 89d 95 9999^9962 So the
doub. of LCs 0d 20 cent. 698.1300 To BH = BM + DK 698.1297 Sub. MH = DK 0 d. 15
cent. ^61.798^ Rest BM the sine of 0d. 25 cent. 436.330^
4 Example.
Let EB 0 d. 30 cent. be inquired. There being given ED 0 d. 20 cent. EC 0 d.
25 cent.

As the Radius 90 1000.0000 To Cos. BC viz. s AN 89.95 9999.9962 So twice L^ =
BF viz. 25 cent. 872.6618 To BH = BM + DK 872.6613 Subt. DK = MH 0d. 20 cent.
149.0950 Rest* MB the sine of 0 d. 30 cent. 523.5963
And in this manner may the whole Canon of sines be completed, or the sines of
the first or last 60 degrees. being thus made, or the sines of 45 degrees. being made
by this rule and the sines of 15 d more by the 24th thereof, the other 30 d.
may be more easily made by the following Problem.

26 The sum of the Sines of any two arches equally distant from 30 degrees. is
equal to the cosine of the distance.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram we have already proved.

AB. AN BF. BH therefore also AB. AN BF. BH, now then if BF = AB sine of 30
degrees. AN the cosine of the distance must be also equal to BH, the sum of the
sines, as was to be proved.

Example.
Let DK the sine of DE 27 d. be 45399.04997

And BM the sine of EB 33 d. be 54463.90350

Their sum is BH = AN sine of 87d. 99862.95347

27 The Canon of sines being thus made, a Table of Tangents and Secants may be
easily deduced from them, by the following problemes.

28 As the cosine of an arch, is to the sine thereof, so is Radius, to the
Tangent of that arch.

Demonst. In the annexed diagram, the Triangles AEF and AHG are like, because
of their right angles at F and G, and their common angle at A. Therefore, AF.
FE AG. GH.



29 The Radius is a mean proportional, between the tangent and the tangent
complement of an arch.

Them. HG is the tangent of an arch, CK the co-tang. thereof and LH = AG and the
triangles, ALH and ACK are like, because of their right angles at L and C, and
their common angle at A. Therefore AL = HG. LH AC. CK.

30 The Radius is a mean proportional, between the right sine of an arch, and
the secant of its complement.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram the triangles AEF and AHG are like,
therefore, AF. AE AG. AH.

31 As the sine of an arch or angle is to Rad. so is the tangent of the same
arch, to the secant thereof.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram the triangles AEF and AGH are like,
therefore OF. AE HG. AH.

32 As Radius, is to the secant of an arch, so is the co-tangent of the same
arch, to the co-secant thereof.

Demonst. In the preceding diagram, the triangles ALH and ACK are like,
therefore LH, AH CK. AK.

Other more easy and expeditious ways of making the Tangents and Secants, you
may see in the first Chap. of my Trigonometria Britannica, but the Canons being
now already made, these Rules we deem sufficient.

The construction of the Artificial Sines and Tangents, we have purposely
omitted, they being nothing else but the Logarithmes of the Natural, of which
Logarithmes we have showed the construction in a former Institution, by the
extraction of roots, and in my Trigonometria Britannica by multiplication: and
therefore shall now proceed to the use of the Canon of Sines, Tangents and
Secants, in the solution of all Triangles, whether plain or Spherical.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Calculation of plain Triangles.
A Plain Triangle is contained under three right lines, and is either
Right-angled, or Oblique.

2 In all plain Triangles, two angles being given the third is also given: and
one angle being given the sum of the other two is given: because the three
angles together are equal to two right by the 9th of the second.

Therefore in a plain right angled triang. one of the acute angles is the
complement of the other.

3 In the resolution of plain Triangles, the angles only being given, the
sides cannot be found, but only the the reason of the sides: It is therefore
necessary, that one of the sides be known.

4 In a Right-angled Triangle two terms (besides the right-angle) will serve
to find the third; so the one of them be a side.

5 In Oblique angled Triangles there must be three things given to find a
fourth.

6 In right-angled plain Triangles there are seven cases, and five in Oblique,
for the solution of which the four Axioms following are sufficient.

1 Axiom.
In a right-angled plain Triangle: The rectangle made of Radius and one of the
sides containing the right-angle, is equal to the rect-angle made of the other
containing side, and the tangent of the angle thereunto adjacent.

Them. In the right angled plain triang. BED draw the periphery FE, then is BE
Radius and DE the Tangent of the angle at B, make CA parallel to DE, then are
the Triangles ABC and EBD like, because of their rightangles at A and E and
their common angle at B, therefore BA, BE AC. ED. and BA x ED = BE x AC. that
is BA x tB = Rad. x AC. as was to be proved.

2 Axiom.
In all plain Triangles: The sides are proportional, to the sines of their
opposite angles.

Demonst. In the ^plain triangle BCD extend BC to F making BF = DC, and draw
the arches FG and CH, then are the perpendiculars FE and CA the sines of the
angles at B and D by the 7th of the third, and the triangles BEF and BAC are
like, because of their right angles at E and A, and their common angle at B.
Therefore C. C A BF. FE. that is BC. sine D DC = BF. sine B. as was to be
proved.

3 Axiom.
In all plain Triangles; As the half sum of the sides, is to their half
difference: so is the tangent of the half sum of their opposite angles, to the
tangent if their half difference.

Demonst. In the triangle BCD let the sides be CB and CD, and CG = CB.
wherefore Z crur. = EG. and x crur. = EC, draw CH bi-secting BG at right
angles, and make the angle GCI = D, then will the angle GCH = Z angle B and D
whose tangent is HG, and the angle ICH = x ang. B and D whose tangent is HI.



But EG. EC HG. HI. that is. Z crur. x crur. t Z ang t X ang.

4 Axiom.
In all plain triangles: As the base, is to the sum of the other sides, so is
the difference of those sides, to the difference of the segments of the base.

Demonst. In the triangle BCD let fall the perpendicular AC, extend BC to F and
draw FG and DH, then ^ BF = Z crur. and HB = x crur. and GB the difference
between AB and AD the segments of DB the base. And the triangles HDB and BGF
are like, because of their equal ang at D and F the arch HG being the double
measure to them both, and their common angle at B. Therefore

DB. BF HB. GA. That is, DB. Z crur. x crur. x seg. base.

These things premised, we will now set down the several Problems or cases in
all plain triangles right-angled and oblique, with the proportions by which
they may be solved, and manner of solving them both by natural and Artificial
numbers.

Of right angled Plain Triangles.
IN right angled plain triangles, the sides comprehending the right-angle we
call the Legs, and the side subtending the right angle, we call the Hypotenuse.

1 Probl. The legs given to find an Angle.

In the right-angled plain triangle, ABC, the angle ACB is inquired.

The given legs AB. 230 AC. 143.72


AC. Rad AB. tA CB by the 1 Axiom.

That the quantity of this angle, or any other term required may be expressed
in numbers, if the solution be to be made in natural numbers, multiply the
second term given by the third, and their product divide by the first, the
Quotient is the fourth proportional sought.

But if the solution be to be made in artificial numbers, from the sum of the
Logarithmes of the second and third terms given, subtract the Logarithme of the
first, the remainer shall be the Logarithme of the fourth proportional required.

Illustration by natural numbers.
As the Leg AC 143.72 Is to the Radius AC 10000000 So is the Leg. AB 235 To the
tang. of ACB grad. 58.55
The product of the second and third terms is 2350000000, which being divided
by 143.72 the first term given, the quotient is 16351238 the tangent of the
angle ACB which being sought in the Table the nearest less is 16350527, and the
arch answering thereto is Grad. 58. 55 parts.

Illustration by Logarithmes.
Logarithmes. As the leg AC 143.72 2.157517 Is to the rad. IC 10.0000 So is the
leg AB 235 2.371068 To the tang. of. C. gr. 58.55 10.213551

2 Probl. The angles and one leg given, to find the other leg.

In the right angled plain Triangle ABC, the leg AC is inquired:

The given Angle ABC Leg. AB
Rad. AB* t ABC. AC. by the first Axiom.

3 Prob. The Hypotenuse and a leg given to find an angle.

In the right angled plain Triangle ABC, the angle ACB is inquired.

The given Hypoth. BC. Leg AB.


BC. Rad AB. s. ACB. by 2 Ax.

4 Probl. The Hypotenuse and angles given, to find either leg.

In the right angled plain Triangle ABC, the leg. AB is inquired:

The given Hypot. BC. Angle ACB.


Rad. BC s. ACB. AB. by 2 Ax.

5 Probl. The angles and a leg given, to find the Hypotenuse.

In the right-angled plain Triangle ABC, the Hypotenuse BC is inquired;

The given Angle ABC. The given Leg AC.


s. ABC. AC Rad. BC. by the second Axiom.

6 Probl. The Hypotenuse and leg given, to find the other leg.

In the right-angled plain Triangle ABC, the leg AB is inquired,

The given Hypot. BC Leg. AC


1. BC. Rad AC. s. ABC, by the 3 Problem.

2. t. ABC. AC Rad. AB. by the 2 Probl.

7 Probl. The legs given, to find the Hypotenuse.

In the right-angled plain Triangle ABC the Hypotenuse BC is inquired.

The given legs AB AC


1 AB. Rad AC. t. ABC by the 1 Problem.

2 s. ABC. AC Rad. BC. by the 5 Problem.

Of Oblique angled plain Triangles.
1 Probl. Two sides and an angle opposite to one of them given, to find the
angle opposite to the other side.

In the Oblique angled plain Triangle DCB the angle CBD is inquired.

The given Sides DC 865 CB 632


The given Angle CDB 26. 37



But here it must be known whether the angle sought, be acute or obtuse. CB. s
CDB CD, s. CBD. by the second Axiom.

Illustration by natural Numbers.
As the side CB 632 Is to the sine of CDB 26.37 4441661 So is the side CD 865
To the sine of CBD 37.43 6079172
For if you multiply 4441661 by 865, the product will be 3842036765, which
product being divided by the first term 632, the quotient 6079172 is the sine
of 37 degrees. 43 parts.

Illustration by Artificial numbers.
As the side CB 632 2.800717 Is to the sine of D 26.37 9.647545 So is the sides
CD 865 2.937016 12.584561 To the sine of B 37.43 9.783844
2 Probl. Two sides with the angle comprehended by them given, to find either
of the other angles.

In the Oblique angled plain Triangle BDC.

The angle DBC is inquired.

The given Sides DC BC


The given Angle DCB

Subtract the angle given, out of 180d. the remainer is the sum of the other
angles, and Z c^ur. DC and BC. X crur t Z ang. t X ang. by the 3 Ax. To the
half sum of the other angles, add the half difference found, and you will have
the greater angle, subduct it and you will have the lesser, in our example Z
ang. + Xang. is = DBC sought, because that is the greater ang.

3 Probl. The angles and a side given, to find either of the other sides.

In the Oblique angled plain triangle CBD,

The side DB is inquired.

The given Angles DCB CDB


The given Side CB

s. CDB, CB s. DCB. DB. by the second Axiom.

4 Probl. Two sides with the angle comprehended by them given, to find the
third side.

In the oblique angled plain triangle DCB

The side CB is inquired.

The given Sides DB CB


The given Angle CBD

First, find the angle BCD by the third Axiom.

Secondly, find the side CB by the second Axiom.

5 Probl. The three sides given to find an angle.

In the Oblique angled plain triangle CBD.

The angle CDB is inquired.

The three sides being given. DC CB DB


The resolution of this Problem does require two operations, first, for the
segment of the base GB.

DB.Z crur. DC and CB X crur. GB. ^y the fourth axiom.

And DB - GB = DG, and DG =DA or AG.

And DC. Rad AD. s ACD, by the second axiom whose complement ^s ADC.

And AG + GB = AB, therefore ang. ABC may be also found in like manner.

CHAP. V.
Of the affections of Spherical Triangles.
HAving done with plain triangles, we come next to speak of Spherical.

1 A Spherical triangle is that which is described on the sur-face of the
Sphere.

2 The sides of a Spherical Triangle are the arches of three great circles of
the Sphere, mutually intersecting each other.

3 The measures of Spherical angles are the arches of great circles described
from the angular point between the sides of the angles, those sides being
continued to quadrants.

4 Those are said to be great circles which bi-sect the Sphere.

5 Those circles which cut each other at right angles, the one of them passes
through the poles of the other and the contrary.

6 In every Spherical triangle, each side is less then a semicircle, for if in
the triangle ABC, you produce the sides AB, BC, till they meet in the point D
the arches BAD, and BCD are each of them a semicircle because they intersect
each other in the points B and D, and therefore the arch BA or BC is less then
a semicircle. In like manner if the sides AB and AC be produced, the side AC
may be also proved to be less then a Semicircle.

7 In every Spherical Triang. any two sides are together greater then the
third, for otherwise they cannot possibly make a triangle.

8 The sum of the sides of a Spherical Triangle are less then two semicircles.
For if any two sides be produced as suppose AB, BC till they concur in the
point D, the arches BAD, BCD shall be each of them a semicircle, but in the
train. ADC, the sides AD and CD are together greater then AC by the last
aforegoing, therefore the three sides AB, BC, AC are together less then the two
semicircles BAD, BCD,

9 If two sides of a Spherical triangle be equal to a semicircle, the two
angles at the base shall be equal to two right. If they be less then a
semicircle, the two angles shall be less then two right: but if greater then a
semicircle, the two angles shall be greater then two right. As in the spherical
Triangle ABC let the sides AB AC be equal to a Semicircle, ther^ are the angles
at B and C equal to two right, for the arch BC (...) produced to D, the angle
ACB shall be equal to B, and seeing that the two angles at C are equal to two
right, the two angles ACD and B shall be also equal to two right.

Again. Let the sides AB and AC be less then a semicircle, seeing that the two
angles at C are equal to two right, and the angle B less then the angle ACD,
the angles ACB and B are together less then two right.

Lastly, Let the sides AB and AC be more then a semicircle, the angles at C
being equal to a semicircle, and the angle at B greater then the angle ACD, the
angles ACB and B shall be greater then two right.

10 The sum of the three angles of a Spherical triangle are greater then two
right angles and less then six.

Demonst. In the triangle ABC let the side BC be produced to D, then shall the
angle ACD be either more or less or equal to the angle ABC; first, suppose them
equal, then the arches AB and AC shall be equal to a semicircle, by the last
aforegoing, and the angles ABC and ACB are equal to two right, and therefore
the three angles A.B.C are more then two right.

Again. Let the angle ACD be less then the angle B, then the sum of the arches
AB and AC shall be more then a Semicircle, and therefore the angles ABC and ACB
greater also then two right, and therefore much more are the three angles
A.B.C. greater then two right.

Lastly. Let the angle ACD be greater then the angle ABC, and make the angle
DCE equal thereto, and the side AB being produced to E that the arch BE and CE
may meet, and let the arch CA be produced to F, then shall the arches EB and EC
be together equal to a semicircle, and therefore AE and EC are together less
then a semicircle, and the angle EAF or BAC is greater then the angle ACE by
the ninth hereof, but the angles ACE, ACB and B are equal to two right,
therefore the angle ACB, ABC and BAC are greater then two right.

And because every angle of a Spherical Triangle is less then two right, the
three angles together must needs be less then six, as was to be proved.
Therefore,

11 Two angles of any Spherical Triangle are greater then the difference
between the third angle and a semicircle also.

12 Any side being continued, the exterior angle is less then the two
interior opposite ones.

13 In any Spherical Triangle, the difference of the sum of two angles, and a
whole circle is greater then the difference of the third angle, and a
semicircle.

14 In any Spherical Triangle, one side being produced, if the other two sides
be equal to a semicircle, the outward angle shall be equal to the inward
opposite angle upon the side produced: if they be less then a semicircle, the
outward angle shall be greater then the inward opposite angle: if greater then
a semicircle, the outward angle shall be less then the inward opposite angle.

In the Spherical Triangle ABC let the side BC be continued to D, and let the
sides AB and AC be together equal to a semicircle. I say then that the outward
angle ACD is equal to the inward opposite angle at B, because the angle B = D
and the angle ACD = D and therefore angle ACD = B.

Again, Let the sides AB and AC be less then the semicircle BAD if the common
arch AB be taken away, there shall remain the arch AC less then the arch AD and
therefore the ang. ACD shall be greater then the angle D, therefore also more
then B.

Lastly, If the sides AB and AC be together more then a semicircle, taking away
the common arch AB, the remaining arch AC shall be greater then AD, and the
angle ACD lesser then D, and therefore also lesser then B as was to be proved.

15 A Spherical Triangle is either right or angled or oblique.

16 A right angled Spherical Triangle is that which has on right angle at the
least.

17 The legs of a right angled spherical Triangle are of the same affection
with their opposite angles.

In the spherical Triangle ABC right angled at A let the side AB be a quadrant,
I say then that the angle ACB shall be a quadrant also, because B is then the
pole of the arch AC, and the arch BC perpendicular thereunto, therefore also in
the Triangle ACD, the side AD, being more then a quadrant, the angle ACD shall
be also more then a quadrant, it being more then the right angle ACB, and in
the right angles Spherical Triangle AEC the side AE being less then a quadrant,
the angle ACE shall be also less then a quadrant, it being less then the right
angle ACB.

18 In a right angled spherical Triangle, if either leg be a quadrant, the
Hypotenusa shall be also a quadrant; but if both the legs shall be of the same
affection, the Hypotenuse shall be less then a quadrant; if of different, then
greater, and the contrary.

In the right angled triangle ABC right angled at A let the side AB be a
quadrant, I say then that the Hypotenuse BC is also a quadrant, because the
angle ACB is right, by the last afore-going, and the arches AB and BC which are
perpendicular to the arch AC do meet in the pole B.

Again, Let the sides AB and AC be continued to their opposite pole at F, then
shall the Triangle FBC be equal to the triangle* ABC, but the arch GH being
drawn by the points G and H, the base GH will be common to the right angled
triangle AHG, whose legs AG and AH are greater then the quadrants AB and AC and
also to the other right angled triangle FGH whose legs FG and FH are less then
the quadrants FB and FC, and GH is less then the quadrant BC, which is the
measure of the right angles at F and A, if it be not less, it must be either
more or equal to it, it cannot be more because the triangle ABC having all the
angles right, can have no side greater then a quadrant, and it cannot be equal,
because neither of the legs are a quadrant.

Lastly, In the triangle DAH right angled at A, the leg AD is less then the
quadrant AB, and the leg HA is greater then the quadrant AC, therefore the
Hypotenusa DH is also greater then a quadrant, for AC and DC are each of them
quadrants by the work, if therefore upon the pole D you describe the arch CI it
will cut the Hypotenuse DH in the point I, and therefore DI is a quadrant and
DH more then a quadrant, as was to be proved.

19 In a right angled spherical triangle, if either of the angles at the
Hypotenusa be a right angle, the hypotenusa shall be also a quadrant, but if
both shall be of the same affection it shall be less, if of different then
greater and the contrary.

In the triangle ABC right angled at C if either of the angles at A or B be
right, the side opposite thereto shall be also right by the 17 hereof, and the
Hypotenusa AB shall be a quadrant by the last aforegoing, but if the angles at
A and B be both acute or obtuse the sides AC and CB shall be both acute or
obtuse also by the 17th hereof, and the Hypotenuse AB less then the quadrant by
the last aforegoing: but if either of the angles at A and B be acute, and the
other obtuse, one of the legs shall be less, the other more then a quadrant, by
the 17th hereof, and the Hypotenuse AB more then a quadrant by the last
aforegoing, as was to be proved. Therefore

20 In a right angled spherical Triangle either of the Oblique angles is
greater then the complement of the other, but less then the difference of the
same complement to a semicircle.

21 An Oblique angled spherical Triangle, is either acute or obtuse.

22 An acute angled spherical Triangle has all its angles acute.

23 An obtuse angled spherical Triangle has all its angles either obtuse or
mixed, viz. acute and obtuse.

24 In any Spherical Triangle, whose angles are all acute, each side is less
then a quadrant.

In the Triangle ABC let all the angles be acute, and A the greatest angle,
then is BC greater then either of the other arches AB, AC, and the arch A E
being drawn at right angles to the arch AB and made equal to AC, the arch BE is
less then a quadrant, because the legs of the right angled Triangle ABE, viz.
AE and AB are each of them less then a quadrant, and therefore the arch BC is
much more less then a quadrant, and if BC the greatest arch be less then a
quadrant, the sides AB and AC which are each of them less then the arch BC,
must needs be less then quadrants also.

25 In any oblique angled spherical Triangle, if the angles at the base be of
the same affection, the perpendicular drawn from the vertical angle shall fall
within, if of different without.

In the oblique angled Triangle ABC whose angles at B and C are acute, the
perpendicular AD shall fall within the triangle, for if it fall not within, it
must be the same with one of the sides, or else fall without the Triangle if it
be the same with either side, the angle at B or C must be right, which is
contrary to the proposition, if it fall without the triangle, suppose at E the
angle AEB shall be right, but the angle ABE is obtuse, viz: the complement of
the acute angle ABC and therefore the side AE is greater then a quadrant, by
the 17th thereof, and the angle ACE being acute AE shall be also less then a
quadrant by the same Theorem, but that the same side should be both more and
less then a quadrant is absurd in this case therefore the perpendicular shall
fall within the triangle.

But in the Triangle AEB, obtuse-angled at B, acute at E, the perpendicular AD
shall fall without the triangle, upon the side EB continued, or if otherwise,
it must be the same with one of the sides, or fall within the triangle, it
cannot be the same with either of the sides, for then the angle at B or E
should be a right angle, and cannot fall within the triangle because then the
angles at B and E must either be both acute or both obtuse as has been already
proved, if therefore the angles at the base be of different affection, the
perpendicular shall fall without, as was to be proved.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Calculation of Spherical Triangles.
IN Spherical Triangles there are 28 varieties or cases, 16 in rectangular and
12 in oblique angular, whereof all the rectangular, and 10 of the oblique
angular may be resolved by these two Axioms following.

1 Axiom.
In all Spherical rectangled Triangles, having the same acute angle at the
base: The sines of the Hypotenusaes are proportional to the sines of their
perpendicular.

2 Axiom.
In all Spherical rectangled Triangles, having the same acute angle at the
base: The sines of the bases, and the tangents of the perpendiculars are
proportional.

Demonst. Let ADB and AIM represent two Spherical Triangles having the same
angle at A, then is IH the sine of IM and FD the sine of DB. But

s. AD. AI Rad s DF s. IH.



Again. KB is the tang. of DB and LM the tang. of IM. And

s. AB. t. KB s. AM. t. LM. as was to be proved.

That all the case of a right-angled Spherical Triangle may be resolved, by
these two Axioms, the several parts of the Spherical triangle, proposed must
sometimes be continued to quadrants, that so the angles may be turned into
sides, the hypotenusaes into bases and perpendiculars, and the contrary, by
which means, the proportions as to the parts of the Triangle given, instead of
sines do sometimes fall in Co-sines, and sometimes in co-tangents instead of
tangents, which the L. Nepeir observing, those parts of the right-ang.
Spherical triangle which in such conversion do for the most part change their
proportion, he notes with their complements, viz. the hypotenuse and both the
acute angles, but the sides containing the right angle are not so noted: and
these five he calls the Circular parts of the triangle, amongst which the
right angled is not reckoned, and therefore the two sides which do contain it,
are supposed to be joined together.

Of these five Circular parts, one is always in the middle, and two of the
five are adjacent to that middle part, and the other two are disjunct, the
parts adjacent, are called extremes adjacent, and the parts disjoined, are
called extremes disjunct.

Each of these five circular parts, may by supposition be made the middle part,
and then the two circular parts which are next to that which is by supposition
made the middle, are the extremes conjunct, the other two remote from the
middle part assumed are the extreme parts disjoined.

As in the Triangle ABC, if comp. AC be made the middle part, comp. A, and
comp. C are the extremes conjunct, and the sides AB and BC are the extremes
disjunct, and so of the rest as in the Table following.



Mid. part Extr. conj. Extr. disj. Leg. AB. Comp. A Leg BC Comp. AC Com. C
Comp. A Comp. AC Leg. AB Com. C Leg. BC Comp. AC Comp. A Comp. C Leg. AB Leg.
BC Comp. C Comp. AC Leg. BC Comp. AB Leg. AB Leg. BC Comp. C Leg. AB Comp. A
Comp. AC

The parts of a right angled Spherical Triangle, being thus distinguished into
five circular parts, (besides the right angle) the three parts remote from the
right angle, being noted by their complements, and of these five one accounted
the middle, the other either extremes adjacent or disjunct, the L. Nepeir as a
consectary from the two preceding axioms, for the help of memory, and
therefore the more easy resolving of all spherical Triangles has composed
this Catholic and Universal Proposition.

The Sine of the Middle part and Radius are reciprocally proportional, with the
tangents of the extremes conjunct, and the co-sines of the extremes disjunct.

That is, As Radius, to the tangent of one of the extremes conjoined: So is
the tangent of the other extreme conjunct to the Sine of the Middle part.

And also, As Radius, to the cosine of one of the extremes disjunct: So is
the cosine of the other extreme disjunct, to the sine of the Middle part.

Therefore, if the Middle part be sought, the radius must be in the first
place, If either of the extremes, the other extreme must be in the first place.

Only note, That if the Middle part, or either of the extremes conjunct, be
noted with its complement in the circular parts of the Triangle, instead of the
sine or tangent, you must use the cosine or co-tangent of such circular part
or parts.

If either of the extremes disjunct, be noted by its complement in the circular
parts of the triangle, instead of the cosine, you must use the sine of such
extreme disjunct.

That these directions may be the better conceived, we have in the table
following set down the circular parts of a Triangle under their respective
titles, whether they be taken for the Middle part, or for the extremes, whether
conjunct or disjunct, and unto those parts we have perfixed the sine or cosine,
the tangent or co-tangent as it ought to be by the former Rules.

Middle part Extr. conjunct Extr. disjunct. Sine AB Co-tang A Sine AC Tang. BC
Sine C Cosine A Co-tang. AC Sine C Tang. AB Cosine BC Cosine AC Co-tang. A
Cosine AB Co-tang. C Cosine BC Cosine C Co-tang. AC Sine A Tang. BC Cosine
AB Sine BC Co-tang. C Sine A Tang. AB Sine AC

These things premised, we will now set down the several cases with the
Analogies by which they may be solved, according to this Catholic proposition
of right angled Spherical triangles first, and then of oblique, and in every
case in which we deem it necessary, we will Demonstrate the truth of the
Proposition by the first and second Axioms of this chapter, as where the
middle part, is either one of the legs containing the right angle, or one of
the oblique angles or the Hypotenusal.

Of right angled Spherical Triangles, Problem. 1.
A leg with an angle opposite thereunto being given, to find the other leg. If
it be known whether the Hypoteuuse or the other angle be more or less then a
quadrant.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The leg AB or middle part is inquired

The given Leg BC ang. com. A
are extreme conjunct.

Analogy Rad. cot. ang. A tang. BC. sine AB.

Demonst. The Triangles AGD and ACB have the same acute angle at the base.



Therefore ^an. DG. AD tang. BC ^ine AB by the second Ax. And by the 29th of
the third.

Rad. AD. co-tang. DG tang. DG. AD -- therefore, Rad. cot. DG tang. BC. sine AB
and DG is the measure of the angle, at A therefore, as Rad. etc.

Illustration by Natural numbers.

As the Radius. 10000000 To Co-tang. A grad. 30. 17320508 So tang. BC. grand.
22.89 4222108 To sine AB. 46 d. 994 7312904
Illustration by Artificial numbers.

As the Radius 90 d. 10.000000 To co-tang. A 30 10.238561 So tang. BC 22.89
9.625529 To sine AB. 46.994 9.864090
Problem 2.
A leg and an angle coonterminate therewith being given, to find the other leg

In the R. angled spherical trian. ABC.

The leg BC one of the extremes conjunct is inquired.

The given Angl. Comp. A the other extr. conj. Leg AB the middle part.

Cot. A. Rad sine AB. tang. BC by the analogy in the first Problem.

Problem 3.
The legs given to find an angle.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The angle comp. A one of the extremes conjunct is inquired.

The given legs AB the middle part. BC the other extrea. conjunct.


Analogy Tang. BC. sine AB Rad. cot. A. The inverse of that analogy in the
^st Problem.

Problem 4.
The Hypotenuse and a leg given, to find the ^^gle contained by them.

In the right angled Spherical Tri^ngle, ABC.

The angle, comp. C, or middle part ^s inquired.

The given Hypot. comp. AC Leg BC
the adjac. extr.

Analogy, rad. cotang. AC tang. BC. cosine C.

Demonst. The triangles EFH and EIG have the same acute angle at the base,
therefore, ^IG = AC. Rad. IE t. FH = BC. -- sine FE. by the 2 Ax.

Rad. co-tang. IG tang. IG. Rad. by the 29 of the third. Therefore

Rad. cot. IG t. FH sine FE, or Rad. cot. AC t. BC. cosine C, because FI the
complement of FE is the measure of ACB.

Problem 5.
A leg and an angle conterminate with it given to find the Hypotenuse.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The Hypot. comp. AC. one of the extremes conjunct is inquired.

The given Leg BC. the other extr. conjunct. Angle comp. C, the middle part.

Analogy. tang. BC. cosine C rad. cot. AC, it being the inverse of the
Analogy in the former Problem.

Problem 6
The Hypotenuse and angle given, to find the leg conterminate with the given
angle.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle, ABC.

The leg BC one of the extremes adjacent is inquired.

The given Hypot. comp. AC the other extr. conj. Angle comp. C. the middle part.

Analogy, cotang. AC. Rad cos. C. tang. BC.

This also is the inverse of the 3 Problem, and therefore needs no further
demonstration.

Problem 7.
The Oblique angles given, to find the Hypotenuse.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The Hypot. comp. AC, the middle part is inquired.

The given ang. Comp. A. Comp. C
The extremes conjunct.

Analogy, Rad cotang. C cotang. A cosine AC:

Demonst. The triangles CGH and CIF have the same acute angle at the base, CG
is the complement of AC, HG the complement of GD the measure of A, and FI the
measure of C, but

Tang. FI. CI tang. GH, sine GC by 2 axiom. therefore,

Tang. C. Rad. cot. A. cos. AC. And as Rad. cot. C tang. C. Rad. Therefore Rad.
cot. C cot. A. cosine AC.

Problem 8.
The Hypotenuse and an angle given, to find the other angle.

In the right angled Spherical Trigle ABC.

The angle comp. C, one of the extremes conjunct is inquired.

The given Hypot. comp. AC, the middle part. Ang, comp. A the other extr. conj.
Cotang. A. cosine AC Rad. cot. C, by the Analogy in the preceding Probl.

Problem 9.
The Hypotenuse, and an oblique angle given, to find the leg opposite to the
given angle.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The leg BC the middle part is inquired.

The given Hyp. comp. AC Angle comp. A extreme disjunct.

Analogy, Rad. sine A sine AC sine BC.

Demonst. The Triangles ACB and AGD have the same acute angle at the base,
therefore by the first axiom, AG. s. GD sine AC. sine BC.

Problem 10.
A leg and an angle opposite thereunto, being given, to find the Hypotenuse. If
it be known whether it, or the other leg or angle be acute or obtuse.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The Hypotenuse comp. AC one of the extremes disjunct is inquired.

The given Ang. com. A the other extr. d. Leg. BC the middle part.

Anal. Sine A. R. sine BC. sine C, by the analogy in the preceding Probl.

Problem 11.
The Hypotenuse and a leg given, to find the angle opposite to the given leg.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The angle comp. A one of the extremes disjunct is inquired.

The given Hyp. comp. AC, the other extr. disj. Leg. BC the middle part.

Anal. Sine AC, sine BC R. sine A by the analagie in the 10 Probl.

Problem 12.
An angle and leg conterminate with it given, to find the other angle.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The angle comp. A the middle part is inquired.

The given Angle comp. C The given Leg. BC
Extremes disjunct.

Anal. Rad. sine C cs BC. cos. A.

Demonst. The triangles CFI and CHG have the same acute angle at the base,
therefore by the first axiom^ Rad. FC. sine FI sine HC. sine HG, and the compl.
of HC is the leg BC, and GD the measure of the angle at A is the complement of
HG.

Therefore,

R. sine C cosine BC. cosine A.

Problem 13.
An angle and leg opposite thereunto being given, to find the other angle. If
it be known whether it, the Hypotenuse or the other leg be acute or obtuse.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The ang. comp. C one of the extremes disjunct is inquired.

The given Leg BC the other extreme disjunct. Angle, comp. A the middle part.

Anal. cs BC. cs A Rad. sine C. by the analogy in the preceding Problem.

Problem 14.
The oblique angles given, to find either leg.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The leg BC one of the extremes disjunct is inquired.

The given Angle, comp. C the other extr. disj. Angle, comp. A, the middle part.

Anal. Sine C Rad cs A. cs BC. the inverse of that analogy in the last Problem.

Problem 15.
The legs given, to find the Hypotenuse.

In the right angled Spherical Tri^gle ABC.

The Hypotenuse comp. AC the middle part is inquired.

The given legs AB BC
Extreme disjunct.

Anal. Rad. cs AB cs BC cs AC.

Demonst. Tsie triangles HBD and HCG have the same acute angle at the base,
therefore

Rad. HB. sine BD sine CHAPTER s CG, But BA is the complement of BC, and BC the
complement of CH, and CG the complement of AC.

Therefore, Rad. cs AB cs BC. cs AC.

Problem 16.
The Hypotenuse and a leg given, to find the other leg.

In the right angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The leg AB one of the extremes disjunct is inquired.

The given Leg BC the other extreme dijunct. Hypot. comp. AC the middle part.

Anal. cs BC. cs AC R. cs AB, by the analogy in the 15th Problem.

CHAP. VII.
Of Oblique angled Spherical Triangles.
IN Oblique angled Spherical triangles, there are 12 Cases, 10 whereof may be
resolved by the Catholic proposition, if the Spherical Triangle propounded be
first converted into two Right, by letting fall of a perpendicular, sometimes
within, sometimes without the triangle, if the angles at the base be both
acute, or both obtuse, it falls within the triangle, but if one of the angles
at the base be acute, and the other obtuse, it falls without, by the 25 of
the 5th. chapter: however it falls it must be always opposite to a known
angle, for your better direction, take this general Rule.

From the end of a side given, being adjacent to an angle given, let fall the
perpendicular,

As in the triangle ABC, if there were given the side AB and the angle at A: by
this rule the perpendicular must fall from B upon the side AC.

But if there were given the side AC, and the angle at A, the perpendicular
must fall from C upon the side AB continued if need req^ire.

And to know whether the side upon which the perpendicular shall fall, must be
continued or not, that is to know whether the perpendicular shall fall within
or without the triang. If the former direction be not sufficient, the
calculation will determine it, for if the arch found at the first operation
(whether side or angle) be more then the arch given, the perpendicular shall
fall without, if less, within the triangle, as shall plainly appear by our
explanation of the ensuing Problemes.

Problem 1.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find the angle
opposite to the other. If it be known whether the angle sought be acute or
obtuse.

In the oblique angled Spherical triangle ABC.

The angle BAC is inquired.

The given Sides AB 42.15 BC 29.83


The given Angle ACB 36. 14

The Anal. s. BA. s. BC s. C. s A.



For by the Catholic proposition.

1 R. s AB s A. s BD. 2 R. s BC s C. s BD. Therefore, s AB. s BC s C. s A.
Illustration by natural numbers.
As the sine of AB 42.15 6710738 To the sine of BC 29.83 4974282 So is the fine
of ACB 36.14 5897603 To the sine of BAC 25.92 4371552
Illustration by artificial numbers.
As the sine of AB 42.15 9.826770 To the sine of BC 29.83 9.696730 So the sine
of ABC 36.14 9.770675 19.467405 To the sine of BAC 25.92 9.640635
Problem 2
Two angles with a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
opposite to the other. If it be known whether the side sought be more or less
then a quadrant.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The side AB is inquired.

The given Angles BAC ACB


The given Side BC

The Analogy is s A. s C s BC. s AB, by the last aforegoing.

Problem 3.
Two sides and their contained angle given, to find the third side.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the side DC is inquired.

The given Sides AD AC


The given Angle DAC

In this case the perpendicular may fall from the extremity of either side, but
opposite to the angle given.



The terms of proportion.

1 ct AC. R cs DAC. t AB And AD - AB = BD in the 1 Triang. But AD + AB = BD in
the 2 Triang. 2 cs AB. cs AC R. cs BC 3 R cs BC cs BD. cs DC
Therefore

cs AB. cs AC cs BD. cs DC.

Problem 4.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them, to find the third side. If it
be known whether the side sought, or the angle opposite to the other given
side, be acute or obtuse.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD the side AD is inquired.

The given Sides AC DC


The given Angle ADC

In this case let the perpendicular fall from the concourse of the given sides
on the side inquired, continued if need be.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct CD. R cs ADC. t. BD. 2 cs BD. cs CD Res CB 3 cs CB. R ct AC. cs AB
Therefore

cs CD. cs BD cs AC. cs AB And BD + AB = AD in the 1 Triang. But BD - AB = AD
in the 2 Triang.
Problem 5.
Two sides and their contained angle given to find one of the other angles.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the angle ADC is inquired.

The given Sides AC AD


The given Angle CAD

In this case the perpendicular may fall from the extremity of either side
given opposite to the angle given.

The terms of proportion.

1. ct AC. R cs DAC. t AB. And AD - AB = BD in the 1 Triang. But AD + AB = BD
in the 2 Traing. ct CAD. s AB R. t BC. t BC. R s BD. ct ADC
Therefore,

s AB. ct CAD s BD. ct ADC.

Problem 6
Two angles and a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
between then. If it be known whether the side sought or the side opposite to
the other given angle be acute or obtuse.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the side AD is inquired.

The given Ang. ADC CAD


The given Side AC

In this case let the perpendicular fall from the extremity of the given side
on the side inquired, continued if need be.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct AC. R cs DAC. t AB. 2 ct CAD. s AB R t BC 3 R. t BC ct ADC. s BD.
Therefore,

ct CAD. s AB ct ADC. s BD. And AB + BD = AD in the 1 Triang. But DB - AB = AD
in the 2 Triang.
Problem 7.
Two angles and a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the third
angle. If it be known whether the angle inquired or the side opposite to the
other given angle be acute or obtuse.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, angle ACD is inquired.

The given Angles DAC ADC


The given Side AC

In this case let the perpendicular fal^ from the angle inquired.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct CAD. R cs AC. ct ACB 2 s ACB. cs CAB R. cs BC 3 cs BC. R cs BDC. s BCD
Therefore.

cs CAB. s ACB cs BDC. s BCD. And ACB + BCD = ACD in the first Triangle. But
BCD - ACB = ACD in the second Triangle.

Problem 8.
Two angles and the side between them given, to find the third angle.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the angle ADC is inquired.

The given Angle ACD CAD


The given Side AC

In this case, let the perpendicular fall from the extremity of the given side,
and opposite to the angle inquired.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct CAB. R cs AC. ct ACB. And ACD - ACB = BCD in the first Triangle.

But ACD + ACB = BCD in the second Triangle.

2 s ACB. cs CAB R. cs BC

3 R. cs BC s BCD. cs CDB

Therefore

s ACB. cs CAB s BCD. cs CDB.

Problem 9.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find their
contained angle. If it be known whether the angle inquired or the angle
opposite to the other given side be acute or obtuse.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the angle ACD is inquired.

The given Sides AC CD


The given Angle ADC

In this case, let the perpendicular fall from the angle inquired.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct CDB. R cs CD. ct BCD. 2 ct CD. cs BCD R. t BC 3 R. t BC ct AC. cs ACB
Therefore

ct CD. cs BCD ct AC. cs ACB. And BCD + ACB = ACD in the first Triangle.

But BCD - ACB = ACD in the second Triangle.

Problem 10.
Two angles and the side between them given, to find either of the other sides.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ACD, the side DC is inquired.

The given Angles DAC ACD


The given Side AC

In this case, let the perpendicular fall from the concourse of the side given
and sought, on the third side continued if need be.

The terms of proportion.

1 ct CAB. R cs AC. ct ACB. And ACD - ACB = BCD in the first Triangle.

But ACD + ACB = BCD in the second Triangle.

2 ct AC. cs ACB R. t BC

3 t B C.R cs BCD. ct CD

Therefore

cs BCA. ct AC cs BCD. ct CD.

Problem 11.
Three sides being given to find an angle.

To resolve this Problem there must be some preparation made, for that the
Catholic proposition is not of it self sufficient either for this or for the
ensuing Problem. And therefore the Lord Nepier to bring these Problems within
some compass of the Catholic Proposition, first, finds the difference of the
segments of that side, which being made the base of the Triangle is divided
into two parts by letting fall a perpendicular, and that by help of this
Analogy, which we have demonstrated in the second Book of our Trigonemotria
Britannica, chap. 2.

As the tangent of half the base.

Is to the tangent of half the sum of the other sides.

So is the tangent of half the difference of those sides.

To the tangent of half the difference of the segments of the base.

In the Oblique angled spherical Triangle ACD, the angle CAD is inquired.

The given Sides AC CD


The given Base AD



The terms of proportion.

t AD. t Z cru. AC. CD t X cr. t AE

And AD + AE = AB AD - AE = BD

In the first Triangle.

AE + AD = AB AE - AD = BE or BD.

In the second Triangle.

Hence to find the angle at A.

R. ct AC t AB. cs CAB.

Problem 12.
The three angles being given, to find a side.

This Problem is the converse of the last aforegoing, and to be resolved after
the same manner, if so be we convert the angles into sides: for the two less
angles are always equal unto two sides of a Triangle comprehended by the
arches of great circles drawn from there Poles, and the complement of the
greatest angle to a semicircle must be taken for the third side. If in this
triangle therefore thus connected, you shall by the preceding Problem find an
angle, that angle so found shall be one of the three sides inquired.

As the Triangle ACD the poles of those arches are H. R and Q, which connected
make the Triangle HRQ, the sides of the former Triangle being equal to the
angles of the latter, taking for one of them, the complement of the greater
angle to a Semicircle: as AD is equal to the angle at H, or the arch EN.

DC is equal to the angle at Q, or the arch MF.



And AC is equal to the complement of the angle HRQ, or the arch GL. Therefore
if the angles, A, D, C, be given, the sides QR. QH. RH are likewise given.

If therefore we resolve the triangle HRQ by the directions of the last
Problem, the angle so found, shall be the side inquired.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Solution of Oblique angled Spherical Triangles without letting fall a
perpendicular.
HItherto we have explained the Catholic or Universal Proposition, and showed
how serviceable it is, or may be made in Oblique angled spherical Triangles, as
well as right; and now for variety sake we will show how all the case in an
Oblique angled spherical Triangle may be resolved without letting fall a
perpendicular, and that by help of these Propositons following.

Propos. 1.
In any spherical Triangle: the sines of the angles are proportional to the
sines of their opposite sides, and the contrary.

This we have demonstrated from the Catholic Proposition, in the first Problem
of the last chapter.

Propos. 2.
In all Oblique angled Triangles whose sides together are less then a
semicircle.

As the sine of half the sum of the angles at the base,

Is to the sine of the half difference of those angles,

So is the tangent of half the base,

To the tangent of half the difference of the sides.

And also:

As the cosine cf the sum of the angles at the base

Is to the cosine of the half difference of the same angles,

So is the tangent of half the base:

To the tangent of the half sum of the sides.

This you may see demonstrated in the 2 chapter of Spherical triangles in our
Trigonometria Britannica.

Propos. 3.
In all spherical Triangles: As the difference of the versed sines of the sum
and difference of any two sides (including an angle) is to the Diameter: So is
the difference between the versed sine of the third side, and the versed fine
of the difference of the other two sides, to the versed sine of the angle
comprehended of the said two sides.

Let the sides of the Triangle APS be known, and let the vertical angle be SAP,
then shall AS the one side be equal to AR, and PR = Z cru. and PB the versed
sine of PR, and PC is the difference of the sides AS and AP, and the versed
sine of PC is PM, now then MB is the difference between BP the versed sine of
PR the sum of the sides, and PM the versed sine of PC the difference of the
sides.

MH is the difference between PH the versed sine of PS, and PM the versed sine
of PC the difference of the sides, QV is the diameter and OV the versed sine of
PAS the angle sought: and the right lines NC. KL. and RG being parallel by the
work, their intersegments MB and RC, MH and SC are proportional by the 14 of
the second chapter. MB. MH RC. SC RC. SC QV. OV


Therefore, MB. MH QV. OV. as was to be proved.

Or thus, MB. MH QV. OV.

Propos. 4.
In all spherical Triangles: As the Rectangle of the sines of the sides
containing the angle inquired, is to the square of Radius: So is the difference
between the versed sine of the base and the versed sine of the difference of
the other two sides, to the versed sine of the angle sought.

Let the sides of the Triangle AEK be given and let the angle at A be inquired,
and from O let fall the perpendicular OB, now then OE being the difference of
the sides AE and AK =AO the right line OQ is the right sine thereof, and EQ the
versed sine, in like manner, SM is the right sine, and EM the versed sine of
ES, that is. of the base EK, and MQ or OB is the difference of those versed
sines, OK is the versed sine of the angle OAK in the measure of the parallel
OF, and DX is the versed sine of the same angle in the measure of a great
Circle, whose Diameter is DH, now then because of their like arches it shall be
DC. DX LO. OK and because NE and OK are parallel, as* also EC and OB, the angle
BOK and CEN are equal, and the Triangles ECN, OKB like, and therefore the sides
NE. EC. OB = MQ and OK. are proportional, and LO. DC OK DX It will NE EC OB. OK
be also. LO x NE. DC x EC OK x OBDX x OK.

Or rejecting the comm. altitude OK, it will be LO x NE. DC x EC OB. DX* the
versed sine of the angle sought as was to be proved.

Propos. 5.
In all Spherical Triangles: As the Rectangle of the sines of the sides
containing the angle inquired.

Is to the square of Radius,

So is the Rectangle of the sines of the half sum and half difference of the
base, and difference of the legs.

To the Rectangle made of Rad. and half the versed sine of the angle inquired.

We have already proved, by the last afore-going.

LO x NE. DC x AC OB. DX.

And therefore also

LO x NE. Rad. q OB. DX.

And in the following Diag. OEGH the sum of ES and OE is the double measure of
the angle BSO, the arch OS is the difference between the base ES and EO, the
difference of the ^ides AK and AE, and R. OS OH. OB, OS and OH = OB x R.



Therefore,

LO x NE. Rq OB x R. DX x R

And also,

LO x NE. Rq OS x OH DX x R which was to be proved.

Propos. 6
In all Spherical Triangles: As the Rectangle of the sines of the sides
containing the angle inquired.

Is to the square of Radius,

So is the Rectangle of the sines of the half sum and half difference of the
base, and difference of the legs.

To the square of the sine of half the angle inquired.

We have already proved, by the last aforegoing.

LO x NE. Rq OS x OH. DX x R.

But the Rectangle made of Rad. and half the versed sine of an arch, is equal
to the square of the sine of half the arch, as in the former figure, let the
arch given be DT, then is DX the versed sine of that arch, and DF the right
sine of half the arch, and the Triangles DFR and DTX are like.

Therefore,

DR. DF DT (= DF.) DX and DR x DX = DFq

Therefore,

LO x NA. Rq OS x OH.D Fq as was to be proved.

Problem 1.
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find the angle
opposite to the other.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the angle BAC is inquired,

The given Sides AB BC


The given Angle ACB

The Anal. s BA. s BC s C. s A. by the first Prop.

Problem 2.
Two angles with a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
opposite to the other.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the side AB is inquired.

The given Angles BAC ACB


The given Side BC

The Anal s A. s C s BC. s AB by the first Prop.

Problem 3.
Two sides and their contained angle being given to find the other angles.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The angles BAC ACB
are inquired.

The given Sides AB BC


The given Angle ABC

1 Operation.
s Z crur. s X crur. ct B. t X ang. A and C.

2 Operation.
cs Z crur. cs X crur. ct B t Z ang. A and C, by the second Proposition of this
chapter. Z ang. + X ang.=ACB, Z ang.- X ang.=BAC.

Problem 4.
Two angles and their contained side being given to find the other sides.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC.

The sides AB BC
are inquired.

The given Angles BAC ACB


The given Side AC

1 Operation.
s Z ang. s X ang. t AC. t X crur. AB and BC.

2 Operation.
cs Z ang. cs X ang. t AC. t Z cr. AB and BC. by the second Proposition of this
chapter. Z crur. + X crur.=AB. Z crur.- X crur.=BC.

Problem 5
Two sides with an angle opposite to one of them to find the third side.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the side AC is inquired.

The given Sides AB BC


The given Angle ACB

1 Operation.
s AB. s BC s C. s A. by the first Proposition.

2 Operation.
s X ang. A and C. s Z ang. t X crur. t AC.

By the first operation of the last probl. And AC being doubled, gives the
side AC inquired.

Problem 6.
Two angles with a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the third
angle.

In the Oblique angled Spherical triangle ABC, the angle ABC is inquired.

The given Angles BAC ACB


The given Side AB

1 Operation.
s C. s A s AB. s BC. by the first Proposition.

2 Operation.
s X crur. s Z crur. t X ang. A and C. ct ABC. by the 1 oper. of the third
probl.

And the double of ABC is the angle ABC inquired.

Problem 7.
Two angles and a side opposite to one of them being given, to find the side
between them.

In the oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the side AC is inquired.

The given Angles BAC ACB


The given Side AB

1 Operation.
s C. s A s AB. s BC. by the first proposition.

2 Operation.
s X ang. s Z ang. t X crur. t AC. By the 1 oper. of the 4 Problem.

And the double of AC, is the side AC inquired.

Problem 8.
Two sides and an angle opposite to one of them being given, to find their
contained angle.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the angle CBA is inquired.

The given Sides AB BC


The given Angle ACB

1 Operation.
s AB. s BC s C. s A. by the 1 Prop.

2 Operation.
s X crur. s Z crur. t X ang. ct ABC,
by the 1 oper. of the 3 Probl.

And the double of ABC, is the angle ABC inquired.

Problem 9.
Two sides and their contained angle given, to find the third side.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the side AC is inquired.

The given Sides AB BC


The given Angle ABC

First, find the other angles by the third Probl. Then you may find the third
side by the 1 Prop.

Or thus*

Radq. s AB x s BC s q ABC. X us AC and us X crur. by the 4 and 6 Prop of this
chap.

And the versed sine X cr. + X us AC and us X cr. = us AC.

Problem 10.
Two angles and the side between them given. to find the third angle.

This Problem is the converse of the last, and to be resolved in the same
manner, either at 3 operations, finding first the other two sides by the 4th
Probl. and then the third angle, by the 1 Propos.

Or, else by the 4 and 6 Propositions of this chap. the angles being first
converted into sides, and their contained side into an angle as has been
showed in the 12 Probl. of the last chap.

Problem 11.
Three sies being given, to find an angle.

In the Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC, the angle CBA is inquired.

The sides AB. BC. and AC being given.

Analogy, s AB x s BC. Radq. s ZAC and X cru. x s XAC and X cru. sq B. by the
6 Propos.

Problem 12.
Three angles being given, to find a side.

This is the converse of the last, and to be resolved after the same manner,
the angles being first converted into sides, (as has been already showed in
the 12 Probl: of the last chapt.) for then the angle so found, shall be the
side inquired.

FINIS.

