The Hue and Cry after the PRIESTS: Who wander from Benefice to Benefice,
directed to those who are near neighbors to the great Parsonages, where (if it
be possible) they are to be found.

It being an ANSWER to the MINISTERS Hue and Cry; Published by a Devout
Clergyman; R. Culmer.

The Dialogue explained, the Priests dress pulled off, the Speakers, who in
the Parsons attireing-house were clothed in a Disguise; Mr. Culmers Speakers.

Paul Shepherd. Barnaby Sheafe. Rob. Rob-Minister. Tom-Tyth-Short.
Alias, Paul Sheep-biter; Barnaby Shift; Rob. Rob not Christ's Ministers; Tom
has Tythed too-long: hoping the hours approach wherein he shall no longer
Tithe.

The Imprimatur says, Let this Hue and Cry pass, follow it Have; Post Have.

Let it pass the Parochial, Provincial, Classical combination; But for all
your haste, we must examine its warrant, least it be a false pretense, and not
sealed with the Royal Signet of King JESUS.

Can. 5.7. The watchmen found me, and smot me they wounded me (...) Micha 3.11.
The Priests teach for hire. Jude 3. They run greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward. Published by the weakest and unworthiest of the Laborers in
Gods Vineyard.

CHARLES NICHOLS.

LONDON. Printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Crown in Popes-Head-Alley, 1651.

A Rambling Hue and Cry coming lately to my hand, with this Superscription next
the Imprimatur.
Follow it have, post have.
I Was somewhat suspicious that it made more have then good speed, or that it
made great have to pass through men's hands, least it should be over-taken, and
attached for A Cheat. Wherefore I could not but a little commune with the
Officer, under whose conduct it came forth, and that was the Title of R.
Culmer, and casting but a glaunce on the Book, I espied a design on foot, or
else the barn Doors would never have made so hideous an outcry; And because I
would not trust the first sight, I looked again thereon, and at every cast of
my eye, I more and more espied A Priestcraft therein. I then enquired whence
the Hue and Cry came, and the three first Leaves answered me, From compassing
the Earth: and indeed how could the witty Interlocutor so dexteriously have met
with every Parsons cart, if they had not trotted their horses to very Jades in
so Classical a service? Then I very much desired to know of what race the
Stratagem was, and to find out its progeny; at last it seemed to be of the
kindred of Grangrena, at Jest one of the hand-maidens to that sweet-lipt Lady;
Peradventure it is Midwift into the world instead of that Abortive, though
often promised Rejoinder. But be it what it will be, I shall send abroad the
examination of the Witnesses there produced, that so, if you shall meet with
the hasty Hue and Cry, you may understand its hidden language. But what need
the Author be in such post, and sweat, and froath himself in such A hasty
Outcry, the harvest being no nearer? does he mean to set his seal upon every
tenth Blade of corn as it peepeth out of the ground?

In the Title Page there be 3 Texts alleged as witnesses; The First is, Mal.
3.8. which made me almost think that some wandering Jew, borrowing the Title of
R. Culmer, in his pilgrimage to the Temple had fallen asleep, and being half
asleep, and half awake, as in a dream, had cried out, will you rob God of
Tithes and Offerings? For it is most evident that this Text refers to Israel
who paid Tithes to Priests and Levites, and the Author of the Hue and Cry
says, p 15 We are no Priests, and it is the more shame for him that he urges
this place, for Malachi tells us that the sons of Levi must be purged in the
third verse of this third Chapter, and in the seventh verse of the same
Chapter, the Prophet tells Israel they were gone away from Gods Ordinances,
instancing in Tithes, and thereupon says Malachi, God is robbed. And it was
then robbery of God, because of God reserved the Tyth, when he gave Israel
Canaan, and gave it to the Priests and Levites for the service of the
Tabernacle, Number. 28.
and in the 10. verse of this 3 of Mal. says the Prophet, bring the Tithe into
the storehouse, that there may be meat in Gods house; According to that Law in
Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6 and elsewhere; In which Israel was enjoined to go to the place
God should choose, and thither they were of old to bring their offerings and
tyths, and there to eat them before the Lord in his house, Mr. C. knows the
Parsonage Barn is not that Storehouse God has chosen no one place whereunto
Saints under the Gospel should bring their offerings. Gods material house made
of stones, etc. is destroyed, and therefore there can be no meat eaten in it,
God has separated no part of our estate for himself more then other, Col
2.14. Heb. 7.12.
Christ has taken away that handwriting off Ordinances, and Saints rob not
God in keeping their Tenth; But the Hue and Cry commits a Rape on the Text,
adulterating the sense thereof to self ends. The next witness which the Hue and
Cry calls in, is Act. 5.1. Ananias and Saphira sold their possessions, and
kept back part of the price, which very witness does cast the Author in his
piteous plea for Tithes, for it discovers a change of the Law of tithes, since
the change of the Priesthood, had tyths been in sort instead of bringing in
their possessions Ananias should have brought in his Tyth, and it shows a
difference between the possessions of Saints under the Gospel, and Israel in
the land of Canaan. Levit. 25.23.
The land of Canaan was Gods, and might not be sold for ever, and the tenth was
Gods by special reservation; But Ananias possession was his own, in his own
power, as the Apostle testifies, he might sell it for ever, Tenth and all;
otherwise he might colourably have replied, that the part of the price which he
kept back was to satisfy the Priest for tithes. But what thick scales are
before M. C. eyes, who hardly discernes this Scripture as well as the blind man
in the Gospel did men, Mark 8.
who saw them walk, like trees. M.C. sees whole possessions stand like tithes,
and tithes like whole possessions, for by this Text he can descerne no interest
in the truth, but if he will follow the prefident in this 5 of the Acts, we
must bring the price of our whole possessions, and lay them down at his feet,
and who will be the Leveller then? But M. C. may do well in his next Hue and
Cry to declare who sold him the tenth of their estates, and stood not to the
bargain. If he can charge any that profess Christ with a Lie, (as that was
the sin of Ananias) let them bear their sin and shame; but whilst he craftily
slanders the truly conscientious, it is not the fig-leaf of a Dialogue will
cover his nakedness, from being an accuser of the brethren.

The next place alleged is, 2 Cor. 11.26. In perils of Robbers, in perils of
false brethren. It is no great wonder that M. C. meets with robbers sometimes,
traveling so often between the Committees threshold and his own barn doors,
surely Robbers know fat Parsons, and they can digest the price of two or three
Tyth Piggs without the thought of Sacrilege; But let me assure you M. C. if
you call the people of God thieves under the flourish of a Dialogue; false
accusers will one day be arraigned at a most dreadful tribunal, where a Book
shall be opened more righteous then your Easter Book, Rev. 2^ 12. 2 Tim^
out of which they shall be adjudged; If false brethren were perilous to Paul,
must none of the truest Ministers be perilous to true brethren?

In the next place I met with the Epistle dedicated to the Committee. In the
Front whereof my Lord General was fixed, moving the Parliament for the relief
of the oppressed. And Sir, in that motion why moved he not against the
oppression of Tithes; then M.C. clothes the Ministers in gay titles as Able,
Orthodox, etc. and it is to be hoped that his brethren when their pens are
active to reward him, will remember the Able, Orthodox, Hue and Cry, and spread
a skirt of applause upon the Author that he be not naked. But the committee are
informed that the Ministers are the most oppressed party in the Land, and to
prove his assertion, he wonderfully argues, that they have scores of complaints
against their oppressors: It is as soon said, they are the most oppressing
party, and there is as good Logic to prove it, for there are hundreds of
complaints against their oppressions; then M. C. says, If he should hold his
peace the stones of the wall, and beams of timber in the barn would cry: That
is if he should hold his peace, and not make such a noise, the very barnes
would cry down tithes, and therefore the Hue and Cry out cries them, to drown
their language from being understood, then M. C. affirms; That Ministers
suffer under the people, as they did under the Prelates; But forgets to inform
us, that the people should be troubled to discern, whether the Bishops were
removed, or no, but that the honorable, and our honored Parliament
commissionate not these Hue and Cry Merchants to lash all whom they make
offenders at their pleasure. Then Mr. Culmer smooths over his own Parish, as
if he complained not against them, but he limits his encomium with this clause,
As to late transactions, implying that formerly the Hue and Cry might have
hunted for them. But they having done sufficient penance, he publishes their
absolution. Yet he says, he has cause to cry out against one or two, and the
tithes of one or two will pay for his three sheets, since they are not sealed
with his Leviticall signet for good Churchmen; Then Mr. C. glories, That his
plain discovery of the disease will procure a speedy remedy from the State and
Church Physicians. And who can dream of a less effect, since the Hue and Cry
has played the Mountebanke, and looked into the Urinall with Spectacles that
fit the sight of old women of an hundred year old at the least, and cried out
Leprosy, who judges healthinesse not by the quality, but by the quantity of
blood; stuff the barn, and the Hue and Cry will say all is well, though it be
with the moldie bread of Tithes. But this Masterpiece of wit, must be
presented to the Committee, and could the Author do less then gratify those
whose threshold he so haunts, with some profound piece to eternize their names?
But let me commune with the Book, and softly whisper one word into the ear of
the Hue and Cry, and therefore Dromo adesdum, speak the truth once, and tell
me this Question, Why art thou gilded with the name of the Committee in thy
Epistle? Ans. H.C. Truly, I could never have passed from door to door, but
every where should have been baited like a Bear at a stake, as I do very well
deserve, had it not been for this shift; Moreover I am sent by my sharpness
(if it be possible) to whet the Committee to an edge to cut some, whom they
find not worthy of bonds, and therefore let me pass, Haste, Haste, least I
come too late. Reply, Thou should have passed for me, and I would never have
spent drop of ink to cross thy hasty journey, but that by this Hue and Cry so
many foul blots are injuriously cast in the faces of honest men, that I could
not in conscience but wipe of those undeserved stains; And so I come to the
design of the Author, which in general is to keep up tottering tithes; and
herein I cannot but observe, how God has blinded his eyes, and broken the
design in the very management. Indeed Mr. Culmer has found out a new way of
gleaning into his Vintage, the sour Grapes of Tithes; for having carried all
he could into his Barn, he has bound up the rakings in a Book, and its
probable he may have a good market for them; many may purchase his experiments,
to learn thereby to Tithe most artificially. He has labored to rake every
gratten for the Parson, but he has taken a course to make the boughed Shocke
thinner then ever, for he has taught men (to cosen, as he calls it in Print)
and no question but many may be apt Scholars, and hundreds may learn by the
Hue and Cry, the mystery of Tything-Short. And this great Ingineer who thought
to have undermined the reputation of good men, and to have consumed their fame
by the wildfire of his Hue and Cry, has done little else then blown up
himself, and Tithes, that darling of his Bosom in his train. It is
wonderful to see what a profound Student the Author is, in what he calls
Cheating, as if he were an old Doctor at it. Surely the aggrieved Clergy have
wrung their hands before this Champion, for the decay of their Merchandise, he
has notable intelligence from the Barns, how thin they are, and how they come
to be so starven; he has registered whole leaves full of tricks to teach men to
Tyth-Short, and if they be his own inventions, he has sweat fair to teach
men so compendious a way to keep their tenthes, and may commence Master of that
Art, and wear the Garland before all that ever went before him. But if they be
stories of what is past, the ages to come will be beholding to M. C. for so
painful a gleaning up, and so zealous a recording of the practices of the
generation past for their instruction; and to have completed the Hue and Cry,
Mr. C. might have added this outcry: O yes, O yes, If any poor aggrieved
Parson, have complaint to make, against those who cannot pay Tithes, let him
come to my Court of Records, and now whilst I am pursuing my Hue and Cry,
having Commissionated my self to be chief Officer, I will set forth his
complaint, to the utmost power of my Gigantine arm in Print: But I shall pass
over his Tricks, leaving them for any one to improve to the best advantage, and
shall go forth to unmaske the defigne further; the Author laboring to Cloak
the single-hearted intentions of men guided by the Word in the ugly and
hateful disguise of Malignancy, Levellisme, and Profaneness. And to the tune
of this Pipe dances the first page, wherein Mr. C. clearly hints that the
reasons which move men to act against Tithes are: First, that Ministers may be
their Trencher-Chaplaines; but he is whist, and tells us not, whose
Trencher-Chaplaine the Assistant to the Dr. of Harble-downe was, whom the
following story so applaudes: then he insinuates that the Priests are hindered
from Tithes, because they be Roundheads: But if Mr.C. be pleased to pull off
his Mask, he may see that those he calls Malignants, are the most devout
Tythe-payers, and they are beholding to him, for so befriending them for their
pains, as secretly to brand those who cannot pay Tithes, with the obloquie of
Malignancy. Moreover it is experienced that there be many who although they
cannot pay Tithes, yet are as true and trusty to the State as the best of Mr.
Culmers tribe; and let me inform Mr. C. that if ante-Statisme condemn men,
most of his Coat will fall as short, and shorter of praise, as those whom he
secretly bespatters with Malignancy for not paying of Tithes; and because it
here suteth, I shall allege somewhat from the 16. and 17 pages, there being
^ickned ^ins, waxing faint, and feeble, by the same disease; Where Mr.C.
through the lips of Tom Tythe-Short, would persuade us that those that cannot
Tithe it to his content have gotten Mr. Maligo to be their Pastor, and want the
Communion on St. Christmas day, and other Coat-card days, and that they feast
Mr. Maligoes Carcass, who preaches Elephantly, etc. but through this mist men
may clearly see, that many who cannot pay Tithes are so far from affecting Mr.
Maligo, that Mr. Cs. Tribe sents the worse in their nostrils, for their Maligo
savor, and they do not trouble Mr. C. for his communion, though some may
expect Mr. C. whole service, who pay him whole wages; And for Coat-card Sermons
(to speak in Mr Cs. own Dialect) they so ill relish them, that they affect
those men the worse, whose dress makes them look like one of the Coatcards;
and if Maligo men speak so Elephantly, we may judge of what Island M. C. is,
for he has written very Elephantly, showing a great tooth ready to bite if it
were but sharpened with power; and it is to be supposed that Mr. C. is not much
behind hand for plum-porredge Sermons which he so accuses, and though he blame
some for keeping Sermons in the Pickle, yet it is more then probable that he
has somewhat in his powdring Tub: and we see a Dialogue in brine what Masters
and Dames so ever it pleases. Then Mr Maligo is accused for giving the
Communion to all comers, like Hogs to a Trough, which thing though it be
abominable, yet it would trouble us to reckon how many Swine, M. C. has fed
with that bread, and if that be Mr. Maligoes badge, we shall find Mr. Maligoes
good-store. But I would entreat Mr. C. though some stand to the corrupt
principles, which they have sucked from the Pulpits, and know not how to break
their old wheel-trades to drive after him, but love their old fashions wherein
they have been dressed by Clergy honds, I say, I would desire M.C. with such
not to condemn those who have shaken off, not only those stinking clothes,
but are desirous to be stripped also, and that upon Scripture grounds of the old
relic of Tithes.

The next ragg of filthiness in which Mr. C. would wrap Antetytheists is,
Profaneness; But I am confident such is the guiltlesnesse of many, in what
the Hue and Cry secretly charges them, that if they should be covered with the
mask either of Malignancy, Prophanenes, or Levelisme, their honest hearts
could not know their own faces in that garb. Mr.C. adds that no Tyth-payers,
are no Sermon men, and that they can well spare two things, A priest, and a
Sabbath. But how can M. C. be spared? whom shall we then get to write Hue and
Cries? But many who are dead with Christ to Tithes sanctify the Sabbath, which
they can in no case spare, and delight in Sermons, though not in those Satyrs
and Dialogues which are stuffed with subtle slanders; Wherefore I could not but
speak the truth to their vindication, who frequent Alehouses less then many
of Master Culmers Tribe, though he would persuade men that the reason they
cannot get Tithes, is, their zeal against Alehouses, and Oaths; I can easily
think. that Alehouses shrink the Tyth-heapes of some, but it is because they
haunt them so much: Then we are informed that in the 8. of Amos we may see the
pedigree of some men. And in the third of Mal. 11. We may see the pedigree of
others, where we find that the Priests teach for hire, both which together
conclude, Like Priests, like people.

The third wound that Mr.C. could give Antichrists in their reputation is
Levelisme, page 6. where he says under the Title of Tom. T.

It goes against my will, I mean my conscience, to pay Tyth rent or Landlords
rent, then Tom calls himself a Leveller, which he explains with this profound
proverb, Joane should have been as good as my Lady, etc, here to flatter the
Committee, and to blind the people Mr. C. would persuade that wilfulness was
all the conscienciousnesse that men used in not paying Tithes; But I here
assert it, that the Scripture-guided-conscience holds the hands of many from
paying of Tyths, and I would here at large prove it, but I intend not a volumn
here, only I was pressed in spirit to draw my pen through the lines of the Hue
and Cry, to give a dash over the head of the slanders which I there found, and
so I humbly refer the Reader to a Book lately published, entitled, A
Declaration of the grounds of not paying, and the grievances of many in being
forced to the payment of Tyths. And let me assure, M. C. that such men defy
the name of Levelling, and the gloss he puts upon it, which is, To make Jane
as good as my Lady; If that be the guise of a Leveller, then, who be Levellers?
When tithes make many a Joane Lady-like, as for paying of Landlords Rent, let
their practice comment upon their principle. Are they Levellers, or do they
level men's estates? who would not have the Parsons barn level the Country, and
be the only mountain, and though Mr. C. does, yet the Gospel does not call
them robbers, who are not Tythe-payers.

Thus I have explained the design in general, and so I shall briefly touch
the Divinity of Paul Sheapheard.

Page 7, M.C. out of the mouth of Tom. Trumpets forth Paul Sheapheard praise,
calling him Able, Godly, Orthodox. But if Tyth-divinity be the Orthodox stuff
Mr. C has to vent, he will scarcely be able to prove it godly under the New
Testament; then Mr. C. calls Rob. Robber, because he robs Paul Shepherd
of his good name, and by his own Logic he is a Robber, in robbing honest men
of their good names, and leaving Malignant and Leveller in their room; Mr. C.
says he rejoices in Slanders, but it is small joy to suffer as an evil
doer, I rather think by the Hue and Cry, that he rejoices in slaundring. He
prints moreover that our Governors know the Mystery of it, when men pretend
they cannot edefie by one whom they choose not. The Mystery is easily known,
to wit, that every Church of Christ has undoubted right to choose their own
Officers, then he instructs his neighbors, that they cannot put tricks upon
the Governors; And yet he has fathered thirty one tricks at least, a whole
game of tricks, upon the Committee for patronage, and so has put the trick of
an Hue and Cry upon honest men. Page 8. M.C. asserts, that one or two sway a
Parish, and so do the Parson and Vicar if they can. Then he complains, that
some be like hounds, that when one yalpes, all open; but we cannot be so
currish as to open in Consort at the yalping of P.C. Blood-hound the Hue and
Cry: The rest of that page is spent in a story of an honest Minister of
Harbledowne. 1 Of R.C. as I suppose, but the commendation being by his own
pen, I shall leave it upon record as the Author has published it: This honest
Minister (but it is supposed he has put on his best clothes in the
expression) is called Assistant to a Dr. alias Journey-man Curat: which Dr. is
wonderfully applauded, and no wonder, since we are sent to him for intelligence
in the Harbledowne story. At last we are certified, That the good Minister went
away, and shook off the dust of his feet against them: and yet I am persuaded
he carried away as much dust from them as he could; And where can we find an
honest Minister, without this badge of goodness, amongst Mr. C. Tribe? That
will not shake off the dust of his feet against a small living, to thrust them
up to the knees into the mire of a great Parsonage. But we are told it was done
willingly on the Ministers part; yet it seems he had not the peoples wills to
stay any longer. In the ninth page, Mr. C. cavels against free maintenance;
where he says, That the Disciples were to heal diseases freely, then he
affirms, that their bodily cures could not but every where bring them in
plenteous provision, then he adds, That they were as sheep among Wolves. And
how could they be so plenteously provided for, and yet be among Wolves? how
could they heal diseases freely, and yet sell their cures? He adds, These
things are ceased. But their chief work was to preach the Gospel, and their
encouragement therein, was, what was freely communicated to them, Luke 8.4
Phil. 15, 16.1 Romans 15 27. 1 Cor. 1^ 2.
and there is not one clause of Gospel that shows us, that this free
maintenance was to cease, or to be exchanged for a forced maintenance; neither
was it changed, until Churches grew corrupt. M. C. documentiseth us, That
maintenance is as due to the Minister, as hire is to the Labourer; so it was of
old, and yet it was left to the people to contribute, as God moved their
hearts. But by what new sound Law or Oracle would Mr.C. persuade men, that they
must pay those who do no work for them, he would have men pay those whom they
never hired, and though they do labor to pull down Christ's buildings, yet he
would have them paid: The labor it seems must be considered, though it be a
laboring to destroy: But he that sets some at work will pay them their wages.
Neither does Christ hire his laborers with Tithes. Maintenance indeed the
Gospel allows, and it is so a debt that it is free, and so free that it is a
debt, as says the Apostle, Romans 15.27. It has pleased them of Macedonia and
Achaiah to make a contribution, ver. 28. The Apostle adds, their debtors they
are, giving us the reason, to wit, they had been made partakers of their
spiritual things; where we see it was a debt, and it was due for spirituals,
and to discharge this debt it pleased them to contribute, and they contribute
what they pleased; no bounds were set them, no outward force compelled them. He
that receives spirituals, owes carnals, but it is left free, neither does the
Gospel determine, how much he shall pay.

Neither can I see any warrant to call in earthly power to force men to
contribute more then they be free, Act. 5. the Apostle told Ananias that it was
in his own power, if he had not brought it, it should not have been compelled
from him, 2 Cor. 9.6, 7.
he does not say it was in Caesar's power, but in the power of the Donor. Indeed
we are enjoined, not to sow sparingly, but note the penalty, which is, least
you reap sparingly; it is not added least the Magistrate turn Christian, and
force it with damage from you, the next verse crosses that, where it is said;
God loves a cheerful giver, yea, and he hates a grudging giver, and to force a
man by earthly power to give, who grudges thereat, is to force him to do what
God hates. But Mr. C. to speak like himself, that every sentence might bear
his image in its forehead, adds, That men's free benevolence is a Wolfish
benevolence. And is not the Parsons spirit a wolfish spirit, who if men will
not feast him, will devour them; then he tells us that Christ found such a
wolfish benevolence: but he may blush at that drop of his pen, since neither
Christ nor his, never went about to force better entertainment by worldly
weapons, and would, M.C. be better then our Lord and Master, or does he think
now nothing to good for him, since he has sent his Hue and Cry abroad to
proclaim his fame? The next thing which is abomination in his eyes is, working
with his hands; yet I should be sorry to see M.C. have power to slash all whom
his Hue and Cry persues, fearing least he work, and belabour them with hands
and feet too. But M Culmer summons us to distinguish between the Church in
prosperity, and in persecution, the distinction is too too clear. For the
Churches under prosperity began to be Antichristian, and to lay the foundation
of their Kingdom in the world, whereas under persecution they were purest, and
were best content to follow the Lord in his leading footsteps.

Then M.C. grants, as being not able to deny. That Paul would not abuse his
power, by being chargeable, where it could not be without oppression to the
distressed; And by that grant, multitudes are judged, who though Christ give
them no power to live of Tithes, yet they abuse the power they pretend to, in
being oppressors to the destressed. For the Priest will have from poor men,
tyth, who can hardly keep a Cow to feed their infants with milk, yea, the
tenth egg must not escape his fingers, though a poor man's child want it to
make a meal, and such like things Mr. Vicar calls his privy Tithes. I do
believe that the Gospel allows a Gospel Minister, to accept of a livelihood,
as due for Gospel service, in the way of the Gospel; but I cannot meet with
Scripture or reason, that shows they should live of the Alter. Then Mr. C.
adds, that he is not one penny charge to Robin the Farmer for tyths, and other
duties, and that he receives none of his temporalls; which is such a riddle,
that M. C. must charm up Edipus to uphold it; Does he mean that he has none
of Robins temporalls, because Robin keeps his tithes himself? or does he mean
he has none of his temporals, adjudging tithes not to be temporals but
spirituals? or does he mean they are not his, but Gods, because in the first
page we are told that God is robbed? but surely the man means the Tithes are
not the Farm^^s, and if they be not his; how can he pay his debts to the
Priests (as they call them) with them; the reason is given; Because the Farmer
pays so much the cheaper for the Land, and hires it upon that condition. I
never saw a Lease yet expressing that condition, and if it be employed, what a
snare is it, that men cannot follow their callings without such a burden? that
a man may not hire a piece of land without that bondage which grates his
conscience, and grindes his Family. But is the Parson no charge to the Farmer,
monstrum horendum; though the Land be his Landlords, yet the seed is his own,
either paid for, or to be paid for. The tillage his own, the mending of that
Land his own, the harvest his own, the servants and stock his own; and if
M.C, can teach the farmer to do all this without charge to him, it would have
gotten him more respect then his Hue and Cry, and the tenth arises out of all
this; the Land will not bring forth alone. Tithes are so chargeable to some
that they almost beggar them, I might have said altogether. A poor Farmer may
owe for his seed, and plough and dung his land at great cost, and at harvest,
his crop may not be much more then he sowed, beside all other charge, and yet
what the Canker, and Crows, and Rookes, and Dawes have left, the Parson will
Mildew, though the Landlord have as much rent as the Land is worth without
Tithes, But the Priest is no charge it seems, the tenth Sheaf is dung it seems
enriching the Land, Contus contrarium verumest; But M.C. triumphs, in that
Tithes were before Levi. So was circumcision, Gal. 5.4, 5
the same Abraham in whose loins Levi paid Tithes, circumcised Isaac, so was
cleanes and uncleanesse of beasts, etc. in Noah's time; and yet they are ceased,
and he that is circumcised makes Christ of no effect; we are informed that
Tithes were Gods way: and so was circumcision, so was cleanness and
uncleanness, but now they are not owned by God being abolished. If Tithes were
the way of God for Gospel Ministers, then Christ, and the best of
Gospel Ministers were out of Gods way, who took none. But M.C. alleadges that
Christ approved of Tithes, mat. 13. But to whom was it approved? even to the
Pharisees, and is M. C. one of the Sect? But Christ had not then altogether
fulfilled the Law, and abrogated the ceremonies thereof; and since his death
and resurrection, we have not the least tittle of approbation thereof, either
by Christ or his Apostles. M.C. produces, Gal. 6. where he that is taught in
the word is to communicate to him that teaches him in all good things. But no
man is enjoined how much, but therein is left free, neither is any one engaged
to communicate to him by whom he is not taught; Then M.C. calls for the
Magistrate to punish evil doers, but cannot prove the non-payment of tithes to
be an evil deed, and to encourage them that do well; and do not they do well,
who desire that the slain ceremonies may be buried in Christ's grave, and much
better then they who would rake them out? Then to sound the profundity of his
brain, he cronicles, That one may do a duty freely, 1 Cor. 7.23.
though the Magistrate command it, but a man fearing God must not sin against
his duty of God, by the commands of what men soever, since we find our selves
in the Gospel, neither enjoined by duty to pay tithes; nor liberty left us to
revive the dead ceremonies of the Law, we cannot freely betray our consciences
in offering such a sacrifice; M. C. demands, if they that rob him against Law,
will freely maintain him without Law: If he be a Minister of Christ he must
have recourse to the Gospel for maintenance, and if Saints embrace him as such
an one, they will and ought to maintain him without men's Laws. It is next
asked; Whether the profane and heretical will maintain Orthodox Ministers. I
would gladly see where the Gospel expects from such Minsteriall maintenanance,
whilst such. Must Christ's Ministers be fed out of the troughs of Swine, Mr. C.
told us even now, that the Preacher of Harble-downe shook of the dust of his
feet, and I am confident such a practice is more justifiable from Scripture,
then to force tithes from them who despise both Ministers, and Ministry. Then
Mr.C. argues, that if Ministers must be maintained by voluntary contribution,
that they will be ensnared to daube up those people; and the same argument
holds, that if some men settle on them Tyths, that they will daube them to keep
their Leviticall Patrimony, and do they not bravely daube, and grease their
Patrons, whose servants, orators flatterers they will be, and theirs for a
Presentation: Then the man not without a notable forehead publishes, That
heresies will abound as in Paul's time, if there be not settled maintenance. This
is a gallant strain, and had need be powdered up for fear of savor; can a man
be so wilfully blind, as secretly to charge the heresies in Paul's time upon the
want of settled maintenance; but he can see as well through a stone-wall, as
through a Tyth-shocke? do settled riches preserve from heresies? or rather are
they not the poison of Churches? as Austin said, Religio peperit divitias, and
filia devoravit matrem. It would please the Parson well to have the Church
planted in Dives his Family, and to have Lazarus excommunicated. Can an earthly
Law preserve from heresies, more then that Apostolical spirit which breathed in
Paul's time? who are fuller of heresies then the Romish Synagogue, and yet who
swim more in Tithes, and other riches? Nay the Whore Rev. 17. has her
abominations and filthiness of fornication poured into a Golden Cup. If
forcing of tithes will drive and keep out heresy, it verefies the old
Proverb; that one heat will drive out another, one heresy another. We are
told Christ paid tribute, what is that? since he, nor his took no tithes, must
all the Land be tributary to the Priest, have they conquered us into a
vassallage? Then he says, Tithes be due by a Civil Law, even now, he brought
forth the old Law of God, which is changed, and told us of robbing God.

Then he persuades himself, that none can deny, but that Tithes be the
equallest way; it would be worth seeing, if he shall call forth but half so
many arguments to back his assertion, as their be men, who upon demonstration
can show, that there is no equality in them. Why should a poor farmer pay more
then a rich Landlord, or a great Shopkeeper? Then M.C. says he has as much
right to the tenth part as the owner has to the nine, that must be understood,
he as a Minister has this right. But till he can show where the Gospel
enrights him to the tenth, he must give men leave to be at their choice whether
they will believe it or no.

In the next place, Mr.C. does not love to hear of going to another parish to
be paid better, which is a sure mark of a good benefice. He says, so to do
would make Ministers Runagates; But who made a runagate of the good man of
Harble-down, and of other, who post from Benefice to Benefice for gain. Now
the feet which could shake of dust against a small living, are sunk so deep in
the mire of Tithes that they must not be wagged; then we are told, that Christ's
own would not receive him. But he did not force himself upon them, which he
might have done, with much more reason then Mr. Culmer, surely he cannot
challenge whole parishes to be his own, if he can, he were best claim the
first borne, and to take the price of redemption, which was in force when
tithes were, M.C. tells us it is a prejudice to their Ministry to be in and
out. Poor men they be asleep and dream not of this thought, when the great
Barnes cry Come, then the Echo is, Number. 18.5
Here we be, how shall we get in? Then if they or theirs, be Cosen to a Patron,
or a Committee man, or the like, or acquainted with them, they run to them to
help them obey the call of the Barn, which in no case will go out of their
ears,

In the 13. page M.C. would turn opposition of Ministers into opposition of
State, as if Ministers were the States Ambassadors. And to applaud the Civil
Seal, which he glories to have received to his Ministry; he expresses that the
Scripture speaks of sending, But the New Testament speaks not of earthly Kings
sending of Gospel Ministers, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings sends his
own Ambassadors; and to fill up the Epha of guile Mr. C. adds, that some
would would be subject in nothing, meaning those that cannot pay tithes. A pure
Neronian blast, fit language for the Hue and Cry, just as if of old they should
have said, because Paul bid us not be servants of men, and to stand fast in our
liberty, in which Christ has made us free, This Paul whom they called
Pestilent fellow, 1 Cor. 7.23. Gal. 5.3^.
would have us subject in nothing. But let me tell M.C. that we can freely give
to Caesar the things which be Caesar's, though we dare not make the Commandment
of God of no effect by Tradition, being taught that they worship God in vain,
who teach for doctrines the commands of men, Mat 15.6.9. Then M. C. as if he
knew the way, plainly affirms, That some will go to hell to save charges,
paying of tyths will not keep men out under the Gospel; some men have bought
hell with money, in thinking to buy heaven, in giving great sums for bulls,
pardons, dispensations. Then M.C. dislikes that any should say they hear him
not, and therefore need not pay him tyths, because they may hear if they will,
but some cannot communicate with the Parish Parsons, some again have land in
three Parishes, and cannot partake of spiritual from them all, by the Parish
account, and yet they all will claim temporals. Then he tells us, that Mrs.
complains of servants now they are not compelled to go to Church at home; he
has not forgot, that when men were strictliest bound to their Parish Church,
as he calls it, that then there was ground enough to complain of servants,
and masters also, when was there more sporting on the sabbath, etc. M.C. would
never think of slashing those to parish assemblies, who in conscience cannot
join there, but are led by an enlightened conscience to spend the Lords day
elsewhere to their souls edefying, according to Gods word, but that he wants
their tyths, as if such an offering would expiate any sin. Then M.C. to
persuade men to pay him, tells them they have paid tyths to popish Priests, and
altar Priests, and has he not as much right to them as they; what goodly
president P. Shepherd has gotten: Then we are assured, that the Parliament
will not be companions of Thieves, nor guilty of other men's sins: Many rejoice
at it that our worthies will not force men to pay tithes, who in conscience
cannot pay to whom it would be a sin to pay; what is not of faith is sin. Then
he queries, Whether we think their will be a failer of Justice in Parliament?
Truly, many hope not, and for all M.Cs. accusations, they hope to see their
righteous transactings in removing of tyths. Then he publishes, That
combination against Law is sedition. But when they wanted the Bishops down who
were established by law, that they might get in their rooms, then it was not
sedition in them for to move against them. Then they pleaded to be eased by the
Parliament in the correction of the oppressing laws, and that is all the
combination against law that I know honest men to use in respect of tyths; even
humbly to desire the Parliament to repeal that Law, which enforces
conscientious men against their consciences. But he cavels at holiness next,
with this Quest. Is fraud holiness? as if not to pay tyth could be accounted
fraud, then we are told, That these are times of discovery. Many of M.Cs. tribe
have proved it true, in showing what they are. Then he declares That a good man
is a Law to himself, when he can do evil without danger of law, and that
tyth-robbing has ever been the badg of a Knave. But why does M.C. put light
for darkness, and darkness for light; May any by Law continue what Christ
has abolished? can the law of man make that good which is not good? though a
good man be good without law, yet he cannot be evil by law Who does M.C. call
Tyth-robbers, they who take tyth, where men cannot pay tyth, or those who pay
no tyth. If a man be a knave for not paying tyth, then is he a knave for
following of Christ and his Apostles, and the Saints in the Primitive times,
who neither took nor paid any; it is to be hoped that the next book M. C.
publishes will be a Callender full of new holidays, where we may look to see
Tyth-payers cannonized for saints, and festivals to be kept, if not for their
sakes, yet at their costs. But no men speak so much unlike Peter as they that
pretend most to Peter's Chair; and what man can speak more unlike Paul then he
that pretends to the name of Paul Shepherd? Does Paul say, It is the badg of
a Knave not to pay tyths? No, no, this is some of the Hue and Cry Orthodox
divinity, and the vomit of M.C. stomach, who further says; That he that makes
no conscience to pay tyths and other duties to the Minster, will be found
unconscionable in all his dealings when he has advantage, whatever fair
pretense of conscience he make M. Cl. dialogue will not wash away the blot
which this foul slander casts upon his name; but because he says it is matter
of his own observation, it is the less wonder, because he looks on such men
through the spectacles of prejudice; but however M.C. overlooked them; there be
many that cannot pay tyths, who have as few motes in their eyes as himself,
and show as great a conformity to Christ in the whole course of their
conversation as he does, or can do. Mr.C. accused some to be enflamed with
hellish Covetousnes. When, or from what pit arose those sparks which have
enflamed M. C. tongue that it scorches so hotly in these fiery fire revilings.
Then he ads It is but a figleafe to cover the withholding of tyth, under
pretense it is but tyth: and when Christ who judges righteously shall appear,
I doubt it will prove little better then afig leaf to many, to cover the
coveting of their neighbors goods, under pretense that it is tyth. Then to
strike at the very root, we are told, That it is the depth of Satan to set
pretenders to new light seekers, etc. to quench the light of the Gospel by
taking away the livelihood of the Minister; which brings to my mind that
passage concerning Satan, of whom it is said, That he shull rage, having but a
short time; what can be foamed out more against the people of God, then may be
found in the Hue and Cry of P.S. As for the light of the Gospel, it is of a
more divine nature then to be quenched by the decay of the oil of tyths; and it
did shine brightest when it had none of that foreign fuel: and when lamps
have been fullest of that oil, the light of the Gospel has been most thick and
cloudy, and filled with the snuffie stenches of domineering humane inventions.
To M.C. next leaf I have replied, in the beginning of my answer, only I shall
quote one clause of the H. C. then passed over, which is this; M.C. affirming,
That Gods word and not our reasons must be the rule of our life and
conversation, I would M. C. would have the sent of that notion in his nostrils
when he hunts after tyths, and measure out his maintenance by the line of the
Gospel. Then M.C. tells us, That Barnaby Sheaf, to wit the Impropriator, wonders
why men be so obstinate as not to pay tyths; and may he not wonder whose eyes
be daubed up through partiality and interests, all the while in the Dialogue,
Barnaby stood mute, and now is called forth instead of a Clerk to say Amen, to
P. Sheepheards Orthodox stuff. Now he can sing in tune with Paul Sh. and say,
Men are unperswadeable by clear light and reason: But where shall we find that
clear light and reason, the Hue and Cry only groaps in the dark, or does the
clear light and reason shine in the firmament of Rome? But a candle of their
own making will give light enough to serve their turn. Then Bar. Shea. Paul
Shep. brother in law says, his estate lies in tyths; and can it lie worse? he
is unwilling to be undone; O that he were so unwilling to undo others. Then he
says, that parsonages have been bought and sold, the more is the pity, that
poor men's labors and estates should be bought and sold, and some have got by
the bargain, those who have not may be satisfactorily considered. But not being
able to hold longer, he is so anointed with the spirit of hue and cry love,
that he breaks forth crying for whips and cords, saying, treble damages are too
liltle; O brave Paul! this is your conscionable and Orthodox Divinity. ^ox 118.
Surely the Parsons mind is a bottomless gulf that it can swallow up more
then treble damages. M. C. is less charitable then Gregory of Rome was who
told Aust. that the Church should not require increase, what was stolen away in
earthly things, and seek her own good, by the damages of others. But the hue
and cry can do nothing without a slash. Then M.C. demands, Why the Parliament
enjoin tyths? truly it is the hope and desire of many, ^eb. 10.34
that the Parliament will not enjoin them; however they must choose rather to
suffer then to sin, M C. says Some of them make briek and have no straw. What
has M C. so many heaps of corn, and no straw, has he found out by Chimistry
to turn his straw into Wheat? If he have no straw, it is pity that he goes not
out of Egypt, and leave his straw maintenance he looks for; if he were to
spend the straw he has in brick making, we should hear another tune: he says
also, That some of them can glory more then Paul, he preached for nothing, and
they for less then nothing; will any man in the world believe it? he that can
stretch his faith upon the tenter-hook of that expression, I will warrant him,
it will be a sufficient size to reach to the bottom of any old wives fable; is
50. or 1, 2, 3 hundred pounds a year nothing, yea less then nothing, a
competent number of such devourers, who can swallow two or three hundred a
year, and judge it nothing, through the wideness of their throat, will eat up
and beggar a Island. If M. C. cannot get some tyth in, yet he cannot glory as
could Paul, for it is against his will he falls short of an ear, we see he sends
hue and cry after the loose ears, but what Paul did he did voluntarily: then
he complains, They spend their temporal estates in spiritual livings. In the
14 P. he called tyths his temporals, and here he talks of spiritual livings,
indeed he knows not what to call them, but do great tyth-livings wast so fast,
male parta, male dilabuntur, he said, Their livings be their dying. And no
wonder since they live on the dead things of the Law, and when they bury their
living by tyths, if it pleased M.C. I will invite some guess to the funeral:
he tells us They be soldiers, and if they be Christ's soldiers, they will be
content with Christ's pay, if they be not his soldiers, I will be none of their
company.

Then he finds fault, That men muzzle the Ox till they make an Ass of him,
Indeed God sometimes makes foolish the wise things of this world, but if M.C.
had been so mightily muzled, how could he have cried out, this Hue and Cry, but
it is true, that sounds more like braying then any thing else. M. C. speaks of
the trouble of going to Law about tithes, he may save all that trouble, Fox 5
if he please to follow the example of the Primitive Ministers. It was objected
by a Popish Priest to Mr. Thorpe. How they should live without law, who could
hardly live by the Law of Tithes. To whom he replied, no wonder, since people
know that you live contrary to Christ, and his Apostles; if you would not be
maintained contrary to Christ, the hearts of the people would be open. Mr. C.
hints of the Kingdom of Christ being looked upon for a Kingdom of fools, for
neglecting their livelihood. I think few of our English Tribe of Levi are
guilty of that folly; When they go to a Benefice, the first question is, How
big is it, what is it worth? And the world without question accounts Christ's
servants fools, for their leaving father, mother, house and land for Christ,
though some are so wise, as not to part with their Leviticall Patrimony for
Christ. Then Mr. C. would have those quarter soldiers that pay not tithes. And
what if some should be so heretical in Mr. C. account as to judge it as
equitable, that the Parsons (who do plead so much for hospitality) should
quarter every tenth soldier, having each tenth sheafe of wheat for bread, and
of barley for beer, and of fodder for horse, and Piggs for their Suppers. Then
Mr. C. tells us that Kings, Parliament and Bishops, etc. are cried against for
not better settling of Ministers Livings out of alienated lands, and yet he
could allow Barn. Sheafe the alienation of a Parsonage to be a witness to his
Tyth story; though he says, That for want of such a maintenance there is the
guilt of the blood of souls. O horrible impiety! what preachers have been more
corrupt then those who have been most richly maintained, who have imbittered
the waters of the Gospel more then they with wormood and gall? who have stabbed
more souls with the daggers of their own inventions? Then we are told of the
Pious mind of the founders, and of the stones of the Abbeys crying out etc.
Does not his paper blush at this expression? What, were Abbey founders pious
minded men now? what, were they not built for the Abbots and Monks to say Mass
in. Willet in his Synopsis says, speaking of Monasteries, the Lands which were
bestowed on them, were first given upon an evil intent, that the Monks by
their prayers should redeem the souls of their founders, who most of them had
committed some notable sin, and so pro remedio animarum, built them. King
Ethelstand for killing of his brother Edwin built two for his soul, etc.
surely, this is not religious founding. Did M.C. abuse the pious minds of the
sounders at the Cathedral window in Canterbury? Surely, if Satan should set
some men on the Pinnacle, and show them the glory of the world, and say as he
did to our Savior, All these things will I give thee, if he should be as good
as his word he should be a pious founder. Mr.C. likes not to have his reward in
money, it seems he would be his own carver. But yet if the State will come up
to his condition, they be allowed by him the honor to pay him his hire;
Providing for the Country Clergy somewhat more then for the City, because says
he their charge is more; In keeping horse and servants for Markets, and
Lectures, and Mill. It might have been added, and for the charges of the Hue
and Cry; How gladly Mr. C. would have his servants and horse wear the public
Livery. And so he draws to a period, saying, that he prays, a new way of
concluding of Hue and cries, and so he bids farewell, but would not have us
fare so well as to eat Tyth-piggs. And so farewell Paul until I see you
again, Farewell Hue and Cry, I see no reason to follow thee with such have
have, post have. But go thy ways, and sun, until thou art out of breath,
and then lie down and breath thy last, and so conclude thy act with

Plaudite.
FINIS.

