THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: Or, A Brief INTRODUCTION TO THE SEVEN LIBERAL ARTS.
Grammar, Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, Astronomy, Rhetoric, and Logic.


To which is Added.

The Necessary Arts and Mysteries of Navigation, Dyaling, Surveying,
Mensuration, Gauging and Fortification; Practically laid down in all their
Material Points and Particulars, highly approved to be known by the Ingenious,
and such as are desirous to Profit, or render themselves Accomplished.

Chiefly intended for the Instruction of Young Scholars, who are acquainted
with no other than their Native Language; But may also be very useful to other
Persons that have made some progress in the Studies of the said Arts.

The Second Edition.

By John Newton, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by A. Milbourn, for Tho. Passenger, at the Three Bibles and
Star, on London Bridge, 1693.

Licensed, October 24 th. 1677.

TO THE READER.
I Have perhaps troubled thee and the Press already too much; if it be so, I
shall however hope, that I am not unpardonable, because I have still intended
well to the good of the Public; every one I think desires to give their
Children the best Education that they can; but the highest degree of Education
is not always best: And I must beg thy Pardon, if I do offend thee, in saying,
That next to the bare Reading of English, the sending of Children to the Latin
School, is not the best way of giving them Education, for if that were granted,
which I must deny, That the Latin and Greek Tongues were not only necessary for
all Children whatsoever, but also more easily learned, than the liberal Arts;
yet Writing is so necessary to be first Learned, that it is almost impossible
to attain the other without it.

And as Writing is very necessary in order to the Latin and Greek Tongues, so
is it also necessary in order to the true Spelling and Understanding of the
English, or any other Native Language; and indeed the Art of Grammar is the
only One of the Seven, that claims a propriety in every Native Language: As for
the other Arts, they are the same, in all Languages, the Rules of Arithmetic
and Geometry, of Music and Astronomy, of Rhetoric and Logic, are in the
General, as Intelligible in every Language, as in the Latin and Greek, or any
other; and therefore to them, that have no other need of the Latin and Greek
Tongues, than the Learning of these Arts, may, I conceive, spare that pains,
and Learn them in their own Native Language, or as many of them, as will be
thought useful for them, in their several Stations in the World.

Again, these Arts are not only attainable in every Native Language, but more
easily attainable than the Latin and Greek Tongues are, to which some seem
desirous to confine the Arts; and being so attained, do render other Languages
more easy also.

For these, and the like Reasons, as I have already Published distinct
Introductions to every Art, except Music; for which I refer thee to Mr. Joh.
Playford's Introduction; so now I have been easily persuaded, to give thee a
short view of them altogether; he that desires more full Instruction, may
peruse the several Tracts by me Written, in our own, or those that are Written
by other Men in other Languages. The whole Building is but small, and therefore
I will not make the Porch great, I have placed the Arts in that Order, in
which, (with submission to better Judgments) I do conceive they should be
learned: And although I cannot say now, as I have in some of my Epistles
preceding my former Tracts, that there is not so much as one Mathematical
School in England, for now there is by the Bounty of King Charles the Second a
fair one Erected in Christ's Hospital, London, and a worthy Master chosen to
Manage it, by Name Mr. Edward Pagett, who is so well known, that he needs no
Man's Commendations to express his VVorth; Yet thus much I still declare to be
my opinion, That it is more proper, that the Latin School should be supplied
with Scholars from the Mathematical, than that the Mathematical should be
supplied from the Latin and Greek Schools: However by this means, I hope it
will come to pass, that after-ages will be supplied with that Knowledge in
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy, which hitherto our Writing-Masters have
not been able to Teach, nor our Grammar Masters either able or willing to
undertake; so that in a Word, There are few Schoolmasters that can Teach these
things: But yet amongst them, the well Accomplished Mr. John Colson, now living
in Goodmans-fields, with whom I have not had the happiness to be immediately
Acquainted, yet Report has rendered him to the World a worthy Master and
Teacher of that Science. And there are not many Tutors in either of our
Universities that do; and yet the usefulness of these Arts cannot be denied,
and therefore my hopes are, that some Universal Encouragement will yet be given
for the Teaching of them.

And could I be so happy, as to see something done in order to it, I should
think my self abundantly satisfied for all the Pains I have hitherto taken, and
shall1 ever rest,

Thine and his Countries Servant, JOHN NEWTON.

THE PREFACE OR, INTRODUCTION TO THE Arts and Sciences in the General.
WIsdom is the principal thing, and therefore says Solomon, Get Wisdom, and
with all thy getting, get Understanding. Pro. 4.7. And what is meant by Wisdom,
Holy Job tells us, Job 28.28 Behold the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and
to depart from Evil, that is Understanding. They who seek for this Wisdom, are
the only true Philosophers: for Philosophy is nothing else but the love of
Wisdom, and they who Fear God, and depart from Evil, are the lovers of that,
which is only real and true Wisdom: Now for as much, as we cannot be said to
fear God, except we know him, Wisdom may well be defined to be the Knowledge of
God, and the things that are of him, the knowledge of things Divine and Humane,
and this is commonly called Philosophy, but somewhat improperly, for Philosophy
is not properly the Knowledge it self, but the love of that Knowledge; and what
soever Art or Science does conduce to this Knowledge, may be rightly and truly
called Sophia or Wisdom; and because all Men should love such Knowledge and
Delight in it, I shall not gain say the general Name by which it is called,
custom will have it so, let it therefore be called Philosophy.

Sophia then, or Philosophia, Wisdom, or the love of Wisdom, is the Knowledge
of all Arts and Sciences, which any way do conduce to the Knowledge of God: And
because some of them do thereunto conduce more, some less: These arts may be
distinguished into two Sorts, Superior and Inferior.

The Superior Arts are four;

1. Theology or Divinity, whose Subject is the Divine Essence.

2. Metaphysics, otherwise called the first Philosophy, whose Subject is,
Being in common, or Being as Being.

3. Physics, whose Subject is the Knowledge of Natural Bodies, as they are
Natural.

4. Ethics, whose Subject is Morality, or the Doctrine of Manners and Civil
Honesty.

The Inferior Arts are of two sorts;

1. Internal or Liberal Arts, so called, because they are attained by the
faculties of the Soul, which is a liberal or free agent, and not by the Labor
or Ministry of the Hands; and these are seven: 1. Grammar, 2. Arithmetic, 3.
Geometry, 4. Music, 5. Astronomy, 6. Rhetoric, 7. Logic.


And these are the Subjects of this little Book.

2. The External or Mechanical and Manual Arts, so called, because they depend
more upon the labor of the Body, than the Mind; such are the Arts of Tillage;
Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, Weaving, and many more, not needful to be named,
because no part of the ensuing Discourse.

THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The FIRST PART. OF GRAMMAR. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of Letters and Syllables.
Grammar is an ART which Teaches how to Speak and Write truly.

The Parts thereof are Four, Letters, Syllables, Words, and Sentences.

A Letter is a Character, or Index, of a simple sound. And in the English
Tongue there are Twenty four.

The which Letters are distinguished from one another, partly by their shapes
and partly by their sounds.

In reference to their shapes, they are distinguished by three different
Characters, the Roman, Italick, and black English.

And in each of these Characters there is the great and the small Letter.

In the Roman Character, the Great Letter is thus formed,

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z.

The small thus,

a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x, y,
z.

The great and small Italick Letters are made thus,

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z,

a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x, y,
z.

The great and small black English thus,

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z.

a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, r, s, s, t, u, v, w, x,
y, z.

The great Letters are used in the beginning of proper Names, Emphatical words,
Sentences, and Verses. The Letter I when it stands alone, is always written
with a great Character.

These Twenty and four Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

A Vowel is a letter which makes a full and perfect sound of it self, and they
are five, a, e, i, o, u, besides the Greek Vowel y.

A Consonant is a letter which makes a sound by help of a Vowel, and these are
Eighteen, besides the letters j, v, and y, which sometimes are Consonants also.

Of the eighteen Consonants, some are mutes, as these eight, b, c, d, g, k, p,
q, and t. Some semi-Vowels, as these eight, f, l, m, n, r, s, x, and z, of
which these four, l, m, n, r, are also called Liquids, x, and z, double
Consonants, and the other two, h, and w, irregular Letters.

Some of these Letters, as well Vowels as Consonants, have sounds very
different from their common names. Thus the letter c, before e, and i, is
sounded like f, but before a, o, u, it is sounded like k, as in cat, cot, cut.

The Letter f, is sometimes sounded according to its usual name, as when it
follows a Vowel, as in if, of, effeminate, but when it begins a Word or
Syllable, it is sounded fee, as in feet, foolish.

The Letter g, before a, o, and u, is sounded hard, thus, ghee, as in gad, God,
gut, but before e and i it is sometimes, but not always, sounded according to
its usual name gee, as in danger, ginger.

The Letter h, is never sounded according to its name ach, but thus, he, as in
hand, help, him.

The letters j and v, when they come before themselves, or any other Vowel in
the same Syllable, become Consonants, and have different sounds from their
usual names, j is pronounced like g soft, thus ji is pronounced like gi, in
ginger, v is pronounced vee, or vu, as in vanish, vine; and when they are thus
sounded, their shape is also changed, and hence some would have them to be
distinct letters, and would have the number of our letters to be not 24 but 26.

The Liquids l, m, n, and r, when they begin a Word or Syllable, are sounded
thus, lee, me, ree, as in light, mind, need, read.

The letter q, has always u after it, to help its sound, but is not to be
sounded according to its name eu, but que, as in question.

The letter s, when it begins a word or Syllable is to be sounded thus; see, as
in sad, secret, but in the end of a word, or between two Vowels or Dipthongs,
it has for the most part the sound of z, as in easy, bosom.

The letter t before i, if another Vowel follows, has the sound of si, as in
Egyptian, patience; but when it follows s or x, it has its own proper sound,
as in bestial, mixtion.

The letter w, has its name from its shape, being composed of twice u, it is
called double u; but is in no case so sounded, but we, as in wall, well, will.

The letter x, when it begins a word or Syllable, is sounded thus, xee, as in
Xerxes; in other cases thus, ex, or ecs.

The letter y has by no means its sound according to its usual name wi, but
when it begins a word or Syllable, and so becomes a Consonant, it is sounded
ye; when it comes in the middle or end of a word, it is sounded like i Vowel,
as in my, thy.

The letter z is to be sounded zee, as in Zeal.

A Syllable is a literal or articulate Voice of one individual sound.

Syllables are of two sorts, improper and proper.

An improper Syllyble is made of one or more Vowels without a Consonant; as
a-ny, e-vil, Ae-neas, Oe-dipus.

A Proper Syllable is the comprehension of one or more Consonants, with one or
more Vowels, in one sound or breath; as Ge-ne-ra-ti-on, Moun-tain, and in our
English Tongue does sometimes consist of eight letters, as strength.

When two Vowels are joined together in one sound or breath, they are called
Dipthongs; of which there are two sorts, Proper and Improper.

Of proper Dipthongs, there are these eight, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, ee, and oo.

The first six are sometimes written thus, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow.

Of improper Dipthongs there are but these three, ea, oa, and ie.

The two Vowels which make a Dipthong, are for the most part to be sounded
together, as in Faith, neither, Eunuch, but in these words, Laity, Mosaic
work, Deity, Atheist, moity, doing, reenter, reiterate, and such like; and in
most Proper Names in the Bible they are to be sounded severally.

The Improper Dipthongs ea, and o^, are sounded together, except in these
words, beatitude, Creator, creation, real, theater, and most proper names of
Women, Cities, and Countries; but the two Vowels in this Dipthong ei, are
usually parted, except in these two words, friend, grief, and when they come in
the end of a word, as in mercy, charity, and such like.

An English syllable, though it may consist of eight letters, yet does it never
begin with more than two Vowels before a Consonant, of three Consonants before
a Vowel or Dipthong.

The two Consonants which may begin an English word or syllable, are these
thirty, Bl, br, ch, cl, cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, gl, gn, gr, kn, pl, pr, sc, sh, sk,
sp, sl, sm, sn, sq, sw, th, tr, tw, wh, and wr.

And the three Consonants that may begin an English word, are these nine, Sch,
scr, shr, skr, spl, spr, str, thr, thw.

In the sounding of the Consonants, which are joined together in the beginning
of a word, there is no difficulty, but in these few, ch, gh, and th.

The letters ch, when they come before a Vowel in a pure English word, they are
to be sounded as in chance, cheap; and when they come after a Vowel, they are
to be sounded, as in ach, reach, rich. But in words derived from the Greek and
Hebrew, they are to be sounded like k, as in character, these few only
excepted, Rachel, Cherubin, Tychicus, Archbishop, Archduke, Architect,
Arch-enemy, Arch-pirat.

The letters gh, in the beginning of a word, are to be sounded like g hard, as
in ghost, ghess, in the midd1e of a word, they are either not sounded at all,
or but softly, as in might, light, and in the end of a word they have the sound
of ff, as cough, tough.

These letters th, in words of one syllable, and in words of more than one,
ending in there, thed, theth, thest, thing, they have the sound of d, in other
words the sound of t, or the Greek Theta.

The letters ph, never begin a pure English word, but such only as are derived
from the Greek and Hebrew, as Pharisee, Pharez, Epitaph, and in these they are
sounded like f.

The Liquids, l, m, n, r, when another Consonant does precede them in the
beginning or middle of a word, do retain their own sound, but in the end of a
word, though the Vowel e, ought to be written, yet in the pronounciation, you
must stop at the two Consonants, and omit the Vowel; for Example, fable, acre,
uncle, must be pronounced as though they were written thus, fabl, acr, uncl.

CHHP. II. Of Words.
A Word, is such a comprehension of letters and syllables, as helps Mankind
to express their minds to one another.

There are eight kinds of Words, or parts of Speech, Noun, Pronoun, Verb,
Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.

A Noun, is the name of a Person or Thing; as, an Author, a Book, learned,
gilded.

Of Nouns, some be Substantives, and some be Adjectives.

A Noun Substantive, is a Word, that signifies something, and may have the
sign ( a) or ( the) before it; as a Man, the Book.

A Noun Adjective, is a Word, that cannot signify a thing of it self; as,
good, bad.

There are two sorts of Nouns Substantives.

A Noun Substantive proper, and a Noun substantive common.

A Noun Substantive proper, is a Noun that is proper to the person or thing,
that it betokens; as, Henry, England.

A Noun substantive common, is a Noun common to all things of the same kind;
as, a Man, a Land, an Angel.

To a Noun there does belong two things, number and comparison.

There be two Numbers, the singular and the plural; the Singular number
speaks but of One; as a Man, a Book, a Stone. The Plural number speaks of
more than One, as Men, Books, Stones.

Nouns Substantive of the singular number, are turned into the plural, by
adding unto them s or es, as web, webs, robe, robes, Church, Churches, hedge,
hedges. Some Nouns of the singular number ending in f, being plurals, do change
f into v, as beef, beeves, calf, calves. And some are made plurals, by adding
of en or ren; as, Ox, oxen, chick, chicken, brother, brotheren, or by
contraction brethren, child, children; of Man is formed mannen, or men, house,
housen, hose, hosen; to which may be added, mouse, mice, louse, lice, die,
dise, sow, swine, cow, kine, peney, pence, goose, geese, tooth, teeth, foot,
feet; these two; Sheep and Mile, are both singular and plural; as, one sheep,
ten sheep, one mile, ten mile or miles.

Other variation of Nouns we have none in the English Tongue; all other
distinctions are made by these Articles and Prepositions; a, of, to, the, o,
and in, or from, etc.

Nouns that signify the Male-kind, we call he is; such as signify the Female,
we call she is; and of such as signify neither, we say it; as, Esau could not
obtain his Fathers blessing, though he sought it, with tears: Jezabel was a
wicked woman, for she slew the Lord's Prophets.

Comparison belongs only to Nouns Adjectives, whose significatoin may be
increased, or diminished.

There be three degrees of Comparison, the Positive, Comparative, and the
Superlative.

The Positive degree sets down the quality of a thing absolutely without
excess, as hard, soft, swift.

The Comparitive degree raises the signification of the Positive, in
comparison of some other, as harder, softer, swifter.

The Superlative exceeds his positive in the highest degree, as hardest,
softest, swiftest.

Adjectives are compared in the English tongue, either by the signs more and
most, or by the terminations er, and est, as hard, ha^der, or more hard,
hardest, or most hard.

Some Adjectives are compared irregularly; as, Good, better, best; bad, worse,
worst, little, less, least.

CHAP. III Of a Pronoun.
A Pronoun is a part of Speech, much like to a Noun, implying a Person, and not
admitting the sign a or the, before it.

There are twelve Pronouns, I, Thou, He, who, which, that, the same, my, thy,
this, his, whose.

Of Pronouns, some be primitives, and some derivatives.

Pronoun primatives are of three sorts, Personal, Relative, and Demonstrative.

There are three Pronoun personals, I, Thou, and He.

Pronoun Relatives, are likewise three, who, which, and that.

Pronoun Demonstratives, are these two, this, the same.

Pronoun Derivatives, are these four, my, thy, his, whose. All which with their
variations, are expressed in the following Type.

Possessives.
1. Person. Sing. I, me, my, mine. 1. Person. Plur. we, us, our, ours. 2.
Person. Sing. thou, thee, thy, thine. 2. Person. Plur. ye, you, your, yours. 3.
Person. Sing. Mal. he, him, his. Fem. she, her, hers. neith, it, its. 3.
Person. Plur. they, them, their, theirs Relatives. To pers. who, whom, whose.
Relatives. To thing. what, whereof.
Own is a Noun adjective, and self, or selves, a Substantive, but are sometimes
joined to, or compounded with the Pronouns; as, my self, thy self, themselves,
his own self, their own selves.

This word where, with certain Prepositions following it; as, about, at, by,
in, of, unto, with, has the signification of which as, wherein, or in which.
And these words, here, there, and in like manner used for, this, that; as,
herewith, therewith, for with this, with that.

CHAP. IV Of a Verb and Participle.
A Verb is a part of Speech, that joyneth the Signification of other words
together.

There are three kinds of Verbs, Active, Passive, and Neuter.

A Verb Active, is a Verb that betokens doing, as, I love.

A Verb Passive, is a Verb which betokens suffering, as I am loved.

A Verb Neuter, is a Verb which betokens being, as I am.

Four things belong to a Verb, Mood, Tense, Number and Person.

There are four Moods, the Indicative, the Imperative, the Potential, and the
Infinitive.

The Indicative either shows a reason true or false, as I love, or asks a
Question, as, do thou love.

There Imperative Mood, entreats, permits, or commands, as love he, or
let him love.

The Potential Mood, signifies a power, duty, or desire, and has one of these
Signs, may, can, might, would, should, could, or ought, as I may or can love.

The Infinitive Mood, notes no certain Number or Person, but follows another
Verb, or an Adjective, and has commonly this Sign ( to) before it, as I desire
to learn, worthy to be praised.

The Tenses or distinctions of Time, are five, The Present Tense, the
Preterimperfect Tense, the Preterperfect Tense, the Preterpluperfect Tense, and
the Future Tense.

These Tenses in respect of signification, are thus distinguished; in the
Indicative Mood, do is the sign of the Present Tense, did of the
preterimperfect Tense, have of the Preterperfect, had of the Preterpluperfect,
shall and will of the Future,

In the Potential Mood, by the signs already given, the Present Tense by the
signs may or can, the Preterimperfect would, should, could, or ought, and the
Preterperfect, by annexing the sign have to the former Signs, and the Future,
by adding hereafter to the signs of may or can, the Signs of the Present, as, I
may or can hereafter, the Preterpluperfect in this Mood is wanting in the
English Tongue.

But in respect of Termination, there are no Moods but one, no Tenses but two,
namely, the Present, and Preterimperfect Tenses.

And the Preterimperfect Tense is formed from the Present, by adding thereto
the termination ( ed) and in some few the termination ( en) as of love is
formed loved, of fall, fallen.

The Persons in every Tense are distinguished by the personal Pronouns, I,
Thou, and He, in the Singular Number, and We, Ye, They, in the Plural; only the
Second Person Singular in the Present and Preterimperfect Tenses is formed from
the first, by adding thereto the Termination est, as of love, love, of loved,
lovedst; and the Third Person Singular in the Present Tense is formed from the
First, by adding thereto the Termination ( eth) as of love is formed loves.
other variations of Persons or Tenses there is none, but what is done by Signs,
as was said before.

A Verb Active then is thus formed in the Indicative Mood.

Present Tense.
Sing. Love, love, loves. Plur. Love, Infinitive, To love.

Preterimperfect Tense.
Sing. Loved, lovedst, loved. Plural. Loved.

This Verb Neuter, Am or Be is thus formed.

In the Present Tense. Am, art, is, Plur. Are.
Be, be, be Plur. Be.


In the Preterimperfect Tense. Was, wast, was Plural. Were.
Were, were, were, Plural.Were.


Infinitive. To be.

A Verb Passive, is the same throughout all Moods and Tenses, with a Verb
Neuter, the Preterimperfect Tense of the Active Voice, being added thereunto;
Thus the Passive Voice of this Verb Active, I love, is formed, by adding loved
to all the Tenses and Persons of this Verb Neuter, I am.

For example.
The Present Tense of the Indicative Mood is thus formed, I am loved, Thou art
loved, He is loved. We are loved Ye are loved, They are loved


A Participle is a part of Speech, derived of a Verb, from which it has
Signification, of Time present, past, or to come.

There are two Participles, one of the Active, and another of the Passive Voice.

The Participle of the Active Voice is derived from its Verb, by adding the
Termination (ing) to the Present Tense; as of love, loving.

The Participle of the Passive Voice is for the most part, the same with the
Preterimperfect Tense of the Active; as the Participle of the Passive Voice in
this Verb love is loved.

From this General Rule many Verbs are Excepted, for of
Make Is formed made take, took, taken lead led shake, shook, shaken bereave
bereft sees, sod, sodden smell smelt shear, shore, shorn seek sought rise,
rose, risen beseech besought give, gave, given think thought strive, strove,
striven work wrought sing, sang, sung buy bought know, knew, known grind
ground throw, threw, thrown stand stood go, went, gone,

Of these, see more in my School Pastime.

CHAP. V. Of Adverbs, Conjunctions, Prepositions, and Interjections.
AN Adverb is a Word joined to a Verb or Noun, to declare their Signification.

Some of Time, as when, now, then, to day.

Some of Number, as, how often, once, twice.

Some of Order, as, first, next, afterward.

Some of Place, as where, here, there.

Some of Affirming, as, yea, perhaps.

Some of Denying, as, no, not.

Some of Showing, as, lo, behold.

Some of Similitude, as, so, how much, more.

A Conjunction is a part of Speech, which joyneth Words and Sentences together,
of which these are some, And, also, likewise, nor, neither, whether, or,
either, but, for, etc.

A Preposition, is a Word commonly set before other parts of Speech, either in
apposition, as before the Master, or in composition, as overwise.

An Interjection is a Word, expressing some sudden passion of the Mind, oh,
alas, O strange, ho, hark, sirrah.

CHAP. VI. Of Dividing of Words into Syllables.
FOr the dividing of Words into Syllables there are four Rules.

1. Two Vowels which make no Dipthong, must be divided; as, ie, iu, ua; as in
qui-et, tri-umph, mutu-al.

2. Those Consonants which are doubled in the middle of a Word, must be
divided; as in Abba, accord, adder.

Except they be needlessly doubled, as in words of the Plural Number; as in
crabbs, rodds.

Except such words in which they are doubled for distinction sake; as in the
words, Ann, Cann, Inn.

3. Rule. When a Consonant comes between two Vowels, it is to be joined to the
latter; as in a-vail, a-ni-mate.

But to this Rule there are four Exceptions

1. Except Words ending in es, as in Nouns, of the Plural Number, and Verbs of
the third person Singular, in which this particle is for the most part
swallowed up, in the former Syllable; but in all proper Names, except Charles
and James, it makes a distinct Syllable.

2. Except Words that are compounded of such Simple Words, as are significant
apart, in which each Simple Word must retain its own letters; as, Tradesman,
safeguard, henceforth.

3. Except Derivative Words, whose addition to the Primitive, does signify
nothing of it self, in which the Primitive must be sounded by it self, and the
addition by it self; as, hope-less, lov-ing, joyn-ing, and such like.

4. Except such Words in which x comes between two Vowels, in which it must be
joined to the first Vowel; as, ox-en, exercise.

5. Rule. Any two or three Consonants, which may be joined together in the
beginning of a word, are not to be separated in the middle; as in a-gree,
bestow, en-thrall; destruction; but in compounded words, each simple word must
retain its own Letters.

When you are to write any hard long word, mark how many sounds or Syllables it
has, as if you were to write disdainfullness, universalitie, or the like,
before you write it, say thus to your self; dis-dain-full-ness,
u-ni-ver-sa-li-tie, and you shall hardly miss in the writing thereof.

CHAP. VII. Of Sentences, and such Distinctions, or Points as are to be used in
Writing, and observed in Reading.
A Sentence, is a number of words, joined together in perfect Sense.

The Stops or Points to be observed in Sentences, are of two sorts, Primary,
and Secundary.

The Primary Points are these Eight.

1. A Comma, made with a little stroke thus (,)

2. A Colon, made with two points thus (:)

3. A Semi-colon, made with a point, and a little stroke under it thus (;)

4. A Period, made with a single point thus (.)

5. An Erotesis or Interrogation, made in this manner (?)

6. An Ecphonesis, or note of Admiration, whose note is a perpendicular right
line, with a point under it thus (!)

7. A Parenthesis, is a note, like two half Moons, enclosing a sentence, which
may be used or omitted, and yet the sense remain entire, thus ()

8. A Parathesis, is a note, which does include a word which is opposed to
another word, and is made with two Semiquadrats, thus []

The Secondary Points are these six.

1. An Apostrophe, which is a note, set on the top or side of a Letter, whereby
two Syllables are contracted into one, and is made like a Comma, thus (') as
it is for it is.

2. An Eclipsis, which is a note cutting off one or more words in the beginning
or ending of a Verse or Sentence, cited in our Writing, and is made with a long
stroke thus -- as -- Princes are not wise,
Who sleep themselves, and trust their servants Eyes.


3. A Dieresis, which is a note for the parting of two Vowels, which otherwise
might seem to make a Dipthong, and is made with two pricks over the two Vowels,
thus, (") as in Lais.

4. An Hyphen, which is a note of continuation, made thus (-) and is to be used
when one part of a word concludes the former line, and the other part
begins the next; or else, when two words are, by way of Elegancy, as it were
joined into one; as self-love, for the love of ones self.

5. An Accent which is a small stroke drawn slopewise toward the left hand,
thus, (') and is to be set over that Syllable in a word, which is to be
pronounced long.

6. A Circumflex, which is the joining together of two oblique strokes into one
figure, one of them being made toward the right hand, and the other toward
the left, and is to be set over a Vowel, thus, ( a) which is to be pronounced
long, as in bite, wile, style, not in bit, will, still.

The Accent in words of many syllables is commonly placed on the third Vowel
from the last; as in toleration, industry.

But words ending in (ary) have the accent on the first syllable; as temporary;
words that have many Consonants in the last syllable save one, have their
accent on that syllable, as in eternal; words ending in ire and ure, have their
accent in that syllable; as inure.

A Noun has its accent in the first, a Verb in the last syllable; as absent,
to absent.

So Humane, when it comes before a Substantive, as humane-learning; but in the
last syllable, when it comes after a Substantive, as Christ had two natures,
the one divine, the other humane.

THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The SECOND PART. Of ARITHMETIC.
CHAP. I. Of single Arithmetic in whole Numbers.
Arithmetic is the art of accompting by Numbers; it is either positive or
negative.

2. Positive Arithmetic, is that which is wrought by certain and infallible
Numbers at first propounded; and this is either single or comparative.

3. Single, which is wrought by Numbers, considered alone, without relation to
one another, and this either in whole Numbers; or in Fractions.

4. The parts of single Arithmetic, are two, Notation and Numeration.

5. Notation has two parts; the first shows the value of the Notes, by which
all numbers are expressed; the second shows how to read the Numbers which are
expressed by those notes.

6. The Notes or Characters, by which all Numbers are usually expressed are
these, 1. one, 2. two, 3. three, 4. four, 5. five, 6. six, 7. seven, 8. eight,
9. nine, 0. nothing.

7. These notes are either significant Figures, or a Cipher.

8. The significant Figures, are the first nine, viz. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. The first whereof is more particularly termed an unite or unity, the rest
are said to be composed of unities; so 2, is composed of two unites 3, of three
unites, etc.

9. The Cipher, though it signify nothing of it self, yet being set before or
after any of the rest, increases or decreaseth their value, as shall be
farther showed hereafter.

10. The second part of Notation, is the reading of the Number expressed by
these notes; and this is done by distinguising the Number given into Degrees
and Periods.

11. The degrees are three, the first is that first place of a number toward
the right hand, and is the place of Unity. The second is the second Figure
toward the right hand, and this is the place of Tens. The third is the third
Figure toward the right hand, and is the place of Hundreds; so this Character
9, does signify Nine; these Notes 27, Twenty seven; and these 235, Two hundred
thirty five.

12. A Period, is when a number consisting of more notes than three, has each
three notes thereof (beginning at the right hand) distinguished by Points or
Commas: The several parts of the Numbers so distinguished, are called Periods;
so the Number 38156249, being distinguished into Periods, will stand thus,
38.156.249. of which the first Period is read thus, Two hundred forty nine; the
first Figure in the second Period is the place of Thousands, the second Tens of
Thousands, and the third Hundreds of Thousands. In the third Period, the Figure
is in the place of Millions, the second Tens of Millions, and so this Number is
thus to be read. Thirty Eight Millions, One Hundred Fifty Six Thousand, Two
Hundred Forty Nine.

13. Numeration, is that which by certain known Numbers propounded, does
discover another Number unknown.

14. Numeration has four Species; Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and
Division.

15. Addition, is that by which diverse numbers are added together, to the end
that the Sum or Total may be discovered. For which purpose, having placed the
numbers as in the following Example, begin with those in the Unity place first,
then with these in the place of Tens then of Hundreds, and so forward,
according as the Numbers given do consist of places, carrying the Tens, if
there be any, to the place of the next greater rank, as here you see. 472961
341608 74325 6739 895633
3814527 4567890 6549238 816365 15748020


16. Subtraction is that, by which one number is taken out of another, so that
the Residue or remainder may be known. To perform this, you must rank your
Numbers, and begin as in Addition; and in case any of the figures of the Number
to be subtracted shall be greater than that, from whence the Subtraction is to
be made, you must borrow one from the next place above it; as in the Examples
following.

17. 895633 341695 553938
6549238 3814527 2734711
Multiplication, is that by which we Multiply two numbers, the one by the
other, to the end, that their Product maybe discovered.

18. Multiplication has three Parts, the Multiplicand, the Multiplicator, and
the Product.

19. Multiplication, is single or compound.

20. Single Multiplication, is when the Multiplicand, and Multiplicator, do
each of them consist of one only Figure; as if 9 were given to be Multiplied by
6, 9 is the Multiplicand, 6 is the Multiplicator, and 54 is the Product.

21. Compound Multiplication, is when the Multiplicator and Multiplicand do
either, or both consist of more Figures than one.

22. When the Product of any of the particular Figures shall exceed ten, place
the Excess under the Line, and for every ten that it so exceeds, keep in mind
one to be added to the next rank: Example; 76147, being to be Multiplied by 5,
the Product is 180735, and 39634 being given ^ to be Multiplied by 47, the work
will stand as in the Margin, where the Product by 7 is 277438, and the Product
thereof by 4, is 158536, and the Sum of these two Products is 1862798.

23. Division is that by which we discover how often one Number is contained in
another, that we may find out the Quotient.

24. Division has three parts, the Dividend, the Divisor, and the Quotient;
thus, if 35 were given to be Divided by 5, 35 is the Dividend, 5 the Divisor,
and 7 will be found to be the Quotient.

25. In Division, make a crooked line at each end of your Dividend, that on the
left hand serving for your Divisor, and that on the right for the Quotient;
then see how often your Divisor is contained in the first Figure or Figures of
your Dividend, and put the answer in the Quotient, then Multiply your Divisor
by the Figure in the Quotient, and the Product subtract from your Dividend,
then draw down the next Figure of your Dividend, and ask how often your Divisor
may be found in the remainer so increased, and the answer put in the Quotient,
and proved as before, till there be no Figures left in your Dividend, and so
often as the Question is repeated, so many places must be in the Quotient, as in
manifest by the following Example.^

Let 1862798, be given to be divided by 47, I ask how often 47 may be had in
186? the Answer is 3, which I place in the Quotient, then I Multiply 47 by 3,
the Product is 141, which being Subtracted from 186, the Remainer is 45, to
which draw down 2 the next Figure in the Dividend, and then it will be 452, now
then I ask how often 47 may be had in 452? the which by the Table made by the
continual Addition of 47 unto it self, is 9 times, therefore I place 9 in the
Quotient, and the Product of 47 is 423, which being Subtracted from 452, the
Remainer is 29, to which I draw 7 the next Figure, and then proceed as before,
and so at last I find the Quotient to be 39634.

26. Multiplication and Division, prove one another, for if you Multiply the
Quotient by the Divisor, the Product will be equal to the Dividend: so 39634,
being Multiplied by 47, the Product is 1862798, and this Product being Divided
by 47, the Quotient is 39634.

CHAP. II. Of Single-Arithmetick in Fractions.
SIngle Arithmetic in a whole Numbers, has been showed in the last Chapter;
Single Arithmetic in Fractions now follows.

2. A Fraction is a part of an Integer.

3. Single Arithmetic in Fractions, does also consist of two Parts, Notation,
and Numeration.

4. Notation of Fractions, is that which shows how the Fraction part of any
Integer may be expressed in numbers; that is, an Integer on one whole thing
being Divided into any Number of equal parts, Notation shows how these parts
may be expressed; as if a Yard were Divided into four parts, and it were
desired, that I should set down three of these parts; the usual manner is thus,
draw a line, and set the Number of parts into which the Integer is supposed to
be divided, under the line, and the Number of parts you would express set above
the line; thus to express three of four parts, I write 4 under a line, and 3
above it, thus,; and so may you do with any other number propounded: Where
note, that the number above the line is called the Numerator, and the number
under the line the Denominator.

5. A Fraction is either Proper or Improper.

6. A Proper Fraction is that whole Numerator is less than the Denominator,
such as are these 6/12 25/100.

7. A Proper Fraction is either single or compound.

8. A Single Fraction is that which consists of one Numerator and one
Denominator, such as are 6/12 25/100.

9. A Compound Fraction (otherwise called a Fraction of a Fraction) is that
which has more Numerators and more Denominators than one, which kind of
Fractions are discoverable by this word (of) which is interposed between their
parts; as, of is a Fraction of a Fraction, or a Compound Fraction, and
expresses two thirds of three fourths of an Integer.

10. The things expressed by broken numbers or Fractions, are principally the
Parts or Fractions of Money, Weight, Measure, Time, and things accounted by the
Dozen.

11. The least part or Fraction of Money used in England is a Farthing; and
four Farthings makes a Penny; twelve Pence, a Shilling; and twenty Shillings,
one Pound Sterling.

12. The least Fraction of weight used in England, is a Grain; that is, the
weight of a Grain of Wheat, well dried and gathered out of the middle of the
Ear, whereof 32 make a penny weight, and twenty penny weight an ounce Troy, and
twelve ounces a Pound; but a penny weight being thus ascertained, it is now
subdivided into twenty four Grains.

13. The weights used by Apothecaries are derived from a Pound Troy, which is
subdivided in this manner.

lb A Pound Troy, is 12 Ounces. An Ounce, is 8 Drams. A Dram, is 3 Scruples. A
Scruple, is 20 Grains.

14. Besides Troy weight, there is another kind of weight used in England,
called Averdupois weight, a Pound whereof is equal to fourteen Ounces, twelve
penny weight Troy, the which is subdivided into 16 Ounces, each Ounce into 16
Drams, and each Dram into 4 Quarters. Of this weight 112 makes a Hundred.

15. The Measures used in England are of Capacity or Length.

16. The Measures of Capacity are Liquid or dry; Liquid Measures are according
to this Table.

One pound of Wheat Troy weight -- One Pint. Two Pints One Quart. Two Quarts
One Pottle. Two Pottles One Gallon. Eight Gallons One Firkin Of Ale. Nine
Gallons One Firkin Of Beer. Two Firkins One Kilderkin. Two Kilderkins One
Barrel. Forty two Gallons One Tearce of wine Sixty three Gallons One Hogshead.
Two Hogsheads One Pipe or But Two Pipes One Tun.

17. Dry Measures are those in which all kind of dry substances are Meted; as
Grain, Sea-coal, Salt, and the like; their Table is this that follows.

One Pint Makes One Pint. Two Pints Makes One Quart. Two Quarts Makes One
Pottle. Two Pottles Makes One Gallon. Two Gallons Makes One Peck. Four Pecks
Makes 1 Bushel land measure. Five Pecks Makes 1 Bushel water measure. Eight
Bushels Makes One Quarter. Four Quarters Makes One Chaldron. Five Quarters
Makes One Wey.

18. Long Measures are expressed in the Table following. Three Barley-corns in
length Make One Inch. Twelve Inches Make One Foot. Three Foot Make One Yard.
Three Foot 9 Inches Make One Ell. Six Foot Make One Fathom. Five yards and a
half Make One pole or perch. Forty Poles Make One Furlong. Eight Furlongs Make
One English Mile.

Note that a Yard, as also an Ell is usually subdivided into four quarters, and
each quarter into four Nails.

19. A Table of Time is this that follows. Sixty Minutes Make One Hour.
Twenty four hours Make One Day natural. Seven Days Make One Week. Four Weeks
Make 1 month of 28 days

Fifty two Weeks, one Day, and six hours make one Year.

And these Fractions of Money, Weight, Measure, etc. are usually written under
their several Denominations, instead of having their Denominators written under
them thus;

lib. shill. pence. farth. 23. 19. 08. 3.

And as their Notation is twofold, so is their Numeration also, First, then I
will show you the Numeration of parts when written, as Integers, and then as
vulgar fractions.

20. Numeration of parts when written, as Integers, is Accidental or Essential.

21. Accidental Numeration, otherwise called Reduction, is either descending or
ascending.

22. Reduction Descending, is when a number of greater Denomination being
given, it is required, to find how many of a lesser denomination, are equal in
value to that given Number of the greater. And this is performed by
Multiplication; as if it were required to Reduce 329 Shillings into Pence, if
you Multiply 329 by 20, the number of shillings in a pound, the Product will be
6580 shillings, and 6580 shillings being multiplied by 12, the number of pence
in a shilling, the Product will be 78960 pence.

23. Reduction Ascending, is when a number of a lesser Denomination being
given, it is required, to find how many of a greater Denomination, are equal to
that given number of the lesser: And this is done by Division; as if it were
required to find how many Pounds there were in 78960 pence; if 78960 pence be
divided by 12, the number of pence in a shilling, the Quotient will be 6580
Shillings, and if 6580 shillings be divided by 20, the number of shillings in a
pound, the Quotient will be 329 Pounds, and so for any other.

24. Essential Numeration, does consist of four Species, Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, and Division.

25. In Addition of Numbers of several Denominations, you must begin with the
least first, and when the sum of any of the Denominations amounts to an
Integer, add it to the next Denomination that is greater.

Example.
^

26. In Subtraction of Numbers of several Denominations, when any of the parts
of the greater Number are less than the parts of the lesser Number subscribed,
Deduct the parts of the lesser Number from the parts of the greater, increased
with an Integer, of the next superior Denomination, and keeping one in mind,
add to the next place of the number given to be Subtracted.

Example.
^

27. In Multiplication of numbers of several Denominations, you must first
reduce the numbers given to their least Denominations and then Multiply them as
has been showed in whole numbers, the Product divided by the square of the
parts of an Integer, reduced to the least Denomination, shall in the Quotient
give the Product required.

Example.
Let the Product of 17 l. 19 s. 6 d. by 5 l. 13 s. 6 d. be required. 17 l. 19
s. 6 d. being reduced to make 4314 Pence. And 5 l. 13 s. 6 d. reduced do make
1362 Pence.

The Multiplicand.^

The Multiplicator.^

The Product.^

The number of pence in a pound are 240, and the square thereof is 57600, by
which dividing 5875668 the Quotient; 102 lib. 00 shill. 01 penny. 3 farthings,
and 4608/5760 is the Quotient sought.

28. In Division of numbers of several Denominations, first reduce your Divisor
to its number of parts in the least Denomination, then Multiply your Dividend,
by the square of the parts in an Integer reduced to the least Denomination; and
if there be any parts annexed, to the Integers of the Dividend, they must be
reduced to the highest Fraction, that the square of the parts in an Integer
reduced to its least denomination will bear, and added to the former Product,
the whole being divided by your divisor reduced, will give you the Quotient
sought.

Example.
Let 102:00:01:3 4608/1760 be given to be divided by 5:13:6. First I reduce the
divisor given to its number of parts in the least denomination, and it makes
1362 pence, then I Multiply 102 the Integral part of my dividend, by 57600, the
square of pence in a pound, the Product is 58752, and the Fraction of my
dividend 00:01:3 4608/5760 being reduced, is 468/57600, which being added to
the former Product 58752, the sum is 5875668, for the dividend; which being
divided by 1362, the Quotient is 4314 pence, that is 17 lib. 19 shill. 6 pence.

29. Numeration of Fractions, when written with their Numerators and
Denominators, is also Accidental and Essential.

30. Accidental Numeration, otherwise called Reduction, is threefold.

1. To Reduce one Fraction which is not already in its least terms, to a lesser
denomination.

To do this, divide the numerator and denominator by their greatest common
measure, the two Quotients shall be one of them, a new numerator, and the other
a new denominator of a Fraction equal to the Fraction given, and in its least
terms.

Example 91/117 being given to be Reduced, the greatest common measure is 13,
by which dividing 91, the Quotient is 7, for a new numerator, and dividing 117
by 13, the Quotient is 9 for a new denominator, and so 91/117 is reduced to 7/9.

The greatest common measure between two numbers is found thus; divide the
greater number by the less, and your divisor by the Remainer, if there be any,
your last divisor is the common measure sought, as in the following Example.

^

2. To Reduce many Fractions of diverse Denominations into one Denomination.

To do this, Multiply each Numerator by all the Denominators except its own,
the Products shall be the new Numerators, then Multiply all the Denominators
together, and the Product shall be the common Denominator sought.

Example. 6/7 will be reduced to 70/105 84/105 90/105.

3 To Reduce any Fraction from one Denomination, to any other Denomination
desired. And to do this Multiply the Numerator given, by the Denominator
required, and divide the Product by the Denominator given, the Quotient shall
be the Numerator desired.

Example, let it be desired to Reduce 17/20 to a Fraction, whose Denominator
shall be 100, first Multiply 17 by 100, the Product is 1700 which being divided
by 20, the Quotient is 85, for the new Numerator desired.

31. Essential Numeration of Fractions has four Species, Addition, Subduction,
Multiplication and Division.

32. In Addition of Fractions, the Fractions given must be first Reduced to one
Denomination, and then add the Numerators together, so have you the Sum of the
Fraction, so 2/9 and 5/9 make 7/9.

33. Subtraction of Fractions is thus, if of one Denomination, deduct the less
from the greater, their difference is the remainer, so 2/9 taken from 7/9 rest
5/9.

34. Multiplication of Fractions, is thus, Multiply all the Numerators
together, so is their Product a new Numerator, then Multiply all the
Denominators together, and their Product is a new Denominator.

Thus if 7/12 and were to be Multiplied, the Product will be 35/96.

35. Division of Fractions is thus, Multiply the Numerator of the dividend by
the denominator of the divisor, the Product shall be a new Numerator; also
Multiply the numerator of the divisor, by the denominator of the dividend, so
shall the Product be a new denominator, and this new Fraction is the quotient
sought; so if 4/9 were to be divided by 3/5, the Product will be 20/27.

36. When the denominator of a Fraction is an Unite with Ciphers, the Fraction
is more particularly called a Decimal; and such Fractions may be expressed
without their denominators as well as with them, thus, 5/10 may be written
thus, 5.

37. When the Numerator does not consist of so many places, as the denominator
has Ciphers, fill up the void places of the Numerator with Ciphers, so, 5/100,
25/1000, are written thus,.05, and.025.

38. Numeration of Decimal-Fractions, is likewise twofold, Accidental and
Essential.

39. Accidental Numeration, otherwise called Reduction, is performed, by the
third way of Reduction; showed in the Twenty seventh Rule of this chapter.

40. Essential Numeration, has in it the four usual Species, Addition,
Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division.

41. Addition of Decimals is the same with Addition of whole Numbers, if a
point or line be set between the Integers and the Parts, as in the following
Examples. 2.00741.74258.96314 3.71313
23.06578 16.14365 32.76108 71.96151


42. Subduction of Decimals does differ from Subduction in whole Numbers, but
by a point to distinguish the whole number from the broken; as in the Example
following.

23.07496 17.89637 7.17859
36.01436 17.83589 18.17847


43. Multiplication of Decimal Fractions, is the same with Multiplication in
whole numbers, but when the work is finished, to distinguish the Integers from
the Decimals, do thus; so many places of parts as are in both the numbers
given, being separated by a point, the rest of the figures toward the left
hand are Integers, and those toward the right are Decimal parts; as in these
Examples. ^

44. Division of Decimal Fractions is the same with Division in whole numbers,
but when the Work is finished, to distinguish the Fractional part from the
Integers, observe this general Rule.

The first figure in your quotient will be always of the same degree or place
with that Figure or Cipher in your dividend, which stands over the Unites
place in your divisor.

For Example: 78925, being given to be divided by 32, the quotient will be
2466, and because the place of Unites in the divisor, does stand under the
place of seconds in the dividend, therefore the first figure in the quotient,
will be in the place of seconds, and the first must be supplied with a Cipher,
and then the quotient will be 0.02466.

CHAP III. Of Comparative Arithmetic.
THus much has been said concerning Single Arithmetic, Comparative follows,
which is wrought by Numbers, as they are considered to have relation to one
another.

2. This Relation consists either in quantity or in quality.

3. Relation in quantity is the reference that the Numbers themselves have one
to another; as when the comparison is made between 8 and 2, or 2 and 8; 7 and
3, or 3 and 7.

And here the Numbers propounded are always two, whereof the first is called
the Antecedent, the other the Consequent.

4. Relation in quantity, consists either in the difference, or in the rate or
reason found between the Numbers propounded; the one is found by Subtracting
the less from the greater; so 6 is the difference between 8 and 2; but the
other, to wit, the rate or reason, is found by dividing the greater by the
less, and thus the rate between 8 and 2 is fourfold, because 2 is found four
times in 8; Or the rate may be also found by dividing the less by the greater,
or setting the Numbers given in manner of a Fraction, and thus the rate between
2 and 8 is 4 also, or 2/8 that is.

5. This rate or reason of Numbers is either equal or unequal; equal reason, is
the relation that equal Numbers have one to another, as 5 to 5, 6 to 6. Unequal
Reason is the relation that Unequal Numbers have one to another, and this is
either of the greater to the less, or of the less unto the greater.

In the one the greater Number is the Antecedent, and the less the Consequent;
and in the other the lesser Number is the Antecedent, and the greater is the
Consequent.

6. Relation in quality, (otherwise called Proportion) is the reference or
respect that the reasons of Numbers have one to another, and therefore the
Numbers must be more than two, or else three cannot be the comparing of reasons
in the Plural Number.

7. Proportion is twofold, Arithmetical and Geometrical.

8. Arithmetical Proportion, is when numbers differ according to equal reason;
that is, have equal differences; as 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 3, 6, 9, 12, in the
first rank the common difference is 2, and in the second 3.

9. Arithmetical Proportion, is either continued, or interrupted.

10. Arithmetical Proportion continued, is when diverse numbers are linked
together by a continued Progression of equal difference; and in such a
Progression, the sum of the first and last Terms being Multiplied by half the
number of the Terms, the Product will be the sum of all the Terms; as in this
Progression, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, the sum of the first and
last is 13, which being Multiplied by 6, half the number of the Terms the
Product is 78, the sum of all the terms in that Progression.

11. Three Numbers being given in Arithmetical Proportion, the mean number
being doubled is equal to the sum of the Extremes; so 3, 6, 9, being given, the
double of 6, the mean number is equal to the sum of 3 and 9, the two Extremes.

12. Arithmetical Proportion Interrupted, is when the Progression is
discontinued, as in these numbers, 2, 4, 8.10.

13. In Arithmetical Proportion continued, or discontinued, the sum of the
Means is equal to the sum of the Extremes, as in 3, 6, 9, 12, being given, the
sum of 6 and 9 is equal to the sum of 3 and 12; or 3, 6, 12, 15, being given,
the sum of 6 and 12, is equal to the sum of 3 and 15.

14. Geometrical Proportion is, when diverse numbers differ by the like reason;
as, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, which differ one from another by double reason; for as 1 is
the half of 2, so 2 is the half of 4, 4 of 8, 8 of 16.

15. Geometrical Proportion is either continued or interrupted, Geometrical
Proportion continued, is when diverse numbers are linked together, by a
continued Progression of the like reason; as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 3, 6, 12, 24,
48.

16. In numbers Geometrically proportional, If you Multiply the last Term by
the common rate by which they differ, and from the Product deduct the first
Term, and divide the Remainer by the former rate less by an Unite, the Quotient
shall be the sum of all the Progressions; So 2, 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1458,
being propounded the last term 1460, being multiplied by 3 the rate, the
Product is 4374 out of which deducting 2 the first Term, the Remainer is 4372,
which being divided by 2 the rate less one, the quotient 2186 is the sum of
that Progression.

17. Three Proportionals being given, the square of the Mean is equal to the
Product of the Extremes; so 4, 8, 16, being given, the square of 8 is equal to
four times 16.

18. Geometrical Proportion interrupted, is when the Progression of like reason
is discontinued; as, 2, 4, 16, 32, where the Term between 4 and 16 is wanting,
and therefore the rate between 4 and 16 is not the same that is between 2 and
4, or 16 and 32.

19. Four Proportional Numbers whatsoever being given, the Product of the two
Means is equal to the Product of the two Extremes; so 2, 4, 16, 32, being
propounded, 4 times 16 is equal to 2 times 32, which is 64.

CHAP IV. Of the Rule of Proportion, or Rule of Three.
FRom the last Rule of the former Chapter arises that precious Gem in
Arithmetic, the Rule of three, which for its excellency, deserves the name
that is given to it, The Golden Rule.

2. The Golden Rule, is that by which certain numbers being given, another
number Geometrically proportional to them may be found out.

3. The Golden Rule is either single or compound.

4. The single Rule, is when three terms or numbers are propounded, and a
fourth in proportion to them is desired.

5. The Terms of the Rule of Three consist of two Denominations; two of the
Terms propounded have one Denomination, the third propounded and fourth
required, have another.

6. Of those two numbers given which are of one Denomination, that which moves
the Question must possess the third place, the other number of the same
Denomination, must be put in the first place, and consequently, the other known
Term, which is of the same Denomination with the fourth required, must possess
the second place.

7. The three Terms propounded being thus placed, consider whether your third
does require more or less; if it requires more, Multiply the middle number by
the greater of the two Extremes, and divide the Product by the lesser, the
Quotient is the fourth Number or Term desired.

But if the third Term in the Question require less, Multiply the middle Term
by the lesser of the two Extremes, and the Product Divide by the greater, the
Quotient shall be the fourth Term desired; An Example in each Case will
sufficiently explain the Rule.

If 7 Pound of Sugar cost 2 s. 7 d. What shall 28 Pound of Sugar cost? The
Terms must stand thus, lb sugar. s. d. lb sugar. 7 2 7 28

Where it is plain, that 28 pound of Sugar must needs cost more than 7,
therefore I Multiply 2 s. 7 d. or 31 pence, by 28, the Product 868 being
Divided by 7, and the Quotient is 124 d. or 10 s. 4 d.

2. Example: If 7 Men will digg a Garden in 31 Days, In how many Days will 28
Men digg the same Garden? Here the Terms must stand thus, Men. Days. Men. 7 31
28.

And by the state of the Question it plainly appears, that the third Term
requires less: therefore I Multiply 31, the middle Term, by 7, the lesser
Extreme, and the Product 217 being Divided by 28, the Quotient 7 21/28 is the
fourth Term desired.

CHAP. V. Of the Compound Rule of Three.
THe Compound Rule of Three, is when more than three Terms are propounded.

2. Under the Compound Rule of Three is comprehended the Double Rule of Three,
and diverse Rules of plural proportion.

3. The Double Rule of Three, is when five Terms are propounded, and a sixth in
proportion to them is required.

4. In this Rule the five Terms given do consist of two parts; first a
Supposition, and then a Demand; the Supposition is expressed by three of the
Terms propounded, and the demand by the other two.

5. And here the greatest difficulty is in placing of the Terms; for which
observe amongst the Terms of Supposition, which of them has the same
Denomination with the Term required, reserve that for the second place, and
write the other two Terms in the Supposition one above another in the first
place; and lastly, the Terms of Demand one above another, likewise in the third
place, in such sort, that the uppermost may have the same denomination with the
uppermost of those in the first place.

Example.
If 6 Clerks can write 45 sheets of Paper in 5 Days; How many Clerks can write
300 sheets in 72 Days? Here the Question is concerning the number of Clerks,
the 6 Clerks must therefore possess the second place, and the Days and Paper
in the Supposition must be set in the first, one over the other, of which, if
Paper be the uppermost in the other Terms, the Paper must be set over the Days
in the third place, and then the Number in the Question will stand thus, 45 6
300 5 13

6. The Terms propounded being thus placed, the Question may be resolved by two
Single Rules of Three in this manner.

1. As the uppermost Term of the first place is to the middle, so is the
uppermost Term in the last place to a fourth Number.

2. As the lower Term of the first place is to that fourth Number, so is the
lower Term of the last place to the Term required.

But in both these Proportions, consideration must be had to the Term required,
namely, whether it must be more or less than the middle Term given.

In our present Question, the fourth term in the first proportion must be
greater than the second; for it is plain, that more work will require more men;
therefore I say,

as 45. 6 300. 40 Clerks.

But in the second proportion, it is likewise plain, that the more time is
given, the fewer persons are required; and therefore in this proportion,
5.40.13. I multiply the middle term by the first, and the product 200 I divide
by 13, the last, and the Quotient is 15 10/13.

2. Example: If 100 l. gain 6 l. in 12 months, what shall 276 l. gain in 18
months? In this Question the terms must be thus placed.

100 6 276 12 18

1. 100. 6 276. 16. 56. 2. 12. 16. 56 18. 24. 84.
CHAP. VI. Of the Rule of Fellowship.
THe Rules of plural proportion are those, by which we Resolved Questions that
are discoverable by more Rules of Three than one, and cannot be performed by
the double Rule of Three mentioned in the last chapter.

Of these Rules there are diverse kinds and varieties, according to the nature
of the Question propounded; I will only mention one, and refer the rest to my
larger treatise of this Subject.

2. The Rule of plural proportion that I mean to mention, is the Rule of
Fellowship.

3. And the Rule of Fellowship is that by which in Accounts amongst diverse Men,
(their several stocks together) the whole Loss or Gain being propounded, the
Loss or Gain of each particular man may be discovered.

4. The Rule of Fellowship is either single or double.

5. The Single Rule of Fellowship is, when the stocks propounded are single
numbers; As in this Example: A and B were Partners in an Adventure to Sea, A
put in 25. l. B 56, and upon return of the Ship, they sold the Freight for 50
l. profit; the question is, What part of this 50 l. is due to A, and what to B?
to resolve this and the like Questions, the sum of the stocks must be the first
term in the Rule of Three, the whole gain the second, and each particular stock
the third; this done repeating the Rule of Three, as often as there are
particular stocks in the Question, the fourth term produced by these several
operations are the respective Gains or Losses of those particular stocks
propounded; so in the present question, the Resolution will be as here you see.
^

6. The Double Rule of Fellowship is, when the stocks propounded are double
numbers, that is, when each stock has relation to a particular time. A, B, and
C, hire a piece of Ground for 45 l. per Annum, in which A had 24 Oxen 32 days,
B 12, for 48 days, C 16, for 24 days; now the question to be resolved is, What
part of the Rent each person must pay?

For this purpose you must first Multiply each particular stock by its
respective time, and take the total of their Products for the first term, the
Gain or Loss for the second, and every man's particular stock and time for the
third; this done repeating the Rule of Three so often as there are Products of
the double Numbers; the fourth terms produced upon those several operations are
the numbers sought. So then in the question propounded, the Product of 24 and
32 is 768; the Product of 12 and 48 is 576, and the Product of 16 and 24 is
384, the sum of these Products is 1728, which is the first term, 45 l. the Rent
is the second, and each particular Product the third; ^

By which three Operations the question is Resolved.

FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY. The THIRD PART. Of GEOMETRY.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition and Division of Geometry.
GEOMETRY is the Art of Measuring well.

2. The Subject of Geometry is Magnitude, or continued Quantity, whose parts
are joined together by a common term or limit.

3. Magnitude is either a Line, or something made of a Line or Lines.

4. A Line is a Magnitude, consisting only of length, without either breadth or
thickness, the term or limit whereof is a Point.

5. A Point is an indivisible sign in Magnitude. A Point therefore is no
quantity, but the beginning of all continued quantities, which are divisible in
power infinitely.

6. A Line is either considered simply by it self, or else comparatively with
another Line.

7. A Line considered simply of it self, is either Right or Oblique.

8. A Right line, is that which lies equally between his Points.

9. An Oblique line, is either circular or mixed.

10. A Periphery, or Circular Line, is that which is equally distant from the
middle of the comprehended space, which middle is called the Center, and the
distance between that Center and the Circumference, is called the Radius.

11. Lines compared to one another are or the same or different Species.

12. Lines compared together of the same Species, are either Parallel or
Angular.

13. Parallel lines, are such as are equally distant in all places, and are
either Right lined Parallels, or Circular.

14. Right lined Parallels, are such as being in one and the self same plane,
and infinitely produced on both sides, do never meet in any part.

15. A Circular Parallel is a Circle drawn within or without another Circle.

16. Angular lines are such as inclining, or bowing to one another, touch one
another, but not in a direct line.

17. An Angle is either Right or Oblique.

18. A Right Angle, is that whose legs or sides are Perpendicular to one
another.

19. An Oblique Angle, is that whose legs or sides do incline to one another
upon one side more than upon another.

20. An Oblique Angle is either Acute, or Obtuse.

21. An Acute Oblique Angle, is that which is less than a Right.

22. An Obtuse Oblique Angle, is that which is greater than a Right Angle.

23. The Measure of an Angle, is the Arch of a Circle described upon the
Angular Point, and intersected between the sides of the Angle sufficiently
prolonged; but of this Measure there can be no certain knowledge, unless the
quantity of that Arch be expressed in Numbers.

24. Every Circle therefore is supposed to be divided into 360 equal parts,
called Degrees, and every Degree into 60 Minutes, and every Minute into 60
Seconds, and so forward; others suppose every Degree to be subdivided into 10
parts, and every one of those into 10 more, and so forward, as far as you
please.

25. A Semicircle is the half of a whole Circle, and contains 180 Degrees.

26. A Quadrant, or fourth part of a Circle, is 90 Degrees; and seeing that a
Right Line falling Perpendiculary upon a Right Line, does make the Angles on
both sides equal, and cutteth a Semicircle into two equal parts, the fourth
part of a Circle, or 90 Degrees, must needs be the Measure of a Right Angle.

27. Thus are Lines compared with Lines of the same Species, the comparing of
Lines of different Species, is the comparing of Right Lines with those that are
Oblique or Circular.

28. And Right Lines, as they have reference to, or are compared with the
circumference of a Circle, are either such as are inscribed within it, or
applied to it.

29. A Right Line, inscribed in a Circle, either passes through the Center, as
the Diameter and Radius, or is drawn besides the Center, as Chords and Sines.

30. A Diameter, is a Right Line inscribed through the Center of the Circle,
dividing the Circle into two equal parts.

31. The Radius of a Circle is the one half of the Diameter, or a Right Line
drawn from the Center to the Circumference; thus the Right Line GBD, in Fig. 1.
is a Diameter, GB, or BD, the Radius.

32. A Chord or Subtense, is an inscribed Right Line drawn through or besides
the Center bounded at both ends with the Circumference.

33. A Chord or Subtense, drawn through the Center is the same with the
Diameter.

34. A Chord or Subtense, drawn besides the Center, is a Right Line bounded at
both ends with the Circumference, but always less than the Diameter.

35. Sines are either Right or Versed.

36. A Right Sine is half the Chord of the Double Arch and it is either the
whole Sine, and Sine of 90 Degrees. or Sine less than the whole.

37. The whole Sine is equal to the Semidiameter or Radius of a Circle, as the
right Line BE.

38. A Sine less than whole, is half the Chord of any Arch less than a
Semicircle; as CA is the sine of CD.

39. A Versed Sine, is a part of the Diameter lying between the right sine and
the circumference, as the Right Line AD, which is one part of the Diameter, is
the versed sine of the Arch C D, and the right line AG, which is the other part
of the Diameter, is the versed sine of the Arch CEG.

40. A Right line applied to a Circle, is either a Tangent or Secant.

41. A Tangent, is a right line without but touching the Circle, drawn
Perpendicular to the end of the Radius or Diameter, continued to the Secant.

42. A Secant, is a right line drawn from the Center of the Circle, through the
term of an Arch, and continued to the Tengant; thus the right line FD, is the
Tangent, and the right line BF, is the Secant of the Arch CD, or of the Arch
CEG, the Complement thereof to a Semicircle.

43. These Lines thus inscribed in, or applied to a Circle, may to any limited
Radius be drawn or made upon a Rule of Wood, Brass, or other Metal; or, a Table
may be made, expressing the length of these lines in numbers, answering to
every Degree and part of a Degree in the Quadrant or Semicircle; That is, the
lines of Chords and Versed Sines may be made to any part of a Semicircle, and
the lines of Sines, Tangents and Secants, to any part of a Quadrant: The use of
such Scales and Tables is such, that no Student in Geometry can well be
without them; here therefore I will lay down such Propositions as will
sufficiently demonstrate the way of making these lines upon a Scale or Ruler,
but as to the construction of the Tables by which the lengths of these lines
are expressed in Numbers: I refer them to my Trigonometria Britannica, and
other Books of the like nature.

Proposition I. Upon a Right Line given, to erect a Perpendicular, from any
Point assigned.
Let it be required to erect a Perpendicular to the line DG, from the Point B,
in Fig. 2. take two equidistant Points, as D and G, open your Compasses to a
convenient distance, and setting one Foot of your Compasses in B, draw the Arch
EC, and keeping your Compasses at the same distance, set one Foot in G, and
with the other draw the Arch HIF, and through the Intersections of these two
Arches draw a right line, as BL, which shall be perpendicular to the Point B.

But if it were required to erect a Perpendicular from the end of a line, do
thus, your Compasses being opened to any convenient distance, set one Foot in
the Point given, as at A, in the line AB, and the other at D, or where you
please, and making D the Center, draw the Arch CAE, and from the points C and
D, draw the right line CDE, then draw the line AC, which shall be Perpendicular
to the line AB, from the point A, as was required.

Proposition II. From a Point assigned without a Right Line given, to let fall
a Perpendicular.
Let the given line be DG, and let the point assigned be L, at the distance of
LD draw the Arch DAGF, then setting one Foot of your Compasses in D, draw the
Arch IK, and keeping your Compasses at the same distance, set one Foot in G,
and with the other draw the Arch M, the right line LBD drawn through the
Intersections of those two Arches shall be Perpendicular to DG, from the Point
L, as was required.

But if it were required to let fall a Perpendicular from the point E, upon the
line AB, draw the line EDC at pleasure, which being bisected at D, upon D as a
Center at the distance of ED, draw the Arch EAC, so shall the line EA be
perpendicular to AB, as was required.

Proposition III. To Divide a Right Line given into any number of equal parts.
Draw the line AC, and from the points A and C erect the Perpendiculars AE and
XC, and at any distance of the Compasses, set off as many equal parts as you
please upon the Perpendiculars AE, and XC, and draw the Parallel lines EX, FV,
GT, HS, KR, LQ, MP, and NO; and let it be required to divide the right line
into three equal parts, open your Compasses to the length of the line given,
and setting one foot in A, where the other foot shall touch the third Parallel,
make a mark which is at Z, draw the line AZ, so shall the line AZ be divided
into three equal parts, as was desired.

And thus may that line be made, which is commonly called the Diagonal Scale.

Proposition IV. How to divide a Circle into 120 Parts, and by consequence into
360.
Draw the Diameter BC, and upon the point A, describe the Circle CDBL, then
draw the Diameter DAN, at Right Angles, to the Diameter CAB.

2. The Semidiameter or Radius of a Circle will divide the Circle into 6 equal
parts, and so is equal to the Chord of 60 degrees, AC, therefore being set from
D to F, shall mark out the Arch DF, 60 degrees.

3. The side of a Pentagon of fifth part of a Circle, is 72 degrees; now then,
if you bisect the Radius AC in the point E, and make EG = ED; then shall DG =
DM, the side of a Pentagon or Chord of 72 degrees, and FM the difference
between DM, 72 and DF 60, that is the Chord of 12, which by bisection shall
give the Chord of 6 and 3 degrees, and so the Circle may be divided into 120
parts, as was propounded.

4. A Circle being thus divided into 120 degrees, the Arches are so equal, that
the third part of the Chord of 3 degrees will subdivide it into 36, without
sensible error; and your Circle being thus divided into 360 parts, lines at
every degree, or half degree, drawn parallel to the Diameter, shall constitute
the line of Chords, and half those Chords the line of sines; and the Segments
of the Diameter, the line of versed sines, and as for the Tangents and Secants,
a line touching the Circle drawn perpendicular to the end of the Diameter, and
continued to the several lines drawn from the Center, through every degree of
the Quadrant, shall constitute the line of Tangents, and those lines drawn from
the Center to the Tangents, shall constitute the line of Secants also. And thus
may a Scale be made with the lines of Sines, Tangents, Secants, and equal parts.

CHAP. II. Of Right Lined Triangles.
HItherto we have spoken of the first kind of Magnitude, that is, of Lines, as
they are considered of themselves, or among themselves.

2. The second kind of Magnitude, is that which is made of Lines, that is a
Figure.

3. A Figure is that which is every where bounded, whether it be with one only
limit as a Circle; or with more, as a Triangle, Quadrangle, Pyramid, or Cube,
etc.

4. The terms or limits of every Figure, are either Lines or Superficies.

5. A Figure, which is terminated by Lines is a Superficies.

6. A Figure, which is bounded or limited with several Superficies, is a Body
or Solid.

7. A Superficies is a Magnitude, consisting of length and breadth, and is
either right lined, curved lined, or composed of both.

8. A Right Lined Plane or Superficies, is that which is Terminated with right
lines; and it is either a Triangle, or a Triangulate.

9. A Triangle, or the first right lined Figure, is that which is comprehended
by three right lines. It is distinguished from the sides, or from the Angles.

10. In respect of the sides, a Triangle is either Isopleuron, Isosceles, or
Scalenum.

An Isopleuron Triangle, is that which has three equal sides. An Isosceles,
which has two equal sides. And a Scalenum, whose three sides are all unequal.

11. In respect of the Angles, a Triangle is either Right or Oblique.

12. A Right Angled Triangle, is that which has one right line.

13. An Oblique Angled plane Triangle, is either Acute or Obtuse

14. An Oblique and Obtuse Angled plane Triangle, has two Acute Angles and one
Obtuse; an Acute angled Triangle has all the three Angles Acute.

15. The second sort of right lined planes is called a Triangulate, or a Plane,
composed of Triangles.

16. The sides of a Triangulate, are in number more by two than the Triangles,
of which it is composed.

17. A Triangulate, is either a Quadrangle, or a Multangle.

18. A Quadrangle, is a Plane comprehended, by four right lines, and is either
a Parallelogram or a Trapezium.

19. A Parallelogram, is a Quadrangle, whose opposite sides are Parallel or
Equidistant, and it is either Right Angled or Oblique.

20. A Right Angled Parallelogram, is that which has every Angle Right; and it
is either a Square or an Oblong.

21. A Square is a Right Angled Parallelogram, whose four sides are equal, and
the Angles Right.

22. An Oblong, is a Right Angled Parallelogram, whose Angles are all right,
but the sides unequal.

23. An Oblique angled Parallelogram, is that whose Angles are all Oblique, and
is either a Rhombus, or a Rhomboides.

24. A Rhombus, is an Oblique Angled Parallelogram, of equal sides.

25. A Rhomboides, is an Oblique angled Parallelogram of unequal sides.

26. A Trapezium, is a Quadrangle, but not a Parallelogram, and it is either
Right angled, or Oblique.

27. A Right Angled Trapezium, has two opposite sides, parallel, but unequal,
and the sides between them perpendicular.

28. An Oblique Angled Trapezium, is a Quadrangle, but not a Parallelogram,
having at least two Angles thereof Oblique, and none of the lines Parallel.

29. A Right angled Multangled Plane, is that which is comprehended by more
than four lines.

30. A Multangled Right lined Plane, or Polygon, is either Ordinate and
Regular, or Inordinate and irregular.

31. Ordinate and Regulate Polygons, are such as are contained by equal sides
and angles, as a Pentagon, Hexagon, etc.

32. Inordinate or Irregular Polygons, are such as are contained by unequal
sides and angles.

32. Having thus showed what a right lined Figure is, with the several sorts of
them, we will now show, how they may be measured, both in respect of the lines
by which they are bounded, and also of their Area or Superficial Content.

33. And first we will show how the lines, and angles of all plane Figures,
especially Triangles, may be measured, as being the first and chiefest of them,
and into which all other may be reduced.

34. The sides of all plane Triangles, and other plane Figures, are to be
Measured by the scale or line of equal Parts.

35. The Angles may be measured by the lin^s of Sines, Tangents, or Secants, as
well as by the line of chords; but here it shall suffice to show how any Angle
may be protracted, or being protracted, be Measured by the line of Chords only.

Proposition I. How to protract or lay down an Angle to any quantity or number
of Degrees proposed.
Draw a line at pleasure at AB, then open your Compasses to the number of 60
degrees in your line of Chords, and setting one of that extent in B, with the
other describe the Arch CD, and from the point B, let it be required to make an
Angle of 40 degrees; open your Compasses to that extent in the line of Choads,
and setting one Foot in D, with the other make a mark as at E, and draw the
line EB, so shall the Angle ABE contain 40 degrees, as was required.

Proposition II. How to find the quantity of any Angle already protracted.
Let the quantity of the Angle ABE, be required; open your Compasses in the
line of Chords, from the beginning thereof to 60 degrees, and setting one foot
thereof in the point B, with the other describe the Arch DE, then take in your
Compasses the distance between E and D, and applying that extent to the line of
Chords, it will show you the number of degrees contained in that Angle, which
in our Example will be found to be 40 degrees.

These things premised, we will now show you how all plane Triangles may be
measured, in respect of their Sides and Angles, both by the Scale, and also by
the Tables of Sines and Tangents.

CHAP. III. Of the Solution or Mensuration of plane Triangles.
IN the Solution of plane Triangles, the angles only being given, the sides
cannot be found, but the reason of the sides only; it is therefore necessary,
that one of the sides be known.

2. In all plane Triangles, the three angles are equal to two Right: two Angles
therefore being given, the third is also given; and one of them being given,
the sum of the other two is also given.

3. In a Right angled plane Triangle, one of the Acute Angles being given, the
other is also given, it being the Complement of the other to a Quadrant or 90
degrees.

4. In a Right Angled plane Triangle, there are seven Cases, whose Solution
shall be showed in the Problems following.

5. The sides comprehending the Right angle we call the legs, and the side
subtending the Right angle, we call the Hypothenuse.

Problem I. The Legs given, to find an Angle and the Hipothenuse.
In the right angled plane Triangle ABC, let there be given the legs.

AB 512. To find Hypot. BC. AC 384. To find Angl. B and C.
Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and upon the point A, erect the perpendicular
AC, and by help of your Scale of equal parts, set off from A to B, 512, and
also from A to C, 384, and draw the line BC, for the Hypothenuse, which being
Measured by the scale of equal Parts, will be found to be 640. and by the line
of Chords, the angle at B 36.87, whose complement is the angle ACB, 53.13.

By the Tables, the Proportions are, 1. A^. AC Radius. tang. B. 2. s^^. AC
Radius. BC.


Problem II. The Angles and one Leg given to find the Hypothenuse and the other
Leg.
Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and at Right angles the point A erect the
perpendicular AC, and by your scale of equal parts set off from A to B 512, and
upon the point B lay down the angle ABC, 36.87. and draw the line BE, till it
cut the perpendicular AC, then measure the lines BC and AC, by the scale of
equal parts, so shall the one, to wit, BC, be the Hypothenuse, and AC, the
other leg inquired.

By the Tables, the Proportions are,

3. Rad.. AB 4 B. AC.

4. Sine C. AB Rad.. BC.

Problem III. The Hypothenuse and Oblique Angles given, to find the Legs.
Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and upon the point B protract one of the
angles given, suppose the lesser ABC, 36.87. and draw the line BC, and by your
scale of equal parts, number the given Hypothenuse from B to C 640. and from
the point C to the line AB, let fall the Perpendicular AC, then is BA one, and
CA, the other leg inquired.

By the Tables, the Proportion is,

5. Rad.. BC sB. AC.

Problem IV. The Hypothenuse and one Leg given, to find the Angles and the
other Leg.
Draw a line at pleasure, as AB, and by your scale of equal parts, number from
B to A, the quantity of the given leg AB, 512. then upon the point A erect the
Perpendicular AC, and opening your Compasses to the extent of your Hypothenuse
BC 640, set one Foot in B, and move the other, till it touch the Perpendicular
AC, and there draw BC, so shall AC be the leg inquired, and either Angle may be
found by the line of Chords.

By the Tables, the Proportions are,

6. BC. Rad. AB. Sine C.

7. Rad.. BC Sine B. AC.

6. Hitherto we have spoken of Right angled plane Triangles, the Problems
following concern such as are Oblique.

Problem V. The angles in an Oblique angled plane triangle one side given, to
find the other sides.
In the Oblique angled plane Triangle BCD, let there be given the side CB 632,
and the Angles DCB 11.07. D. 26.37.

Draw the line CB at pleasure, and by your scale set off from C to B 632, and
upon those points protract the given Angles DCB 11.07 CBD. 142.56, and draw the
lines CD and BD, till they intersect one another, then shall the one side be CD
865, and the other DB 273.

By the Tables, the Proportion is,

1. Sine BDC. BC sDCB. DB.

Problem VI. Two sides of an Angle opposite to one of them being given, to find
the other Angles and the third side, if it be known whether the Angle opposite
to the other given side be Acute or Obtuse.
In the Oblique angled plane Triangle BCD, let there be given, The Sides CB 632
Ang. D. 26.37. The Sides CD 865 Ang. D. 26.37.


Draw the line CD at pleasure, and by your scale set off from C to D, 865, and
upon the point D protract the Angle CDB 26.37 and draw the line DB, then open
your Compasses to the length of the other side CB 632, and setting one foot in
C, turn the other about till it touch the line DB, which will be in two places,
in the point B or point nearest to D, if the angle opposite to the side CB be
Obtuse, but in the point E, or point farthest from D if Acute; according
therefore to the Species of that Angle, you must draw either the line CB or CE,
and then you may measure the other angles and the third side, as has been
showed.

By the Tables, the Proportion is,

2. CB. Sine D CD. Sine B.

3. Sine D. CB Sine C. BD.

Problem VII. Two Sides with the Angle comprehended being given, to find the
other Angles, and the third Side.
In the Oblique angled plain Triangle BCD, let there be given, The Sides DC 865
Angle C. 11.07. The Sides BC 632 Angle C. 11.07.


Draw a line at pleasure, as DC 865, and by your Scale set off from C to D,
865, then protract the Angle at C 11.07, and draw the line BC, and by your
Scale set off from C to B 632, and draw the line BD, and so have you
constituted the Triangle BDC, in which you measure the Angles and the third
side, as has been showed; but to resolve this Problem by the Tables, it is
somewhat more troublesome.

1. To find the Angles, the proportion is, ^.

2. To find the third Side.

Sine D. BC Sine C. BD.

Problem VIII. The three sides given to find an Angle.
Let the given sides be DC 865. BC 632. and DB 273.

Draw a line at pleasure, as DC, and by your Scale set off from C to D 865,
then open your Compasses to the extent of either of the other sides, and
setting one foot of your Compasses in C, with the other draw an Occult arch,
then open your Compasses to the extent of your third side, and setting one foot
in D, with the other foot describe another Arch cutting the former in the point
B, then will the Lines BC and DB, constitute the Triangle, whose Angles may be
measured, as has been already showed.

To resolve this Problem by numbers, the Proportions are for the Segments of
the Base.

As the base is to the sum of the other sides, so is the difference of those
sides to the difference of the Segments of the Base; which being subtracted
from the Base, half the remainer will show where the perpendicular must fall,
suppose at F, and constitute the two Right angled Trianges BDF, and FDC, in
which we have given the Hypothenuses BD and DC, and the Legs BF and CF, and
therefore we may find the Angles of those Triangles, as has been showed in the
fourth Problem.

Problem IX. To find the Superficial content of Right lined Figures.
Having showed the Mensuration of Triangular planes in respect of their sides
and Angles, we will now show how the Area or Superficial content of them, and
any other plane Figures may be found: And because all many-sided Figures may be
best Measured by reducing them first into Right angled Triangles, Quadrangles,
or Trapezias, we will first show how the Area or Superficial content of these
Figures may be readily found; and first of a Right or Oblique angled plane
Triangle.

2. To Measure the Right angled plane Triangle BDF, in Fig. 7. Multiply BF by
FD, half the Product shall be the content.

3. To Measure the Oblique angled plane Triangle BDC, let fall the
Perpendicular DF, then Multiply BC by DF, half the Product shall be the content.

4. To find the Area or Superficial content of any Oblique angular Trapezium,
convert it into two Oblique angled Triangles, by a Diagonal, as the line BD in
the Trapezium ABCD, then turn the Oblique angled Triangles into Right, by
letting fall the Perpendiculars AE and CF, then Multiply BD by the sum of AE
and CF, half the Product shall be the content. In like manner may any other
Irregular Multangle be also measured by turning it into Triangles and
Trapeziums, and computing them severally, and adding all their contents
together.

Vide A.

Problem I. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the Circumference.
Vide B.

The Circumference of a Circle whose diameter is 1, is 3.14159 and therefore,

As 1 is to 3.14159, so is any other Diameter, to the Circumference answering
that Diameter.

Problem II. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the Superficial
content.
Archimedes has Demonstrated, that the Area of a Circle is equal to the
content of a Right angled plane Triangle, whose Legs comprehending the Right
angle, are one of them equal to the Semidiameter, and the other to the
Circumference of a Circle. And therefore the Area or Superficial content of a
Circle may be found, by Multiplying half the Circumference by half the
Diameter, or the whole Diameter by the fourth part of the Circumference, they
taking the Diameter of a Circle to be one, and the Circumference 3.14159, the
Superficial content of such a Circle will be found to be 07853975.

And therefore, As 1 is to 78539, so is the Square of any other Diameter to the
Superficial content required.

Problem III. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the side of a
square which may be inscribed within the same Circle.
The Chord or Subtense of the fourth of a Circle, whose Diameter is 1, is
7071067; therefore, as one, to 7071067, so is the Diameter of any other Circle,
to the Side required.

Problem IV. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the Diameter.
By the Diameter to find the Circumference, the proportion by the tenth Problem
is; As 1 to 3.14159, so the Diameter to the Circumference, and therefore
putting the Circumference of a Circle to be 1.

As 3.14159. 1 1. 318308.

And therefore as 1 to 318308, so is any other Circumference, to the Diameter
sought.

Problem V. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the Superficial
content.
As the Square of the Circumference of a Circle given, is to the Superficial
content of that Circle, so is the Square of the Circumference of any other
Circle, to the Superficial content of that other Circle.

And in a Circle whose Diameter is 1, the Circumference is 3.14159, and the
Area 7853975, and supposing an Unite to be the Circumference of a Circle, it
is, as the square of 3.14159. 7853975 1. 0079578, and therefore, As 1.
0.079578, so is the square of any other Circumference, to the Area desired.

Problem VI. The Circumference of a Circle being given, to find the side of a
square which may be inscribed within the same Circle.
As the Circumference of a Circle whose Diameter is 1, viz. 3.14159, is to
707107, the side of the inscribed square of that Circle, so is the
Circumference of any other Circle, to the side inquired; and putting the
Circumference to be Unity, it is, as 3.14159. 707107 1. 225078, therefore,

As 1 to 225078, so is the Circumference given, to the side inquired.

Problem VII. The superficial content of a Circle being given to find the
Diameter.
This is the Converse of the 11. Problem, the Diameter given, to find the
Content, for which the Proportion is; as 1 to 7853975, so is the square of the
diameter, to the content: and therefore we must say; as 7853975 is to 1 so 1 to
1.27324; and hence, as 1 to 1.27324, so is the Area, to the Square of the
Diameter.

Problem VIII. The Superficial content of a Circle being given, to find the
Circumference.
This is the Converse of the 14. Problem, the Circumference given, to find the
Content.

As 1 to 079578, so Circumference square, to the Content: And therefore,

As 079578. 1 1. 12.5664, and by consequence,

As 1 to 12.5664, so the Area, to the Square of the Circumference.

Vide C.

Problem IX. The Axis or Diameter of a Sphere being given, to find the
Superficial Content.
As the square of the Diameter of a Circle, which suppose 1, is to 3.14159 the
Area, so is the square of the Axis given, to the Area that is required.

CHAP. IV. Of Bodies or Solids.
AFter the description of lines and planes, the Doctrine of Bodies is to be
considered.

2. A Solid or Body, is that which has Length, Breadth and Thickness, whose
bounds or limits are Superficies.

3. A Solid is either Plane or Gibbous.

4. A Plane Solid, is that which is comprehended of Plane Superfices, and is
either a Pyramide or Pyramidate.

5. A Pyramide, is a solid Figure, which is contained by Planes, set upon one
Plane or Base, and meeting in one point.

6. A Pyramidate, is a solid Figure, composed of Pyramides, and is either a
Prisme or a mixed Polyhedron.

7. A Prisme, is a Pyramidate or solid Figure, by Planes, of which these two
which are opposite, are equal, like, and parallel and all the other Planes are
parallelograms.

8. A Prisme, is either a Pentahedron, a Hexahedron, or a Polyhedron.

9. A Pentahedron Prisme, is that, which comprehended of five sides, and the
Base Triangle.

10. An Hexahedren Prisme, is that which is comprehended of six sides, and the
Base a Quadrangle.

11. An Hexahedron Prisme, is either a Parallelipipedon, or a Trapezium.

12. A Parallelipipedon, is that whose sides or opposite planes are
parallelograms.

13. A Prisme, called otherwise a Trapezium, is that solid, whose opposite
planes or sides are neither parallel nor equal.

14. A Parallelipipedon, is either Right angled or Oblique.

15. A Right angled Parallelipipedon, is that which is comprehended of right
angled sides and it is either a Cube or an Oblong.

16. A Cube, is a Right angled parallelipipedon of equal sides.

17. An Oblong, is a right angled parallelipipedon of unequal sides.

18. An Oblique angled Parallelipipedon, is that which is comprehended of
oblique sides

19. A Polyhedron, is that which is comprehended of more than five sides, and
the Base a Multangle.

20. A mixed Polyhedron, is that whose Vertex is in the Center, and the several
sides exposed to view, and of this sort, there are only three; the Octahedron,
the Icosohedron, and the Dodecahedron.

21. An Octahedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by eight Equal and
Equilateral Triangles.

22. An Icosohedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by twenty Equal and
Equilateral Triangles.

23. A Dodecahedron, is a solid Figure, which is contained by twelve Pentagons,
Equilateral and Equiangled.

24. A Gibbous solid, is that which is comprehended of Gibbous Superficies, and
it is either a Sphere or Various.

25. A Sphere, is a Gibbous body, absolutely Round and Globular.

26. A Various Gibbous Body, is that which is comprehended by various
superficies and a circular base; and is either a Cone, or a Cylinder.

27. A Cone, is a Pyramidical Body, whose Base is a Circle.

28. A Cylinder, is a solid Body of equal thickness, having a Circle for its
Base. The solid content of these several Bodies may be measured by the Problems
following.

Problem I. The Base and Altitude of a Pyramide or Cone given, to find the
Solid Content.
Multiply the Altitude by a third part of the Base, or the whole Base by a
third part of the Altitude, the Product shall be the solid Content required.

Problem II. The Base of a Prisme or Cylinder being given, to find the sold
content.
Multiply the Base of the Prisme or Cylinder given, by the Altitude, the
Product shall be the solid content.

Problem III. In a Piece or Frustum of a Pyramide, Cone or other irregular
Solid, both the bases being given, to find the content.
If the Aggregate of both the Bases of the Frustum, and of the mean
Proportional between them, be drawn into the Altitude of the Frustum, the third
part of the Product shall be equal to the solid content required.

Problem IV. The Axis of a Sphere being given, to find the solid content.
A Sphere (as Archimedes has showed) is equal to two thirds of a Cylinder
circumscribing it; now then, such a Cylinder being made; by the Area of a
Circle multiplied by the Diameter; and therefore the Area of a Circle being
multiplied by two thirds of the Diameter, the Product shall be the solid
content of a Sphere.

The Area of a Circle whose Diameter is 1, is 7853975, which being multiplied
by 666666, the two thirds of the Diameter, the Product 523598 is the solid
content of such a Sphere; therefore,

As 1 to 523598, so is the Cube of any Axis given, to the solid content
required.

FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The FOVRTH PART. Of MUSIC.
CHAP. I. Of SINGING.
MUSIC is the Art of modulating Notes in Voice or Instrument.

2. It does consist in Singing or Setting.

3. In Singing there are five things to be considered: 1. The Number of the
Notes. 2. Their Names. 3. Their Tunes. 4. Their Times. And 5. Their Adjuncts.

4. The number of Musical Notes are three times seven, or twenty one, that is
from the lowest Note of a Man's Base, to the highest of a Boy's Treble, we
usually reckon twenty one Notes; though there are some Bases that reach below,
and some Trebles that arise above this ordinary compass.

The number of Musical Notes is therefore divided by Septenaries, because there
are in Nature, but seven distinct sounds expressed in Music, by seven distinct
Notes, in the several Cliffs or Cleaves of the Scale; for the eighth and
fifteenth have the same sound or tune, and therefore the name and cliff of the
first; the 9 th and 16 th of the second; the 10 th and 17 th of the third; the
11 th and 18 th of the fourth; the 12 th and 19 th of the fifth; the 13 th and
20 th, of the sixth; the 14 th and 21 th, of the seventh.

6. These thrice seven Notes are descerned by their places. A place is either a
Rule or space, and therefore in eleven rules with their spaces, is comprehended
the whole scale.

7. At the beginning of each rule and space is placed one of the first seven
Letters in the Alphabet, and these Letters are thrice repeated one above
another, the letter G being put upon the first or lowest place of each
sepentary being the first letter in the word Greece, and in the first
sepentary, retained the Name and Form of the Greek Gamma, in remembrance, that
the Art of Music, as other learned Arts came to us from that seat of the Muses.

8. By these seven letters of the Alphabet, otherwise called seven cliffs or
cleaves, the scale is divided into three several parts of Music; the first and
lowest is called the base; the 2d. or middle part, the Mean; the third or
highest part, the Treble. As for the Notes, which do exceed this compass,
either in the base or treble, they are signed with double letters in the same
manner, that the ordinary Notes are with single.

9. The second thing to be considered in Singing, is the Name by which each of
these Notes is called.

10. And for these seven notes, signed by the first seven letters in the
Alphabet, there are but six several names invented to help the learner in the
tuning of them; ut, re, Mi, fa, sol, la, and for the seventh note, because it
is but half a tone above la, as the fourth is above Mi, (whereas the rest are
all whole tone) it is fitly called by the same name with the fourth, and so the
next will be an eight, or Diapason to the first, and consequently placed in the
same letter or cliff, and called by the same name.

And thus they were wont to be placed in the scale, in which the first name ut
being placed upon the same line with the Greek Gamma, has caused the whole
scale to be called the Gamut; but modern Musicians in these latter times, have
rejected the names of ut and re, as finding the other four to be sufficient for
the expressing of the several sounds, and less burdensome to the Memories of
Practisioners.

11. This scale or Gamut then is divided into four Columns. In the first you
have the Alphabetical letters or cliffs, the other three show the names of the
notes, ascending and descending, according to their several names and keys*

In the second column is set the names of the notes as they be called, where is
B duralis, or B sharp, as having no flat in B mi, and then your notes are
called as they are set there on the rules and spaces ascending.

In the third Column is B proper, or B naturalis, which has a B flat in B mi
only, which is put at the beginning of the line with the Cliff, and there you
have also the names as they are called on Rule and Space.

In the fourth Column is B fa, or B mollaris, having two B flats, the one in B
mi, the other in E la mi, placed as the other; by ^^serving of which you have a
certain rule for the Names of the Notes in any part.

12. In these three columns observe this for a general rule, that what name any
note has, the same name properly has his eight above or below.

13. Although the whole ordinary scale of Music does contain three septenaries
of lines and spaces; yet when any of the parts which it is divided into, shall
come to be Pricked out by it self in Songs or Lessons, five Lines is only
usual, for one of those Parts as being sufficient to contain the compass of
notes thereunto belonging: And if there be any Notes that extend higher or
lower, it is usual to add a Line in that place with a Pen.

THE GAM=VT OR SCALE OF MUSIC
The Treble or highest Keys
aa la mi re la la mi gg sol re vt sol sol la ff fa vt fa fa sol E la la mi fa
D la sol sol la la C sol fa fa sol sol B fa mi mi fa fa A la mi re la la mi G
sol re vt * cliffe * sol * la The Mean or middle Keys
G sol re vt * cliffe * sol * la ff fa vt fa fa sol E mi la mi fa D la sol re
sol la la C Sol fa vt * cliffe fa * Sol * Sol B fa mi mi fa fa A la mi ^ sol re
vt sol sol la F fa vt * Cliffe fa fa * sol The Basse or lowest Keys
F fa vt * Cliffe fa fa * sol E la mi la mi fa D sol re sol la la C fa vt fa
sol sol B mi mi fa la A re la la mi G Gamvt sol sol la FF fa vt fa fa sol EE la
mi la mi fa DD sol re sol la la CC fa vt fa B Duralis 1 sol B Naturalis 2 Sol B
Mollaris 3

14. Though the seven Letters set at the beginning of each Rule and Space, are
seven Cleaves, yet four of them are only usual: The first is called the F fa ut
Cleave or Cliff, thus marked * this is proper to the Base or lowest Part, and
is set upon the fourth line, at the beginning of Songs or Lessons. The second
is the C sol fa ut, which is proper to the middle or inner parts, and is thus
marked. *. The third is the G sol re ut Cleave or Cliff, which is only proper
to the Treble or highest, and is signed thus, * on the second line of the Songs
or Lessons; and these are called the three signed Cliffs.

The fourth is the B Cliff, which is proper to all Parts, as being of two
natures and properties; that is to say, Flat and Sharp, and does only serve for
the Flatting and Sharping of Notes; it is called by two Names, and signed by
two Marks, the one is B fa, or B flat, and is known on Rule or Space by this
mark, (), The other is called B mi or B sharp, and is known by this mark

15. Concerning this fourth Cliff, you are to observe: 1. That the B fa, or B
flat does alter both the Name and Property of the Notes before which it is
placed; changing mi into fa, and making that Note to which he is joined, a
Semi-tone, or half a note lower. 2. That the B mi or B sharp alters the
property of the Notes before which he is placed, but not the Name; for he is
usually placed either before fa or sol, and they retain their name still, but
their sound is raised half a Tone or Sound higher. Lastly, note, that these two
B Cliffs are placed not only at the beginning of the Lines with the other
Cliff, but is usually put to several Notes in the middle of any Song or Lesson,
for the flatting and sharping of Notes, as the Harmony of the Music does
require.

16. Of these four Notes now in use, Mi is the principle or master Note, for
that being found, the rest are known by this direction; after Mi, sing fa sol
la, twice upward and la sol fa, twice downward, and so you come to Mi again in
the same Cliff both ways.

17. This Note Mi, has his being in four several places, but he is but in one
of them at a time. Its proper place is in B mi, as in the second Column of the
Gamut; but if a B fa, or B flat, be in its place, then he is in E la mi, as in
the third Column of the Gamut, which is its second place. But if a B flat be
placed there also, then its in A la mi re, which is its third place. If a B
flat come there also, then it is removed into its fourth place, which is D la
sol re, according to these Examples.

1. Example. Mi in B mi.^Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol.

II. Example. Mi in E la.^Sol la fa sol la mi fa sol.

III. Example. Mi in Ala mi re.^La mi fa sol la fa sol la.

IV. Example. Mi in D la sol.^La fa so la mi fa sol la.

CHAP. II. Of the Tunes of Notes.
THe next thing to be considered in Singing, is the Tunes of Notes, which
cannot be declared by Precept, but must be learned either by the lively Voice
of the Teacher, or by some Instrument rightly Tuned. Only observe that from mi
to fa, and so from la to fa, is but half a Tone; but between any other two
Notes is a whole Tone, as from fa to sol, or sol to la. And in the first
guiding of the Voice, it will much help, if at the first Tuning, you sound by
degrees all these Notes, as sol la mi, and at the second Tuning, leave out la
the middle Note: this will not only help you to Tune a Third, as from sol to
mi, but it will also help you in the raising of Fourths and Fifths, etc.

Of which there are some Examples in the plain Songs following.

First. ^Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol fa la sol fa mi la sol.

Second. ^Sol mi la fa mi sol fa la la fa sol mi fa la mi sol la so

Third. ^Sol la mi sol mi sol la mi fa sol fa sol la mi fa sol

^sol sol sol la mi fa sol la sol la sol la mi fa sol la fa

^sol fa sol la mi fa sol la fa sol sol sol sol fa la

^sol la sol fa la sol sol sol sol fa la sol fa

^sol fa sol fa la sol fa mi sol mi sol fa la sol

^fa mi la sol la sol fa la sol fa mi la sol sol sol

^fa sol la sol sol sol fa sol mi sol la sol.

CHAP. III. Of the Time of Notes.
THe Notes in Music have two Names, one for Tune, the other for Time or
Proportion. The Names of Notes in reference to their Tunes, are, as has been
said, these four, Sol La Mi Fa; And their Names in Proportion of Time, are
Eight; A Large, a Long, a Breve, a Semi-breve, a Minum, a Crotchet, a Quaver, a
Semi quaver.

The four first are of Augmentation, or Increase; the four latter are of
Diminution or Decrease, and are thus proportioned. The Large being the first of
Augmentation, and longest in Sound; the Semi-breve is the last of Augmentation,
and the shortest in Sound, and in Time is called the Master-Note, being of one
Measure by himself, all the other Notes are reckoned by his value, both in
Augmentation and Diminution.

In Augmentation, the Large is Eight Semi-breves, the Long four, the Breve two,
the Semi-breve is one Time or Note.

In Diminution, the latter four do decrease in this proportion; two Minums make
a Semi-breve, two Crotchets make a Minum, two Quavers make a Crotchet, and two
Semi-quavers make a Quaver. As in the Table following may be seen.

Notes of Augmentation.
* -- A Large. * * -- A Long. * * * * -- A Breve. * * * * * * * * -- A
Semi-breve.




Notes of Diminution.
* -- A Semibreve. * * -- A Minum. * * * * -- A Crotchet. * * * * * * * * -- A
Quaver. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * -- A Semiquaver.




CHAP. IV. Of the Adjuncts belonging to Musical Notes.
THere belong to Notes, thus described by their Number, Names, Tunes, and Time,
these seven things. A Tie, a Repeat, a Pause, a Direct, a Close, and single and
double Bars, and several Moods.

2. A Tie is a Semicircle, whose two ends point to the two Notes conjoined, as
when two Minums, or one Minum and a Crotchet are tied together; as also, when
two or more Notes are to be Sung to one Syllable, or two Notes or more to be
played with one drawing of the Bow on the Viol or Violin.

3. The middle and principal Note is the Semibreve: And when any Note and his
half note in the same place are conjoined for one Syllable, the mark of the
half Note, and of the Ligature too, is a point set by the Note, as *^ *^ and it
is as much, as if with the Note his half Note were expressed, and conjoined by
Ligature, and prolongeth the sound of that Note it follows, to half as much
more; thus a Semi-breve, which is of it self but two Minums, having a prick
after it, is made three Minums, in one continued sound, and so in other Notes.

4. A Repeat is either of the same Notes and Ditty together, or of Ditty with
other Notes, and is marked thus, {vocal join} and is used to signify, that
such a part of a Song or Lesson must be Played or Sung over again from that
Note over which it is placed.

5. A Pause is a mark of rest or silence in a Song for the time of some Note,
whereof it has its name. A line discending from a superior Rule, and not
touching the Rule below, is a Semibreve Rest: the like line rising from an
inferior Rule, and not touching the Rule above, is a Minum Rest: the same with
a crook to the Right hand, is a Crotchet Rest, and to the left hand, a Quaver
Rest: Also a line reaching from Rule to Rule, is a Breve Rest, or a Pause of
two Semibreves; a line from a Rule to a third Rule, is a Long pause, or of four
Semibreves, and two of them together make a Large pause, or a Rest of Eight
Semibreves.

6. A Direct in the end of a line, shows where the Note stands in the
beginning of the next line, and is marked thus, ^

7. A Close is either Perfect or Imperfect; A Perfect Close is the end of Song,
noted thus, * or thus, {fermata below} or with two Bars thwart all the Rules,
or both ways. An Imperfect Close, is the end of a Strain, or any place in a
Song, where all the Parts do meet and Close before the end, and it is marked
with a single Bar. ^

8. The usual Moods are two, the Imperfect of the more, when all goes by two,
except the Minims, which goes by three, as two Longs to a Large, two Breves to
a Long, two Semibreves to a Breve, three Minums to the Semibreve, with a prick
of perfection; this Mood is thus signed, *3 and is usually called the Triple
Time.

The other usual Mood is the Imperfect of the less; when all goes by two, as
two Longs to a Large, two Breves to a Long, two Semibreves to a Breve, etc.
this is called the Common Time, because most used, and is marked thus, *.

Thus much, concerning singing; I leave setting to the larger Treatises of this
subject.

FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The FIFTH PART. Of ASTRONOMY.
CHAP. I. Of the General Subject of Astronomy.
AStronomy, is an Art, by which we are Taught the Measure and Motion of the
heavenly Orbs and Stars that are in them.

2. The Heavenly Orbs are either (...), without Stars, as the Primum Mobile, or
(...), such as have Stars in them, as the eight inferior Orbs.

3. The Stars are either fixed or moveable: The fixed Stars are those which
always keep the same distance from one another; but the moveable Stars,
otherwise called Planets, are such as do not always keep the same distance.

4. All the Stars, as well fixed as moveable have a double motion; the one
occasioned by the Primum Mobile, from East to West, the other natural or proper
to themselves, by which they move from West, to East.

5. According to this double motion of the Stars, this Art of Astronomy is
divided into two Parts; the first shows the motion of the Primum Mobile, and
how the several Heavenly Orbs are by that carried round the World, from East to
West, which is called the Diurnal motion of the Stars.

The second part of Astronomy, shows the Periodical motion of the Stars, in
which the inferior Orbs, according to their own proper and natural motion, do
move from West to East.

6. For the better understanding of these several motions, the Primum Mobile,
or tenth Orb, is usually represented by a Sphere or Globe, with such lines
drawn about it as the Stars in their motions are supposed to make, or may help
to discover unto us, the quantity of their motions, and show the time of their
Risings and Settings, and such like.

7. This Sphere or Globe, is a round body, containing one Superficies, in the
middle whereof there is a Point, from whence all Right Lines drawn to the
Superficies are equal.

8. In the Sphere or Globe, there are ten imaginary Lines or Circles, of which
six are great, and four are small.

9. The great Circles are these which divide the Sphere or Globe into two equal
Hemispheres, and such are the Horizon, Aequinoctial, Zodiac and the two
Colures; the two first of which are called external and mutable, the other
internal and immutable.

10. The Lesser Circles, are those which divide the Sphere or Globe, into two
unequal Hemispheres, whereof one is more, and the other less than the half of
the Sphere or Globe; such are the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, and the
Artick and Antartick Circles, all which are represented in Fig. 9.

11. The Horizon, which is also called the Finitor, is a Circle, which divides
the visible part of the Heavens from the not visible; that is, the lower
Hemisphere from the upper, as the line AB; one of whose Poles is in the Point
directly over our heads, and is called the Zenith, the other Diametrically
opposite, called the Nadir, and noted with the Letters Z. N.

12. The Horizon, is either Sensible or Rational.

13. That is called the Sensible Horizon, which bounds our sight, and seems
to divide the Heavens into two equal Hemispheres.

14. And that is called the Rational or Intelligable Horizon, which does indeed
bisect the Heavens; and this is Right, when it passes through the Poles of the
World; or Oblique, when one of the Poles is somewhat elevated, and the other
depressed; or Parallel, when one Pole is in the Vertical Point or Zenith, for
then the Horizon is Parallel to the Equator; it otherwise makes therewith
either Right or Oblique Angles.

15. Hence there is a threefold position of Sphere. 1. A Right, where the
Horizon is Right; that is, where the Equator passes through the Zenith and
Nadir, 2. Oblique, when the Horizon is Oblique; that is, when one Pole is
somewhat elevated and the other depressed. 3. Parallel, when one of the Poles
of the world is in the Zenith.

16. In a Right Sphere, all the Stars do Rise and Set, but in an Oblique
Sphere, some are hid from our sight, and some are always above the Horizon.

17. The Meridian is a great Circle peculiar and proper to every place, and
drawn through the Vertical point and the Poles of the World, to which when the
Sun comes in his Diurnal motion, in the Daytime he makes the Midday, and in
the Night time, he makes Midnight. There may be as many Meridians as there are
Vertical points, but upon the Globe they are usually drawn through every tenth or
fifteenth Degree of the Equator.

CHAP. II. Of the Internal and Immutable great Circles.
HItherto of the two External and Mutable Circles, the Horizon and Meridian, I
come now to the Internal and Immutable.

2. The first Internal and Immutable Circle is called the Equator, or
Equinoctial Circle, which divides the whole Sphere or Globe into two equal
parts between the Poles, to which when the Sun comes, which is twice in the
Year, the days and nights are equal in all places but in a Parallel Sphere:
this Circle is noted with the letters OF.

3. This Circle is also the measure of Time; for as often as 15 Degrees of this
Circle do ascend above the Horizon, so many hours are completed in its going
round.

4. The second Immutable Circle is called the Zodiak, which is a great Oblique
broad Circle, under which the Planets do always move; the Poles of this Circle
are distant, from the Poles of the world 23 Degrees, 31 Minutes, and 30
Seconds, or 23.53 Centesms.

5. This Circle does differ from other Circles in the Heavens, in that other
Circles to speak properly, have Longitude or Length, but no Breadth, whereas
this Circle is allowed to have both.

6. In respect of Longitude, this Circle is divided as other Circles commonly
are into 360 Degrees, but more peculiarly into 12 parts, constituting, as it
were, the 12 Parts or Months of the Year, or 12 Constellations of Stars, called
Signs, each Sign being subdivided into 30 Degrees or Parts. The Names and
Characters of these 12 Constellations, or Signs, are as follows. Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus,
Aquarius, Pisces.

7. The Zodiac, in respect of Latitude, is divided into 16 Degrees, that is,
into 8 Degrees Northward, and 8 Degrees Southward, because all the Planets,
except the Sun, do in their Motions vary from the middle Line, sometimes one
way, and sometimes another; to the quantity of 8 Degrees; and the middle Line
in which the Sun moves, is the Ecliptic Line, because when the Sun and Moon
are in Conjunction, the Sun is Eclipsed, but when they are in Opposition, the
Moon is Eclipsed.

8. Of these 12 Signs, 4 are called Cardinals, viz. Aries and Libra, in which
do happen the Vernal and the Autumnal Aequinoctials; Cancer and Capricorn, in
which do happen the Summer and the Winter Solstices.

9. Again these Signs are distinguished into Northern and Southern; the
Northern signs are those which decline from the Equator toward the North
Pole, as,,,,,; And the Southers signs are those which decline from the Equator
toward the South Pole, as,,,,,.

10. All other Constellations or fixed stars are referred to some one or other
of the 12 signs, whether they be the 21 Northern constellations, called Vrsa
Minor, Vrsa Major, Draco, Cepheus, Arctephylax, Corona Bore alis, Engonasus,
Lyra, Avis, Cassiopeia, Persius, Heniochus, Serpentarius, Serpens, Sagitta,
Aquila, Delphinus, Equisectio, Pegasus, Andromeda, Triangulus. Or whether they
be the 15 Southern constellations, called Cetus, Orion, Eridanus, Lupus, Canis
Major, Precyon, Argo, Hydra, Crater, Corvus, Centaurus, ^^ra, Ara, Corona
Austr. Pisces Austra.

11. The two other great Circles called the Colures, are the two Circles which
pass through the Poles of the World, and the four Cardinal points in the
Zodiac.

12. That circle which passes through the Poles of the world, and the two
Solstitial points in the Zodiac, which are the beginnings of and, and is
called the Solstitial Colure.

13. That Circle, which passes through the poles of the world and the two
Aequinoctial points, or first entrance into and, is called the Aequinoctial
Colure, and in Fig. 9. represented by the line D. C.

14. The Lesser Circles of the Sphere are the two Tropicks of and with the
Artick and Antartick Circles.

15. The Tropic of is a Circle joined to the Zodiac in the beginning of, and
is described by the Suns Diurnal Motion, when he is in the Summers Solstitial
point, and is distant from the Aequinoctial toward the North Pole 23 degrees. 31'
30" or in Decimal Numbers, 23 degrees. 5.25. to which when the Sun comes, he
causes the longest day and shortest night to all Northern; the shortest day
and longest night to all Southern Inhabitants; and is noted with G.

16. The Tropic of, is a Circle joined to the Zodiac in the beginning of, and
described by the Suns Diurnal Motion, being in the winters Solstitial point,
and is distant from the Aequinoctial toward the South Po^^ ^3 degrees. 31' 30", or
in Decimal Numbers, 23 degrees. 5.25 parts, to which, when the Sun comes, he
makes the longest day and shortest night, to all Southern; the shortest day
and longest night to all Northern Inhabitants, and is noted with H.

These two Circles are called of the Greeks (...), a convertendo, because when
the Sun touches any of the Circles, he is at his greatest distance from the
Equator, and returns thither again.

17. The Artick Circle, is distant from the North Pole of the world, as much as
the Tropic of is distant from the Aequinoctial and is noted with KL.

The Antartick Circle is distant from the South Pole as much as the Tropic of
is distant from the Equator, and is noted with OM.

18. By the Intersection of any three of the greatest Circles of a Sphere is
made a Spherical Triangle.

19. A Spherical Triangle, is either Right Angled or Oblique.

20. A Right Angled Spherical Triangle, has one Right Angle at the least.

21. An Oblique Angled Spherical Triangle, is either Acute or Obtuse.

22. An Acute Angled Spherical Triangle, has all its Angles Acute.

23. An Obtuse Angled Spherical Triangle, has all his Angles, either Obtuse or
mixed, that is one Angle at the least Obtuse, and the other Acute.

24. In Spherical Triangles, there are 28 Varieties or Cases, 16 in
Rectangular, and 12 in Oblique Angular, whereof all the Rectangular and 10 of
the Oblique Angular, may be resolved by one Catholic, and Universal
Proposition; for the understanding whereof, some things must be premised.

1. That in a Right Angled Spherical Triangle, the Hypotenuse and both the
Acute Angles are supposed to be noted with their Complements.

2. That the Right Angle is not reckoned amongst the Circular parts, and
therefore one of the other five will be always a middle part, and the other
four extremes Conjunct or Disjunct.

The Proposition is this:
A Rectangle made of the Sine of the middle part and Radius, is equal to the
Rectangle made of the Tangents of the Extremes Conjunct, or of the Cosins of
the Extremes Disjunct: Therefore,

When two things are given, and a third required, you must first find out the
middle part, and where the other Terms be Extremes Conjunct or Disjunct; if the
things given and inquired lie together, the middle is the middle part, but if
they be disjoined, that which stands by it self is the middle part.

Note also, that when a Complement in the Proposition does chance to concur
with a Complement in the Circular Parts, you must take the Sine it self, or the
Tangent it self, because cs of the cs=S. and ct of the ct=t.

25. These things being understood, the Analogies to be used in every of the 16
Cases of a Right angled Triangle, will from this Proposition be as follows.

Bata Q. Analogia. 1 BCA AB Rad cot. A tBC. sAB. 2 AAB BC cot A. Rad sAB. tBC.
3 ABBC A tBC. sAB Rsd. ctA. 4 ABA AC tAB. csA Rad. cotAC. 5 ACAB A Rcot. AC
tAB. csA. 6 ACA AB cot AC. Rad csA. tAB. 7 AC AC Rad. ctC ct A.csAC. 8 ACA C
ctA. csAC ctC. 9 ACA BC Rad. sA sAC. sBC. 10 BCA AC SA. sBC Rad. sAC. 11 ACBC A
SAC. sBC Rad. sA. 12 ABA C Rad. sA csAB. csC. 13 ABC A csAB. csC Rad. sA. 14 AC
AB sA. csC Rad. csAB. 15 ABBC AC Rad csAB csBC. csAC. 16 ACAB BC csAB. csAC
Rad. csBC.

26. In Oblique angled Spherical Triangles, there are, as has been said, 12
Cases, 10 whereof may be resolved by the Catholic Proposition, if the
Spherical Triangle propounded be first converted into two Right, which may be
done by this General Rule.

From the end of a side given, being adjacent to an Angle given, let fall the
Perpendicular.

A Type of the several Varieties here follows.

1. AC CD
D A Rad. SCD sD. sBC. sAC. Rad sBC. sA.
2. CD A D
AC sA. sD sCD. sAC. 3. AC CD D
AD cot CD. R csD. tBD. cosBD. csCD R. csBC. R. csBC csAC. csAB. BD + AB = AD.
1 Tri. BD - AB = AD. 2. Tri.
4. AC CD D
C ct D. Rad csCD. ct BCD ctCD. csBCD R. tBC. R. tBC ctAC. csACB. BCD + ACB =
ACD. 1. Tri. BCD - ACB = ACD. 2. Tri.
5. A D CA
C ctA. R csAC. ctACB. sACB. csCAB R. csBC. csBC. R csBDC. csBCD. ACB + BCD =
ACD. 1. Tri. BCD - ACB = ACD. 2. Tri.
6. A D A C
AD ct. AC. R csDAC. tAB. ct. DAC. RAB R. tBC. R. tBC ctADC. sBD. AB + BD = AD.
1. Tri. RD - AB = AD. 2. Tri.
7. A A AC
AD ct. CAB. R csAC. ctACB. ACD - ACB = BCD. 1. Tri. ACD + ACB = BCD. 2. Tri. s
ACB. csCAB R. csBC. R. csBC sBCD. csCDB.
8. A C AC
DC ctCAB. R csAC. ctACB. ACD - ACB = BCD. 1. Tri. ACD + ACB = BCD. 2. Tri.
ctAC. csACB R. tBC. tBC. Rad. csBCD. ctDC.
9. AD AC A
DC ctAC. R csCAD. tAB. AD - AB = BD. 1. Tri. AD + AB = BD. 2. Tri. csAB. csAC
R. csBC. R. csBC csBD. csDC.
10. AC AD A
C ctAD. R csCAD. tAE. AE - AC = CF in 1. Tri. AE + AC = CF 2. Tri. ctCAD. sAE
R. tDF. tDF. R sCF. ctDCF.
11. AC AD DC
C sAC x sCD. Rad. square. s z - AC x s z - CD. Q. s 1/ C.


The Twelfth, is but the Converse of the last taking the Angles for Sides, and
the Sides for Angles; so shall the Angle found, be the Side inquired.

CHAP. III. Of the Ascensions and Descensions of the Parts of the Zodiac.
HItherto we have spoken of the general Principles of Astronomy, from whence
the motion of the Primum Mobile is explained; come we now to these affections
which properly belong to the motion thereof, and these are the Ascension and
Descension of the Parts of the Zodiac, or Astronomical Rising and Setting.

2. Astronomical Rising and Setting, is the Elevation of the parts of the
Zodiac or Ecliptic above the Horizon, and Depressed under it, compared to the
Ascension and descension of the parts of the Equator; and this comparison is
in reference to diverse Elevations of the Poles.

3. But this Astronomical Rising and Setting, takes his Denomination from the
parts of the Zodiac; which are above the Horizon or beneath it, and are
measured with respect unto the Equator; for Astronomers do not refer the
Equator to the Zodiac, but the Zodiac to the Equator, for it is Zodiac,
and not the Equator which stands in need of measuring.

4. And an Arch of the Ecliptic or Zodiac, is to be understood two manner of
ways; namely, Continued or Discreet; A Continued Arch, is when it is reckoned
in the Equator in a Continued Series, from the beginning of Aries, and so
forward into the consequent Signs.

5. A Discreet Arch, is so called, because it is not reckoned from the first
Degree of Aries, but from any other point; as from the fourteenth of Gemini, to
the fourteenth of Taurus.

6. Any part of the Zodiac is then said to Ascend Right, when a greater part
of the Equator rises above the Horizon than of the Zodiac. And that is said
to be a greater Arch of the Equator, which is more than 90 Degrees.

7. Any part of the Zodiac is then said to Descend Right, when a greater part
of the Equator than of the Zodiac is beneath the Horizon.

8. Any part of the Zodiac therefore is said to Ascend Obliquely, when a less
part of the Equator than of the Zodiac does Ascend; as also, to Descend
Obliquely, when less of the Equator than of the Zodiac is below the Horizon.

9. Ascension, is either Right or Oblique.

10. Right Ascension or Descension, is that which is in a Right Sphere.

11. In a Right Sphere, the four Quadrants of the Zodiac beginning from the
Aequinoctial and Solstitial Points, do equally Ascend and Descend, so that in
these whole Quadrants, as many Degrees of the Equator as of the Zodiac do
Ascend; but the intermediate parts of those Quadrants in the Zodiac do vary,
and have not equal Ascension and Descension with the parts of the Equator.

12. Those Signs that are equally distant from any of those Points, have also
equal Ascension, as Gemini and Cancer. And the Ascension of a Sign is always
equal to the Descension of the same.

13. In a Right Sphere therefore, four Signs only do rise Right, all the rest
do rise Obliquely.

14. In an Oblique Sphere, the two halves that begin at the two Aequinoctial
Points, do rise together, but the parts of those halves do rise Obliquely. And
those Signs that rise Rightly, do Descend Obliquely, and the contrary.

15. The Ascension of opposite Signs in an Oblique Sphere, taken together, are
equal to the Ascension of the same in a Right Sphere. And those signs that are
equal distant from either of the Aequinoctial Points, have equal Ascensions,
because they equally Decline from the Equator.

16. Besides the Astronomical Rising and setting of the stars, or their rising
and setting, in respect of the Horizon and Equator, there are other affections
of the stars to be considered, namely, those which they have in respect of the
sun.

17. In respect of the Celestial Circles, that is in respect of the Zodiac,
Equator, and Horizon, there is a fourfold affection of the stars. 1.
Longitude. 2. Of Altitude. 3. Of Latitude. 4. Of Declination.

18. The Longitude of a star is his distance from the first Degree or Point of
Aries, accounting from West to East.

19. The Altitude of a star is to be considered generally or specially.
Generally considered, the Altitude of a star is the height thereof above the
Circle of the Horizon.

20. Specially considered, the Elevation of the Pole star above the Horizon, is
called the Altitude.

21. The Latitude of a star is his dDstance from the Ecliptic, that is from
the very middle of the Zodiac toward either Pole, whether North or South.

22. The Declination of a star, is his Distance from the Equator, and as he
declines from thence either Northward or Southward, so is his Declination
nominated either North or South.

23. Thus much of these affections of the stars, which they have in respect of
the Celestial Circles; come we now to those which they have in respect of the
sun; usually called the Poetical rising and setting; and this is threefold. The
first of these in Latin, is called Ortus Matutinus sive Cosmicus, The Morning
or Cosmical Rising. The second, Vespertinus five Achronicus, The Evening or
Achronical; and the last, Heliacus vel Solaris, Heliacal or Solary.

24. The Cosmical or Morning Rising of a star, is when it Rises above the
Horizon, together with the sun. And the Cosmical or Morning setting of a star
is, when it-setteth at the opposite part of Heaven, when the sun rises.

25. The Achronical, or Evening Rising of a Star, is when it Rises on the
opposite part, when the Sun sets; And the Achronical Evening setting of a
Star, is when it sets at the same time with the Sun.

26. The Heliacal Rising of a Star, which you may properly call the Emersion of
it, is when a Star that was hid by the Sun beams, begins to recover it self
out, and to appear. And so likewise, the setting of such a star, which may be
also called the Occultation of the same, is when the Sun by his own proper
motion overtaketh any star, and by the brightness of his beams does make it
invisible unto us.

And thus having briefly showed the chief affections of the Primum Mobile; how
the quantity of these affections may be computed, by the Doctrine of Spherical
Triangles, shall be declared in the Problems following.

Problem I. To find the Suns Greatest Declination and the Poles Elevation.
In Fig. 9. AZ, BN represents the Meridian, OF the Aequinoctial, HR the
Zodiac, P the North Pole; O, the South; AB, the Horizon; Z, the Zenith; N, the
Nadir; HC, a Parallel; of the Suns Diurnal Motion at H, or the Suns greatest
Declination from the Equator toward the North Pole; RQ, a Parallel of the
Suns greatest Declination from the Equator toward the South Pole. From whence
it is apparent, that from A to H, is the Suns greatest Meridian Altitude, from
A to Q, his least; if therefore you deduct AQ, the least Meridian Altitude,
from AH, the greatest, the Difference will be HQ, the Suns greatest Declination
on both sides the Equator; and because the Angles E D H, and F D R, are equal,
therefore the Suns greatest Declination toward the South Pole is equal to his
greatest Declination toward the North, and consequently, half the Distance of
the Tropicks; that is, EQ, or EH, is the quantity of the Suns greatest
Declination; and then if you deduct the Suns greatest Declination, or the Arch
HE, from the Suns greatest Meridian Altitude, or the Arch AH, the Difference
will be AE, the height of the Equator above the Horizon, the Complement
whereof to a Quadrant, is the Arch AO equal to BP, the height of the Pole.

Example.
The Suns greatest Meredian Altitude, taken June the Eleventh at London. --
61.99167 The Suns least Meridian Altitude December the tenth -- 14.94167 Their
Difference is the distance of the Tropicks. -- 47.05000 Half that is the Suns
greatest Declination whose difference from the Suns least Meridian Altitude, is
-- 23.52500 The Elevation of the Equator and the Complement thereof to 90, is
the Elevation of the Pole -- 38.46667 51.53333
Problem II. The Suns greatest Declination being given, to find his Declination
in any point of the Ecliptic.
In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled Spherical Triangle GLD, we have given the suns
greatest Declination GDL, and the suns distance from the next Aequinoctial
point LD, to find the present Declination GL, for which the Proportion is Rad.
sLD sD. sGL.

Problem III. The suns greatest declination and his distance from the next
Equinoctial point given, to find his Right Ascension.
In Fig. 9. In the Right Spherical Triangle GDL, we have given as before the
Angle, GDL, and the Hypotenuse DL, to find the suns Right Ascension DG; the
Proportion is Rad. tDL csD. tDG.

Problem IV. The Elevation of the Pole, and declination of the sun being given,
to find his Amplitude.
In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled spherical Triangle DTV, we have given the
Complement of the Poles Elevation or Angle VDT, and the suns declination VT, to
find DT, the suns Amplitude; for which the Proportion is; sVDT. Rad. sVT, sDT.

Problem V. The Poles Elevation and suns declination being given, to find the
ascentional difference.
In Fig. 9. In the Right Angled spherical triangle DVT, we have given the
Complement of the Poles Elevation, or Angle VDT, and suns declination VT, to
find the Ascensional Difference DV; the Proportion is, tVDT, Rad. tVT. sDV.

Problem VI. The right ascension, and ascensional difference being given, to
find the Oblique ascension and declination.
In Fig. 9. GV, represents the right Ascension; DV, the Ascensional difference;
GD, the Oblique Ascension, which is found by deducting the Ascensional
difference DV, from the Right Ascension GV; for if the Declination be North,
Add The Ascensional diff. to or from the right Ascen. and it will give Obl.
Asc. Sub. Desc.

If the Declination be South, Sub. The Ascensional diff. to or from the right
Ascen. and it will give Obl. Ascen. Add Desce.

Problem VII. To find the time of the Suns rising and setting with the Length
of the day and Night.
First find the Ascensional difference, as has been showed in the fifth
Problem; which, when the Sun is in the Northern signs, is to be added to the
Semi-diurnal Arch of the Right sphere, which is 90, but is to be subtracted
from the same, if he be in the southern signs, and the sum or difference will
be the semi-diurnal Arch, which doubled, is the day Arch, whose Complement to
24, is the night Arch, which Bisected, is the time of the suns rising.

Problem VIII. The Poles Elevation, and the suns Declination given, to find the
time when he will be due East and West.
In Fig. 10. In the Right Angled spherical Triangle TPZ, we have given PZ, the
Complement of the Poles Elevation, and TP, the Complement of the suns
declination, to find the Angle TPZ, for which the Proportion is, Rad.. tPZ
ctTP. csTPZ. whose Complement to a Quadrant TPD, being converted into time,
shows how much it is after six in the Morning, when the sun will be due East,
and before six at night, when he will be due West.

Problem IX. The Poles Elevation, with the Suns Altitude and Declination given,
to find the Suns Azimuth.
In Fig. 10. In the Oblique Angled spherical Triangle SPZ, we have given SP the
Complement of the suns declination, PZ the Complement of the Poles Elevation,
and SZ the Complement of the suns Altitude, to find the Angle SZP, the suns
Azimuth from the North; for which by the eleventh case of Oblique Angled
spherical Triangles, the Proportion is; As the Rectangle of the sines of SZ,
and ZP, is to the square of Radius, so the Rectangle made of sines of the
differences of those containing sides and half sum of three sides given, to the
Square of the sine of the half angle inquired.

CHAP. IV. Of the Secondary or Periodical Motion of the Stars.
Having done with the first part of Astronomy, the motion of the Primum Mobile,
and the affections of the stars, occasioned by that motion; we are now to speak
of their own Proper or Periodical motion; in which contrary to the motion of
the Primum Mobile, they are carried from West to East.

2. This motion of the fixed stars is very slow; for they alter their places
but little in many Years, but are not immovable as some thought; the quantity
of their annual motion, according to Tycho Brahe is 50 seconds, and 37 thirds
of a degree, and others since him do conceive that 50 seconds only is the
quantity of their annual motion, that is most agreeable unto truth and
observation.

3. This motion in the Planets is more swift, and although they never move out
of the Zodiac, yet they do move sometimes in one part of Heaven, sometimes in
another, sometimes toward the south Pole, sometimes toward the North,
sometimes near one fixed star, sometimes near another, and sometimes nearer,
sometimes farther from one another also, whereas the fixed stars do always keep
the same distance from one another.

4. The Planets do not move in one Orb, but every Planet has a several Orb,
whereas the infinite number of fixed stars do all move in one only sphere or
Orb.

5. The Names and Characters of the planets are these:

1. Saturn, whose mark is, finisheth his revolution in 29 Years, 174 Days, 4
Hours.

2. Jupiter, whose mark is, finisheth his Revolution in 11 Years, 317 Days, 15
Hours.

3. Mars, whose mark is, finisheth his Revolution in 1 Year, 321 Days, 23 Hours.

4. The Earth or Sun, marked thus, finisheth his Course in 365 Days, 5 Hours,
49 Minutes, 4 seconds, and 21 thirds.

5. The Moon, marked thus, finisheth her Course in 27 Days, 7 Hours, 43
Minutes, and 6 seconds, but returns not into Conjunction with the Sun, under
29 Days, 12 Hours, 44 minutes, and 3 seconds.

6. Venus, marked thus, finisheth her Course in 224 Days, 16 Hours, 40' and 30".

7. Mercury, marked thus, finisheth his Course in 87 Days, 23 Hours, 00' and
15".

6. The Civil Year, though it does not exactly agree, yet has it some
proportion with the Motions of the sun and Moon in every Nation; Romulus the
founder of Rome, appointed the year at first to consist of 10 Moons, or Months,
and called the first March, 2. April, 3. May, 4. June, the rest Quintilis,
Sextilis, S^ptember, October, November, December, because they were 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, and 10 Months distant from March.

After whom, Numa Pompilius added two Months more, and called them January and
February, and appointed each Month to contain 29 and 30 Days, whereby the Year,
did consist of 354 Days, in which time the Moon returns into Conjunction with
the Sun, and this is the quantity of the Year in Turkey at this day; only in
every third Year, they reckon 355 days. The Persians and Egyptians do also
count 12 Moons or Months to their Year, but their Months are proportioned to
the time of the Suns continuance in every of the 12 signs: In their Year
therefore, which is solar, there are always 365 days, that is, 11 days more
than the Lunar Year.

And the Julian Year, which is the account of all Christendom, does differ from
the other only in this, that by reason of the suns excess in motion above 365
days, which is about 5 Hours, 49 Minutes, it has a day intercalated once in
four Years, and by reason of this Intercalation, it is more agreeable with the
motion of the Sun, the former differing from the Numan Year, 11 days and 6
Hours, the which 11 days, Julius Caesar distributed amongst the Months, and the
month Quintilis, was by him called July, according to his own name; and
Augustus Caesar called the Month Sextilis, by the name of August, and altered
the Position of days in each month to that which we now use, in which there are
52 Weeks, and one odd day, and this one day supernumerary, makes an alteration
in all the rest, so that the days of the Week, which used to be assigned by the
Letters of the Alphabet, fall not alike in several Years, but Sunday this Year,
must fall out upon the next years Monday, and so forward, till seven years; and
because the six odd Hours do make a day in four years, every fourth year has a
day added to its account, and such a year does consist of 366 days, which does
occasion the Sunday letter still to alter till four times 7, that is, 28 Years
be gone about. This Revolution is called the Cycle of the Sun, taking name
from, Sunday, the Letter whereof it does appoint for every year, as by the
Table may be seen.

To find which of 28 the present is, add 9 to the Year of Our Lord, because
this Circle was so far gone about at that the time of Christ's birth, divide
the whole by 28, what remains, is the present year; if nothing remain, the
Cycle is out, and that year you must call the last, or 28.

This Intercalation of a day, placed in February, does occasion the Letter F to
be twice repeated in the latter end of that Month, viz. upon the 24 and 25
days, and in such a year St. Matthias day is to be observed upon the 25 of that
month, and the very next Sunday does change and alter this letter, from which
Leaping or Changing, such a year is called the Leap Year, and the Number of
days in each Month is well expressed in these Distichs.

Thirty Days has September,

April, June, and November;

February has Twenty Eight alone,

All the rest has Thirty and One:

-- But when of Leap Year comes the time,

Then Days has February Twenty and Nine.

That this Account is somewhat too long, is acknowledged and confess^d by the
most skilful Astronomers, as for the Number of days in a year, the Emperors
Mathematicians were in the right, for it is certain, no Year can consist of
more than 365 days, but for the odd Hours, it is a certain that they cannot be
fewer than five, nor so many as six, so that the doubt is upon the minutes,
sixty whereof goes to the making of an Hour; a small matter one would think,
and how great in the recess and consequence we shall see.

Julius Caesar allotted 365 days, 6 hours, to his Revolution; but the Sun goes
about in less time, that is, (according to the most exact account,) in 365
days, 5 hours, 49 Minutes, and a little more; so that the Emperors year must
of necessity breed a difference in so many Minutes every year, betwixt the year
which the Sun it self describes in the Zodiac, and that which is reckoned upon
in the Calender, which though for a year or two may pass insensibly, yet in the
space of 134 years it will rise to a whole day that is, the beginning of the
year in the Calender must be set one day back.

As for Example.
Let the Year begin in the Vernal Aequinox, or Spring, in the Emperors time,
that fell out to be the 24 th of March, but now this year it fell out the 10 th
of March, 13 days backward and somewhat more; and so if it be let alone, will
go back to the first of March, and first of February, till Easter come to be on
Christmas day, and so infinitely.

To reform this difference in the account, some of the latter Roman Bishops
earnestly endeavored, and the thing was brought to that perfection it now
stands, (so much as it is,) by Gregory the Thirteenth, in the year 1582. his
Mathematicians, (whereof Lylius was the chief) advised him thus: That
considering there had been in agitation in the Council of Nice, somewhat
concerned in this matter upon the motion of the Question about the Celebration
of Easter; and that the Fathers of that Assembly, after due deliberation with
the Astronomers of that time, had fixed the Vernal Aequinox; at the 21 th of
March, and considering also, that since that time a difference of 10 whole days
had been past over in the Calender, that is, that the Vernal Equinox or Spring,
which began upon the 21 th of March, had prevented so much as to begin in
Gregory's days, at the 10 th of the same, 10 days difference, or thereabout;
they advised, that 10 days should be cut off from the Calender, which was done,
and the 10 days taken out of October, in the Year 1582, as being the Month of
that Year in which the Pope was born, so that when they came to the 5 th of the
Month, they reckoned the 15 th, and so the Aequinox was come up to its place
again, and happened upon the 21 th of March, as at the Council of Nice. But
that Lylius should bring back the beginning of the year to the time of the
Nicene Council, and no farther is to be marvelled at; he should have brought it
back to the Emperors own time, where the mistake was first entered; and instead
of 10, cut off 13 days; however this is the reason why these two Calenders
differ the space of 10 days one from another.

And thus I have given you an account of the year as it now stands with us in
England, and with the rest of the Christian World, in respect of the Sun; some
other particulars there are with us and them, that do depend upon the motion of
the moon, for the better understanding of them, I will give you a brief account
of her Revolution.

The Solar year consisting, as has been said, of 11 days more than the Lunar
year; those 11 days called the Epact, are therefore added to the Lunar Year, to
made it equal with the Solar, by the addition of which access, in every three
years there is gotten a number more than 30, but because the Moon between
change and change does never pass 30 days, the Epact cannot exceed that number,
and the time in which the Moon is supposed to make her several Motions and so
return to the place where she first began, is a circle or Revolution of 19
years, first found out by Meton, and Athenian, who lived about 439 years before
Christ, this Cycle is therefore called Cyclus Decenno ^ennalis, and from the
Author A^nus Metonicus from whose Athenians, the Egyptians may seem to have
received it, as the Romans from them, in letters of Gold, from whence (if not
from the more precious use of it) it attained to be called, as yet still it is,
the Numerus Aureus, or Golden Number: It is made Christian, by the Fathers of
the Nicene Council, as being altogether necessary to the finding out of the
Neomenea Paschalis, upon which the Feast of Easter and all the rest of the
moveable Feasts depend: It self is found by adding a Unite to the year of our
Lord, and dividing the whole by 19, the Remainder shall be the Cycle of the
Moon, or if nothing remain, the Cycle is out, that is, 19.

And the Epact is found by Multiplying the golden Number by 11, and dividing
the Product by 30, what remains is the Epact; but to save this trouble of
Calculation, you have it set down to your hand in the table before the Calender
the use whereof as of the Golden Number is to find the Change of the Moon, for
the Ancient Philosophers supposing the Moon to make a perfect Revolution in 19
years, did Calculate the several Changings of the Moon that happened in each
Month for that time, and placed the golden number for each year, right against
the day of the Month on which the Moon changed, that so having found the golden
number, they might thereby presently know on what day of the month the Moon did
change, in any Month of the year for ever, as also the time, when the Feast of
Easter was to be observed, according to the Canon made at a General Council
held at Nice, in the year of our Lord, 322, in which it is commanded that
Easter should be Celebrated upon the next Sunday following the first Full Moon
after the Vernal Aequinox, which then was upon the 21 th day of March, and
according to this rule is this Feast observed with us at this day, and not
according to the true Motion of the Moon, or precise time of the Vernal
Aequinox, which now is about the 10 th of March; This use of the Golden Number
is well expressed in these Distichs.

In March after the first C,
Look the Prime where e're it be;
The third Sunday after Easter day shall be,
And if the Prime on the Sunday be,
Then reckon that for one of the three.
To find the New Moons by the Epact, do thus, To the Epact for the year given
add the number of the months from March including both Months, and the days of
that Month past, the Sum of these three Numbers shall give you the age of the
Moon, if they exceed not 30, if more than 30, cast away 30, and the Remainder
shall be the Age as before.

Example.
I would know the Age of the Moon on the Fifteenth day of August, 1672. The
Epact is 11, and the Months from March to August are 6, and 15 the day of the
Month, all which put together, do make 32, from whence take 30, and there rests
2, the Age of the Moon that day. And to know the day of the Change, do thus: To
the Epact add all the months from March, and if they joined together, come not
to 30, look what they lack of 30, and at so many days of the month the moon
changes: If they be above 30, and the month you desire have 31 days, then
Subtract 30; but if 30 days, then Subtract 29, and that rest take from 30, then
look what remains, and at so many days of the month the moon changes, by
either of these ways the time of the new moons may indeed be guest at, but not
exactly found: How that may be done, is showed in the larger Treatises of this
Subject; this we deem sufficient for our present purpose.

A Table, showing the Cycle of the Suns, Dominical Letter, Golden Number, and
the Epact.
Year of our Lord. Cycl. Dom. Let. 1672 1 GF 1673 2 E 1674 3 D 1675 4 C 1676 5
BA 1677 6 G 1678 7 F 1679 8 E 1680 9 DC 1681 10 B 1682 11 A 1683 12 G 1684 13
FE 1685 14 D 1686 15 C 1687 16 B 1688 17 AG 1689 18 F 1690 19 E 1691 20 D 1692
21 CB 1693 22 A 1694 23 G 1695 24 F 1696 25 ED 1697 26 C School 27 B 16^^ 28 A

Year of our Lord. Golden Number. Epact. 1672 1 11 1673 2 22 1674 3 3 1675 4 14
1676 5 25 1677 6 6 1678 7 17 1679 8 28 1680 9 9 1681 10 20 1682 11 21 1683 12
12 1684 13 23 1685 14 4 1686 15 15 1687 16 26 1688 17 7 1689 18 18 1690 19 29

January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October.
November. December. 1 3 a Circum. d 3 d David. g 11 b Philip and Jacob. e 19 g
8 c Lammas. 16 f 16 a d All Sain. f 2 b 11 e Purifica. e 11 a c 19 f 8 a 16 d 5
g 5 b 13 e 13 g 3 11 c 19 f 11 f b 19 d 8 g b 5 e a 13 c 2 f 2 a 4 d 8 g g 19 c
8 e 16 a 16 c f 13 b 2 d g 10 b 5 19 e a 19 a 8 d f 5 b 5 d 13 g 2 c e 10 a c 6
8 f Epipha. 16 b 8 b 16 e 16 g c e 2 a d 10 f b 18 d 7 g 5 c c 5 f 5 a 13 d 13
f b 10 e g 18 c 7 e 8 16 a d 16 d g b 2 e 2 g 10 c 18 f 18 a 7 d f 9 5 b 13 e 5
e 13 a 13 c f a d 7 g 7 b e 15 g 10 c 2 f f 2 b 2 d 10 g 10 b 18 e a c 15 f 4 a
11 13 d g 13 g c e a c 7 f 15 b 15 d 4 g b 12 2 e 10 a 2 a 10 d 10 f 18 b 18 d
g 4 c 4 e a 12 c 13 f b b e g 7 c 7 e 15 a d f 12 b 1 d 14 10 g c Valent. 10 c
18 f 18 a d f 4 b 12 e 12 g 1 c e 15 a 18 d d 7 g 7 b 15 e 15 g c 1 f 1 a d 9 f
16 18 b 7 e 18 e a c 4 f 4 a 12 d g b 9 e g 17 7 c f 7 f 15 b 15 d g b 1 e 9 a
9 c f 17 a 18 d 15 g g 4 c 4 e 12 a 12 c f b d 17 g 6 b 19 15 e 4 a 15 a d f 1
b 1 d 9 g 17 c 17 e 6 a c 20 4 f b 4 b 12 e 12 g c e a 6 d 6 f b 14 d 21 g 12 c
c 1 f 1 a 9 d 9 f 17 b e St. Mat. g 14 c 3 e S. Tho. 22 12 a 1 d 12 d g b e g 6
c 14 f 14 a 3 d f 23 1 b e 1 e 9 a 9 c 17 f 17 a d 3 g 3 b e 11 g 24 c 5 f f b
d 6 g Jo. Bapt. 6 b 14 e S. Bartholo. a c 11 f a 25 9 d 17 g S. Math. 9 g
Annun. 17 c S. Mark. 17 e a c Jam. Ap. 3 f 11 b 11 d 19 g 19 b Christm. 26 e a
a 6 d 6 f 14 b 13 d g 19 c e a 8 c S. Steve. 27 17 f 6 b 17 b e g 3 c 3 e 11 a
d 19 f 8 b d S. John. 28 6 g 14 c 6 c 14 f 14 a d f b 8 e 3 g Simon and Jude c
16 e Innoce. 29 a d 3 g 3 b 11 e Pet. Ap. 11 g 19 c f S. Mich. a 16 d 5 f 30 13
b 14 e a c f a 8 d g 16 b 5 e Andrew g 31 3 c 3 f 11 d 19 b e 5 c 13 a

THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The SIXTH PART. Of RHETORIC.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition and Parts of RHETORIC.
RHETORIC, is the Art or faculty of Eloquent and delightful Speaking.

The Parts of Rhetoric are Five; Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory,
and Pronounciation.

In Invention, we are to consider three things:

1. What we are to Invent. 2. By what Arguments we may confirm the Matter
Invented. 3. From what Topics or general Heads those Arguments may be raised.

And first, the thing or matter which we are to invent, is the scope and
purpose of the intended Oration: That is, we must propound some certain
Proposition to which we mean to direct our Speech; and of those several
Propositions which may be raised from the subject propounded, we should still
make choice of that which is most agreeable to the Sentence given.

Secondly, When we have resolved upon a Proposition, we are to bethink our
selves of some Arguments or probable Reasons, by which that Proposition may be
confirmed.

Thirdly, We are to consider the several Topics or common places from whence
these probable Arguments may be invented and raised, and these are of two
sorts; Intrinsecal and Extrinsecal; those that are called Intrinsecal, which
are comprised in the matter which is propounded, and the Topics or Heads, from
whence such Arguments may be invented, are these following.

1. Definition. 2. Division. 3. Notation. 4. Conjugation. 5. Genus. 6. Species.
7. Semilitude. 8. Dissimilitude. 9. Contraries. 10. Opposites. 11. Comparison.
12. Causes. 13. Effects. 14. Adjuncts. 15. Antecedents. 16. Consequents. All
other Topics, from whence Intrinsecal or Artificial Arguments may be raised,
are contained in these, or may be derived from them.

1. Definition, is a Speech explaining or declaring what a thing is; The parts
whereof, according to Logicians are two; 1. The Genus, or general name agreeing
with the thing defined, and with several other things besides. 2. The
difference or particular name, which does only agree with that which is defined:

For Example.
Man is a Living Creature, endued with Reason. In which the Genus is living
Creature; and this agrees with other Creatures besides Man; the Difference, is
endued with Reason, and this is proper to Man only. But such Definitions as
these, are seldom used by Orators, but such rather as are called Descriptions,
more properly than Definitions; as when a thing is described by its parts, or
by its effects, or by the causes by which effects are produced, and such like.

2. Division, is the distribution of the matter propounded into its parts; Thus
the Life of Man may be divided into Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Middle-age,
Old Age.

3. Notation, or Etymology, is the Interpretation of a Word, showing as well
the Original thereof, as the Signification; As a Senate is so called from the
convention of the Seniors or Old Men.

4. Conjugation, is either when one word has various endings; as knife,
knives; or when several words do come from one Primitive, thus; beautiful and
beautifulness, are both derived from beauty.

5. A Genus, is that which comprehends several things under it; which are
really different from one another.

6. A Species, is that which may with other things be referred to one common
Genus: And thus this word Art, is a genus, in respect of the seven Liberal
Sciences; as Grammar; Rhetoric, etc. and these Sciences Grammar, Rhetoric,
etc. are the Forms and Species which are contained under this Genus or general
term, Art.

7. Similitude, is the comparing of two or more things together, which are in
themselves diverse, but do agree in some particular.

For Example.
A shadow and glory, are in themselves very different things; but yet they
agree in this, that the shadow does accompany the body, and glory, virtue.

8. Dissimilitude, is the disagreeing of two or more things in some particular.

9. Contraries, are such things which cannot both at the same time, agree with
one and the same thing: Thus no man can be said to be wise in that thing in
which he is a Fool.

10. Opposites, are such things as can never agree together, as wrath and
friendship.

11. Comparison, is the comparing of one thing with another; This is either
equal or unequal.

Equal Comparison is, when two equal things are compared together; as thus, He
has deceived thee, therefore he will deceive me also.

Unequal Comparison, is two ways, first, when we argue from the greater to the
less: As God spared not the Angels that sinned, how then shall He spare Man?

Secondly, when we argue from the less to the greater; As, He will not let one
sin go unpunished; much more will he therefore punish a multitude of sins.

12. Causes, are such things by which any thing is in any sort produced; there
are Four sorts of Causes; Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

The Efficient cause, is that which makes a thing: Thus the Sun causes or
makes the day.

The Material cause, is that of which a thing is made, as Money, of Gold and
Silver, etc.

The Formal cause, is that by which the thing is what it is, or that by which
it is distinguished from other things; thus a Ship and a Timber-house do differ
in the form, or diverse disposing of the parts.

The Final cause, is that for which a thing is made.

13. Effects, are such things as are propounded by their causes.

14. Adjuncts, are such things which are joined to the thing or person
propounded, but not of necessity; and these are usually seven.

Quis? Quid? Vbi? Quibus Auxiliis? Cur? Quomodo? Quando?

In English thus,

First ask, Who? What? and Where? and Then,
What aid? with Why? and How? and When?
Quis? Who? does signify the quality of the Person, in which there must be
considered his Nature, Sex, Age, Nation, Kindred, and Estate, in respect of his
Body, Mind, and Fortune.

Quid? What? imports an Inquiry after the nature of a thing, as whether it be
of importance or not; whether great or small; noble or ignoble.

Vbi? Where? denotes the place.

Quibus Auxiliis? With what aid? notes an inquiry concerning the person that
joined with him in that action, or other Instruments by which it is effected.

Cur? Why? denotes the final cause, with what intent, or to what end it was
done.

Quomodo? How? shows the manner of doing it; as namely, with ease, or how
hardly.

Quando? When? notes the time in which it was done, and this head does many
times afford great plenty of matter.

15. Antecedents, are such things which go before the thing or matter; as you
made him tremble, therefore he is sensible.

16. Consequents, are such things which do necessary follow after the thing or
matter as he that is thrust through the heart, must needs die; these are the
Intrinsecal or Artificial Topics, from whence Arguments may be raised on any
Theme or matter propounded in this manner.

Every Theme or Proposition does consist of three parts; a Subject, a
Predicate, and a Copula.

That is called the Subject, of which we speak; The Predicate, is that which is
spoken of the Subject; and the Copula, is some Verb, which joins the Subject
with the Predicate, as in this Proposition; Claudius laid snares for Milo:
Claudius is the Subject, because it is of him that we are to speak. Snares for
Milo, is the Predicate; because that is the thing which is said of Claudius.
And the Verb laid, is the Copula, which joins the Subject with the Predicate.
Now then if you will find out Arguments on this Proposition, take the Subject,
and go through every Topic: First go to Definition, and ask what it is? what
is the nature of it? and how it is distinguished from other things? then go to
Division, and see into how many parts the Subject may be divided; and so
forward from Topic to Topic. And still observe to yourself every Argument,
which does by this means arise from the Subject, and apply it to the Predicate;
so shall you easily see, whether it does fully confirm your Proposition, and
when you have done with the Subject, take the Predicate, and run through the
several Topics with that also; but if the matter require it, and that you
judge it more convenient to take the whole Proposition, then the Subject and
Predicate a part by themselves, you may in that manner run through all the
heads of Invention; but stay not too long upon any one, for if matter offer not
it self in one head, go to another, for every head perhaps may not afford
matter, at least not such as is apt and fit. But if you would know whether your
Arguments or matter be drawn from the Subject, or from the Predicate, put it
into the form of a Syllogism, and if the major be most certain, you may
conclude, that the Argument is drawn from the predicate; but if the minor be
most certain, it is then drawn from the Subject.

When you have found the Arguments which prove the Proposition, you must
reduce them into the form of a Syllogism, which does consist of three
Propositions: the first whereof is called the Major, the second the Minor, and
the third the Conclusion or Inference.

For Example.
In the former Proposition, Claudius laid snares for Milo; the matter or
Subject of the Discourse may be drawn from the Predicate the snares laid for
Milo; which being a treacherous thing, every one may naturally infer, that it
does deserve punishment.

Now then join this Inference with the Predicate of your Proposition; saying,
He that lays snares deserves punishment, and this is your Major; then take
the Subject of your Proposition, and join that with the Predicate, and say,
Claudius lays snares, and that is your Minor: From both which, this
conclusion must needs follow, Therefore Claudius deserves punishment.

17. Hitherto we have spoken of Artificial Arguments, Inartificial are either
Testimonies or Examples.

Testimonies are either Divine or Human, a Divine Testimony, is that which has
God for its Author; such are the Oracles of God, and the predictions of his
Prophets.

Humane Testimony, is either Common or Proper.

Common Testimony, is that which depends either upon some Law, Custom, or
Opinion and Sayings of wise Men.

Proper Testimony, is that which is peculiar to some particular Causes.

Example, is an Inartificial Argument, by which the truth of a thing is
confirmed and illustrated.

CHAP. II. Of Disposition.
DIsposition, is the orderly placing of those things which are invented: It is
twofold.

First, Natural, in which things are discoursed in that order in which they
were done, or in which according to Nature, they should be done; as if you were
to commend a Person, you should begin with his Childhood, next his Youth, and
so to the other degrees of his Age.

The second way is Artificial, which does either for delight or profit diversely
mingle and confound the matter, putting that in the end, which should be in the
beginning, and the beginning in the end, that so he may both delight the
Auditors, and hold them in suspense; which in an unexpected event does not a
little please and delight the Hearers.

The Orator then having resolved of his Proposition, must first consider of
what nature it is, whether single, or consisting of several parts; and which of
the parts should be first handled, which next.

Secondly, he must choose some few of the best Arguments he has invented, and
place some solid Argument in the beginning, those that are less forcible in the
midst, reserving still the best and most convincing for the conclusion; because
the Auditor at the first being greedy of knowing, must be prepossessed and
convinced; but in the end he must be strongly confirmed and forced.

And the most persuasive Arguments are those which proceed from the Definition,
Distribution, Genus, Causes, and Effects of the thing discoursed of, for these
explain the nature thereof; and less forcible Arguments are such as are
collected from some trivial Adjuncts and Conjectures.

Thirdly, he must Logically dispose of these Reasons and Arguments; First, into
Syllogisms; and then consider how to enlarge them in an Oratorical manner.

Fourthly, he must consider into what parts his Oration should be divided, and
the parts of an Oration are usually reckoned to be these five. 1. Exordium. 2.
Proposition. 3. Narration. 4. Confirmation. 5. Peroration, or Conclusion.


As for Confutation, it is comprised in Confirmation: But all these parts are
not always necessary; for the ingenious Orator, may as he shall see it
convenient, sometimes omit the Narration, sometimes the Exordium, sometimes the
Peroration or Conclusion, yea, and the Confirmation is many times scarce
discernable; as when the things propounded are certain, there is more need of
Ornament than Proof, as in Gratulatory Orations, and the like. As for the
placing of these parts, their natural Order is that in which we have named
them. 1. The Exordium. 2. The Proposition. 3. The Narration, if it be not
thought fit to omit it. 4. The Confirmation; and Lastly, The Peroration.

An Exordium, is as it were the door of the Oration, in which the Orator does
prepare the minds of the Auditor for that which is to follow: And this is
commonly done by one of these three ways; By bespeaking their favor; by making
them Docible; or by begging their Attention. The Favor of the Auditors is
bespoke either from the person of the Orator, from the persons of the Auditors,
from the persons of the Adversaries, or from the subject matter of the
Discourse. The Orator may bespeak the Favor of the Auditors, in respect of
himself, if his gesture and deportment be suitable unto theirs that are his
Auditors, and express himself modestly. And in respect of the Auditors, if he
show how well they have deserved of the Commonwealth, of him, and other men.
And in respect of the Adversaries, if he modestly show wherein they are faulty,
and render them to the Auditors inexcusable. And lastly, in respect of the
matter in hand, if he say, that it is some excellent, necessary, and profitable
thing.

Secondly, the Orator may be said to make the Auditors Docible, if he clearly
explain the thing of which he is to speak, and how he purposes to enlarge upon
it.

Thirdly, the Attention will be quickened, if he says, that he intends to
speak of some great and wonderful thing, and something that is delightful;
necessary, and very much concerns his Auditors, etc.

The second part of an Oration is the Proposition; and the Proposition is that
part of the Oration, in which the Orator does briefly deliver the sum of the
whole Matter, of which he intends to speak, and bespeaks the Hearers Attention,
if need be. Sometimes it does immediately follow the Exordium; sometimes it
follows the Narration; in what place soever it be put, it must be short and
clear, and fit for Confirmation.

The third part of an Oration is Narration, by which a relation is made of the
matter or thing done. And this is either a distinct part of the Oration, and
then for the most part it does immediately follow the Exordium, that the
Proposition with the Confirmation, which is to be done in such Orations which
assume the explaination of the thing done to prove the matter in hand.

For Example.
If you were to prove that some Valiant Person had been a Soldier in some
War; it is necessary that you should declare what the particular Actions were
in which he showed his Valor.

But now in that Narration, which is made a distinct part of the Oration, the
thing done must be briefly and simply declared without any exaggregation: And
in such a Narration as makes way for Confirmation, the things done may be
illustrated with great neatness of Language, with Sentences and Figures, and
some Discourses may be made concerning the worthiness of the action, with some
amplification from Similitudes and Comparisons.

The fourth part of an Oration, is Confirmation: and Confirmation is as it were
the very Heart and Soul by which an Oration may be chiefly said to Live: Or it
is the chief part of an Oration in which the Arguments are produced, by which
we would prove our Proposition, and refute or answer the contrary opinion of
our Adversary, if need require. What is necessary in this behalf, may be
collected from what has been already said. Seeing that Confirmation does
consist of the Arguments that are invented and the right disposition of them,
both which have been fully enough declared before.

Confutation, is a part or kind of Confirmation, in which we Answer all
Objections; it does either precede or follow Confirmation, or may be here or
there used in all the parts of the Oration.

And these objections may be either all Answered together, or those first which
are first made, and then the latter; or those first which are most material,
and the rest may fall of themselves; or the weakest first, that they being
avoided, the strongest Arguments may be somewhat weak'ned. And the manner of
doing this, is by showing, that the Adversaries Allegation is either false,
impossible, uncertain, or impertinent, and the like.

Peroration, or Conclusion, is the last part of an Oration, in which the Orator
should very much endeavor to set an edge in the minds of his Auditors, and
incline them to be of his side; and here he should therefore use such Figures,
as are most proper to move the Affections: It does chiefly consist of two
parts, Enumeration, and Amplification.

Enumeration is required, that the chief Arguments more largely opened in the
former discourse may be clearly repeated in a new form of words.

Amplification, desires that this repetition may be made, by some serious
expressions, adorned with Sentences and Figures.

CHAP, III Of Elocution.
ELocution, or the garnishing of Speech, is an Art by which the Speech is
beautified with the Elegancy of Words and Sentences.

And this is performed two ways; by the fine manners of Words, called a Trope;
or by the fine frame of Speech, called a Figure.

A Trope is such an Elocution or manner of Speech, as does change the
signification of a word into a different signification from the natural.

In a Trope two things are to be considered. 1. The Affections. 2. The Kinds.

The Affections of a Trope are four,

Catachresis. Hyperbole. Matalepsis. Allegoria.
Catachresis, is a harsh and unpleasant change of a Word; as namely, when one
word or name is put to another, not by any proper relation, but by a kind of
force. He threatens me a good turn.

Hyperbole, is a very high relation of a thing, or a more bold excess of a
Trope, which does exceed belief, either by Augmentation or by Diminution. Note
that though an Hyperbole does vary from the truth, yet does it not deceive us
through-Fiction, or such variation.

An Hyperbole is twofold; Auxesis or Meiosis.

An Auxesis is, when for Argumentation sake or Amplification, we interpose a
more vehement expression, in his proper place; as when we say, magnificent for
liberal.

A Meiosis, or a Tapinosis, is when for extenuation sake, we use a milder or
more favorable expression, than the matter requires; as when we say a
flatterer is a courteous and an affable person.

A Matalepsis, is that which contains many Tropes in one expression; as, when
we by an improper Speech, signify, first, that which is improper, and by that
improper Speech perhaps another, and so forward, till we come to that which is
proper, making way for Transition, by interposing a mean degree; as All the
City was moved. Mat. 21.10. where the City is put for Jerusalem, by a
Synechdoche Generis: and Jerusalem for its Inhabitants, by a Metonymy of the
Subject.

An Allegory, is the continuation of a Trope as where many Tropes of the same
kind are joined together; as, Put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians 6.11.

In an Allegory, observe to end with the same kind of Trope with which you
begin, or else the Consequence will be abused.

The several kinds of Tropes are these four: 1. A Metonomy. 2. An Irony. 3. A
Metaphor: and 4. A Synechdoche.


A Metonomy, is a Trope of the Cause to the Effect, of the Subject to the
Adjunct: and the contrary, of the Effect to the Cause, or of the Adjunct to the
Subject.

There are four kinds of Causes.

1. The Efficient Cause, by which a thing is. 2. The Material Cause, of which a
thing is made. 3. The Formal Cause, by which a thing is what it is. 4. The
Final Cause, for which a thing is; of which the two first only belong to our
present purpose.
A Metonymy of the Cause, is of the Efficient, or of the Matter.

A Metonymy of the Efficient Cause, is when the Author or Inventor of any thing
is put for those things which he has invented; as Virgil, for the Poem or
Works composed by Virgil.

A Metonymy of the Material Cause, is when the name of the Matter is put for
the Effect; as Brass, for Brass Money.

A Metonymy of the Effect, is when the Efficient Cause is signified by the
Effect; as, Pale Death, which makes Pale.

A Metonymy of the Subject, is when the proper name of any Subject is made to
signify the Adjunct; as, the Cup, for the Drink in the Cup.

A Metonymy of the Adjunct, is when the Adjunct is put for the Subject; as Genesis
31.53. Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac, i. e. by God, whom Isaac
feared.

An Irony, is a Trope from one opposite to another, or in which we speak by
contraries.

Opposites; are either unlike or contrary; all things of different natures are
said to be unlike, as a Man, a Stone; and all things of contrary natures are
said to be contrary to one another; as light and darkness.

An Irony of a thing unlike, is when any thing is spoken of one person, and
understood of another.

An Irony from the contrary, is when one contrary is signified by another; as O
thou have done very well; meaning that he had done very ill.

Paralepsis, is a kind of Irony, by which we seem to pass by, or take no notice
of such things which yet we strictly observe and remember.

Apophasis, is a kind of Irony, by which we deny to say or do what yet we speak
with greatest earnestness, and do with all our might.

A Metaphor, is a Trope, by which we express our selves by a word, which is of
the like signification with that we mean; as, the King is the Head of the
Commonwealth.

Synecdoche, is a Trope, by which a part is put for the whole, or the whole for
a part.

A Part, is either a Member or Species.

A Synecdoche of a Member, when by a Member the whole is signified; as, the
Roof for the House.

A Synecdoche of the Species, is when the Species is put for the Genus; as,
Croesus, for a Rich man.

The whole is either an Integer or Genus.

A Synecdoche of an Integer, is when an Integer is put for a Member; as, His
Army was so great, that it drank the Rivers dry; meaning a great part of the
Water in the River.

A Synecdoche of the Genus is, when the general is put for the special; as,
Preach the Gospel to every Creature, meaning Mankind only, and not to every
Creature.

Hitherto of Tropes, the first kind of elocution, the second kind of Elocution
by Figure.

CHAP. IV. Of a Figure.
A Figure, is a kind of Elocution, by which the form of a Speech is changed
from its right and plain use.

A Figure, is either of a Word, or of a Sentence.

A Figure of a Word, is that by which an Oration or Speech is composed of words
aptly and sweetly suitable to one another, and this consists in the Dimension
or Repetition of Sounds or Words.

A Figure, in the Dimension of Sounds, is the sweet number of Sounds in a
Sentence.

Number, is either Poetical or Oratorical.

A Poetical Number, is that which is confined to a perpetual observation of
certain Spaces.

A Number Poetical, is either Rhyme or Meter.

Rhyme is a Poetical Number, containing a certain number of Feet, without any
regard to the quantity of the Syllables; whether long or short, As, Dare to be
true; nothing can need a lie:
A fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.


A Meter, is a Poetical Number, consisting of certain Feet, of which the last
Foot has the last Syllable indifferent or common; that is, long or short.

Oratorical Number does indeed consist of Feet, but not of any certain number
of Feet, but of as many or as few as the Orator pleases.

The Figure of a word in respect of the repetition thereof, is either of like
or unlike Sounds.

A Figure of a word in the repitition of the like Sound, is either with, or
without Intermission.

Repetition of the like Sound without intermission, is either an Epizeuxis, or
an Anadiplosis.

An Epizeuxis, is when a like Sound is repeated in the same Sentence without
Intermission; as, a sword, a sword is sharpened.

An Anadiplosis, is when a like sound without Intermission is repeated in
diverse sentences, i. e. when it ends one and begins another; as, If then, why I
take not my leave, she ask;
Ask her again, why she did not unask?


Repetition of like sound with intermission in the same place, is either an
Anaphora or Epistrophe.

An Anaphora, is when a like sound is repeated in the beginning of Sentences;
as, By art of Sails and Oars, Seas are divided:
By art the Chariot runs, by art Loves guided.


An Epistrophe, is when a like sound is repeated, in the close of sentences;
as, Are they Hebrews? so am I: Are they, Israelites? so am I: Are they of the
seed of Abraham? so am I.

Repetition of like sound with intermission in diverse parts or places, is
either an Epanalepsis, or an Epanados.

An Epanalepsis, is when a like sound is repeated in the beginning and ending
of the same Sentence; as, In sorrow was I born, and I must dye in sorrow.

An Epanados, is when the like sound is in the beginning and ending of diverse
sentences, an Anadiplosis coming between; as Parthenia desired above all things
to have Argalus; Argalus feared nothing but to miss Parthenia.

A Figure of a Word made by the repetition of sounds somewhat unlike, is either
Paronomafia, or Polyptoton.

Paronomafia, is when a Word being changed in a Letter or Syllable, it is also
changed in sense and signification; as, Though you advise me to repent, I have
not Grace to follow your advise.

A Polyptoton, is when words of the same Original are reiterated, but with some
variation; as, Deceiving, and being Deceived.

A Figure in reference to a sentence, is a Figure which affects the whole
sentence with some motion of the Mind, either in absolute reasoning, or in
reasoning Dialogue-wise.

Logismus, or absolute Reasoning, is when a sentence is composed without any
talking with other supposed; this is either Ecphonesis, a recalling of ones
self, Apostrophe, or Prosopopeia.

Ecphonesis, is a Figure in reasoning, by way of Exclamation, by an Adverb
expressed, or understood; as, O wretched man that I am!

Recalling of ones self, is when something is called back; and it is as it were
a Diminution of the over-hastiness or heat of speech; and this is either
Epanorthosis, or Aposiopesis.

An Eparnorthosis, is when something precedeing is called back, by correcting
it; as, I had one only Young Man to my son; ah! what have I said! I had! yea I
had! It is now uncertain whether I have or not.

An Aposiopesis, is when the close of a sentence begun is stopped, by keeping
in a part, which yet is understood; as, You Rogue if I Live!

An Apostrophe, is when a speech is directed to another, than was by the speech
it self at first intended; as, God knows I lie not.

A Prosopopoeia, is when in our Oration, we suppose another person to be
speaking; as, Josh. 24.27. Behold this shall be a witness unto us; for it has
heard all the Words of the Lord, which he has spoken unto us.

A Figure, in reasoning Dialogue-wise, is when a sentence is composed in form
of a Conference; this consists in Question and Answer, in Consenting or
dissenting Dialogism.

A Figure of consenting Dialogism, is when ones Answer does admit of the
Objection expressed or understood; yet so, as that from thence the
inconsequence of the Objection may be showed if need be.

Dissenting Dialogism, is when ones answer does impugn or cross the Objection.

And thus much concerning Elocution, as for Memory and Pronounciation, which
are the other two parts of Rhetoric, I purposely omit them, as being natural
Endowments, which may be better improved by constant practice, than by any
Precepts which can be given.

FINIS.
THE ENGLISH ACADEMY: The SEVENTH PART. Of the ART of LOGIC.
CHAP. I Of Simple Themes.
Logic, is an Art which conducteth the Mind in the knowledge of Things.

2. The Parts of Logic are two, Thematical and Organical.

3. The Thematical part is that, which Treats of Themes, with their various
affections, and second Notions, as of the matter of which Logical Instruments
are composed.

4. The Organical part, is that which treats of these Instruments, and their
Composition.

5. A Theme, is any thing propounded to the understanding, that it may be known.

6. A Theme, is either simple or compound.

7. A Simple Theme, is one Voice, signifiing one thing as, a Man, a Horse.

8. A Compound Theme, is a Theme made of several simple themes rightly Joined
together; signifying many or several things; such are all Orations.

9. A Simple Theme or Voice, is, 1. Concrete, which expresses a thing
Concretely or Jointly; as, Learned. 2. Abstract, which notes something
Abstracted from all others; as, Learning.


10. An Abstract Voice, or simple theme, is Singular or Universal.

11. A singular theme, is that which in its own nature can be spoken of no more
than one, and is called an Individual.

12. Individuals are of two sorts. 1. Such as are Certain and Determinate; as,
this man, Paul, Alexander, the Apostle of the Gentiles, etc. 2. Such as are
uncertain and indeterminate, as some man.


13. An Universal simple Theme, otherwise called a Predicable, is that which
may be spoken of many; as, a Body; and this is either of the first or second
Intention.

14. A simple Theme of the first intention, is that which expresses the thing
it self; as, Gold, Stone, etc. so called, because they are the names by which
the things themselves are first made known.

15. A simple Theme of the second Intention, is that which does not express the
things it self, but certain affections agreeing to the thing, and such are all
Words of Art; as, a Noun, a Metaphor, etc.

16. An Universal simple Theme, may be spoken of many, two ways.

1. In Quid? or by declaring what a thing is; and thus it is spoken of such as
do differ in the species, and is called Genus; as, a living Creature, color,
etc. or else of such as do differ in number only, and is called species; as, a
Man.

2. In Quale, or by declaring what a kind of thing it is, of which it is
spoken; and that Essentially or Accidentally, Essentially, and then it is
called Difference, the which is,

1. Divisive, by which a Genus is divided into its several species, as by
rational and irrational a Living Creature is divided into a Man or a Beast.

2. Constitution, which does Essentially constitute some species, and this is,

1. Generical, which does constitute some remote species, but not the next, for
the next is the Genus, thus sensibility in respect of Man, is a generical
difference, constituting first a living Creature, and then a man. And this is
always spoken of many differing in species, or number.

2. Specifical, which does constitute the nearest species; as, rationalibility
does constitute man.

2. Accidentally, and that either of necessity, and then it is called a proper
Accident, which is convertable with its Species, perpetually inherent in every
of them, and in no other, as the visible faculty in a Man.

Or not of necessity, and then it is called a common or simple Accident, not
convertible with its Species; as white.

17. All simple Themes, may be reduced to ten ranks or orders, called
Predicaments, of which some are more principal, some less.

18. The more principal Predicaments are the first six, the less principal, are
the other four.

19. The Predicamental Ranks or Orders, are of two sorts, the one of Substance,
and the other of Accidents.

20. Of Substance, there is only one, and it is called by that name Substance,
which is a thing subsisting of it self, and it is either first or second.

21. The first substance, is a Singular substance, or a substance that cannot
be predicated of its subject; as, Alexander.

22. The second Substance is an Universal substance, or a substance which may
be predicated of its subject; as, a Man, a Horse. The first substance is
chiefly and properly a substance, and among the second substances, every one is
by so much more a substance, by how much it is nearer to the first.

23. The Predicamental Ranks or Orders of Accidents, are of two sorts.

1. Absolute, as the Predicaments of quantity, Quality, Action, and Passion.

2. Relative, as the Predicament of Relation.

24. Quantity, is an absolute accident, by which a thing is said to be great in
bulk or number.

25. Quality, is an absolute Accident, by which it is simply and determinately
declared what kind of thing, that subject is, of which it is the Quality.

26. Action, is an Accident, by which a subject is said to be doing.

27. Passion, is an Accident, by which the subject is called Patient; or it is
the reception of Action.

28. Relation, is a respective accident, by which one thing is predicated of
another, or may by some way be referred unto another.

29. The less principal Predicaments are these four, When, Where, Situation,
and Habit.

30. The Predicament When, is an accident, by which finite things are said to
be in time, past, present, or to come.

31. The Predicament Where, is an accident, by which things finite, are said to
be in some place.

32. The Predicament of Situation, is a certain Ordination, or placing of
parts in Generation.

33. The Predicament of Habit, is an accident, by which some garment or
something like a Garment, is put about, hanged upon, or some way or other
joined to a Body.

CHAP. II. Of Compounded Themes.
HItherto of Simple Themes: Compounded Themes, or such as are made of several
Simple Themes are next to be considered; otherwise called Enunciations, or
Propositions.

2. An Enunciation, or Proposition, is an Indicative, Congruent and perfect
Oration, signifying true or false without any Ambiguity.

3. The parts of a Proposition are two, the parts Signing or Signed.

4. The parts Signing are simple terms, whose parts can signify nothing, being
separated from the whole, or no such thing as they did signify being joined
all together.

5. These simple terms are of two sorts, Categorematical, or Syncategorematical.

6. Categorematical, or Significative terms, or such simple terms, as do by
themselves signify something perfectly; and these are either Nouns or Verbs.

7. A Noun, is a simple term or word, which does signify some certain thing
without destinction of time; as, a man, a horse.

8. A Verb, is a simple term, which does signify something, with some
destinction of time past, present, or to come; as, he runs.

9. Syncategorematical, or Consignificative terms, are simple terms, which of
themselves do not signify any certain thing, or constitute a Proposition, but
being joined with other Words, are significative, to express the manner of such
a thing; and such are all Words which serve to express the quantity of a
proposition; as, all, none, some, etc. with all Adverbs, Conjunctions,
Prepositions, and Interjections.

10. The parts signed are three; the Subject, the predicate, and the Copula.

11. The subject is all that which precedes the Copula in the Proposition.

12. The Predicate, is all that which is spoken of the subject.

13. The Copula, is the principal Verb, joining the Predicate to the subject,
and in every Proposition is some person of this Verb Substantive, as in this
Proposition, A Man is a living Creature; a Man is the subject; a living
Creature is the Predicate; and the Verb is the Copula; sometimes the Copula is
some Person of a Verb Adjective; as in this Proposition, Socrates lived at
Athens.

Here note, that the subject does not always precede, and the predicate follow
the Copula, in order of the parts or terms, but in sense and construction; and
also, that in some Propositions, the three terms are not always expressed, but
employed; as, I walk, for I am walking.

14. Propositions are distinguished three ways, according to Substance,
Quantity, and Quality.

15. A Proposition, in respect of the substance or parts of which it does
consist, is either Categorical or Hypothetical.

16. A Categorical Proposition, is that which does consist of one subject, one
Predicate, and one Copula; as, a man is a Living Creature, and this is either
Pure or Modal.

17. A Pure Categorical Proposition, is when the Predicate is purely affirmed
or denied of the subject, without expressing the manner of affirming or denying.

18. A Modal Categorical Proposition, is when besides the subject, predicate,
and Copula, we add some modification, to show how the Predicate is in the
Subject, as, it is necessary; it is contingent, it is possible; it is
impossible that a man should be without reason.

19. An Hypothetial Proposition, is that which does consist of two Categorical
Propositions, joined together by some Conjunction, as, if a man be a living
Creature, then a man is a Body.

20. A Proposition, in respect of Quality, is distinguished two ways; first,
according to the Quality of the sign, and so it is Affirmative or Negative;
secondly, according to the quantity of the thing; and so it is either True or
False.

21. A Proposition, in respect of Quantity, is universal, particular,
indefinite, or singular.

22. An Universal proposition, is that which has a note of Universality added
to a common or universal Subject; as, every man is a Living Creature.

23. A particular proposition, is that in which a note of particularity is
added to an universal Subject; as, some man is a Living Creature.

24. An Indefinite proposition, is that, in which no note, whether Universal or
Particular is put before the universal Subject; as, a man is a Living Creature.

25. A Singular proposition, is that in which the subject is singular, whether
it be a proper Name; as, Secrates is a Philosopher; or whether it be a common
name, with a note of singularity set before it; as, this man is Learned.

26. Pure Categorical propositions, as they have reference to one another, have
three affections; Opposition, Aequipollency, and Conversion.

27. Opposition, is the repugnancy of two categorical propositions, either in
quantity alone, or in quality alone, or else in quantity and quality both, in
which there is the same subject, the same predicate, and the same Copula, as,
every man is just, no man is just.

28. The categorical propositions, may be said to be opposite four ways;
Contrarily, Subcontrarily, Subalternately, and Contradictorily.

29. Two propositions, that are contrarily, and subcontrarily opposite, are
opposite only in quality; and such as are subalternately opposite, are opposite
only in quantity; and such as are contradictorily opposite, are opposite both
in quantity and quality.

30. Opposition, by way of contrariety is the repugnancy of two Universal
Propositions in quality; as, every man does run, no man does run; and these in
a contingent matter, may be both False, but cannot be both together true.

31. Subcontrary Opposition, is the repugnancy of two particular Propositions
in quality; as, some man does run, some man does not run; and these in a
contingent matter may be both true, but cannot be both together False.

32. Sabalternate Opposition, is the repugnancy of two Affirmative, or two
Negative Propositions in their quantity; as, every man does run, some man does
run.

33. Contradictory Opposition, is the repugnancy of two Propositions, both in
quality and in quantity, so that if one of them be Affirmative, the other shall
be Negative; if one be Universal, the other shall be particular; as, Every man
is Learned, some man is not learned: All which may be easily apprehended by the
following Scheme.

34. Aequipollency, is the equivalency of two Propositions, in sense and
signification, though they differ in Words, by virtue of this Word of Negation
( not) being set before the Sign and Subject, after the Sign and Subject, or
both before and after, in which there is the same Subject, and the same
Predicate; as, some man is Learned; not every man is Learned: The several
varieties whereof are fully expressed in these Distichs.

If after sign and subject, this (not) be,
Contraries then, make Aequipollencie.
Only before make contradictories,
But before and aft' are subalternate guise.
35. Conversion, is an apt mutation of the whole subject, into the place of the
whole Predicate, and of the whole Predicate, into the place of the whole
subject, keeping the same Quality, but sometimes changing the Quantity; as,
Every man is a Living Creature; some Living Creature is a man.

36. This Conversion is threefold;

1. Simple, in which the predicate is changed into the place of the whole
Subject, and the Contrary, keeping the same both quality and quantity; as, No
man is a Stone, therefore no stone is a man.

2. By Accident, in which the whole predicate is changed into the place of the
whole Subject, and the Contrary, keeping the same Quality, but changing of the
Quantity; as, Every man is a living Creature, therefore some Living Creature is
a man.

3. By Contraposition, in which the whole Subject is changed into the place of
the whole predicate; and the contrary, keeping both the same Quality and
Quantity, but changing the terms from Finite to Infinite; as, Every-Man is a
Living Creature, therefore every thing that is a Living Creature, is not a man:
What Propositions may be converted this or that way, these Verses do express.

E E, I I, Conversion Simple make.
A I, E O, of Accident partake.
A A, O O, for Contraposits sake.
And what these Letters A, E, I, O, do signify there Distichs do declare: A,
affirms, E, denies both universal are,
I, affirms, O, denies, but both particular.


CHAP. III. Of Difinition and Division.
HAving done with the first part of Logic, namely, that which treats of
Themes.

I come now unto the second, called the Organical, or that which treats of
Logical Instruments, and their Composition.

2. Logical Instruments are four; Definition, Division, Argumentation, and
Method.

3. Definition, is the explication of the thing which is defined; and this is
either Nominal, or Real.

4. A Nominal Difinition, is that which shows the Signification of the Name;
whether it be by giving the Etymology thereof, or by expressing it by some
other Synonymous word more generally known.

5. A Real Definition, is that which shows what the thing is; and this is
either perfect or imperfect.

6. A Real and a Perfect Difinition, is that which does explain the thing by
Essential Attributes.

7. A Real, but Imperfect Definition, otherwise called a Description, is that
which explains the Nature of a thing, by certain Accidental Attributes.

8. Division, is the Deduction of something that is large, into a straighter
and narrower comprehension; and this is either of some ambiguous word, into its
several significations, and then it is called Distinction, or of the whole into
its parts.

9. The whole is either Simple, or Aggregate; Division of the whole, simply and
properly so called is threefold.

1. Universal into its subjective parts, or of the General into the Specials;
as, to divide Animal into Man and Beast.

2. Essential, which resolves the whole into essential parts, and this either
of a Species into its Genus and Difference, or of some special nature into its
matter and form; as, A Man into Soul and Body.

3. Integral, which resolves the whole into Integral parts, and this is the
Division of some individual, either into its sensible or material parts.

4. Division of the aggregated whole into its parts, and by Accident is
five-fold.

1. When the Subject may be divided by its Accidents; as, Men are Learned or
Unlearned.

2. When an Accident may be divided by its Subjects; as, Fevers are in the
Spirits or in the Humors, or in the solid parts.

3. When an Accident may be divided by Accidents; as, Good is either
profitable, honest, or pleasant.

4. When things may be divided by their Objects; as, Sight by Colors, Hearing
by Sound.

5. When Causes may be divided by their Effects; and the Contrary; as, Heavenly
heat is from the Sun, and Elementary from Fire.

CHAP. IV. Of Argumentation.
ARgumentation is an Oration by which some Problem is proved by inference.

1. A Problem, is the proposition or Question to be proved; the which Problem,
when it is so proved is the Conclusion, and follows the Illative note, or note
of inference: All that which precedes is the Antecedent, that which follows is
the Consequent or Conclusion; the Illative is commonly this word (therefore,)
and in this does the tie or force of the Argument consist.

2. Argumentation, may be considered either in reference to the form and manner
of Arguing, which is the more general consideration; or as it is restrained to
certain matter, as shall be showed in his place.

3. The kinds of Argumentation are usually reckoned to be four; Syllogism,
Induction, Enthymeme, and Example, but may be reduced to two; for an Enthymeme
is nothing but an imperfect Syllogism; an Example, an imperfect Induction;
Other less principal kinds of Argumentation there are, which either are of no
use, or may be reduced to a Syllogism; as, Sorites and Dilemma, which are
indeed redundant Syllogisms; Sorites Categorical, and Dilemma Hypothetical.

4. A Syllogism, is an Oration, in which something being taken for granted,
something else not granted before, is proved or inferred from them.

5. A Syllogism is twofold, Categorical, in which all the propositions are
Categorical: or Hypothetical, in which one or more of the propositions are
Hypothetical; in both which we are to consider the Matter and the Form.

6. The Matter of a Syllogism, is either Remote or Next.

7. The Remote matter, is that of which it is remotely made, as the Simple
Terms which in the propositions of the Syllogism are made Subject and predicate.

8. The Simple Terms of a Syllogism are three, of which one is called the
Middle Term, the other two are the M^jor and the Minor Extremes, The Major and
Minor Extremes are the Predicate, and the other the Subject of the question,
and the Middle Term or Argument, is the Term not expressed in the question, but
is united once to the Major Extreme, and once to the Minor.

9. The next or immediate matter of a Syllogism, is that of which the Syllogism
is immediately made, as the three propositions, which are made of the simple
terms, of which the first is called the Major, the second the Minor, and the
third is called the Conclusion.

10. The form of a Syllogism is the right disposing of the twofold Matter,
Next and Remote, and this comprehends two things, Figure, and Mood; the one,
to wit Figure, has respect to the Remote Matter or Simple Terms, and Moods
respects the next Matter or the propositions.

11. A Figure, is the fit disposing of the middle Terms with the Extremes, in
reference to subjection and Predication; this is threefold.

12. The first Figure makes that which is the middle simple term to be the
subject in the major proposition and the Predicate in the minor.

13. The second Figure, makes the middle simple term to be the Predicate, both
in the major and the minor propositions.

14. The third Figure makes the middle simple term to be the subject both in
the major and the minor propositions; according to these Distichs.

Both sub and prae, does the first Figure use.
Twice prae the next, the third twice sub I muse.
15. A Mood is the disposing of the propositions according to quantity and
quality.

16. There are 19 Moods, of which there are nine in the first Figure; four in
the second; and six in the third, according to these Verses.

1. Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, Baralipton. Celamtes, Dabitis, Fapesmo,
Fricesomorum. 2. Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco. 3. Darapti: Felapton,
Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison.
17. These moods are so many words of Art, which serve only to denote the
quality and quantity of every proposition, by help of the Vowels, A, E, I, O,
as has been showed already; and are some of them perfect, as the four first
Moods in the first Figure, and all the moods in the second and third Figures;
the rest are imperfect.

18. And the question propounded is proved by or inferred from the premises, by
help of these moods two ways, viz. Directly, and Indirectly.

1. Directly, when the Minor Extreme is the subject in the Conclusion, and the
Major in the Predicate.

2. Indirectly, when the Major Extreme is the subject in the Conclusion, and
the Minor the Predicate, and this is in the five last moods of the first Figure
only, according to these Distichs.

All the Nineteen directly do conclude,
Except of Figure first, the last 5 Mood.
19. These things premised, a Syllogism, may be made in any Mood and Figure in
this manner.

The question propounded is always the conclusion of the Syllogism, and by the
quantity thereof does plainly show in what mood or moods it may be framed, and
by consequence, in what Figure also.

20. If the Syllogism be to be made in such a mood as does directly infer the
Conclusion from the Premises; then the subject in the Proposition is the Minor
Extreme, and the Predicate the Major; as in the four first moods of the first
Figure, and in all the Moods of the second and third Figures; but in the five
last Moods of the first Figure, the subject in the Proposition is the Major
Extreme and the Predicate the Minor; and the middle term is the Cause or
Argument by which the truth or falsitie of the proposition is to be proved.

21. The Middle Term or Argument being joined to the Major Extreme, does make
the Major proposition, and being joined to the Minor Extreme, it makes the
minor proposition.

Example.
Let this be the Proposition, No Man is a stone: This Proposition being an
Universal Negative, the Syllogism may be framed in Celarent, Celantes, Cesare
or Camestres; if in Celarent, man is the Minor Extreme, and Stone the Major;
and to find out the middle Term, I consider of some Reason or Argument by which
to prove the Question; as, A Man is not a Stone, because he is a Living
Creature; so then Living Creature is the Middle Term, and these three Terms
being thus placed; Middle Term.
Living Creature.

Minor Extreme.

Man.

Major Extreme.

Stone.



Because Celarent belongs to the first Figure, the middle Term Living Creature
must be the Subject in the Major Proposition, and the Predicate in the Minor;
thus, Subj. Praed. Major. Living Creature. -- Minor. -- Living Creature.
Conclu. No man is a Stone.

And joining this middle Term to the Major Extreme, and also to the Minor; the
several Propositions will be these; Major. A living Creature is not a stone.
Minor. A man is a living Creature. Conclu. A man is not a stone.


Lastly adding the Quantity to every Proposition according to the Vowels in
this Mood, the Complete Syllogism is, Major Ce-
No living Creature is a Stone. Minor la-
Every man is a living Creature. Conclu. rent.
No man is a stone.


The like may be done in the other moods.

22. An Enthymem, is an Imperfect Syllogism, inferring the Conclusion from some
one Proposition only; as, A man is a living Creature, therefore he has a soul.

23. An Induction, is an Imperfect syllogism, in which from many singulars,
some Universal Conclusion is inferred; as, This man is a living Creature, and
that man is a living Creature, etc. therefore every man is a living Creature.

24. Example, is an imperfect syllogism, in which from one or more singulars,
we infer another particular; as, Catiline was punished for making of Sedition,
therefore this Seditious Fellow should be punished.

25. Sorites, is an imperfect syllogism, in which, from four or more Premises,
we infer a Conclusion, in which the first subject is joined with the last
Predicate; as, Socrates is a man, a man is a living Creature, a living Creature
is a Body, a Body is a substance, therefore Socrates is a substance.

26. A Dilemma, is an Argumentation which by disjoyning of the Members, does so
enforce the Adversary, that which part soever he chooses, he will be catched,
as, Tribute must be given to Caesar, or to God; If to God, then not to Caesar,
and this is Treason; If to Caesar, then not to God, and this is Sacrilege.

And thus much concerning a syllogism in the General, with the several kinds
and forms thereof.

CHAP. V. Of A Material Syllogism.
I Come now to speak of a Special or Material syllogism, as it is constrained
to certain Conditions of Matter.

2. A special or material syllogism, is of three sorts; Apodictical,
Dialectical and Sophistical.

3. An Apodictical syllogism, otherwise called a Demonstration, may be defined
two ways; either from the end, or from the matter of Demonstration.

4. From the end of Demonstration, an Apodictical syllogism, is a syllogism
begetting knowledge, or making to know. And we are then said to know a thing,
when we know the cause for which it is so, and cannot be otherwise.

5. All Knowledge is of such Conclusions, to which we assent, for our preceding
knowledge of the Premises; and the Praecognita in every Science are these
three: The Subject, the Affection, and the Cause. And the means by which these
are foreknown, are called Praecognitions, and they are two; That a thing is,
and what a thing is.

6. The subject, is the less Extreme, in a Demonstration, concerning which some
accident is Demonstrated by its next Cause; as, a man, concerning whom we must
know both that he is, and what he is.

7. Affection or Passion, is a proper accident, which is Demonstrated of the
subject, by a proper Cause, it is always the greater Extreme, which is
Predicated in the Conclusion; as, Risibility, the which is necessary to be
foreknown, in respect of its name, What it is, but not, that it is; for that is
the thing to be enquired after, the thing we are to find by Denomination.

8. A Cause, is that by which the Affection is Demonstrated of its subject, and
is always the Major Proposition in the Demonstration; as, Every rational Animal
is risible; what the Cause is cannot be foreknown, because it is a compounded
Proposition, but it ought to be known, That it is, or else the Conclusion
cannot be inferred from it.

9. An Apodictical syllogism, being defined from the matter of Demonstration,
is a syllogism, which proves its Conclusion from such Premises, as are of
themselves sufficiently known.

10. A Demonstration, is to be considered, either in respect of the Matter or
in respect of the Form.

11. In respect of the Matter, one kind of Demonstration, shows why the
Predicate is inherent in the subject, and another shows that it is inherent
in the subject.

12. In the first of these kinds of Demonstration, called the Demonstration
causal, why a thing is; the Conditions to be observed, do partly belong to the
Question, partly to the Cause or Medium of the Demonstration, and partly to the
Premises.

13. Every Question does not admit of the first and most perfect kind of
Demonstration, called, Why a thing is? but such a Question only as is true, and
has a certain and immutable Cause of its own Truth.

14. The Medium of a Demonstration, ought to be the next Cause of the
Predicate; and that either Efficient or Final, and the Efficient either
Internal or External.

15. The Conditions to be observed in the Premises of a Demonstration, are
Absolute or Relative.

16. The Absolute Conditions are two; the first is, that the Propositions be
necessarily true and reciprocal; The second, is that they be immediate or
first, in respect of the subject; as, A man is Rational, and in respect of the
Causes; as, That which is rational, is visible, a man is rational, Ergo.

17. The Relative Conditions to be observed in reference to the Conclusion, are
three. 1. That the Premises be the Cause of the Conclusion. 2. That they be
before it: and 3. That they be more known than the Conclusion.

18. The other less principal kind of Demonstration in respect of the Matter,
or the Demonstration what, is twofold, the one is from some sensible Effect,
and the other from a remote Cause.

19. The form of these Demonstrations, is descerned partly from the Quantity,
and so it is Universal or Particular; Partly from the Quality, and so it is
Affirmative or Negative; partly from the manner of the proof, and so it is
Ostensive, or by Reduction to Impossibility.

CHAP. VI. Of a Topical Syllogism.
HItherto we have spoken of a Demonstrative syllogism, whose matter is
necessary, and the end a perfect Knowledge; come we now to a Dialectical or
Topical syllogism, whose matter is Probable and Contingent, and the end Opinion.

2. In a Dialectical, or Topical Syllogism, we are to consider of Problems,
Propositions, and Invention of Arguments.

3. A Problem or Question, is the thing of which it is probably discoursed, and
the Conclusion of a syllogism already made.

4. Dialectical Propositions, ought to be certain, at least probable, and not
Paradoxes; now that is said to be Probable, which not being absolutely true,
does seem to be true rather than false: And that is said to be a Paradox, which
is true, though contrary to the vulgar opinion.

5. For the Invention of Arguments, we are to consider Common places and Rules.

6. A Place, is common Note, by whose help an Argument is found.

7. A Rule or Canon is a Proposition, containing the Reason of the Consequence,
in a Dialectical syllogism.

8. Arguments are of two sorts, Artificial and Inartificial.

9. Artificial Arguments, are such as from the consideration of the parts of a
Problem, are not found but by Rules of Art.

10. Inartificial Arguments, are such as are found without any help of Art, and
these are nothing but Testimonies.

11. Artificial Arguments, may be raised from these seven Topics or Heads. 1.
From the Cause and the Effect. 2. From the subject and the Accident. 3. From
Dissentany and Comparison. 4. From Conjugates and Notation. 5. From the Whole
and its Parts. 6. From Genus and Species. 7. From Definition and Division.

12. A Cause in General, may be defined to be that, by whose power a thing is.

An Argument therefore from the Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the
middle term is the cause of the Major Extreme.

13. There are two kinds of Causes; Internal as the material, or matter, of
which a thing is made; and the Formal, by which a thing is; as, The shape and
form of a statue.

External, as the Efficient, which does bring the thing to pass; and the Final
or End, for which a thing is done.

14. An Argument from the Efficient Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the
middle Term is the Efficient of the Major Extreme: as, The Earth is
Diametricaly interposed between the Sun and the Moon, therefore the Moon shall
be eclipsed.

15. An Argument from the Final Cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the
middle Term is the Final Cause of the major Extreme.

16. An Argument from the material cause, is when in a probable syllogism, the
middle Term is the material cause of the Major Extreme, or the Genus or Species
thereof.

17. An Argument from the Formal Cause, is when in a Probable syllogism, the
middle Term is the Form, Definition, Description, or Difference of the major
Extreme.

18. In the Topics of the subject and the Accident, we do not take the subject
for the substance, in which the Accident is inherent, or the Accident for that
which does precisely and adiquately adhere to the substance; but subject is
here taken for all that, to which any thing not belonging to its essence is
attributed: And Accident is here taken for any such attribute, as, Number is
the subject of Equality, that is, it is an Accident of an Accident.

19. An Argument from the subject, is as often as the middle Term in a Probable
syllogism, is the subject of the major Extreme.

21. The third General Topic for the Invention of Arguments, is from
Dessentainies and Comparison.

22. Dessentanes, are either Opposites or Disparates; as, a Horse, and a Bull:
There are four kinds of Opposites; Relative, Contrary, Privative, and
Contradictory. Comparisons are either in respect of quality; as, like and
unlike, or in respect of quantity, or also of degrees; as, equal and unequal;
and what ever may be said to be more or less or equal.

23. An Argument from Dissentanies, is when in a Probable Syllogism, the middle
Term is opposed to the Major Extreme, whether it be by way of a Disparate, or a
Contrary, or otherwise.

24. An Argument from Comparison, is as often as in a probable syllogism, one
part of the Major Proposition is compared with the other, in reference to their
agreement or their disagreement.

25. The fourth general Topic, for the Invention of Arguments, is from
Conjugates and Notation. And they are properly called Conjugates, which for the
affinity of signification, have also an affinity in the Voice or Sound; as,
Just, Justice, and Justly; some Conjugates are only Nominal, and some Real, and
some both, and do comprehend Denominatives under them, and are either
substantives where one is a Noun substantive abstracted from the Subject; as,
Justice, Just; or Adjectives, where they be both Denominatives, or Concretes,
which show the form in the Abstract; as, Just, Justly. Notation or Etymology,
is the Explication of a Word by the Original thereof; as, a Consul, from
Counselling the Commonwealth.

26. An Argument from Conjugates, is as often as in a probable syllogism; the one
the Conjugates in the major proposition, is the subject of the major Term; as,
He that does Justly is Just.

27. The first General Topic for the Inventing of Arguments, is from the whole
and its parts. And an Argument from the thing divided to the divided members,
is as often as the thing divided is the middle Term, and the dividing Members the
Major Extreme, in a Probable Syllogism. And an Argument from the dividing
Members, to the thing divided, is as often as the dividing Members are the middle
Term, and the thing divided the Major Extreme.

28. The sixth General Topic, is from Genus and Species; And an Argument from
Genus and Species, is when we prove that a thing does not agree with the Genus,
because it does not agree with the species; o^ that it does not agree with the
species, because it does not agree with the genus.

29. The seventh General Topic for the Inventing of Arguments, is from
Definition, and Division. We raise an Argument from the Topic or Definition,
when we seek for the Definition of either Extreme, that is, of the Subject or
the Predicate in the question, which being found, is put into the place of the
Mean, that it may be known whether the Extremes should be conjoined or
separated; thus we prove that Peter is a man, because he is a Rational living
Creature. We argue from the Topic of Division, when we show something to agree
with the dividing Members, because it agrees with the thing divided, or not to
agree with the thing divided, because it does not agree with any of the
Dividing Members.

30. Inartificial Arguments, are only such as are raised from Divine or Humane
Testimony. And an Argument is raised from Testimony, as often as the Authority of
him that bears witness, is the middle Term, agreeing or not agreeing with the
Major Extreme.

CHAP. VII. Of a Sophistical Syllogism.
A Sophistical Syllogysm, is a Captious Argumentation, which is seemingly, or
apparently true, but is indeed deceitful.

2. Sophistical, or Fallacious Arguing, is either in respect of the Words or of
the Things.

3. Fallacies in Words, are five; Ambiguitie, Amphibolie, Composition,
Division, and Figure of a Word.

4. Fallacies in things are seven, Accident, Of a thing spoken after a sort, to
a thing spoken Simply; Ignorance of the Argument; a false or wrong Cause,
Consequent, Beginning of the Question, and an asking of many Questions.

CHAP. VIII. Of Method.
MEthod is the disposing of things belonging to the same Matter or Subject, so,
as that they may be best understood, and easiest remembered.

2. Method is twofold, Natural or Arbitrary.

3. A Natural Method is that, in which the order of Nature and our distinct
Knowledge is observed.

4. In a Natural Method, we must speak first of Generals, and then of
Particulars, and as we proceed from one thing to another, every part must have
a dependence on that, which was last spoken of by some apt transition.

5. A Natural Method is either Total, or Partial.

6. A Total Method is that, in which a whole Science is Methodically ordered or
dispersed. And this is either, Synthetical, or Analytical.

7. A Synthetical or Compositive Method is that, which begins with the first
and most simple Principles, and so proceeds to those which do arise from, or
are Composed of the first Principles.

8. An Analytical or Resolutive Method, is that, which begins with the end, and
so proceeds still lower and lower, till we come to the first and most Simple
beginnings.

9. A Partial Method is that, by which any part of any Art or Science is
Methodically ordered or disposed: or by which any particular Theme or Subject
is handled by it self.

10. An Arbitrary Method is that, which not regarding the Natural order, is
fitted for such a confused Knowledge, as may be most taking with the People, or
sure best with their Capacities.

And thus much concerning Method, which is the fourth and last- Logical
Instrument; and with this I shall conclude these my Logical Precepts, and last
Part of my English Academy: He that desires to be more fully acquainted with
these Arts and Sciences, may for all, but Music, Read my other particular
Tracts of these Subjects, till some body that has more knowledge in them,
shall furnish us with more ample and perfect Instructions; and as for Music, I
am much of Opinion, that Mr. Playford's Introduction may very well serve, to
Instruct our Youth in the first Principles of that excellent Science; For
which, and all other helps of Learning, To the only Wise God, be all Honor and
Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The ART and MYSTERY of NAVIGATION;
As to Observation in taking Heights, etc. Sailing the Sundry ways, etc. And
other useful matters worthy of note to Navigators, etc.
AMongst the many Undertakings, that redound to the Advantage of Mankind,
Navigation is very considerable; for on it depends not only the Welfare of
private Persons, but of Nations and Kingdoms, as being Enriched and Improved in
Knowledge by it: Wherefore it is highly necessary to speak something of it in
this Treatise of Arts and Sciences, that may Instruct the Unexperienced, and,
perhaps, improve the knowledge of the Elder Practitioners.

In the Treatise of Astronomy, you find the names of the Stars, and many other
things necessary to be taken notice of in Navigation; for on that Art much of
this depends, especially in taking the Suns height or Meridian Altitude, and
the Elevation or height of the Pole, as being the Computation or Distance in
Latitude from the Equator, either North or South, or any other Imagined
Parralel, as we find East and West is the distance of Longitude, where ever the
Meridian is found, there must consequently be computed an equal distance on
either side of it; so that the Meridian thus considered, the Rumb must be so
likewise, for that leading from place to place, may be termed the distance run
upon such a point of the Compass. And to come nearer the taking of these
distances and heights are the principal things to be observed in this Art as to
the Carrying a Ship to any Country and Port, and knowing at any time where you
are, and all these (according to the greatest Proficients) are more closely, or
briefly comprised. 1. In the difference of the Latitude. 2. In the difference
of the Longitude. 3. The Rumbs. 4. The distance run upon the Rumb.

Now if two of these be known or given, the two that remain may be easily
found, the first by Observation, and the last by Trigonometry, or Arithmetical
Calculation, etc. And in further consideration of these things, to find the
Latitude or Elevation of the Pole, you must observe the Meridian Altitude
either of the Sun or Stars, and though there are many ways described to do
this, yet what ensues is found the most plain and easy.

Do it by the Astrolabe or Quadrant in this manner, viz. by what we call
backward observation, and not troubling your Eyes with looking through the
sights, permit the Sun to shine through the sight, that is next to the Center,
so ordering it, that the beam may fall directly upon the hole of the other
sight, by which means the thread will fall upon the right Altitude in the
Quadrant, or the Index in the Astrolabe will in the same manner divide the
degrees of Altitude.

If the Sun shine not, and you are desirous to find its Meridian Altitude, you
may do it by informing your self of the declination and Latitude; And upon this
observation, if you find the declination North, then add to the Complement of
the Latitude, which you will ever find to be the same with the height of the
Aequinoctial, but on the contrary, if it be a South declination, then subtract
from the Complement of the Latitude, and that will at any time give you the
Meridian Altitude. As put the case we find in any place the Elevation of the
Pole, that is the Latitude to be 52 degrees, the complement thereof to 90
degrees, is 38 degrees, which likewise is found to be the height of the
Aequinoctial, and then it being granted, that on May 2. the Sun being 20
degrees, 24 minutes of Taurus, his declination Northward is 117 degrees, 56' 21
s. which, when you add to 38, brings the Suns Meridian Altitude to be 55
degrees, 56 minutes, and 12 seconds, but if this be required to be found when
the Sun comes to the Aequinoctial, either on the 13 of September, or the 11 of
March, then the height of the stars or sun, when they are upon the Meridian,
will show the true Latitude if subtracted from 90 degrees, but at other times
you must find out their declinations, and if it happen Northerly, subtract it
from the Altitude, but if Southerly, you must add it to the Altitude, by which
means you will find the height of the Aequinoctial above the Horizon, and
Consequently subtracted from 90 degrees, will give you the true Latitude of the
place where you make your Observation.

If by the Globe you are desirous to find the Elevation of the Pole, take the
Suns Meridian Altitude, bringing the Suns place in the Ecliptic, or the Stars
to the Brazen Meridian, and so move that Meridian with the Globe through the
notches it stands in, till you find the stars, or the suns places Elevated as
many degrees above the Horizon, as their Meridian Altitude is; and whilst the
Globe stands in this position, you may be confident the Pole will be Elevated
to a true Latitude of the Place.

As suppose you find the Suns place in the beginning of Cancer, which may be
the 12 of June, and the Meridian Altitude of the sun is 62 degrees from the
place where you are to make your observation, then bring the first degree of
the sign Cancer to the Meridian, and Elevate the same 62 degrees above the
Horizon, and you will find the Pole Elevated 51 degrees and 30 minutes.

The next thing in Navigation to be considered, is the finding the Longitude,
which could it be brought to perfection, sailing would be far more easy than it
is, and discoverys of yet unknown Countries, Rich perhaps as either Indias; but
indeed, though many have attempted it, and gone very far, they have never
brought to perfection, however, for the light of the Navigator, we will
consider some things herein.

Suppose the Moon to be Eclipsed, observe how much sooner it begins at a place
of known Longitude, for which search the Ephemerides, then at the place where
you stand, and observing your Latitude by the stars, as has been directed, the
true hour of the night may be found; which done, observe the difference of time
of the Moons beginning to be Eclipsed, or its middle or endings, at the place
where you make your observation, which spaces convert into degrees and minutes,
which added or subtracted from the hour of the beginning, middle or end of this
Eclips at a place of known Longitude, these degrees and minutes in their
difference between the hour at one place, and the hour at an other, added or
subtracted from the degrees and minutes of the known Longitude, you will find
them give the required Longitude.

If the Moon be not Eclipsed, which Eclips cannot be expected upon every
occasion, then you may observe it by the Sun and Moons motion, as thus;
suppose, and it is granted, that the Moon is slower in motion than the Sun 48
minutes, in 24 hours, or 360 degrees, then by the help of Mathematical
Instruments, find the true Meridian in any place, suppose the West-Indias, etc.
you must also find the hour of the Moons coming to that Meridian by the
Ephemerides, or other helps; and this being calculated for London, you find by
those helps, that on such a day the Moon comes to the Meridian, at four in the
Afternoon, and you being the same day in the Indias aforesaid, you find her
come to the Meridian 10 minutes past 4, whereupon consider by the Rule of
Proportion, that the Sun and Moons difference in motion, being 48 minutes in 36
degrees, what will it come to in ten minutes, or if 48 gives 360, consider what
ten gives, and the fourth proportional number will be 75d. and so much is the
distance of that place in India from London, and the longitude of London being
subtracted from that number 20 degrees, and 55 Remainder again subtracted from
360, what remains produces the longitude to be 305. Some other ways are laid
down to prove a knowledge of the longitude, but the whole matter being in a
manner in the dark, these may suffice for an Experiment.

But in plain or circular Sailing, the Compass is very much heeded, but
sometimes there may be mistakes by the variation of the Needle, which you may
Rectify by the Globe, in this manner; let the Suns place be brought to the
East side of the Horizon, and observe the Circle of Winds, and then against the
Suns place you have the point of the Compass, whereon it rises, and so proceed
to take notice upon what point it rises or sets, observe then the difference
happening by the Globe, and by the Compass, and if there be any, that is the
Variation, for which Variation, allowing that the Needle will ever show the
Rumb, which is the true point of the Compass, as to the steering the Ship.

If you would know how much way your Ship makes in such and such spaces of
time, this you may observe by the Logline, or Minute Glass, and by the first so
many knots as she runs in half a minute, so many Miles is she counted to Sail
in an hour, or it may be done by hanging up a Bullet in a string, which will
count the Minutes by its swinging, for if the string be proportioned to 38
Inches, it will swing about 60 times in a minute, but if longer not so many,
and therefore it is left to your discretion, to proportion it as you make
observation by the half minute glass, instead of which, this (for necessity)
may serve turn.

If you would find the Suns Amplitude, and thereby the variation of the
Compass, observe, That as the Proportion of the Cosine of the Latitude is to
the Radius, the same you will find the sine of the declination to that of the
Amplitude, as, It* being granted the Latitude of 31 degrees, 23 minutes, its
Cosine, or Complement, is 38 degrees, 28 minutes, and the declination of the
Sun 15 degrees, 10 minutes; the Amplitude then will be found 24 degrees, 52
minutes North, by reason the declination is so. As for the Circumference of the
Compass divided into 360 degrees, observe when the Sun rises and sets, how many
degrees it is from the direct point of the Amplitude so much you will find the
Needle vary in the place.

As for this kind of Navigation it is vulgarly proposed in three manner of
ways, or Methods, especially, as relating to private Seamen as plain Sailing,
Mereators way or Instruction of Sailing, and Sailing by an Arch or great
Circle, called Circular Sailing. The plain way of sailing is by a plain Chart,
which is the most substantial, and that on which the other are grounded, and to
those that sail near the Aequinoctial, they have little or no occasion for any
other way, as having their degrees of Latitude and Longitude equal, each degree
divided in to 60 minutes, and each minute put for a Mile, yet somewhat exceed
the English measured miles, as containing about 6000 feet; but if you are to
come far from the Aequinoctial, then though you may keep your Latitude in plain
sailing, yet you will be at a loss for your Longitude, and therefore to be
better informed, consider that as the Radius or whole sine of 90 degrees, is to
60 Miles, so you will find the Cosine of the latitude, is to the Miles
contained in one degree of longitude in that latitude, so that in the latitude
of 60 degrees, 30 Miles make a degree, as sine 90 degrees to 60 Miles 10000, so
Cosine 60 degrees to 30 Miles 5000. and by this rule we find, that if your
departure from the Meridian was 280 Miles, and they being divided by 60,
reduced into degrees and minutes of longitude under the Aequinoctial, it yields
4 degrees and 4 minutes, but if these 280 Miles happen to be East or west, or
your departure from the Meridian should be in the latitude of 60 degrees, where
30 Miles make a degree of longitude, then divide the 280 Miles by 30, and you
will find it yields 9 degrees 10/30, or one third, which is 20 minutes for the
difference of longitude in that latitude. To sail by Mercators Chart, is little
other than coming to a knowledge of the true latitudes, Meridians, and
Elevations of the Poles, Miles, minutes, etc. as when it so fall out that one
place is under the Aequinoctial, and the other nearer one of the Poles, then we
find, the Meridional minutes, answerable to that place, which has latitude, is
to be Accounted for the Meridional difference of latitude, or that latitude
enlarged.

Again, suppose both places are toward one of the Poles, thereupon subtract
the Meridional minutes that are found answering to the lesser latitude, and the
remainer will be found to be the Meridional minutes required.

Again, if we find one place to have North latitude, and the other be in South
latitude, then add the Meridional minutes, appertaining to either place
together, and you will find the sum thereof to be the Meridional minutes
required, etc.

Circular sailing is held to be a very good way of sailing, as the best,
showing the nearest way and distances between any two places, yet carrys with
it some little difficulty, so that the Seamen seldom keep to their course near
this Arch, wherefore leaving you to consider of what has been said, I proceed
to other useful matters.

Horology, or the Curious Art of Dialing made plain and easy in describing, and
directing the positions of the Sundry sorts of Dials now in use; also to know
by a Sun-dial the time of the night by the Moons shadow.
DIaling is a very Curious ART, and requires much Care and Industry to come up
to it in all Points; for of Dyals there are sundry sorts, varying in somewhat
or other, according to their Places, Positions, and the Suns Degrees, some are
movable, and may be carried from place to place, others fixed, and are found to
be Regular, or Irregular; the Regular are such as are on a Plain, directly
toward one of the Eminent parts of the world, as full West, or full East, but
the Irregular are those that have no direct pointing to any principal quarters
of the world, but rather declines them.

Of those called Regular, they have many names to distinguish them; as, The
Meridian East, The Meridian West, The Ho^izontal Dial, The Vertical Northward,
and the Vertical Southward, The Aequinoctial below, The Aequinoctial above, the
Polar below, and the Polar above.

The Horizontal, is when it is equally distant toward the Horizon.

The Vertical, is a Perpendicular erected above the Horizon, tending directly
toward the Vertical point, being Parallel to the Primary Vertical Circle, and
is duplex, as North Vertical looking to the other which is South Vertical.

The East and West Meridians have particularly either of them their several
ways, being equally distant from the Meridian Circle.

The Aequinoctials mentioned are those of which either have their several ways
equally distant from the Equator, the one above and the other beneath the
Horizon.

The Polars have likewise their different ways, the one being beneath, and the
other above, they are found as Parallels to the Worlds Axis.

The Irregular are either inclining, or declining; the first of these is
equally distant from any Vertical Circle, and from thence is often called
Vertical, though declining from the Primary Vertical, properly so named; and is
of two sorts, there being one declining from the South to either East or West,
and the other from the North to either East or West.

That which inclines falls away from the Vertical Point, having its inclination
toward the Horizon, as not being equally distant from it.

As for the hours which these several sorts of Dials, are to parcel out time
unto, they are Reckoned as to the days they make diverse, according to the
distant Latitudes, the Suns ascending or declining, yet all allow 24 hours to
the day and night, dividing each hour into 60 minutes, and those into seconds
parts, and smaller proportion of time, till it can be discerned only by
imagination. The days are held in two distinctions, the one natural, and the
other Artificial, the Natural day is accounted 12 hours the Artificial as many
as the Sun allows either the longer or the lesser it shines.

But to be an exact Horologian, observe these methods, be sure to have the
exact Elevation of the Pole, which to find, you are directed in the treatise of
Navigation, for by that your determination of the Center of hours must be had
also the style of the Dial's Altitude, and the order of it, and whatever is
requisite beside of that nature; you must likewise know the true Meridian line,
that so the Dials-Meridian line may have its place directly under the Meridian
of the place where it is posited. And he that undertakes this work, must be
furnished with such Mathematical and Astronomical Instruments and Materials, as
may give him a due understanding of the proportions of time, as a Rule,
Compass, Astronomical Quadrant* divided exactly into 90 degrees, with a
description of the hour line and points and to bring this Ingenious work to
perfection, you must be careful the figures of the hours are set at their
proper and proportionable distance to answer the moving of the styles shadow,
and that your style be well contrived as to its Form and Altitude, and make
your observation to fix it exactly; also be very careful in the Application and
Disposition of the Dial when it is finished.

But to come to what is more curious, be sure the hours be described, and to do
it there are granted to be two right lines secting each other at right Angles
cross ways, one of them being the Meridian line, or the 12 th hour line, the
other is termed the Occult line, by which the first cross ways are cut to the
right Angle, and this is generally called the line of hours, because in it the
horary points are designed, but if we come to its more proper denomination, it
may be called the Aequinoctial line, since it represents the Aequinoctial
Circle, the chief rule of all hours.

Thus much being explained as to Dialing, in general, we come now to more
particulars.

If you are desirous to have a right Dial, you must be sure to know its right
Center, or the Center of the hour, to do which, be very mindful of the
Elevation of the Pole, especially in the Horizontal Dial, or any of that sort,
for they will not declare the hours in any place, but under a certain
Elevation, and therefore if they are removed far, you must be again
proportioned to that Elevation Conjecture we then the Pole be Elevated 49
degrees in this Region, which is 41, place here the foot of your Compass in the
Instruments Center, extending the other foot from that to the Aequinoctial line
described in the instrument, where in that part the 41 degrees is cut by the
Radius, so numbering from the 12th hour line, and transfer this extension of
the Compass upon the Dial, having yet the Compasses foot fixed in the Meridian,
and Aequinoctial lines, concourse, and the other fix in the distant part of the
Meridian line, determining, that point to be the hours Center, and so from
thence, and each point in the Aequinoctial line, you are to draw all the lines,
which some term, the Arches of hours. And further a line is to be drawn through
the Center of the hours, a line Parallel to the Aequinoctial, and this is to be
accounted the line of the sixth hour, as well in the Evening as the morning, as
likewise of the hours of 4 and 5 in the Evening, are to be drawn out beyond the
Center of hours, for the like hours in the morning, and so of the rest, equally
compeering; and thus you have an exact description of a Horizontal Dial, whose
figure you may form as you please, placing the Characters of the hours at the
end of the line.

If you design a Vertical Dial, it may be done upon a Regular wall, the same
way as the former, yet there is some difference to be observed, not only in the
Situation, but likewise in the Vertical, in case of being certain of the
Center of the hour, the Polar Elevation degrees are to be here taken for the
Altitude of the style, allowing the degrees complement, though the Horizontal
Dial is the contrary; however, there being a distinction between a Vertical to
the North, and a Vertical to the South, the Vertical to the North is, as we may
suppose, a Meridian Inverted, having the Center of hours downwards falling
short, in showing short, in showing the hours, for in some Adjacent Countries,
it shows but from 4 to 8 in the morning, and the like in the afternoon, and the
South Vertical has the Center of hours and its style upwards, showing from the
six in the morning to noon.

A Meridional Dial either East or West, for the first, it must have a Line
Parallel drawn to the Horizon, and a slight Circle at any opening of the
Compass, beginning from the Horizontal line toward the right side where the
Eastern Dial is to be drawn, conceiving in the Instrument such an Arch at the
like opening of the Compass, in which Arch cut off the Elevation of the
Equator, and carry the Interval to the Circle drawn from the point, and allow
the Arch to be cut off.

To frame an Aequinoctial Dial, two lines must be drawn at right Angles,
whereof one is to be the Meridian, the other that of the hour, 6 morning and
evening, and from the usual section of these lines, draw a Circle as you think
fit to be divided into 24 proportionable and equal parts, for in this kind of
Dyaling, all the Intervals must be equal as to the hours.

The Polar Dial goes Parallel to the Axis of the world, lying as it were in it,
and is to be Elevated above the Horizontal Plain, the same degrees as the
worlds pole, the lowermost part in many places, containing not above 4 hours,
yet generally the morning hours are 4 and 5, toward the left side the Evening
hours 7 and 8, but the topmost shows the hours from 7 in the morning to 5 in
the Evening, but not the sixth by reason the Sun then is parallel to the Dial
glancing then upon its side.

A Dial of Irregular Declination may be best managed by the Mariners Compass,
and applying the Semicircle divided in the Plan to a competent number of
degrees, the pin or style placed at its Center, so that in that Meridional
hour, you will perceive the degree the shadow cuts, and the way it casts, by
the which you may the better determine the species, and how it declines; by
which observation, you may draw a Dial in any place, fixing your style of what
Magnitude you please at right Angles.

If you are desirous to find by the shining of the Moon, the hour of the night
upon a Dial, suppose you have a Horizontal Sun-Dial, movable or fixed, join to
it a Dial, by some called a Moon Dial, made up of two Concentrick Circles,
where in one you will meet with the day of the Moons Age, by applying a Globule
to the number 30, in the other, the 12 hours diversely set down; then knowing
the Moons Age, so place your Sun-dial, that the Moon may fairly shine on it,
and being placed as for the day, see what hour the Moon shaddows on, as suppose
the 8, then place the Globule, the hour you find set down in the Horary Circle,
and then again having recourse to the Moons Age, it will give you the hour
required, as suppose it be the 12 of the Moons Age, you will find the shadow
about 5 and a half, which is the time, if (as it frequently happens) the Moon
Dial be composed of 3 Centrical Circles, whereof the last and greatest be that
of the Moons day, the next to it the hour Circle, and the inmost the Index; let
the Index be applied to the day of the Moon, and then by that Circle, observe
what hour, or part of an hour the shadow marks, and you will find the true
content.

Planimetry, or, The most Exact and Curious Arts of Surveying Lands, etc. after
the newest and most Experienced Method and Practice, etc.
PLanimetry, or Surveying, is numbered among the Curious, and deserves worthily
here to take place; and to be exact in this, have (beside other Instruments
proper to the matter) a Ruler of about 7 or 8 Inches long, and an Inch and a
half broad, and place two Scales, one of 12, and the other of 11, in an Inch
describing a line of Cords 2 Inches long, or somewhat less than 60 or 90
degrees, the Radius of which or 60 degrees, being equal to the Semidiameter of
the same Circle, and after the order of these on the other side, place several
other scales which may be of 16, 20, 24, or the like in an Inch, whereby you
have an Instrument necessary for sundry occasions, and for this scale in its
use you must be provided with a pair of Brass Compasses, also a curious pair of
Calem Compasses, having screws to alter the points, as to draw as occasion
requires to the beautifying the Plats with black Lead or the like; being
provided with Instruments, and all things sitting for measuring, you must
consider the Measures, and reduce that which is called Statute Measure into
such measure as is Customary and Usual, for by an Act of the 23 of Edward the
I. an Acre of Land was to contain 160 Perches or Poles to be made out square,
etc. but by Custom in diverse places of this Kingdom, this has been altered by
the varying of Perches in the number of feet, as, 18, 20, 24, and sometimes 28
foot to the Perch, and this requires the Surveyers diligence to reconcile the
one to the other, of which we shall give some insight.

Suppose you are to Reduce 5 Acres, 2 Roods, 20 Perches measured Statute
measure by 18 foot the Perch, in this case seek the least proportional terms
between 18 and 16 foot and a, and to effect it, because the latter carries with
it a fraction, reduce it into halves, and that they may be of one denomination,
let the 18 foot be likewise halved, and you will find them in this manner
33/36, which you must abbreviate by 3, in saying, how many times 3 shall I find
in 33, and the Answer will be 11 times 3, and the same do by 36, and you will
find it 12 times 3, and thereupon the two proportional terms between 16 and 18,
will appear to be 11 and 12 which being done, reduce the Given Quantity of 5
Acres, 2 Roods, and 20 Perches all into Perches, by which means you will find
them to be 900 Perches; then observe what is the Proportion, the Square 11,
which is found 121, bears to the square 12, which is found 144, the same does
the Acre containing 16 and a half feet to the Perch, bear to that that contains
18 feet to the Perch or Pole.

Always observe, in this was particularly that the greater measure is to be
reduced into the lesser, then multiply the Quantity Given, viz. 900 Perches by
144 the larger square, and you will find the Product to be 129600, and that
divided by 121, you will find the Quotient to be 1071 Perches, and 9/121 parts,
which reduced into Acres, gives us 6 Acres, 2 Roods, and 31 Perches, and 9/121
parts of a Perch, and this compeers with the Quantity of Acres Parallel with
Statu^e measure; but on the other hand, if it had been required for the
reducing Statute Measure into Customary Measure, you must then Multiply 900
perches, your given measure or quantity, by 121, which is the lesser square,
because the lesser is to be reduced into the greater, and you will find the
Product to be 108900, which if you divide by the greater square 144, you will
have the Quotient 756 ^/4, which being reduced into Acres, is 4 Acres, 2 Roods,
36 Perches; and this rule is to be taken with what ever Customary quantity is
proposed in their difference, and degrees, as when the Perch is 20, 24, or 28
foot, or other disproportions of number.

If in this Mensuration, you are required to reduce Perches into Acres, and so
on the contrary, observe that by the Aforementioned Statute, an Acre of Ground
should contain 169 square perches or poles, being every Rood 4 square perches,
so that if you find any number of perches, that must be done into Acres, the
given number must consequently be divided by 160, and the Acres are showed by
the Quotient, but if there be remainder, and it be under 40, they are perches,
but if they are found to exceed 40, divide by 40, which you will find to be the
number of perches contained in a Rood, so that the Quotient will be Roods, and
the Remainder Perches.

But to reduce Acres into Perches, there is no great difficulty, considering it
is but turning it as it were backward, for in the other to bring Perches into
Acres, the division was by 160, but in this case, to turn Acres into Perches,
it must be multiplied by 160, which being observed, we come now to more nearer
particulars, as to the matter in hand. If the piece of ground you measure be
square, having considered well that the Acre is 160 Perches, then multiply one
of the sides by the other joining to it, and you will find the sum is to be
divided by 160, and suppose your Ground be 40 poles one way and but 20 another,
these multiplied, make 800 Poles or Perches, which divided by 160, shows 5
Acres to be the content.

In measuring a Triangular piece of Ground, you must first observe to measure
the longest side of the Triangle, as also the Perpendicular opposed to the said
long side, then multiplying the half of one by the whole of the other, you must
divide by 160.

Suppose the side be 60, the Perpendicular 40; 60 must be multiplied by 20, or
40 by 30, which so done, make 1200, which being divided by 160, renders 7 Acres
and for the true content.

If you are to measure that which we call a Trapezia, or a double Triangle,
then both the Perpendiculars must be multiplied by the Diagonal Line, as being
the usual or common Base of both the Triangles, and must be divided by 160 in
this manner. Let the Diagonal Line be 40, and one of the Perpendiculars 15, the
other 8, which being put together make 23, which being multiplied by 20, which
is half the Diagonal Line, make 460, and that divided by 160, renders two
Acres, three Roods, and 20 Poles.

If the Ground be Circular, then half the Diameter must be multiplied by half
the Circumference, and the product divided by 160, whereby the Diameter of the
Circle being found to be 140 poles, the Circumference is 440 poles, and the
half of these two producing 220, and 70, they are to be multiplied together,
and then produce 15400 Perches, which being divided by 160 produce 96 Acres and
a.

If the piece of Ground given, be Oval, suppose it to be 30 Perches one way,
and 40 the other, to know the content, multiply the length 40 by the breadth,
which as aforesaid is 30, and you will find it make 1200, which again divided
by 203 7/101, and you will find it yield 5 Acres, 3 Roods, and 23 Perches, and
by this last number so working, you may find the number of Acres contained, in
a Semicircle, a quarter or sixth part, or any section or division of a Circle
greater or lesser, multiplying the half Diameter.

If you are to measure wood Land, which is the difficultest of all, you may fix
a mark at either corner of the Wood, that 3 marks may be seen at once, then
having a Quadrant in your hand, lay it flat thereon, and take sight to two of
the marks on each side* and then upon paper, mark the degrees of the Angle, and
measure to the two marks in sight, and place them on the same paper by your
line of equal parts, and do so to all other corners, till you have closed up
the Plat or Wood, which then may be easily brought into Acres by the line of
equal parts. And Note here, if your Quadrant be too small, you may join two
together, or do it by a board for want of a plain Table, so your Plat upon the
paper make 3 Triangles, and to measure one of them, measure for one Triangle
the longest doted line, by half the middle doted line, or Perpendicular, which
gives the content, and by so working the other two Triangles you have
completed it.

The Art and Mystery of Gauging Vessels of Sundry Forms and Quantities, by
Exact Rules laid down plain and easy: Also to Gauge and know the Burden of
any Ship, and other matters.
GAuging is very necessary to be understood by all People that deal in
Commodities, wherein Casks, or the like, give the Dimensions of their Measure;
wherefore, for their better Instruction in this Art, there are two things
principally to be considered: First, That seeing Vessels are mostly of
Irregular Forms, it must be the care of the Gauger, to consider how they are to
be reduced to Regular Proportions; and, in the Second place, to inform himself,
of the true content of the Gallon in Cubick Inches, or parts of a Foot; and for
the first of these, carefully Measure the Diameter of the Cask at the Bung and
Head, and, by those Diameters, to find out the Area of their Circle, and so
take 2 thirds of the Area at the Bung, and 1 third at the Head, which, being
added, will be found to be the mean Area of the Cask; and if you multiply that
Area by the length of the Vessel, it will show how many solid Inches are
contained in that Vessel, which being divided by the number of Cubick Inches in
one Gallon, the Quotient will demonstrate what number of Gallons the Cask holds.

As, if we suppose that a Vessel of Wine be 18 inches Diameter at the head, and
32 Inches at the Bung, the length being 40 Inches, if you would be satisfied in
the content, consider, that one third of Area at the head, is found to make in
its due proportion -- 85, 823

And two thirds of the Area of the Bung, make -- 536, 166

And then consider the sum of the two, to be -- 620, 909

When Multiplied by the length -- 40. -- 959

Makes Inches solid -- 24839, 560.

These being divided by the solid Inches in one gallon of Wine, they being 231
Inches for the content, yield 170 Gallons, 530 parts, which is some small
matter above half a Gallon, yet some raise a dispute about the certain number
of Inches in a Gallon, yet the Wine Gallon is generally concluded to consist of
231 Cubick, or solid Inches, and the Ale Gallon is held by many in Computation
with the Wine Gallon, as 4 to 5, so that in such a degree of difference, it
must be 288 Inches, but upon the imposition of Excise, it has been generally
Esteemed but 282 Cubick Inches.

If you would know the content of any Wine or Beer in Ale or Beer Gallons,
observe for the Beer Barrel.

The diameter at the head 9 inches, 9 parts For the diameter at the Bung, 23
inch, 0 parts

The length -- 27 inches, 4 parts

The Kilderkin has for its measurings.

The diameter at the head. 16 inches, 1 part

Its diameter at the Bung, 18 inch. 6 parts

The Length -- 12 inches, 1 part

And these are called the Coopers scantlings, and very well agree with the
received quantity of the Ale Gallon, allowing it to be 288 Inches and a half,
so that the Barrel this was reckoned to be a Pint over 36 Gallons, and a
Kilderkin a Pint and a half over the half of that, though as I have said, this
Gallon has lately been agreed upon by a Committee of Excise, to hold no more
than 282 Cubick inches.

Now to measure Brewers Vessels, etc. whether they be Square or Round, or of
any other form; First, to know their true Content, observe what has been said
in Measuring such Bodies, dividing by 282 the inches in one Gallon,
demonstrates the content in Gallons, and if you divide the Gallons by 36, the
contents in Barrels are showed, and so by knowing the true number of Inches,
any measure is to be taken.

If you would know the Burden of a Ship, or how many Tun she will hold, or
Commodiously carry: First, inform your self by measure of the length of the
Keel, and take the breadth at the Mid-ship beam, and the depth of the Hold, and
these three you must multiply one by the other, then the product thereof must
be divided by 100, and so the Tuns of Burden will be plainly demonstrated.

As, granting the length of a Ships Keel to be 50 Foot, and at the Middle-beam
her breadth 20, and the depth in the hold ten foot, then to know how many Tuns
she will carry, let 50 be multiplied by 20, and it makes 1000, and that again
multiplied by 10, makes 10000, the which, when divided by 100, and cutting of
the two last Figures, it shows the Ship to be 100 Tuns of Burden; but this way
is usually attributed to Men of War, but for Merchant Ships, they give no
Allowance for Masts, Sails, Ordnance, and Anchors, the which, though they are a
Burden, yet are not accounted Tunnage; wherefore, as to Merchant Ships, your
product must be divided by 95, and then a Merchant Ship, of the aforesaid
length, breadth, and depth, will be found 105 Tuns 25/95 parts Burden, though
there must be regard had in this case, to the middle of the Ship, for fear of
Erring, and if you are doubtful whether you are right or not, if the Ship be
Irregularly built, find out how many Cubick Feet it contains, and Reckoning
that a Cubick Foot of water, weighs, as it is generally accounted, 55
Averdupois, or 16 ounces to the pound, so that consider 2000 weight being
allowed to the Tun, and every hundred 112 lb. the Dimensions must be taken
accordingly, and by this Rule you must take your proportion: But to come sure
of this another way;

Measure on the out side the Ship to her Lightmark, when she is in the Water
unladen, and there you will find the weight or content of the Empty Vessel, so
that if you take your measure from her Lightmark to her full draught of Water,
being Laden, you have the true Burden of her Tunnage. Also, if you're desirous
to know the Burden of another Ship double or treble of the same Mould, or a
greater or lesser proportion, multiply the measure of the Length, and Breadth,
and Depth Cubically, after that is done, double or treble the Cube, and
Extracting the Cube Root, your work is done, and so you may go on to other
matters of this nature, or any other belonging to Gauging, which your Rules and
Instruments of direction will furnish you, in your procedure when you are once
thus far entered, and by degrees it will become easy, if you cast a Method in
your mind.

Exact Rules and Directions for Fortification, Regular and Irregular for War,
Offensive or Defensive, Outworks and Inward Strengths, etc.
FOrtification is of great moment, and in the well observing and Regular
performing it for defense and offense, many times consists the Safety of
Countries and Kingdoms, howev^r the Situation and Circumstances require much
Variation, so that to prescribe the Models of all Fortifications would be
Endless, and therefore it will be most convenient to treat of the modern, or
those most generally in use.

Observe then of this kind, your works require to be Flanked to keep the Enemy
from a sudden Entrance, where any Breach is made by the great Guns, for if the
Besiegers have made their approaches so near, that the Besiegeds Cannon in the
Front are dismounted, then you may be assured their design is to put their
Miners to pass the Ditch, and then if they perceive any place out of sight of
the Besiegeds firing, they will have an opportunity to make their Mines with
little difficulty, so that a place unless the Garrison be very Large to make
frequent Sallys, may be taken in 8 or 10 days, that with Flankers might hold
out much Longer, so that it has been the practice of late to turn the Ancient
Round Bastions into sharp pointed ones, which not only upon occasion serve for
Flankers to defend against any hasty approach, but to slaunt and hinder the
force of the great Shot playing against the Town or Fort.

Amongst other things necessary on this occasion, the great Line of defense is
to be considered, or what may be found near Equal into it, viz. the Polygon
Interior, which ought not in mos^ cases to exceed 120 Fathoms, or 720 Feet,
and this is found to be a point blank of the Execution of a Musket, the Cannon
being here Incommodious, and therefore the defense is to be taken from the
former, the latter beside the waste of Ammunition, lying much liable to be
dismounted, and not so easily again remounted, as the Emergency requires, and
the difficulty is likewise greater in maintaining a continual Fire, and if the
work be not incommoded by their over largeness, the more Capacious, the Gorges
and Flanks are, the better will the Fortification be found for defense, for
then the Soldiers may pass to and fro in a good front to the Bastion, when
Cannon is planted on both sides the Flank, and give no interruption to those
that are at the Flanks, and if there be but a supposed necessity required,
there must be a vacancy left for Retrenchments, and a place under the Bastions
left fit for Mining, that if it come to extremity when you have drawn off as
soon as the Enemy has possessed the Bastion, it may be blown up, and their
Attacque cleared till the Besieged may know what is further to be done in the
defense of the place, and draw their strengths from other parts thitherwards.

Above all, the Curtain Flanks and Faces of the opposite Bastion are to be well
secured and guarded, as likewise the Ditch and Counterscarp being made as large
as the due proportion of the Bastion will allow, for if they be too great,
their Capitals will be found too long, and thereupon the defense Line exceed
the Port of any Musket, or small piece -- and being too little they will
become blunt, and so cut off the second Flank, whilst it ought to be held
considerable.

The degrees of the Angle of a Bastion, ought not to be less than 60, or more
than 90, some small matter allowed over or under; and the reason is, if it be
much under 60, it will be found too slender, or above 90 too large, or more
than may be well supplied; and moreover, by that the second Flank is shortened,
and it will be computed in less Ground than the Bastion, where it is an Angle
of less degrees, though built on the like Gorge and Flanks, and observe in all
your works to let them be Cannon proof.

If we proceed to a description of Regular Fortification, it is to be
understood of such Models as are equally Angular, and founded upon Equilateral
Figures, to be described in a Circle, as it may be a Triangle, Quadrangle, or a
Quartil Pentagon, or a Figure of 5 sides to a Dodecagon, or a Figure of 12
sides, and in this case the Bastion must be so posited, that all the points may
answer in like distance from the Center. The Curtains of Equal Length, and all
the Angles and Lines to be of an equal Magnitude for Regular Models are to be
computed from a Calculation of the Angle at the Center, and that is done by
dividing 360, the number of the degrees that a Circle is usually divided into,
and wherein the Regular Figure is to be described by the number of any Polygons
sides, or the Regular Figure, that any Fort or Work of War of this nature is to
consist on, for hereby the Quotient demonstrates the Angle of the Center, as
may be demonstrated by a Figure of five sides, wherein by operation, the Angle
of the Center is certain to be 72 degrees, and the like of any other figure,
then if you draw a Circle with the Protractor, or Line of Chords, the first
being a Semi circle, and the last the fourth part of a Semicircle, or 90
degrees projected on a straight line, and the Angle beset off at the Center at
72 degrees, the Circle will thereby be divided into 5 equal proportions, or
parts, and the straight line drawn to the points, produces a Pentagone. Besides
this Model of Fortification, there are sundry Outworks required for
strengthening a place, they hinder much the Besiegers from making their
Lodgments if the ground happen to be low near the Counterscarp, or from
suddeinly raising Batteries by the advantage of that ground, if it happen to be
high; wherefore a careful Enginier always provides Outworks to hinder it, and
prolong the approaches to the main Fort, and these Outworks are various as the
Situation of the place, or the danger requires.

Ravelins, being an usual Outwork, they are usually of two kinds, one with
lines, and the other wanting; the first of these are placed before long
Curtains, where the two Bastions are not capable of Flanking each other within
Musket shot, and the length of the Curtain not sufficient for the erecting a
Plate Bastion in its Center, and supply the defect of a Bastion by covering and
defending, and to erect these kind, the Ditch must be cut parallel with the
Curtain, and above it erect a Capital from 18 to 20 Poles, and let your
Demigorges be no more than from 10 to 12 Poles the Flanks, from 8 to 10, the
Ditch surrounding them, and the greatness of the Flanks Parallel to the face of
the Ravelin till the ditch of the place of the face of the Bastion be met by
it, that so the Ravelins Flanks may scowr over all the ditch that faces the
Bastion.

The Ravelins without lines, consist only of a Capital and two faces, the
Capitals from 12 to 18 Poles the face, edging or drawing nearer to the
shoulders of the Bastion, that within the Ravelin may be commanded by the
Curtain and two Flanks.

The half Moon is a work ever raised before the Bastions point, being so named
from the lowness of its Gorges Cavity, etc. and is to secure the two faces of
the Bastion, but when the faces have but a weak defense from the Ravelin, these
works are soon made useless, or ruined, and give the Besieged an opportunity of
Lodgment, and may serve for Batteries and Flanks against the opposing Bastions,
however, they may be retrenched by Traverses, yet they will not fail to
attacque entirely in the face, or where you have your last retrenchment, also,
that called the Counterguard runs the like hazard.

The Outworks, called the Hornworks, are placed before the Curtains, a
Perpendicular Line being drawn from it at the two Flanks about 60 pole front,
toward the Campaign, their front to be 36 Poles, equal to the Curtain, to be
divided into 3 Parts, one of them for the Curtain, and the other for the
Demigorges, appertaining to the Hornwork, as for the Flanks, they are to be six
Rods, or 72 foot each, and this work is held one of the best and strongest
Outworks, if well manned and managed, especially when a Ravelin is placed
before it.

The Outworks called the Tenalis, is built to secure the Bridge when it is hard
pressed upon their sides, containing 50 Poles, and the Fronts no more than 36,
which being divided into 4 equal parts, a Perpendicular is drawn in the middle,
whereon a 1/9 of the front is set off inwards toward the Town, and the Lines
must be drawn from the sides, to form the face; this work is advantageous for
Counter Approaches, and for receiving succors into the Town.

The Crownwork is usually erected, a when height is so near to the place, that
a Musket shot may reach it, and then the sides of the works must be extended
before the Bastion, or Curtain about 65 Poles, and the Demibastions point to be
about 60 degrees, then the Extremities of the sides must be joined, and a
Perpendicular Line raised on the middle, on which six, for the Capital, 18
Rods, making an Angle of two Interior Polygons.

FINIS.
Books Sold by T. Passenger, at the Three Bibles and Star on London Bridge.
THe Elements of that Mathematical Art, commonly called Algebra; Expounded in
four Books, by John Kersey.

Lloyd's Poetical Dictionary, in Folio.

Clark's Examples, 2d. Vol. Folio.

Dr. Salmon's Polygraphice.

-- his Systema Medicinale.

-- his Select Observations.

Cocker's Vulgar Arithmetic.

All Mathematical Books.

Dr. Newton's Art of Logic, and Rhetoric alone.

David's Repentance By Sam. Smith.

Great Assize. By Sam. Smith.

David's blessed man, By Sam. Smith.

Lithgows 19 Years Travels, second Edition.

The Present State of England, 3d. and 4th. parts: Containing, first, an
account of the Riches, Strength, Magnificence, Natural Production, Manufacture
of this Island, with an exact Catalogue of the Nobility and their Seats;
Secondly, The Trade and Commerce within its self, and with all Nations Traded
to by the English, as at this day established, and other matters relating to
Inland, and Marine Affairs: Useful for Natives and Foreigners.

Markham's Masterpiece Revived, Containing all knowledge belonging to the
Smith, Farrier, or Horse-Leach, touching the Curing all Diseases in Horses: and
now in this Impression is added, the Complete Jockey, containing the method for
the Training up of Horses for Racing, with their heats and courses, and manner
of keeping; also instructions for the Buyers to avoid Cheating Horse-Coursers,
and all things necessary for Gentlemen and others.

Dr. Newton's Cosmographia, or a view of the Globes, being an explanation of
the Principles of Geometry, applied to the Surveying and Gaugi^g of Casks; to
which is added an introduction to Geography.

The Mirror of Architecture, or the ground Rules of the Art of Building, by
Vincent Scamozzi; whereunto is added, the description and use of an ordinary
joint Rule, with an Addition of Stair Cases and Chimney Pieces.

The whole Art of Navigation, in 5 Books, containing the Principles of
Navigation, Geometry, and Astronomy with a large new Sinical Quadrant, the
whole delivered in a very easy and familiar style, by way of Dialogue between
a Tutor and his Scholar: Approved by the Ablest Mathematicians, by Capt.
Daniel Newhouse, Published by the Kings Command.

Clavis Commercii, or the key of Commerce, containing an exact and most concise
method of Merchants Accounts, after the Italian manner, in one hundred
propositions, being the most material cases in proper Factorage, and Company
Accounts, both Domestic and Foreign: Also a Practical Waste Book, Journal and
Ledger, fitted for the use of Schools, the contemplation of Gentlemen, and the
practice of Merchants or others, who desire to be accomplished with the famous
art of Book keeping.

The marrow of the Mathematics, contracted into a small compass for the
Pocket, and made plain and easy to the understanding of an ordinary Capacity,
containing the doctrines of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Gauging, the use
of the Sector, Surveying, Dialing, and the Art of Navigation, Illustrated with
several Cuts, after a New, Compendious, easy method.

Gazophylacium anglicanum, containing the derivation of English Words, proving
the Dutch and Saxon to be the prime fountain, and likewise giving the Similar
Words, in most Europian Languages, fitted to the Capacity of the English
Reader, that may be curious to know the original of his Mother Tongue.

Thesaurarium Trilingue publicum: Being an Introduction to English, Latin and
Greek in 2 parts: the first Teaching Orthographia, and the exactest way of
Pointing yet extant. The 2d. containing a method for the more speedy attaining
to to the Greek Tongue, and the truly accenting thereof.

The Complete Servant Maid, or the Young Maidens Tutor, being an excellent book
of Cookery, and teaching young maidens how to qualify themselves for any
Employment: Whereunto is added a Supplement, containing the choicest Receipts
and rarest Secrets in Physic and Surgery, the 5th. Edition corrected and
amended.

Sir Samuel Morlands vade mecum, or the necessary Companion.

Physic Refined, or a little stream of Medicinal Marrow flowing from the bones
of Nature, by John Yarwood Professor ^f Physic. The price but six pence.

The Pathway to health, wherein are to ^e found most excellent and approved
Medicines of great virtue, as also notable Potions and Drinks, with the Art of
Distilling diverse precious Waters, for making of Oils, and other comfortable
Receipts for the health of the Body.

The Famous History of the destruction ^f Troy in 3 parts.

Thesaurus Poeticus.

Anglorum Speculum, or the Worthies ^f England in Church and State;
Alphabetically digested into the several Shires and Counties therein contained,
wherein are Illustrated the Lives and Characters of the most Eminent Men since
the Conquest, to the present Age. Also an Account of the Commodities and Trade
of each Respective County, and the most flourishing Cities and Towns therein.

The Complete Horseman and Expert Farrier in two Books: 1. Showing the best
manner of breeding good Horses, with their choice, Nature, Riding and Dieting,
as well for Running as Hunting, and how the Rider ought to behave himself in
the breaking and riding of Colts, as also teaching the Groom and Keeper his
true Office, touching the Horses and Colts, ^ommitted to his charge. 2.
Directing the most exact and approved manner, how to know and cure all maladies
and diseases in Horses; a work containing the secrets and best skill belonging
either to Farrier or Horse Leach.

Abstractum Chirurgiae Marinae, Or a^ abstract of Sea Surgery designed, for
the use of such Surgeons who desire to serve at Sea, yet are unacquainted
with Sea Practice, in order to their restoring to health sick or wounded
Seamen, in three Books; 1. Containing certain Directions necessary to be
observed by the Sea Chyrurgeon in his fitting out: 2. Teaches how he shall
perform his Chyrurgical duty being at sea, both in an Engagement and other
times. 3. Instructs how he must Execute the Physical Office imposed on him:
By John Moyle.

Thesaurus Astrologiae, or an Astrological Treasury, containing the choicest
Mysteries of that Curious but Abstruse Learning, relating to Physic, being the
Collections and Experiments of a learned Physician and Astrologer deceased,
whose name is not known; By John Gadbury Student in Astrology and Physic.

Wingate's Rule of proportion in Arithmetic and Geometry, or Gunters Line
newly rectified, fitted for all Artists for Measuring and Building, whereinto
is now also inserted, the construction of the same Rule, and a farther use
thereof in Questions that concern Astronomy, Dialling, Geography, Navigation,
Gauging of Vessels, Military Orders, Interest and Annuities.

At the aforesaid Shop, is sold, Paper, Paper Books Ruled or Unruled: Also
Bibles, and other Books, new bound and clasped: Also, Pens, Ink, Wax, Wafers,
Pencils, Bonds, Releases, Letters of Attorney for the Navy, Bills of Lading,
etc*

FINIS.

