FOXES AND FIREBRANDS: OR, A SPECIMEN OF THE DANGER and HARMONY of POPERY and
SEPARATION.

Wherein is proved from undeniable Matter of Fact and Reason, that Separation
from the Church of England is, in the judgment of Papists, and by sad
experience, found the most compendious way to introduce Popery, and to ruin
the Protestant Religion.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere Malorum.

The Second Edition. In Two Parts.

Dublin Printed by Joseph Ray for a Society of Stationers, and are to be sold
by the Booksellers of Dublin, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HAving about the year 1678. set forth in Print the two Examinations of
Faithful Commin and Thomas Heath, not with a design to exasperate or provoke
any party in Religion, but partly to lay open the Plots and Contrivances of the
Romish Emissaries to dash Protestants amongst themselves, and cunningly
undermine that Reformation by divisions, which they were not able to subvert by
a more open assault. It pleased the Learned Dr. Henry Nalson to publish these
Examinations, together with few judicious Remarks and Collections of his own,
under the Title of Foxes and Firebrands; and dedicate it to Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Jenkins, the two great Pillars of our present Separations: And finding that the
First Part was so kindly received by the World, that the Impressions were so
suddenly bought up, and thereby an encouragement given to proceed, in adding
some more materials, in order to a Second Part, as upon the same subject. I
have therefore for thy information caused the First Part to be Reprinted, and a
Second added to it, that so the History of these Jesuitical divisions might be
more complete and absolute. The Collections in this Second Part are most of
them either out of the Memorials of that great Minister of State the Lord
Cecil, or from the testimonies of persons that are still living, and also able
to attest the truth of what is here related: I am not conscious to my self of
any injury that I have done either to Religion in general, or the true sincere
Professors of it, since neither the Reputation of the one, nor the Interest of
the other are concerned in the evil designs of those parties that have a form
of Godliness, but deny the power of it in their practices. I may perhaps have
disobliged the two extreme Factions in Religion, (the Papist and the Puritan)
by exposing their Combinations for the ruin of that Protestant Faith which is
by Law happily established and settled among us: And if I have done so, it is
because I tell them the truth, and lay the scene of things nakedly before them;
and I hope the Reader will look upon it as an argument of my candor and
sincerity, that I do not study to gratify any party in Religion, but have
rather invited their prejudices upon my self, by saying these things that are
disobliging to them both.

The truth is, my chief aim and design in the whole affair is, to have our
dissenting Brethren disabused, and to pull away the scales from their eyes,
which obstructs their prospect into the danger of their separations, to let
them know that the first feuds of their divisions were sown by the Priests and
Jesuits, that whilst they are carrying on the same designs of Schism and
Separation, they are introducing Popery, though they do not think of it; and
making a way for the admission of that mystery of Iniquity into the Churches of
Great Britain, which cost their Forefathers so much Blood to cast out.

If they did seriously consider of these things, I am confident they would
return to the bosom of the Church, and no longer endanger the safety of the
Protestant Religion, by aspersing Episcopacy, and libelling the Government of
the Church of England, and continuing the course of that Separation which was
begun by the Papists, cherished by the Separatists, and will in the end tend to
the utter ruin both of the Conformists and the Nonconformists, which has
already brought one good King to the Block, and was again like to shake the
Crown and Scepter of a second. Almighty God make us all-wise to foresee, and to
prevent our danger.

R. W.

To Mr. Richard Baxter, Mr. William Jenkins, etc.
SIRS,
WIse and Good Men are always wont to look at, and consider the consequences
and ends of things; where our divisions and separations will terminate, is but
too obvious; things cannot long stand in this posture, our vain jangling will
come to the Umpirage either of the sharpened Sword of the Law, or the terrible
Law of the Sword; the one is grievous, the other intolerable, upon which Party
soever it shall fall; for the ill influences of Religious Quarrels are such
upon the Civil Government, as will oblige that for Self-preservation, to
prevent the last by the use of the first, and by timely severities to obviate
future miseries.

I have yet seen nothing offered by Dissenters which will not necessarily
increase, rather than cure our Divisions; and above all, that Toleration which
is so warmly pleaded for by those Nonconformists, who pretend to give an old
Answer to a new Sermon of Dr. Stillingfleet's, is certainly the most
intolerable. It is a Door which will let in infinite Divisions, and
Subdivisions, Errors and Heresies, and by giving people liberty to go either to
Church or Conventicle, will give the lazy, profane, and Atheistical liberty to
go to neither, to the great dishonor of God, and the inevitable decay of
Christian Religion; it will infallibly give the Papists all the advantage these
following Papers discover; they desire to introduce Popery, upon the ruin of
Protestant Religion; it will oblige the Supreme Magistrate to act against his
own, and the public Conscience of Christianity, and to establish Iniquity by a
Law. For such are the Doctrines and Practices of some Dissenters, in the
judgment of all but themselves, and of all Dissenters, in what they oppose one
another.

I know not how they come now to unite so close against the Episcopal Party;
for I know their Breaches are incurable, and the time was when Presbytery was
as much Babylon to Independents, as Episcopacy was to the Presbyterians, and so
of the other Sects and Schisms, which makes some people apply that of the
Psalmist to this Confederation, Psalm. 83. against the Church of England.

For my own particular, I know but one Remedy for these growing Evils, and that
is, to permit the Sovereignty to lodge where God Almighty has placed it, and to
submit to it for Conscience sake. I think the Authors of the Political
Catechism allow his Majesty's Power to be of God; He is the Minister of God for
our good. Now who is to be judge of the goodness and fitness of laws,
Religious, Moral, or Political? either the Prince or the people: If the people,
then is not the King Supreme, contrary to St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2. cap. 13. If the
King be the Umpire in the case, every private Conscience is bound to submit to
the public Conscience, which is the Law of the Nation; which the King, with
the advice, and by the consent of the wisdom of the Nation, has judged, and
therefore established for the public good. So that the Contest of Dissenters
appears to be for Empire and Sovereignty, and who shall be the Supreme Judge of
the Goodness and Expediency of Laws; Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon.
and they do very ill to quarrel at Clergie-mens Coaches and Liveries, who
themselves are grasping at Crowns and Scepters. And if any or many private men
shall not judge these Laws so good as those they would have imposed, they ought
to submit, and study to be quiet, and not make the greater Duty of Mercy and
Peace of the Church submit to the Sacrifice of what, may be, is but Opinion,
and still sub Judice.

I have a Theme before me too copious for an Epistle, and shall therefore, that
I may not transgress the bounds of one, dismiss the other. I only offer these
following discoveries of the Danger to which Protestant Religion and these
Nations are exposed by obstinate Separation, to your cool and retired thoughts,
and hope you are too good men and Christians to esteem me

Your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth. Philirenes.

ERRATA.
PAge 34. line 24. for her, read his. p. 39. l. 1. for Cecil, read Civil. p.
69. l. 6. for Coronensis read Connorensis. p. 80. l. 14. for their read you. p.
129. l. 26. for Lord, read Letter.

FOXES AND FIREBRARNDS, etc.
THat the Papists have ever since the Reformation of Religion in Europe, The
restless design of Papists to regain England to Rome.
been most invincibly industrious in these Kingdoms, to bring the Church of
England to ruin, and a total subversion, there cannot remain the least doubt
or scruple. For, besides apparent matter of undeniable Fact, during the Reigns
of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First, and our present
Gracious Sovereign (whom God long preserve) there are these Reasons which have,
and do animate them in the repeated prosecution of that desperate Enterprise.

First, A vain Enthusiastic Opinion, The Reasons moving them vigorously to
prosecute their wicked Design.
which in this last Century they have generally embraced, That there shall be a
Fifth Monarchy of their Church: For the erecting of which, they embroil their
Brains, 1. An Enthusiastic Belief of the Fifth Monarchy of the Church of Rome.
and the whole Christian World, wrest the Prophecies of the Scripture, and the
pretended Writings of the Sybils, to countenance this beloved Chymaera: Now
they look upon the English Nation become Heretic, and revolted from the Faith,
as too potent and considerable in this part of the World, to permit them to
hope for any success, till that Church and State be either so broken, as to be
disabled to oppose them, or be reduced to the Roman Faith and Obedience.

Secondly, 2. The Church of England the only Bulwork of the Protestant
Religion. and their most potent Enemy.
They look upon the Church of England therefore, as the only Bastion, or
Bulwork of the Protestant Religion and Interest, from whence there have sprung
so many, and such a constant succession of able Champions for Truth, and so
long as that Church continues, are like to do, as will eternally baffle all the
Arguments and Reasons they have hitherto, or can produce to support their
tottering Cause; and in all probability will in time so expose them, as to
convince the World of the Apostasy of Rome from the ancient Primitive
Christianity; and induce them to knock off the shackles of blind Obedience,
which their Ignorance and the Romish Artifice have fastened upon the hands of
all Princes and People under the Papal Jurisdiction, and, whatever some people
may imagine, This is apparent, because they raise them themselves.
there is nothing formidable to Rome in these little Sects of Separatists, who
being by their own Eternally sub-dividing Principles, like the Sheaf of Arrows
in the Apologue unbound, will be broken without any great difficulty: but the
Church of England being a Body compact, firm, and well put together, and
wearing so much of the Primitive Purity and Antiquity, both in Doctrine and
Discipline, is the Gordian knot, which, till by the Sword of Pope Alexander
they can untie, they can never hope to conquer the World by that of Peter, and
therefore that Church is the constant mark of their Hate and Envy, and to
undermine her Foundations, they set themselves and all their Engines to work
with all possible Diligence and Application.

I remember to have heard a pretty odd Relation, An Instance of a Pope's
Charity to the English Heretics.
which came from a Person of Quality of this Nation, who was at Rome in the
time of our late Troubles: This Noble Person having demanded liberty to have an
Audience of his Holiness, obtained it, and was treated with great Civility and
Respect; After the Formalities of the Visit were over, the Pope enquired what
News from England? to which the Gentleman replied with great testimonies of
Compassion, and gave him a short recital of the Tragical Adventures of the
Civil War; at which the Pope fell into such an indecent laughter, that the
English Gentleman smartly repartee'd, Sir, Certainly this is a Scene for Pity,
not for Laughter: Well, young man, said the old Pope, having gravely composed
himself, you say true, and I take your reproof in good part, but, added he, I
cannot forbear this testimony of Joy, when I consider that God is about to
convince you of your Errors by these severe Methods; and by their own hands to
destroy one of the best dressed Heresies that ever appeared in the World since
that of the Arians.

Thirdly, 3. Secular Interest, Ambition, and Honor.
the Romish Clergy look upon themselves to be extremely injured in point of
Interest, and that they are unjustly and violently dispossessed of all the
Dignities and Revenues of the Bishoprics, Cathedrals, Abbeys, Monasteries, and
other religious Houses, and these Promotions, Dignities and Revenues are from
time to time conferred by the Pope upon titular Bishops, Deans, etc. who de
jure pretend a Right to them, and hope de facto to possess them so soon as they
can by any Arts or Ways reduce these Nations to the Obedience of the Sea of
Rome. Nay, the Pope himself has the Vanity or Impudence to be tickled with the
sweet imagination of Sovereignty, and to pretend from the Resignation of King
John to Pandulphus his Legate, a Title to the Imperial Crown of these Realms.

Now ambitious men animated by these Hopes, and professing as matter of Faith,
that they are free from all the Obligations of Duty and Allegiance to Heretical
Princes and Usurpers, as they term ours; and, at least in pretense, being
inflamed with an ardent Zeal for the conversion or confusion of us poor
Heretics; and having always the dazzling beams and luster of Interest and
secular Advantage in their eyes, together with the hopes of Heaven, as the
merits of such Industry to blear the eyes of others, I say, such men and such
principles must of necessity lay them under the constant and restless
temptations, of attempting all things to regain their earthly, and gain a
heavenly glory into the bargain: Nor can it be supposed that they will stick at
the violation of any Laws, Divine or Humane, by Treasons, Perjuries, Wars, or
Bloodshed, which they think so far from sinful, that they esteem them
meritorious and acceptable Services to God, being done in order to the
Salvation of Sinners, and the Exaltation of their Church.

Now the ways and methods by which they propose to effect these, The methods
Papists use to convert Heretics.
as they think and style them, glorious Undertakings, are these:

First, 1. To divide Protestants amongst. themselves.
Since they are hopeless to convince or persuade by force of Arguments, they
endeavor to divide Protestants among themselves; and this they have done ever
since the Reformation, by raising Sects and Separations from our Church in
matters of Doctrine and Practice; and again subdividing these into lesser
Parties and Fractions, under pretense of greater advances to Purity, and a
thorough Reformation, and as this Principle may proceed to, no doubt they will
pursue it in infinitum.

Thus I have been credibly informed, that a St. Omers Jesuit declared that they
were twenty years hammering out the Sect of the Quakers; and whoever considers
the Positions of those People, will easily be induced to believe them forged
upon a Popish Anvil. They refuse all Oaths, a neat covert for Priests and
Jesuits to evade the Tests of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and avoid
the punishment which follows their discovery; the despise the Scriptures, so do
Papists; they contemn our Sacraments, especially the Eucharist, so do Papists;
they do above all things vilify the Ministers, so do Papists; and in many
other Doctrines they bear a great Analogy and Conformity one with the other.
The opinion of a Fifth Monarchy looks extremely like another Spawn of the
Jesuits, and had that prevailed, as it once was in a fair way to do, that would
have done their business; and indeed was the last Sect I think started among
us, as if designed for their purpose; for it would have been an easy
translation of that Monarchy to the Papal Throne, till Christ should come in
person to have exercised it himself: and I find a remarkable hint of this in
Dr. Oats's Narrative and Depositions, Parag. 34. where the Jesuits, and one
Green, with eight other Fifth Monarchy men, club together for the firing of the
City of London.

And indeed herein the Papists have been most industrious, and it is but just
to fear they are so still, to animate those Separations they have created, with
Principles of Hatred and Animosity against the Church of England, as will admit
of no reconciliation, nor any lower terms of Satisfaction than her utter Ruin
and entire Subversion; and they move every stone, that not one stone must be
left upon another in that glorious building: for this purpose they have
endeavored to persuade the people into an hatred of the Governors of the
Church, by telling them of their near approaches to Popery: against which, and
the Pope himself, to cover the Artifice, it is no matter how bitterly they
inveigh, so long as by this Stratagem they divide men from the Church. Thus
have they drawn off the people from the love of the stated and authorized
public Prayers and Service of the Church, by introducing, practicing and
commending that Novel-way of Praying Extempore, to which Gavan the Jesuit was
so inured, that he could not at his Execution forbear running into an
Enthusiastic Fit of it. This has been a Key which has opened the doors of many
lips to blaspheme God and Religion, to utter vain, idle, impertinent,
seditious, heretical, and impious Harangues, the very froth of Fancy, and the
scum of Effrontery, which yet they have dedicated to God Almighty, and though
it was really a Sacrifice of Fools, have fathered it upon the Spirit of Wisdom:
and of this the Papists have made no small advantage to proselyte people from
ours to the Romish Communion; and yet they first recommended this Engine to the
people, they have opposed it too, and exalted it above the Common Prayers, as
more Spiritual and prevailing, branding those with all the titles of Infamy,
and which has succeeded to their wish, and is now generally taken up as a great
truth by all Dissenters, that the Liturgy is nothing but the Mass Book in
English, and the very dregs of Popery, Idolatry and Superstition.

Secondly, 2dly, Having divided us, to destroy us by those Divisions.
Having thus successfully divided us, and inflamed Dissenters with a Zeal so
hot against the Church of England, as is fit upon all occasions both to take
and give fire, they endeavor to blow up those Sparks into a Flame: they
persuade Dissenters Episcopacy is guilty of most intolerable Ambition, Pride,
Avatice and Tyranny, they press them to maintain their liberty of Conscience
against the Antichristian Yoke of Ceremonies, and to pull down Babylon: and
take hold of all occasions to run them into open Hostilities and Rebellion
against the Civil, as well as the Ecclesiastical Power and Government; and all
this in hopes to destroy us with our own Weapons, that then they may erect
their Church Triumphant upon the Ruins of ours, which they have rendered truly
Militant.

-- En! quo discordia, Cives
Perduxit miseros.
The sincere and tender love I have for my Dear and Native Country, the
compassion I have for the wounds of a Bleeding Church and Nation, and the great
Honor and Esteem I have for the Protestant Religion, as professed and
practiced in the Church of England, which I have not embraced out of the
complyances of Education, but the Force and Conviction of Reason grounded upon
deliberate Debates, and a near Examination, oblige me to contribute all I can
to rectify the misunderstandings which have occasioned our unhappy breaches
and divisions; nor could I think of any expedient more conducive to the
attaining my design, than the exposing to the open view of the World the
Artifices of these our inveterate enemies, wherewith they have given us so many
both secret and open wounds, as have once already proved almost mortal and
incurable, for the poison of Asps is under their lips, and they shoot sharp and
envenomed Arrows, which wound at a distance, and kill by degrees: and if we
give them opportunity to redouble their blows, they will in all humane
apprehension lay us weltring in our own and one another blood, without the
assistance of any other Massacre than what we execute upon our selves.

And now in regard that Generals are rarely so forcible or convictive, though
never so true, as particular matters of Fact; These Practices proved by
particular Instances, and matter of unquestionable Fact.
in hopes of doing a charitable office to those who have been hurried down this
Popish Flood of Calumnies with which the Romish Dragon has persecuted our
Church, and driven her into the wilderness, I will prove the truth of my Charge
by such undeniable matter of Fact, as shall leave no excuse for non-conviction
to any persons to whose hands these Papers shall come; except such who have
resolved not to acknowledge any conviction; and who, by a resolute persisting
in a seeming Infidelity, properly called a wilful Obstinacy, justly render
themselves suspected, if not evidently guilty of a confederacy, and downright
combination with the Papists to introduce Popery and Tyranny upon the ruins
both of Church and State.

I will begin then with a remarkable Narrative of a Dominican Friar, A notable
relation of a Dominican Friar, who pretended himself a Puritan in Qu.
Elizabeth's time.
being an Extract out of the Memorials of the Lord Cecil, an Eminent Statesman
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, from whose Papers it was transmitred to the
Reverend Bishop Usher, some time Lord Primate of Ireland; whose Name, so
Venerable even to many Dissenters, may possibly influence them to sober
considerations of the danger to which they expose the Protestant Religion by
their separation, whilst thereby they give opportunity to these Ravening Wolves
in Sheeps Clothing to enter in among them, and scatter those Souls from Christ's
Fold, who otherwise would be one Flock under that one great Bishop and Shepherd
of Souls. The Papers of the Lord Primate coming to the hands of Sir James Ware
Knight, late one of his Majesty's Privy Council in Ireland, Observe how early
the Papists began to act Nonconformists, who then were called Puritans, from
their pretending to a purer reformation, as presently you will find this Friar
do.
his Son Robert Ware Esquire has obliged the Public by the communication of them.

In the year 1567, being the ninth year of the Reign of Queen Eliz. one
Faithful Commin, a Friar of the Order of St. Dominick, a person generally
reputed a zealous Protestant, and much admired and followed by the people for
his seeming Piety, but more particularly for inveighing in his Pulpit most
bitterly against Pius Quintus then Pope, was accused by John Clerkson Chaplain
to the A. B. of Cant. Nicholas Draper, and Mary Dean, who being sworn upon the
Holy Evangelists before her Majesty and the Lords of the Council, deposed, that
the said Faithful Commin was no true Protestant, but a false Impostor, a Sower
of Sedition among her Majesty's Loyal Subjects; upon which, the fifth of April
being Monday, the said Faithful Commin was brought before the Queens Majesty,
and the Honorable Lords of the Privy Council, and there examined by his Grace
Matthew Parker, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, as follows;

L. Archbishop. Faithful Commin, of what Profession art thou?


Fa. Com. Of Christ's Order.


L. Archbishop. What Order is that?


Fa. Com. The very same Answer which all unordain'd Speakers, who are Preachers
at large, and run before they are sent. made at this day.
A Preacher of the Holy Gospel.


L. Archbishop. What Gospel is that you call the Holy Gospel?


Fa. Com. The Gospel of Jesus Christ.


L. A. B. Under what Power do you own to hold that Gospel?


Fa. Com. Under Christ and his Saints.


L. A. B. Do you acknowledge any other Power save Christ to be on Earth?


Fa. Com. Yes, I do.


L. A. B. What Power is that?


Fa. Comm. The Holy Catholic Church.


L. A. B. Do you not acknowledge a Defender of the Holy Catholic Faith?


Fa. Comm. Papists and Dissenters both disown Supremacy, or equivocate and
dissemble about it.
God is the only Desender.


Hereupon the Archbishop addressing himself to Her Majesty, said, Your Gracious
Majesty may perceive that either this man has been instructed what to say, or
otherwise he must be by his Answers a man of Craft; to which the Queen replied,
I suppose so, my Lord.

Then Commin was ordered to withdraw, and her Majesty and the Council were some
time debating how to proceed in this Affair: After which, John Clerkson, the
Archbishops Chaplain was called in before the Board; the Queen demanded his
Name, which he told her: then she further enquired, whether he was acquainted
with Faithful Commin? to which he answered, he was; the Queen asked him how
long he had known him? to which he replied, about a year or more.

Queen. What have you to say against Faithful Commin, that he is suspected to
be an Impostor?


J. Clerkson. Three things.


Queen. What be they?


J. C. First, Let him prove his Ordination since he fell from the Church of
Rome, Secondly, Why he never comes to the Prayers of the now established
Church of England, but starteth up, and Preaches to the people, The exact mode
of most Dissenters, who will come to our Churches.
not coming into the Church till the Prayers be finished. Thirdly, Let him
prove that ever he received the Sacrament according to the Church of England,
from any of our Orthodox Clergymen.


Her Majesty and the Council having considered of these three Points, sent for
the said Faithful Commin to come in again, who appearing, the Archbishop
demanded of him,

A. B. Were you ever ordained?


Fa. Com. Yes, I was ordained.


A. B. By whom?


Fa. Com. By the Cardinal: (meaning Poul.)


A. B. Had you no other Certificate under any of the Bishops hands since the
Reformation?


Fa. Com. Not any.


A. B. Wherefore would you dare to Preach, having not got a Observe the reason
and necessity of all Preachers having License to Preach, and of settled
Parochial Congregations: as also the great care the Church of England takes to
keep Papists from creeping in disguised among us; and the opportunity
Separation gives them to come among Dissenting Congregations.
License of Permission under some of our Bishops hands? How shall we be assured
that you are not of the Romish Church?


Fa. Com. There are several have heard my Prayers and Sermons, and can testify
they that rail most bitterly against Rome and the Pope, may be Papists
notwithstanding.
that I have spoken against Rome and her Pope, as much as any of the Clergy
have since they have fallen from her; I wonder therefore why I should be
suspected?


A. B. By your answer, Mr. Commin, I perceive you would have any one Preach, so
that he speak but against the Pope in his Sermons.


F. C. Not every one, but he whose Function it is, and he who has the Look
here, a Friar in Masquerade of a Dissenting Protestant, one of the first
Pretenders to this extraordinary gift of the Spirit.
Spirit.


A. B. What Spirit is this you mean?


F. C. The Spirit of Grace and Truth.


A. B. A Question worthy of the most deliberate Consideration of all Pretenders
to the Spirit, and all those who follow them; for if they cannot by the fruits
of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 6. prove it the Spirit of Truth, or if it
produces the fruits of the Flesh there mentioned, Hatred, Variance, Emulations,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, it must be the Spirit of Error. Let
Separatists look well to it, for it concerns their Souls and Bodies, and those
of many thousands, who if they be not in that way of Truth, are in the broad
way that leads to destruction.
But is this Spirit that is in you, either the Spirit of Grace or Truth that
does not comply with the Orders of the Church, lately purged and cleansed from
Schism and Idolatry?


F. C. Therefore I endeavor to make it The pretense of all Dissenters for
their Separation.
purer, as far as God permits.


A. B. How do you endeavor to make the Church purer, when you neither
communicate with her in Sacrament or in Prayer?


F. C. Yes, I endeavor it, when I pray to God that he would open the eyes of
men to see their Errors, and several have joined with me when I have prayed
among them; and I have both given and taken the body of Christ, to those of The
very exact Language of Dissenters, and the Original of tender Consciences, a
Popish pretense.
tender Consciences, who have assembled with me in the fear of the Lord.


A. B. By your words then you have a Congregation that follows you.


F. C. I have.


A. B. Of what Parish, and in what Diocese?


F. C. The first Independent Congregation in England gathered by a Popish
Dominican Friar.
Neither of any certain Parish, nor in any certain Diocese.


A. B. Where then, I pray?


F. C. Even in the wide World, among the Flock of Christ scattered over the
whole Earth.


Queen. Your Diocese is very large, Mr. Commin.

Then being commanded to withdraw, the other two Witnesses were called into the
Council Chamber, and examined as follows.


Queen. Mr. Draper, What have you to say to this Faithful Commin?


Draper. He came to my House at the Maidenhead in Maidstone, with several of
his followers, where he bespoke a joint of Mutton and two Hens for Dinner,
hearing that my Profession was a Cook; I showing him a Room for him and the
Company that came with him, perceiving several to come and enquire for this Mr.
Commin: but by chance going up the Stairs, I heard one These passionate and
taking ways are no demonstrations of a true Protestant, though joined with
Extempore Prayer.
groan and weep, which caused me to lift up the Latch; at first I was startled,
and stood in a maze, but enquiring of one of his Followers, what ailed the man?
He replied, Do you not see we be all at Prayrs? The Maid wondering where I was,
came to seek me, and found me among them, and can testify the same.


The Queen. Are you Mr. Drapers Maid?


Maid. Yes, may it please your Grace.


Queen. What is your Name;


Maid. My Name is Mary Dean.


Queen. Did you see this Faithful Commin that was here now before Us, praying
to the people?


Maid. I saw him, and thought he was distracted when I heard him pray: but the
people said See here the Extempore Prayer of a Popish Dominican Friar fathered
upon the Spirit of God, and the people deluded by this pretense to the Spirit.
he was an heavenly man, and that it was Gods Spirit made him weep for the sins
of the World.


Queen. How long continued they at Prayers, do you know, Mr. Draper?


Draper. May it please your Grace, Exactly like our pretenders to the Spirit in
the late times, who made long Prayers, and devoured Widows houses.
about two hours.


Queen. What did they after they had prayed?


Draper. Some went from the house, and about ten, or thereabouts, stayed to eat
what they had bespoken, and paid me to the utmost penny.

Then the Queen commanded to call in Faithful Commin, to whom she thus spoke.
Mr. Commin, If you will receive Orders, and become of the Church of England,
you may; otherwise you must not be permitted to Pray and Preach among my
Subjects: and though you have, as appears by several other Witnesses, preached
against the Pope, yet you have Observe, the Queen thought unordained and
unlicensed Preaching an Usurpation. Let Dissenters answer this, and clear
themselves, for he that usurpeth over the Magistrate, resists the Ordinance
of God, and they that refist shall receive Damnation.
usurped over the Power both of Church and State, in doing contrary to the
Order that We, our Council and Parliament have unanimously agreed on, by and
with the consent of the whole Clergy of my Realm.


Fa. Com. Give me time to consider and I shall give your Grace a further Answer
in a short space.


Queen. Is there any will be bound for your appearance? otherwise you must be
kept a Was this Tyranny in Queen Elizabeth, or a wise and just Defense of the
Protestant Religion?
close Prisoner; for we have other Examinations to take, and Questions to
demand.


F. C. I have three who will answer for my appearance.


Then one: Richard Bland, Brother to the said Commin by the Mothersside, and
two others, gave Bond for his appearance upon the 12th. day of April. Upon
which day, Commin with his Bail came and appeared before her Majesty and the
Council: but the Spanish Ambassador being that day to have his Public Audience
of the Queen, the further Examination of the said Commin was put off till the
next day.

But Commin coming from the Council to his Followers, told them that Her
Majesty and the Council had acquitted him; and that he was warned of God to go
beyond the Seas to instruct the Protestants there, and that e're long he would
return to his Flock with better success. Of which he was a good confirmation,
being a Papist; and one would think this were enough to banish this Popish
Idol, Extempore Prayer, out of England.
He told them that Spiritual Prayer was the chief testimony of a true
Protestant, and A Papist Author of that common slander against the Common
Prayer.
that the set form of Prayer in England was but the Mass translated. So after
he had with a multitude of tears, like a Crocadile, first prayed an Extempore
Prayer, the better to prey upon these poor deluded people, he took his leave of
them, telling them he had not one farthing to support him in his journey, yet
being Gods Cause, he would undertake it out of Charity, An holy Cheat.
and he was assured that the Lord would raise him up friends where ever he
traveled. This Speech set most of the people a weeping, especially the Women,
who requested their Husbands to contribute toward his necessities: and it was
made appear, after his escape out of England, that they collected for him 30 l.
It is by some supposed that this Practice is continued to this day.
besides what the compassionate Sex bestowed upon him, unknown to their
Husbands.

The next day, April 13. Her Majesty and the Council being assembled, and
several others attending to hear this Examination, but no Faithful Commin
appearing, Bland, and the other two who were his Bail, were sent for: they
coming before the Board, and being demanded where Commin was, and the reason
why he did not appear; made answer, that they had performed as much as they
undertook, which was, that he should appear the day before; A cunning Evasion
to save both the Friar and their money.
that if they had received any further directions from Her Majesty and the
Honorable Board, to have brought him as that present day, they would have
obeyed the Commands: but in regard the party accused was only spoken to to
appear, they supposed themselves discharged by his first appearance, and not
bound for his second; with which nicety they drew their necks out of the
Collar, and Commin got an opportunity to make his escape.

Her Majesty, sensible of this Affront, which was the greater in regard it was
to be a Public Hearing, caused diligent search to be immediately made all over
London and Kent; but all in vain, for he went away that very Evening, and was
not heard of till some months after. However, by this search they found out
most of his Followers, who were examined before Her Majesty's Council, and
said, in their Let their Opinions of men be what they will, it is impossible
for Dissenters who hear unlicensed Preachers, to distinguish a true Protestant
from a disguised Papist.
Opinions, they had never seen so zealous and heavenly a man as he seemed to
be; from their Examinations the Council also came to discover the particular
sums of Money, of which this Religious Jugler has cheated these deluded people.

There was no farther account of Commin till on the fourteenth of September one
John Baker, Master of a Ship called the Swan of London, arriving at Portsmouth,
said he had seen the said Faithful Commin in the Low Countries: Her Majesty
being informed thereof, sent for Baker to the Council Board, who there gave
them this relation.

That he had seen the said Faithful Commin in the Low Countries, and, that
coming to unlade some Goods at Amsterdam, one Martin van Daval a Merchant of
that City, hearing him talk of the said Commin, told him that this Faithful
Commin had been lately at Rome, and that the Pope Pius Quintus had put him in
Prison, but that Commin writing to the Pope that he had something of importance
to communicate to him; the Pope sent for him the next day, and as soon as he
saw him, said, Sir, I have heard how you have set forth me and my Predecessors
among your Heretics of England, by reviling my person, and railing at my
Church: to whom Commin replied, I confess my lips have uttered that which my
heart never thought, but your Holiness little thinks I have done you a most
considerable Service, notwithstanding I have spoken so much against you; to
which the Pope returned, How, in the Name of Jesus, Mary, and of all his
Saints, have thou done so? Sir, said Commin, I Preached against set Forms of
Prayer, and I called the English Prayers English Mass; and have persuaded
several to pray spiritually and Extempore; and this has so much taken with the
people, that the Church of England is become as odious to that sort of people,
whom I instructed, as Mass is to the Church of England; It is to be hoped he
will be a lying Prophet, who was a false one, and that this Relation will
contribute to the removing that stumbling Block.
and this will be a stumbling Block to that Church while it is a Church; upon
which the Pope commended him, and gave him a Reward of 2000 Ducats for his good
Service.

Her Majesty and the Council thanking Mr. Baker for his information, ordered
him to withdraw; and upon this the Queen writ over to her Agents beyond Sea, if
possible to have Commin taken and sent over into England; but the thing taking
Air, and it being the common Discourse how the Pope had rewarded this Imposter,
some of his Friends gave him advertisement of his danger, which made him quit
the Low Coontreys, and seek a safe retreat in the Romish Territories.

However, this produced that This gave occasion to the Act for 12 d. per Sunday
for missing Divine Service.
Act for preventing Popery and other Sects, which enjoined all people from ten
years old and upwards, not having a lawful Impediment, to repair every Sunday
to hear Divine Service, under the penalty of forfeiting twelve pence for every
such default.

What is observable in this Narrative, is the original of Separate
Congregations, of Extempore Prayer, the vilifying the public Church Service,
stiling it English Mass, the pretenses to the Spirit, the denying the King's
Supremacy, despising lawful Ordination, and Licenses to Preach in stated
Parochial Congregations, the juggling people out of their Money and their
Loyalty, are all Arrows that originally came out of the Romish Quiver: and that
there can be no doubt, but ever since this man's success, the Pope and College
de propaganda fide, the Jesuits and Priests have been industrious to improve
this Advantage, and to stock us with disguised Emissaries, who increase our
Differences, and exasperate all the Separations against the Church of England,
in hopes by our Divisions to destroy both.

But that in the mouth of two Witnesses Truth may be justified, I will present
the Reader with an exact Counter part of the same Romish Indenture, whereby
they have all bound themselves to work the ruin of the Church of England by
this method of raising, somenting, supporting, and exasperating Divisions and
Separations among us.

The following Narrative is a true Copy taken out of the Registry of the
Episcopal See of Rochester, in that Book which begins Anno 2 and 3 Phil. and
Mar. and continued to 15 Eliz.
IN the year 1568, A strange Discovery of a Jesuit counterfeiting a Protestant,
to sow Division, and raise Sects.
being the 11th. of Queen Elizabeth, one Thomas Heth, Brother of Nicholas Heth,
Bishop of Rochester, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, came to the Dean of
Rochester, and pretending to be a poor Minister, made Application to him, to
present him to the Bishop, in order to some Preserment. The Dean thought it fit
to hear the said Thomas Heth Preach in the Cathedral Church before he would
interest himself in his behalf to the Bishop. Accordingly he appointed him to
Preach upon the 21th. of November, where he took his Text, Acts 12. ver. 6.
Peter therefore was kept in Prison, but Prayers were made without ceasing of
the Church to God for him. But so it happened, that while he was Preaching,
casually by pulling out his Handkerchief, a Letter dropped into the bottom of the
Pulpit, directed to him by the name of Thomas Finne, from one Samuel Malt a
notorious English Jesuit, then at Madrid in Spain.

This Letter being found in the Pulpit by Richard Fisher, Sexton of the
Cathedral, he carried it immediately to the Dean, who upon perusal, went
presently with it to the Reverend Father in God, Edmond Gest, then Bishop of
that See, who upon the reading of it, instantly caused the said Heth to be
apprehended, and the next day being Monday, November. 22. brought him to
Examination.

Bishop. Mr. Heth, how long have you Preached in England?


Heth. About six years and more.


Bishop. Were you of any certain Order formerly, before this late Reformation
of the Church of England?


Heth. Yes, I was.


Bish. What was that?


Heth. It was the Order of Jesus.


Bish. Are you not still of that Order, and have you not now and then some
correspondence with that Order?


Heth. The Ministry will venture to instruct one another; but your Lordship
sees how I have retired my self from those whom you call Jesuits.


Bish. We suppose, Mr. Heth, you have not totally forsaken their Tenants,
though you have their Persons.


Heth. Wherein may I be suspected not to forsake their Tenants as well as their
Company?


Bish. There is great suspicion that you are not of the Church of England, by
the words which you spoke yesterday in your Sermon.


Heth. What words were those, my Lord?


Bish. You said, that it was not those Prayers of the Church of England as are
now established, that brought Peter out of Prison, but Observe the Design of
the Papists from the beginning of the Reformation to bring the Prayers and
Church into contempt, not being spiritual Prayers, and how well the Dissenters
have copied this Original.
spiritual Prayers.


Heth. And were they not spiritual Prayers that availed him? And where have we
The Language exactly of Separatists.
Scripture for any set Form in the Church?


Bish. A good answer to both Papists and Dissenters. Quare whether the
Directory were warranted by express Scripture.
If there be no Scripture for any set Form in the Church of England, much less
for any set Forms among your Fraternities; for what we have established is out
of the written word of God. Diversity and Variety of public Prayers taken from
a Popish Pattern, no where warranted in Scripture.
But as for your Popish Orders, viz. Augustines, Dominicans, Franciscans,
Jesuits, etc. you all differ in the Prayers of the Mass one from another; where
then is your Scripture for so many Varieties of Prayers and Masses.


Heth. They have Antiqiuty on their side, and for the alteration of Prayers,
every Fraternity and Convent has power among themselves, as is most fit, for
that Congregation assembled.


Bish. Now seeing you have begun to talk of Antiquity, pray, Mr. Heth tell me,
The Jesult entrapped by his own Plea.
Were all the Orders of the Church of Rome ordained at once? No surely, for
some Orders are ancienter than others, by reason they have been allowed by
several Popes: But as for yours, that Order was but of late days established,
therefore you have little or no Antiquity to plead.


Heth. My Lord, You see I am fallen from that Society, which I perceive by your
passages in examining me so strictly, you suspect me to be one of them still: I
confess, Observe, that the Jesuits are enemies to Episcopacy, and for a purer,
or in the language of Dissenters, a thorough Reformation.
I am not so totally of the Episcopal Party of England, A Jesuit pretends to
refine, but intends to destory, and it is evident, that whoever do so, do their
work.
because I have labored to refine the Protestants, and to take off all smacks
of Ceremonies that in the least do tend to the Romish Faith.


Bish. Has our Gracious Queen, by her Learned Council, and Assembly of
Divines, who several times sat for the Reformation of Religion, now declared
and confirmed by Her Highnesses High Court of Parliament established the Forms
and Manners thereof, An unanswerable Question to all Dissenters who are no more
but private persons.
what has any particular man to meddle any further?


Heth. From the good will of such Pretenders, whether Papists or Dissenters,
Good Lord deliver us. For we know by woeful Experience, the fire of Reformation
pretends to refine, but being over-hot, does consume.
It was but my good will in endeavoring to make it purer.


Bish. You are a pure Steer, I must needs say, in pretending that you are
reformed: yet let me ask you one Question, Mr. Heth, Had not you of late any
Letters from any of your Society?


Heth. I might have had Letters, must I therefore be of their Order still,
because they write to dissuade a man from his Principles? No sure, my Lord.


Bish. Your Society write, Mr. Heth, not to dissuade you, but that you may
dissuade others; However, tell me, Did you ever know or hear of a man called
Samuel Malt?


Heth. I have heard of such a man.


Bish. Yes, and you know him full well.


Heth. It may be so, my Lord.


Bish. Mr. Dean, Show Mr. Heth the Letter, and let him tell whether he knows
the handwriting; and call in Richard Fisher to come into the Court.


Richard Fisher. Here, my Lord.


Bish. How came you by this Letter?


R. F. I found it yesterday after Even-song, in the Pulpit.


Bish. You know it if you see it, is this the same?


R. F. The very same.


The Letter was, as follows.

Brother,
THe Council of our Fraternity have thought fit to send you David George,
Theodorus Sartor, and John Huts, their Collections, which you may distribute
wherever you may see it may be for your purpose, according to the peoples
inclinations. These mixtures with your own, will not only a little puzzle the
Understandings of the Auditors, but make your self famous: We suppose your
wants are not considerable at present, by what we have heard, how your Flock do
admire you every day more and more. Be not overzealous in your proceedings in
the beginning; but gradually win on them as you visit them, and according as
you find their inclinations bend to your Design, let us hear how you have
proceeded, for it will satisfy your Brethren much, and enable them the better
to instruct you for the future. Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson have set The
Original of the Sects in Germany among the Protestants, from the Jesuits.
a Faction among the German Heretics, so that several who have turned from us,
have now denied their Baptism, which we hope will soon turn the scale, and
bring them back to their old Principles. This we have certified to the Council
and Cardinals, The Reader is desired seriously to observe, that the Jesuits,
Pope and Cardinals have laid this down as a Maxim, that Divisions and
Separations are the most effectual way to introduce Popery, and ruin the
Protestant Religion.
That there is no other way to prevent people from turning Heretics, and for
the recalling of others back again to the Mother Church, than by the
Diversities of Doctrines. We all wish you to prosper.

Madrid October. 26. 1568. Sam. Malt.


Bish. Look here, Mr. Heth, here is a Letter, and it is to be supposed to drop
from you when you Preached yesterday, for none stood in the Pulpit but your
self.


Heth. Let me see the Letter once more, Mr. Dean; See, my Lord, this Letter is
directed to another man, named Thomas Finne, but my name is Thomas Heth.


B. You are not the first man that has altered your Name: How long have you
been in Town?


H. About three weeks,


B. To what intent came you hither?


H. Upon two accounts, my Lord; first, to visit my friends, for my Brother
Nicholas was Bishop of this See formerly; Secondly, to be preferred; for the
Dean promised to recommend me to your Lordship.


B. Mr. Dean, Did you promise to prefer Mr. Heth?


Dean. I did, my Lord, and upon that account I permitted him to Preach before
you; but this Paper has altered my intentions.


After this Examination, it was resolved to send to Mr. Heth's Lodgings at the
Queens Arms in Rochester, where, upon search in one of his Boots were found his
Beads, and several Papers, among which was a License from the Fraternity of the
Jesuits, and a Bull dated the first of Pius Quintus, to Preach what Doctrine
that Society pleased for the dividing of Protestants, particularly naming the
English Protestants by the name of Heretics. In his Trunk were several Books
for denying The Papists Authors of the Sect of Anabaptists.
Baptism to Infants; with several other horrid Blasphemies: which being brought
before the whole Assembly then present, the Bishop adjourned the Court,
appointing another day for further Examination, till they had acquainted her
Majesty and her Honorable Council with these passages, and sent for further
Instructions how to proceed in this Affair. In the mean time Heth was committed
a close Prisoner, and manacled, till Order came from the Board.

On the 25th. of November, being Thursday, the Bishop called a Court, and sent
for Heth, who coming before him, a great number being assembled to hear the
Matter, the Bishop spoke as follows.

Mr. Thomas Heth, It is visible how you have not only deluded several poor
Souls, but also abused her Majesty, and the Ministry of this Kingdom, by your
Romish and Jesuitical Policy, purposely to sow Sedition in the Church of
Christ: it is well known, that though your Society have taken the Name of
Jesus, by terming themselves Jesuits, yet you have denied Christanity, which is
Christ: for several have been called by the Name of Jesus, but none by Christ,
from which all true Believers term themselves Christians: By this means you
endeavor to bring the people back to your Popish Zeal again: Those who still
continue these Separations which the Jesuits first begun, are desired in the
Name and Fear of God, to consider whether they are not guilty of the same
Abuses. A Prediction that Separatists shall, when they see how they have been
abused by the Jesuits, unite with the Church of England to extirpate Popery,
which they have endeavored to re-establish, by overthrowing the Protestant
Religion by their own Divisions.
But you will be mistaken, for that sort of people whom you endeavor through a
blind pretended Zeal to withdraw from the Church, will be at last your Bane,
and hate your Society, so that at the end, when ye shall think ye have
accomplished your evil designs, and fall upon the Church of Christ, those very
people, whom ye have after these Satanical Delusions beguiled, will not so
much, through Love, join with Christ to overthrow your Evil Intentions, as
through perfect hatred to your wicked Policies.

To several men's knowledge, as we have since enquired after thy Actions, thy
Hostess and her Husband have declared, that thou have spoken against thine own
Order; yet thou by thy outward Purity have defiled thine own Calling, under
pretense of purifying the Church of England. What can thou therefore say for
thy self, that thou may not be made a public Example to all Spectators for
thy wicked Schismatical Sedition sown within these Her Majesty's Dominions:
Will thou openly declare before God and the World thy wicked and evil
intentions, which caused thee to run into these Schisms, and reform thy course
of life which now thou live in; and not only my self, but the whole Court
here assembled will endeavor to get thy Pardon, and provide for thy future
maintenance.

H. My Lord, I know not what I might have done, had I not been so publicly
examined, Shame the true reason why some persist in their Opinions, and not
Conscience or Religion.
but seeing my Vocation is so publicly known, I shall not acknowledge my self
to be guilty of any Misdemeanor; for I have fought a good Fight for Christ,
whose Cause I have taken in hand. A true, but dear Experiment, to which the
Church of England may write a sad Probatum.
This Experiment I tried among my Countrymen, that the World may see that all
those who term themselves Protestants, are not of the Church of England, though
they speak against Rome.

The Bishop hearing him speak so obstinately, said, Behold, my Brethren, a
Jesuits Confession! how he has declared he had set up a certain Form of
Religion, purposely to withdraw you from the Church of England. These things
will be among us while we are a Church; A thing soberly to be considered by
Dissenters.
but woe be to those Deluders, or to those who will be deluded by them: We have
a good Law, and the Light of the Holy Gospel now flourishing among us, which
has for these many years past been absconded; A necessary Caution to all such
as value their Souls, Bodies, or Estates, the Peace of the Public, or the
Protestant Religion.
therefore, my Brethren, consider the condition of your Souls; Cedro digna! an
Aphorism of undoubted Truth.
If you start aside once from your Principles, having the right way so plainly
set before you, ye will not only run into Popish Slavery again, but be in peril
of a total confusion of Soul and Body; Which without the Assistance of
Separatists, is humanely speaking, impossible.
and if Rome get once her Foot upon these Dominions again, not only your selves
and your Children, but your Princes and Nobles shall become Slaves to her
Idolatry.

After this, Heth was remanded to Prison, and for three days brought to the
Marketplace at Rochester, where he stood by the High-Cross with a Paper before
his Breast, in which were written his Crimes, then he was Pillored, and on the
last day his Ears were cut off, his Nose slit, and his Forehead branded with
the Letter R. and he was condemned to endure perpetual Imprisonment: but it
lasted not long, for a few months after he died suddenly, not without the
suspicion of having poisoned himself.

From this Narrative we may observe, Observations to be deduced from this
Narrative.
that the chief Rise and Original of our unhappy Divisions and Separations is
to be fetched from the devilish Policy of the Papists counterfeiting a design
to advance the Reformation of the Protestant Religion to a greater Purity; that
the Pope, Cardinals and Jesuits have been always instrumental in raising these
Divisions and Separations, and that they judge this the most effectual way to
introduce Popery; that they hate out Bishops and Prayers, and delude innocent
and unwary people into a dislike and hatred of them; that there is no way to
discover them, but by their sowing these Seeds of Separation and Sedition; and
that therefore it is the Interest of all true Protestants to unite with the
Church of England, and thereby give that deadly blow to the Romanists, which
the Bishop here seems prophetically to foretell, and to quit these Separations,
which otherwise will hazard the ruin of the Protestant Religion, by the
Introduction of Popery.

Thus have the Romanists dealt with us, and persuaded many to break down the
Walls of our Church, to make room for the Wooden Horse of Reformation, whose
Belly is charged with more Sects, Opinions and Divisions than that which
conquered Troy was with crafty Greeks.

All the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James they were busy in preparing
the materials, and undermining the Foundations of the Church of England; but in
the Reign of King Charles the First, thinking themselves strong enough, by the
assistance of the Factious, they had raised to effect their designs, they gave
Fire to the Train, and with the pretended fears of Popery and Tyranny they
first set Scotland, next Ireland, and then England, into the flames of a most
horrid, cruel, and unnatural War, which they managed by the strength and power
of Dissenters from the Church of England.

To confirm the Truth of this, I will give the Reader an account, which I find
in Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections, Rush. Hist. Col. page 970, 971.
a Book much valued among Dissenters, who tells us of a Proposition made to the
King of Spain, and discovered about the time that the Spanish Armada came upon
the Coast of England in the year 1639. where among other passages, discoursing
of an Enterprise upon Scotland, which was then in an high Ferment of the
Covenanters against the King, Bishops, and Common Prayer; the Proposer thus
argues, that there could be no Fleet set out so strong as to attempt them by
Sea, except all the Kingdom contribute to it, which, says he, Cannot be done
except all the States join; of which, we of the Confederacy shall be the
greater Part, and so the Enemy shall forthwith be forced either to give Liberty
of Conscience to the Catholics, or put themselves in danger of losing all.

Observe first, The Scots had no enemies but the King, or, as they pretended,
his evil Counselors, particularly Canterbury and Stafford, who all run the
same Fate which the Papists in Habnerfield's discovery of their Plot had
contrived for them.

Secondly, Liberty of Conscience was the ground of the Quarrel.

Thirdly, They of the Confederacy were the greatest part of the States, but it
is evident the Covenanters were the greatest part of the States (for they had
turned out the Bishops) at that time; and if there be sense in the Words, or
truth in the Relation, it gives a remarkable glimpse of Light into this dark
Vault, and imports a secret confederacy against the King and Church of England,
between the Papists and Covenanters, and that that formidable Armada was
designed for the assistance of the Covenanters: and the next page gives not
only a greater Light, but a clear vindication of the King from any such
complyances with the Papists, as were suggested, and made the foundation of the
War. As for the King of Great Britain, adds he, If he will not give Liberty of
Conscience, he shall be reduced to it with no little damage. Now who were they
that pressed for this Liberty of Conscience, and did reduce these Nations to
it, all people know. And a little after, he urges this design from the danger,
if the King of England being Confederate with all the Heretics of Holland and
Germany, Enemies of God and Spain, should be able to carry on his Pretensions
and Title to the Crown of France, add to this, that there is no improbality
that they who would treat with France and Richelieu, as was proved the
Covenanters did by a Letter written by the Lord Lowdon to the French King,
would make no difficulty to do the same to the Spaniard, then the most Potent
Monarch of Europe, and which confirms the Opinion, I do not remember the Scots
made any complaint of this great Fleet as designed against them.

But that which makes the thing plain, is the discovery which was made to Sir
William Boswell, by Andreas ab Habnerfield, which was communicated first by Sir
William to my Lord of Canterbury, and by him transmitted to the King then at
York, November. 1640. The whole is printed by it self, Rush. Hist. Col. page 1314.
and in Rushworth's Collections, and is too long here to insert, but the
principal parts and matter of the Plot was this, That there was a design on
Foot by the Papists against the Life of the King and the Archbishop. That to
effect this the Scottish Commotions were raised, and fomented by the Jesuits,
that they exasperated the English Dissenters by the severity used against Pryn,
Burton, and Bastwick, and the Scots by the Fears of Popery upon the Imposition
of the Common Prayer Book; that Cuneus or Cou, the Pope's Legate, and
Chamberlain a Scot, Chaplain and Almoner to Cardinal Richelieu, were the great
Negotiators of this Conspiracy, and that the design was to embroil these
Nations in a Civil War. The Troubles came on so fast, as may well be supposed,
precipitated for fear of a further prosecution of this discovery, that the
Archbishop lost his Head for refusing a Cardinals Hat, and opposing the
Scottish Covenanters; and the King this, because he would not give away the
Crown, and pull down the Mitre by granting Toleration. And however the
following Distractions and Rebellion stifled the further prosecution and
discovery of this Plot, yet the Tragical Event justified the Truth of the
Discovery.

What the consequences of these Proceedings would have been if Providence had
permitted those Usurping Powers to come to any firm Establishment, God only
knows; but a Tyranny in the Church like that of the Papacy is most suitable and
natural to the-Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government of Rebels, Regicides, and
Usurpers. But God miraculously restoring our Gracious Sovereign King Charles
the Second to his Throne, and the Church of England to her pristine Splendour,
we were in a State of Tranquillity till of late years.

But the Papists envious of our Happiness, began or rather continued to leaven
the disaffected party of men in Church and State against both; and how far they
had driven on their designs for a second Revolution, few people can be
strangers; the old Stories were revived, and new ones minted, to raise fears
and jealousies of Tyranny and Popery, to set us altogether by the Ears. The
Scots were animated to a Rebellion, and did actually break out into a formed
Rebellion: the Dissenters were busy every where to calumniate the Bishops and
Church as Popishly affected, the Lawn Sleeves were threatened, and the Episcopal
Party branded with all the names of Ignominy; so that the rich and wise
Citizens of the great Metropolis of London knew scarcely whether their greatest
danger was from Papists or Phanaticks, Wealth being always a Crime in Popular
Tumults and Insurrections; Sedition was as commonly talked, and as hot as
Coffee was drank; and in a word, from the Court to the Cottage none could
escape the imputation of Popishly affected, who durst write or speak in
vindication of the Church of England, or against Dissenters.

And that all this was but a Branch of the late horrid Popish Plot against his
Majesty's Life, the Government by Law established, and the Protestant Religion,
I offer the Testimony of Dr. Oats the first and principal Discoverer; who all
along charges the Papists, the disguised Priests and Jesuits with managing the
intemperate heat of Separatists against the Government; and we cannot without
bringing a manifest and dangerous disreputation upon the rest of his Evidence,
but believe him, when upon his Oath he assures us, that the Jesuits creep in
among Dissenters under the disguise of Nonconforming Ministers, to divide and
exasperate, to raise, and blow up Animosities and Calumnies into actual
Rebellion against the Civil Government, under a pretense of their dislike of
the Ecclesiastical.

Thus in his Printed Narrative, Paragraph 1. He informs us that Richard Strange
Provincial, John Keins, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, and Harcourt, Jesuits,
did write a treasonable Letter to one Father Suiman an Irish Jesuit, at Madrid
in Spain, in which was contained the plotting and contriving a Rebellion in
Scotland of the Presbyterians, against the Episcopal Government: In order to
which, they had employed Matthew Wright, William Morgan, and one Mr. Ireland,
to go and Preach under the Notions of Presbyterians, and give the disaffected
Scots a true understanding of their sad Estate and Condition in which they
were, by reason of Episcopal Tyranny exercised over them; and withal to tell
them they had now a fair opportunity to vindicate their Liberty and Religion;
and that it could be done no other way but by the Sword.

Paragraph. 18. That the Fathers of the Society in Ireland were very vigilant
to prepare the people to rise for the defense of their Liberty and Religion,
and to recover their Estates.

Paragraph 35. That the Jesuits by order of the Provincial, were to send new
Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and to inform the
people of the great Tyranny they lay under by reason of their being denied
Liberty of Conscience; and that not being to be procured but by the Sword, they
must take that course to purchase their Liberty.

Paragraph 43. That two new Messengers were sent into Scotland on the 5th. of
August 1678. one by the name of Father Moor, the other of Sanders, alias Brown,
with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist Ministers, and to
Preach to the disaffected Scots, the necessity of taking up the Sword for
defense of Liberty of Conscience; these the Deponent saw dispatched.

Paragraph 50. The Deponent, Dr. Oats, saw a Letter from Father Ireland, August
the 7th. 1678. where, among other things, he intimates the joy he had, that the
disaffected Scots would not lay aside their endeavors for, and after Liberty
and Religion, and that the Catholics of Scotland had promised to use the
utmost of their Interest to keep up the Commotions there.

Here let me be permitted to make a little break to confirm this Evidence by a
remarkable Passage which fell out the last year in the tragical end of the Lord
Forresler. This Lord was the person that after the defeat of the Rebels at
Bothwel-Bridge, took occasion, upon the Indulgence granted by His Majesty, to
erect a House within two miles of Edinburgh, for a public Conventicle of
Non-conformists, and for his building this Synagogue, went for a zealous man
among them; but so it happened, that not long after he was barbarously murdered
by a Woman Relation, with whom he had incestuously lived many years: After his
death a Dispensation was found in his Closet from the Pope to marry her, which
it seems he delaying to do, she took his Life as the price and reparation of
her abused Honor; Raviliac Redivivus.
which plainly shows that these Supporters of the Nonconformists may be, and
are secret Papists.

But to proceed, Paragraph 51. Among other mysterious Phrases relating to the
Plot, John Keins told the Deponent, that the Provincial had taken great care of
keeping alive the differences between the disaffected Scots and Duke
Lauderdale, that Mum and Chocolate should be put down, and the Order of the
Magpies should be turned to their primitive Institution and Habit. By Mum and
Chocolate, meaning the Protestant Peers, and by Magpies, the Bishops.

And for a clear vindication of the Bishops and Episcopal Clergy of the Church
of England, from the unjust imputation of being Popishly affected, the common
brand which Nonconformists burn upon their Reputation, Paragraph 72. He informs
us, that the Pope had issued out a Bull, in which he disposes of the
Bishoprics and other Dignities in England, as follows.

Archbishops.
Canterbury, Cardinal Howard. York, Perrot, Superior of the Secular Priests.
Bishops.
London, Corker, President of the Benedictine Monks. Winchester, White, alias
White-bread, Provincial of the Jesuits. Durham, Strange, late Provincial of the
Jesuits. Salisbury, Dr. Godden. Norwich, Napper, a Franciscan Friar. Fly,
Vincent, Provincial of the Dominican Monks. Exeter, Wolf, one of the Sorbon.
Peterborough, Gifford, a Dominican Friar. Lincoln, Sir John Warner Baronet, a
Jesuit. Chichester, Morgan, a Jesuit. Bath and Wells, Dr. Armstrong, a
Franciscan Friar. Carlisle, Wilmot, alias Quarterman, a Secular Priest.
Chester, Thimbleby, a Secular Priest. Hereford, Sir Thomas Preston Baronet, a
Jesuit. Bristol, Mundson, a Dominican. Oxford, Williams, Rector of Watton, a
Town in Flanders, a Jesuit. St. David's, Belson, a Secular Priest. St. Asaph,
Jones, a Secular. Bangor, Joseph David Keimash, a Dominican Friar.
Abbots.
Westminster, Dr. Sheldon, a Benedictine Monk. Sion House, Skinner, a
Benedictine Monk.
Deans.
Canterbury, Belton, a Sorbonist. St. Paul's, Leybourn, a Secular, Secretary to
Cardinal Howard. Windsor, Howard, with twelve Benedictine Canons. Chichester,
Morgan, a Secular. Winton, Dr. VVatkinson, President of the English College
at Lisbon.
With many other Dignities of the Church, disposed of to Foreigners in that
Bull.

Paragraph 74. That twelve Scotch Jesuits were sent into Scotland, to keep up
the Commotions in Scotland, and that they had instructions given them to carry
themselves like Nonconformist Ministers among the Presbyterian Scots.

And Page 67 of the Narrative, numb. 7. One means, he says, they were to use to
bring in Popery, was by seditious Preachers and Catechists set up, sent out,
maintained, and directed what to Preach in their own, or other private or
public Conventicles and Field meetings.

Now, as in reason we cannot believe the Papists are less sollicitous for their
Affairs in England, than in Scotland and Ireland; so we cannot but conclude
from this evident matter of Fact, that they have been as industrious among the
English Nonconformists to sow dividing Principles, and animate them against the
Government and Governors both in Church and State.

And that this may not pass for a bare supposition, without ground, I I have
heard Mr. Prance affirm, that both Gavan and Whitebread used to Preach
frequently in Conventicles in Southwark and other places: and I am able to
prove, Whitebread, alias White, the Provincial of the Jesuits, who was executed
for the Plot, did not many months before the Discovery, and his Apprehension
Preach in a Conventicle as a Nonconformist, at Spaldwick within five miles of
Huntington; and that he had several times done the like before, as was attested
by several of the Congregation, before diverse Gentlemen in the County of
Huntington; and if the shame of Dissenters did not smother the further
discovery of this Truth, for fear of the just reproach and infamy it would
bring upon them among the miss-led people, I doubt not but we should find these
Friars and Jesuits, in disguise of Nonconformists, and by false Names, as
frequent in the Pulpits of Separatists, as their ordinary Teachers.

And indeed nothing is more feasible or easy; for it is no more than for a
Jesuit to bring a counterfeit Letter of Recommendation from some known
Nonconformist either out of the Town, if he designs to travel and Preach in the
Countries, as an Itinerant, or out of the Country, if he will Preach in the
Town, or a Certificate that he has Preached in such or such Congregations, with
their Approbation, which he is sure to have, if he inveigh against Popery,
Bishops, Ceremonies, Common Prayer, and for Liberty of Conscience, and the
business is done, and without further Examination he is admitted into their
Pulpits, and shall pass for a zealous Protestant, and an heavenly man in the
opinion of the undiscerning Auditors, as Father Commin, and Father Heth have
done, and many others before.

Whereas the Church of England takes care that none be admitted to the Charge
of Souls without all the Caution imaginable against Popery; they must take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, have Testimonials from Persons that know
them, of their Ability and foundness of Judgment, they must show their Letters
of Ordination, before they are admitted to Preach in an unknown Congregation,
and have a License from the Bishop of the Diocese before they can regularly
Preach in a Congregation whereinto they are by Law instituted and inducted.

The natural Inferences which follow from this unquestionable matter of Fact,
here faithfully related, and offered to the serious consideration of all sober
People, of what persuasion soever, are these.

First, That the Pope and Papists have ever since the Protestant Reformation
endeavored to raise up Sects and Differences in Opinion amongst Protestants,
by sending their disguised Emissaries among the zealous and wellmeaning people,
to seduce them into Separation and Schism. Secondly, That they look upon these
practices as most effectual means to bring the people back to the Romish
Religion, and to introduce Popery among us. Thirdly, That for this purpose they
have been all along industrious in this course, by depraving the Government of
Episcopacy as Tyrannical, the Established Prayers as Popish, by extolling
Extempore Prayers as Spiritual, by encouraging an unlicensed Ministry, by
preaching up Liberty of Conscience, and that it is to be obtained and
maintained at any rate; and it is worth observation, that Coleman dates the
Era of all the misfortunes like to happen to Catholics, from the fatal
rescinding of the late Toleration: therein agreeing exactly with Dissenters,
who were no less Querulous for the stopping of that door, though from him
nothing can be more evident, than that the Jesuits designed to bring in Popery
at it, which they could not do, being openly excluded from the benefit of it,
but by pretending to be Dissenters. Fourthly, It is most manifest, that all our
late horrid Civil Wars, Rapines, Bloodshed, and the execrable and solemn
Murder of his late Majesty, and the banishment of our present Sovereign, were
affected according to the fore-contrivance of the Papists, by the assistance
which Dissenters gave them, and the opportunities they had to preach them into
Rebellion, under the pretense of a thorough Reformation; that all the late
Commotions and Rebellions in Scotland sprung from the same Counsel and Conduct:
and that the Papists will never out of the hopes of effecting our ruin, nor
without the same opportunities they have hitherto had, so long as our Divisions
are kept up and maintained, which give them the advantage of dashing us one
against another. Fifthly, That therefore obstinate Dissenters are before God,
and according to the judgment of the strongest Reason built upon plain matter
of undeniable Fact, guilty of all the real danger of Popery prevailing again in
these Nations by the ruin of the Protestant Religion. Sixthly, That the Church
of England in Doctrine and Discipline is the greatest enemy the Papists have,
according to their own declared sense and judgment, and consequently wholly
innocent of any such designs and complyances, or approaches to the Church of
Rome, as Father Du Moulin, and other Brainsick or worse people endeavor to
fix upon her: and that it is impossible to give a clearer demonstration of the
innocence of the Bishops and Clergy of England, than Dr. Oats has in the 72
Paragraph of his Narrative before recited, concerning the Pope's Bull or Breve,
bestowing all the considerable Promotions and Dignities in England upon Papists
there mentioned, which could not be done without turning out the present
Bishops and Dignitaries of the Church: And there cannot be a more demonstrative
argument that he esteems them Heretics and Enemies: for there is no doubt but
if the Pope had any hopes of their compliance with Popery, he would not only
have consented to their continuance in those promotions, but have promised high
Rewards and Encouragements to them. Seventhly, That therefore it is the joint
Interest both of Prince and People of these Nations to support and defend the
Church of England as now by Law established; those of her Communion being by a
tract of Experience of equal date with the Reformation, found to be both in
Principles and Practice the most peaceable and Loyal Subjects, and foundest
Protestants, of unshaken Allegiance and unblemished Loyalty, the ablest
Champions against Popery, and the only bulwork of the Protestant Religion, as
is but too evident by the constant endeavors of the Papists, both by their own
power, and the assistance of Dissenters to undermine and overthrow it.
To conclude, as I have here impartially related matter of Fact, and drawn
necessary inferences from it, without animosity or bitterness of language, so I
hope good men will, without prejudice or partiality weigh it in an equal
balance, and make that charitable use of it for which it was intended, that it
may be a means by discovering the source and original of our Divisions and
Distractions, our Fears and Apprehensions, and thereby give us the opportunity
to break the snares of our Enemies, to which, nothing can so effectually
contribute, as our uniting in the Protestant Religion of the Church of England.

God of his infinite mercy, who makes men to be of one mind in an House, who
is the Author of Peace, and the Lover of Concord, who breaks the Snares of
the Ungodly, turns their Wisemen backward, and their Counsels into
Foolishness; grant that in this our day, we may see, and know, and follow the
things that make for our Peace, that so our Divisions may not be our ruin,
that the Enemies of our Country and Religion may not triumph over us, but that
by our Union with the Established Government in Church and State, we may defeat
the designs of our Enemies, and disappoint their expectations. God long
preserve the Life of our Dread Sovereign, and defend this Church, the most true
Apostolic of any Church upon the face of the Earth.

The End of the First Part.

THE SECOND PART OF FOXES AND FIREBRANDS, Or a SPECIMEN Of the Danger and
Harmony of POPERY and SEPARATION; WHEREIN Is proved from undeniable matter of
Fact and Reason, that Separation from the Church of England is, in the Judgment
of Papists, and by sad Experience, found the most compendious way to introduce
Popery, and to ruin the Protestant Religion.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere Malorum.

DVBLIN, Printed by Jos. Ray for a Society of Stationers. and are to be Sold by
the Booksellers of Dublin. MDCLXXXII

To the Most Reverend the Archbishops; The Right Reverend the Bishops, and the
rest of the Reverend Divines of the Reformed Church of IRELAND.
Reverend Fathers,
THe Publisher of these Collections of this Treatise, knows none so proper to
whom he may dedicate it as your selves; for as You are those Venerable Persons
that intend the Spiritual Good of this Kingdom, and whose Function does oblige
you to watch for the good of Souls, so he doubts not but any the meanest
Present will be heartily accepted of, that tends to the promoting of so
glorious a design. It has been the unhappiness of these Kingdoms ever since
the Reformation to meet with brisk oppositions in point of Religion, not only
from professed Enemies, but disguised Friends; and the Churches of England and
Ireland had no sooner shaken off that Idolatry and Superstition that overspread
and deformed the face of primitive Apostolical Religion; but like the woman in
the Revelations, Cap. 12.
she was persecuted by the Dragon, who raised up all his Arts and Stratagems to
devour that child of the Reformation which had cost her so many throws and
agonies. The Papists on one hand, and the Puritans on the other, did endeavor
to sully and bespatter the glory of her Reformation, the one taxing it with
Innovation, and the other with Superstition, and too near an approach to those
superstitious Rites and Ceremonies which she had reformed: what justice there
is in either of the accusations, the world is sufficiently sensible of by the
many learned Volumes that have defended both her Doctrine and her Discipline,
in opposition to them both; and I presume that every unprejudiced Reader will
cast the balance on the Churches side, and conclude that there is more of
spite and malice than truth in the imputation: For it cannot be imagined that
the Churches of England and Ireland should be guilty of Novelties in point of
Doctrine, when they did so lowdly tax the Church of Rome with Innovations, and
pretended them as one great justifiable ground of their separation from it, and
to symbolize with that Church in superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, is in
effect to say, that they were resolved to maintain what they had abjured, and
act contrary to all the declarations that they had published to the World in
their own defense. But it will appear farther from this discourse, that these
objections were suggested to our dissenters from the Papists, who have
frequently acted and preached in the habits of dissenters, and though they
pretend to be more zealous against Popery than others, yet they are not ashamed
to whet their swords at the forges of the Philistines, and make use of their
arts and assistance for the ruin of the Church: I wish they would but
seriously reflect upon these things, and consider that by insisting in the
paths that the Papists have chalked them out, they are advancing the interest
of Popery, and will in time do their work as succesfully as if they had laid
their heads together to subvert the Government both in Church and State: That
they may not any more be seduced by such kind of artifices, is not only the
design of these Papers, but the hearty Prayers of

Your most Humble Servant, R. W.

Foxes and Firebrands, etc.
The Second Part.
THat the Reader may have a clearer insight into the following discourse, and
understand how little the Doctrine of depriving or resisting Princes was
countenanced by the first Reformers, it may not be inconvenient to entertain
him with the pious and Loyal speech of the great Pillar of the Reformation,
Archbishop Cranmer, whereby it will appear how averse he was either to the
Jesuitical Doctrines of deposing Princes for disowning the Popes Authority, or
the late Phanatical pretenses of taking Arms against the King, where ho
neglects his duty, or stands not to the promises and Covenants that he makes at
his Coronation. The Speech is as follows:

MOST DREAD AND ROYAL SOVEREIGN.
THe promises your Highness has made here at your Coronation to forsake the
Devil and all his works, are not to be taken in the Bishop of Rome's sense,
when you commit any thing distastful to that See, to hit your Majesty in the
teeth; as Pope Paul the Third, late Bishop of Rome sent to your Royal Father,
saying, did thou not promise, at our permission of thy Coronation, to forsake
the Devil and all his works, and do thou turn to Heresy? For the breach of
this thy promise, know thou not that it is in our power to dispose of the
Sword and Scepter to whom we please. We your Majesty's Clergy do humbly
conceive that this promise reaches not at your Highness Sword spiritual or
temporal, or in the least at your Highness swaying the Scepter of this your
Dominion, as you and your Predecessors have had them from God; neither could
your Ancestors lawfully resign up their Crowns to the Bishops of Rome, or to
his Legates, according to their ancient Oaths then taken upon that Ceremony.

The Bishops of Canterbury for the most part have Crowned your Predecessors,
and Anointed them Kings of this Land; yet it was not in their power to receive
or reject them, neither did it give them authority to prescribe them conditions
to take or to leave their Crowns, although the Bishops of Rome would encroach
upon your Predecessors, by his Bishops Act and Oil, that in the end they might
possess those Bishops with an Interest to dispose of their Crowns at their
pleasure. But the wiser sort will look to their Claws, and clip them.

The Solemn Rites of Coronation have their ends and utility, yet neither direct
force or necessity; they be good admonitions to put Kings in mind of their duty
to God, but no encreasement of their Dignity. For they be God's Anointed, not
in respect of the Oil which the Bishop uses, but in consideration of their
Power which is ordained, of the Sword which is authorized, of their Persons
which are elected by God, and endued with the gifts of his Spirit, for the
better ruling and guiding of the people. The Oil, if added, is but a Ceremony;
if it be wanting, that King is yet a perfect Monarch notwithstanding, and God's
Anointed, as well as if he was In-oiled. Now for the Person or Bishop that does
Anoint a King, it is proper to be done by the chiefest; but if they cannot, or
will not, any Bishop may perform this Ceremony.

To condition with Monarchs upon these Ceremonies, the Bishop of Rome (or other
Bishops owning his Supremacy) has no authority, but he may faithfully declare
what God requires at the hands of Kings and Rulers, that is Religion and
Virtue. Therefore not from the Bishop of Rome, but as a Messenger from my
Savior Jesus Christ, I shall most humbly admonish your Royal Majesty what
things your Highness is to perform. Your Majesty is God's Vicegerent, and
Christ's Vicar within your own Dominions, and to see with your Predecessor
Josiah God truly worshipped, and Idolatry destroyed, the Tyranny of the Bishops
of Rome banished from your Subject, and Images removed. These acts be signs of
a second Josiah, who reformed the Word of God in his days. You are to reward
Virtue, to revenge Sin, to justify the Innocent, to relieve the Poor, to
procure Peace, to repress Violence, and to execute Justice throughout your
Realms, for Presidents on those Kings who performed not these things. The old
Law shows how the Lord revenged his quarrel, and on those Kings who fulfilled
these things, he poured forth his Blessings in abundance. For example it is
written of Josiah in the Book of the Kings thus, Like unto him there was no
King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, according to-all
the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him. This was to that
Prince a perpetual fame of dignity, to remain to the end of days.

Being bound by my Function to lay these things before your Royal Highness, the
one as a reward, if you fulfill; the other as a judgment from God, if you
neglect them. Yet I openly declare before the Living God, and before these
Nobles of the Land, that I have no Commission to denounce your Majesty
deprived, if your Highness miss in part, or in whole of these performances;
much less to draw up Indentures between God and your Majesty, or to say you
forfeit your Crown with a clause, for the Bishop of Rome, as have been by your
Majesty's Predecessors, King John, and his Son Henry of this Land. The Almighty
God of his mercy, let the light of his countenance shine upon your Majesty,
grant you a prosperous and happy Reign, defend you, and save you; and let your
Subjects say, Amen.

God save the King.
After his Majesty's Coronation, and the death of King Henry the 8th. several
of the foreign Protestant Clergy wrote to his Son King Edward, and to that
Honorable Council (whom his wise Father had carefully nominated for to
instruct and advise that hopeful Prince) amongst whom Mr. John Calvin was one,
as appears by his Letters to Archbishop Cranmer, yet extant, and Printed
amongst others of his Epinies, in which he offers his service to assist that
King in the Reformation of the Church of England; but King Edward and his
Council refused his proffer.

The parties instrumental for dissuading of this Prince from these offertures
of Calvin's, and the reasons why he was not admitted to be one in this Assembly
were not known, until about the 9th. year of his Siller Queen Elizabeth her
Reign; about which time Sir Henry Sidney some time Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
one of her Majssties Honorable Privy Council, having then the liberty to view
the Papers of State within her Majesty's secret Closet, he happened to find a
Letter directed to the Bishops of Winchester, and of Rochester, These two
Bishops were Gardner and Ponett.
dated from Delph, which he in a manuscript of his own afterward, in the
custody of the most learned Dr. James Usher, late Primate of Armagh, which was
after transcribed by Sir James Ware, and is now entered in a manuscript of that
Knights, number xliiii. Running in this manner following:

Memorandum taken out of Sir Henry Sidney his Book, called the Romish
Policies, numb. 6. page 37. in fol. a manuscript, with Archbishop Usher.
Her Royal Highness giving me the freedom to search the affairs of State ever
since her Royal Fathers denying the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, Sir Henry
Sidney's words amongst other of his discourses within this Book.
amongst others of this sort, I found a Letter directed to the Bishops of
Winchester and Rochester; part of the Contents being for my purpose, be these,
as they were translated out of the Low Dutch.

Edward (Son of Henry the Heretic King of England) by his crasty and politic
Council has absolutely brought in Heresy, which if not by art or other
endeavors speedily overthrown, and made infamous, all other foreign Heretics
will unite with your new Heresies now amongst your selves lately planted, and
so have Bishops as you have; and it is the opinion of our learned men now at
Trent, that the Schisms in England by Edward's Council established, will
reclaim all the foreign Sects unto their Discipline, and thereby be one body
united. For Calvin, Bullinger and others have wrote unto Edward to offer their
service to assist and unite, also to make Edward and his Heirs their chief
Defender, and so have Bishops as well as England; which if it come to pass that
Heretic Bishops be so near, and spread abroad, Rome and the Clergy utterly
falls. You must therefore make these offertures of theirs odious to Edward and
his Council. Receive N. S. and E. L. from Rotterdam, their lessons are taught
them, take you their parts, if checked by the other Heretics; for these be for
Rebaptizing, and not for Infant Baptism: Their Doctrine is for a future
Monarchy upon carth after death, which will please the ordinary kind well, and
dash the other that rages now amongst you. Reverend Fathers, it is left to you
to assist, and to those you know are sure to the Mother Church. From Delph the
4th. I Would of May, Anno Christi, 1549.

D. G.

Her Highness one day discoursing of matters in this kind, Queen Eliz. opinion
at the sight of this Letter.
I told her of this Paper, at the sight whereof she was startled; the Letter
being amongst her Sisters papers, which caused her to express these very words.
I had rather than a years Revenue, that my Brother Edward and his Council had
seen this Letter; nay rather than twice my Revenue I had seen it sooner, and so
caused me to lay it where I found it. The Councils opinion.
The Council upon her Highness discourse concluded that Calvin would have
established Episcopacy beyond Seas, had he been consulted herein, and that the
hindrance of this offerture caused much animosity between Reformers. Having no
more of Sir Henry's words of this nature in this Memorandum, we shall go
forward in the Memorials of other learned men of this kind.

You have seen already our Narrative of Faithful Comin and Tho. Heth, formerly
mentioned in the Book entitled Foxes and Firebrands; Printed at London, anno
1680. and also the Life and Death of George Brown, with the Confession of
Philip Corwine; which Confession was formerly written by John Garvey, some time
Primate of all Ireland, which we have already put out to public view. We shall
therefore also lay before you the Confessions of two great Penitents, viz. the
one of Samuel Mason, some time bred up with the Jesuits at Paris; the other of
Malachias Malone a Carmalite Friar; who were converted to the Protestant Church
of England, the former being converted an. 1566, the latter, an. 1584. the
former being a memorial of that Learned Statesman Sir Henry Sidney, as also
written by John Garvey; the latter a memorial of that Eminent Statesman, the
Lord William Cecill, as follows.

Samuel Mason his Conversion to the Protestant Church of England now
established by her Royal Highness Queen Elizabeth, our Gracious Sovereign Lady
of England, France and Ireland; together with his Speech in the Cathedral of
Christ-Church, Dublin, June the 6th. 1566. and also his Narrative presented to
Sir Henry Sidney on the 25th. of August following, being made before him, being
then Lord Deputy, the Archbishop, Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Dublin,
formerly written by John Garvey, Primate of Armagh, and Dean of the said
Cathedral.

It is usual upon Confession to show some sorrow for sins committed, The
Converts Speech.
and also to promise an amendment for the future. But that sorrow without a
performance is the committing of Sin afresh, besides the committing of the sin
of lying, when the party performs it not: These sorts of sorrows and promises
be odious both to God and Man. But my Confession is not Auricular, as I
publicly here declare it, therefore I hope to be the more credited; and it
would redound to my disgrace from henceforth, to dissemble either with God or
Man: So that I shall not make a rash vow, that I will not return to my evil
ways, yet with Prayer I shall seek my God for his assistance, lest I be led
into temptation, reserving within my self this saying in my mind: Teach me, O
Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto Godly wisdom.

It was not want drove me hither, for had I complied at Paris, where I abode
about eight years, I might have been entertained; yet my frailties were such, I
here openly declare, for two years and upwards, before I departed from thence,
I dissembled with the Society called the Society of Jesus. But spending my time
partly in learning the Language of that Kingdom; and also by searching the
Records and Libraries of the Universities there, I found out variety to
dissuade me from that impious way of living. Therefore I have come hither to
acknowledge both mine ignorance and perverseness when I was of a contrary
opinion for to embrace the truth, which I have for a long time scandalized and
rejected, hoping all here present will be pleased, as Christians, to take this
my Recantation for a real and true one. So the Lord of his mercy recall Sinners
to his Church duly from henceforth. Amen.

After this Recantation of Mr. Masons, Sir Henry Sidney then Lord Deputy took
him for one of his Chaplains, after which Adam Loftus after Primate of Armagh,
upon the resignation of Hugh Corwine Archbishop of this See; Adam our Primate
resigning up the Primacy to succeed Hugh Corwine in this Diocese, he preferred
this Convert to the Parish of Finglas, two miles distant from this City of
Dublin.

After the Recantation of this Convert upon the Feast of St. Bartholomew, soon
after his Conversion, he presented Sir Henry Sidney with this Narrative
following.

The covetousness of the Bishop of Rome for these several hundred of years past
have increased more than ordinary: The Converts Narrative after his Speech
given to Sir Henry Sidney then Lord Deputy of Ireland.
First their covetousness caused them to forget God, by neglecting his Will and
Commandments. Secondly, it has caused them to accept of the earthly pleasures
of this world, which Satan offered to our Savior, but Christ rejected his
offerture by rebuking him, and showed that he cared not for the riches therein;
by his saying, My Kingdom is not of this World, has not only caused the
Bishops of Rome to assume to themselves the Titles due to Emperors, Kings and
Princes; but above all, to assume the name of God to them and their Successors,
which, in a word, is Blasphemy. At Paris, during my stay there, I improved my
self by searching the Records, and viewing the Books in that University;
amongst which, I lighted upon the Clergy of Liege, their Apology to Pope
Paschal the Second, as touching the Oath of Allegiance, which he had granted
against the then Emperor, Henry the Fourth. The substance of this Clergies
Apology being thus translated out of French.

Who can justly blame a Bishop for favoring his Lords party, The Clergy of
Leighs, their apology against Pope Puschal the Second, circa ann. 1105, or near
that time.
to whom he owes Allegiance, and has promised by Oath to observe it. No man
doubts but that Perjury is a grievous offense; God only swears and repents
not, because wisdom keeps the commandment of Gods Oath. But for us who often
repent that we have sworn, we are forbidden to swear. If a man swears, God
enjoins him to perform his Oath unto the Lord, which is not unknown to those
that rend the Kingdom and the Priesthood by a new Schism, and with their
upstart Traditions promise to absolve from all sins; such as incur the crime of
Perjury toward their Sovereign, never reading what God said to Zedekias, (by
the mouth of Ezekiel the Prophet) who had committed Perjury against his
Sovereign Nebuchadonozor; He that has broken the Covenant, shall he escape?
Which St. Hierome expounds thus. Hence we may learn, that we ought to keep
touch even with our enemies, and not consider with whom, but by whom we have
sworn.

Considering on this Apology, my soul was smitten within me, and such a terror
seized on my Conscience, that I said within my soul, surely that if Paschal was
thus reproved by this Clergy so long since, how wicked are his Successors grown
by this time.

At this time, Pope Pius the 4th. his contrivance against the Protestants of
England, anno 1560.
viz. anno 1560 a strict Bull issued out of Pope Pius the 4th. commanding all
the Learned of the several Orders of that Church to find out proofs and reasons
for persuading of Subjects to break their Oaths of Allegiance with their Kings
and Princes; and to gloss this device the better, he dispensed with several of
the learned of the Franciscans, Dominicans, and of the Society of Jesus, to
Preach amongst the Protestants of England; nay with some of them, to marry,
saying that the Marriage of England established by the Queen and her Clergy was
no Marriage, but plain Heresy. All these so dispensed were to give monthly
intelligence; if from France, to the chief Cities there; if from Spain, or from
other Territories, to those places; and for fear any of these should be
dissuaded from their Orders, others were sent to discover them, if they found
their inclinations so bending, before they came to be fully resolved to turn;
this, one Andrew Mr. Gibbons a Scotch Friar assured me, who was sent for this
purpose, and betrayed one John Gyles, who was then a recanting at the City of
Gloucester; but Gyles ingeniously confessing all the contrivance, and desiring
proof might be brought who was his accuser. Andrew Mr. Gibbons was summoned to
appear, and to proceed, but Andrew suspecting that himself was caught,
straightly seemed to go, but pretending to go into his Lodging for some papers to
give the Bailiffs of Gloucester, went out the back-way, and so took Horse, and
fled into France, and came to Paris; what became of John Glyes, I did not
enquire. How the Penitents thoughts were when he searched after these writings
first, and how he altered his opinion after


Still being desirous to search after all Indulgences, Absolutions and
Dispensations for Oaths, Allegiance, and for Rebellions, to strengthen the
Church of Rome, supposing thereby to have made my self a Fortune, and to be
esteemed well of by the Clergy and Laity of Rome. I for the most part made it
my purpose to collect all things of this nature, these being some of my
Collections.

Paul the Third granted an Indulgence for Harlots to use their bodies with any
men, Paul the 3d. his Indulgence for Whoring and Adultery for money.
and to trade in this Sin, as I found by his Bull in the third year of his
Papacy, granted upon the pretense that the flesh being so unruly a member,
could not be mortified, although several Laws had been made against those evil
sins; yet the Sin was to be excused with those who could not consist in the
state of Chastity, provided the man gave a certain fee to the spiritual See,
and that the woman paid a yearly Revenue also, and entered her name in the
Registry to pay her fees accordingly, which was to be gathered weekly; this was
pretended to go for the redemption of Slaves and Prisoners of the Roman
Religion, either with Turk or Heretic. Every House or Stews appointed for
this purpose, to have an Iron-Trunk or Box fastened in the Wall of these Stews,
wherein the party thus inclined, was, before he could be permitted to take his
pleasure to put in his sum through a slit in the said Box: And three Testees
were to wait on these Houses weekly, to take out what sums there were thrown
in, whereof one third part was for the House, the Whores were to have another
third part, and the Sea of Rome another third part; at this time it being
calculated that the Registry contained in Paul the Thirds days, 45000 Harlots
that paid him Tribute, and that by Pius Quintus his Papacy it increased to the
number of 64360 Harlots, paying him weekly Tribute; and all those who went to
any secret Whore, were to be excommunicated, if they were so caught, until he
had paid sevenfold the rate of the Whore's permitted, which was seven Julies
so permitted.

An Indulgence was granted by this Pope for to kill any that followed Luthers
opinion, The Popes Pardon for killing a Lutheran.
a thousand years pardon for his Sins, besides the honor to be enrolled by the
name of Rome's faithful Soldier.

This Pope Paul by his Bull entered at Paris runs, Pope Paul's Indulgence to
Rebels. etc.
Englished thus; Whereas we find the Heretics now concord in the
Administration of the Sacrament of the body of Jesus, We grant full remission
of Sins to those our Sons of our Mother Church that shall stop or hinder their
union amongst Heretics.

We also absolve all Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance unto their
Heretic Kings, Princes, or States, as they be enemies unto the holy See of St.
Peter: All men from their tie of Matrimony with Heretic Wives, or Wives from
their Heretical Husbands: Also all Children from their Parental obedience
either to an Heretic Father or Mother. Also We absolve all Parents not giving
to their Heretic Children their Benediction or Portion, either to give their
Estate to the next Catholics of the Mother Church akin to the Family, or to
give or to dispose of it to any other persons use.

Paul the Third, the Servant of the Servants of Jesus Christ, and to Fernesius
our Trusty and Faithful Son and Champion for the Holy See of St. Peter; the
Blessings of the Holy Trinity attend on the Person of our Wellbeloved Son
Fernesius, of St. Peter, of St. Paul, of the Mother of God: The Benediction of
the holy Host of Heaven, of the Archangels, Angels, Saints, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and holy Martyrs assist thee, and those fighting under
thee, in our holy Cause: Paul the 3d. his Indulgence granted to Fernesius, who
went to fight against the Protestants in Germany.
We grant to thee our Son and Faithful Soldier Fernesius, a true and plenary
Pardon for all thy sins committed, or to be committed by thee, or any other
fighting under thee, fighting for the holy Cause of St. Peter our Predecessor
of this See of Rome. We will and command the Archangels, and Angels, to carry
into Heaven the Souls of those our Soldiers that shall be slain in Battle for
our Holy See of Rome (fighting in so just a cause) immediately upon their
Expiration not suffering or enduring the least pain of Purgatory. Also an
Absolution of sins of one hundred years, to all the Children of those dying, or
being slain in this our holy Cause, against the Heretics and Enemies of our
Holy See of St. Peter's, 4th. I Would June, in the third year of our Pontif.

Paulus Tertius.

Julius the Third continued the Council of Trent; Beneventum that Archbishop
upholds so doing.
and we find in the Universities of Paris a piece of a Letter of this Julius
written to Casa the Archbishop of Beneventum; wherein he returns him thanks,
and absolves this Bishop, for a Book written by this Casa defending the sin of
Sodomy: Which I do heartily lament that I took not a Copy thereof, but can
assure that I saw that Letter, and the Books name specified therein, for
Toleration, and defense of Sodomy.

The Jesuits of Paris their opinion was to the Council of Trent in the year
1559. How the Jesuits to ingratiate themselves with the Pope, and to mislead
the Commonalty, make him and his acts above God and the holy Scriptures.
(just at my coming thither) that the Pope and the Council were above all that
is called God, and of greater force than the Scripture was; for which opinion
one Veratus returned this Society thanks from the Council; and so it was upon
the Jesuits opinion voted in that Council, that their Acts and the Popes were
beyond the Law, the Prophets and the Scriptures.

The Messenger between the Council of Trent and the Jesuits of Paris, Ludovick
de Freake, the Council of Trents Messenger between them and the Jesuits of
France, who brought them these Instructions to destroy the Church of England
from Beneventum the Archbishop, named Casa.
was Ludovick de Freake, formerly a Priest in England, who brought with him up
to Paris, from the Council, several kind of Indulgences and Instructions for
that Society to undertake, and grant, and teach: Part of the Instructions were
thus, to take notice of the confessions of the people of France, especially of
the Nobles and Gentry; and in case they suspect any thing detrimental to the
Holy See of Rome, then to confer with three or more Confessors of the
suspicion, and so to take memorandums of certain questions to be asked of the
party so suspected the next time.

Also to converse with the Noblest, and to discourse variously until they find
which way he is inclinable most, and to please them accordingly in their
discourse; and in case any of you be, or chance to be any of their Confessors,
ye are to take memorandums of things doubtful and suspicious, and at the next
Confession to urge them to those parties then confessing, by which any three or
more are to consult, and give the Sea of Rome and her Councils intelligence
more or less, that the Mother Church might be informed, and all evil prevented
that is or shall be intended against her.

You are to associate with all strangers Heretical, This Dispensation of the
Pope has beguiled many wise men in England.
as well as Christian Catholic; if Heretical, to be civil, and not to discover
your profession; and for the better procurement of these designs designed, or
to be accomplished, ye may with leave of any three of the Society be permitted
to wear what dress or habit you think convenient, provided the Society hear
from the party so dispensed. Any of you thus dispensed with, may go with the
Heretic to any of their heretical Meetings permitted by Acts or Contracts of
Peace between Princes: by this contrivance ye may both inform the
Mother Church, and in case any of you be employed to assist her to go into any
of the heretical Villages or Territories, you will be the more able to serve
the holy See of St. Peter, and keep your selves from suspicion.

In case any of ye be thus employed, The Popes Dispensation with Impostors to
Preach all Doctrines in England, to confound that Church.
ye are dispensed with either to go with Heretics to their Churches, or as you
see convenient. If you own your selves Clergymen, then to Preach, but with
caution, till ye be well acquainted with those Heretics you converse with, and
then by degrees add to your Doctrine by Ceremonies, or otherwise, as you find
them inclinable. If ye be known by any of the Lay Catholics, you are to pacify
them by saying secret Mass unto them, or by acquainting other Priests (who are
not able to undertake this work) with your intentions, who does generally say
Mass unto them. If the Lay men be of any Parts, or of Wit, you may dispense
with them also, reserving the same provisoes, and thereby he may acquire an
Estate, and be the more able to serve the Mother Church.

In case they scruple in taking of Oaths, you are to dispense with them,
assuring them that they are to be kept no longer than the Mother Church sees it
convenient. The Popes manner of dispensing with Oaths, a good memorandum for
Protestant Juries to recollect, and to consider.
Or if they scruple to swear on the Evangelist, you are to say unto them, that
the Translation on which they swear, his Holiness the Pope has annulled, and
thereby it is become Heretical, and all as one as upon an ordinary Story-Book.

In case in strange Countries, ye be known by Merchants or others trading or
traveling thither, for to strengthen your designs the more for your intention,
you are dispensed with to Marry after their manner, and then ye safely may make
answer, that Heretical Marriage is no Marriage, for your Dispensation mollifies
it so, that at the worst it is but a Venial Sin, and may be forgiven.

Ye are not to Preach all after one method, The Popes contrivance to demolish
the Protestant Church of England.
but to observe the place wherein you come. If Lutheranism be prevalent, then
Preach Calvanism; if Calvanism, then Lutheranism; if in England, then either of
these, or John Husses opinions, Anabaptism, or any that are contrary to the
Holy See of St. Peter, by which your Function will not be suspected, and yet
you may still act on the interest of the Mother Church; there being as the
Council are agreed on, no better way to demolish that Church of Heresy, but by
mixtures of Doctrines, and by adding of Ceremonies, more than be at present
permitted.

Some of you who undertook to be of this sort of the heretical Episcopal
Society, This Dispensation shows how the Pope for his purpose dispenceth even
with the Protestant Church of England it self for her gain.
bring it as near to the Mother Church as you can; for then the Lutheran Party,
the Calvinists, the Anabaptists, and other Heretics will be averse thereunto,
and thereby make that Episcopal Heresy odious to all these, and be a means to
reduce all in time to the Mother Church.

You are further (during the time you take these shapes on you) to observe thus
much of the rules of the Mother Church; This Dispensation shows that the Pope
and his Emissaries be the Factions between the King, Parliament and Subjects.
the Mother Church disowneth the Regal Power to be her Superior, especially the
Heretical Powers Regal, or otherwise. Upon this ye are to take these measures:
You must bemone your Followers and Auditors, saying, Are not we persecuted for
righteousness sake? What Flesh and Blood can endure this! We be more zealous
against the Pope than they, and yet we be persecuted. By these means your
cotrivances will light on those ye lead along, and not on your selves. This
will advantage you much; hang you or burn you they dare not; but their
perpetual acts against the party that follow you, will take off the late
severities they lay on us, in saying, We burnt the Heretics their Ancestors,
and so at last bring that odium upon that Heretical Church in England, which
they have thrown on us. And as you will be more admired by the people, so the
Heretics will asperse that Heretical King and his Church as little differing
from us. These Instructions I am commanded to recommend unto you, as being
approved by his Holiness Julius the Third, your Supreme Father, and his
wholesome Council to be handled and performed to the utmost of your Powers,
Wealth, Parts, Learning and Capacities for the good of the Mother Church. Dated
the fourth I Would of November, 1551.

Beneventum.

Upon these consultations I was amazed to behold these and other the
contrivances that has been contrived against the Church of England ever since
King Henry her Royal Highness Father fell from the Sea of Rome, How the
Converts contrary design turned to his Conversion.
but yet duly taking memorandums of these things for my curiosities sake, at
first then designing to have practiced these instructions at last seriously
pondering upon these devices, and upon several others of this kind (which would
contain a large volume to set them out to public view,) I pretended to come
over hither to practice the same; and to color my feigned intention, I said I
took these memorandums for my instructions, and so left Paris in the month of
April, anno 1566. and landed at Dover the month following; from whence I came
to this Kingdom, where since I have satisfied the Archbishop and the rest of my
Brethren the Clergy, by my last confession publicly in this City of Dublin:
Yet for further assurance of my confidence in the Protestant Faith of England
now established by her Highness and her Parliament of this Nation. I Samuel
Mason being stricken in years, not knowing how soon it may please the Almighty
God to take me from hence, as also to take off all evil Calumnies, Aspersions
and Suspicions of me Samuel Mason, as if I should dye in the Roman Church. I do
humbly lay this my Narrative before your Lordship, as Chief under her Highness
in these her Dominions of Ireland, for a true and signal testimony of my
fidelity to her Highness her Government both in Church and State. Dated at
Dublin the 24th. day of August, 1566.

Samuel Mason.

I was the more desirous to keep this Memorial of this Convert, John Garvey his
design for preserving of this memorandum.
by reason the Speech (for the declaring of her Conversion) was spoke in my
Cathedral: I being but the year before by her Royal Highness preferred to that
Deanery, as appears by her Majesty's special Letter now on Record, and also I
have inserted this amongst others of my Diaries to remain hereafter with other
of the memorandums concerning this Deanery, desiring my Successors to follow
the same for the public benefit of their Successors, and to be produced as
time shall serve for their several occasions most opportunely and fit.

The Convert continued not fully two years in his Parsonship or Parish before
he died, The Converts death and burial.
my self preaching his Funeral Sermon, where several with sorrowful tears
lamented the loss of so true a Penitent, choosing this Text suitable for his
Conversion: Blessed are they that die in the Lord, etc. whom all must suppose
did, as appears by his hearty Recantation and declaration aforesaid: He was
buried in his Parish at Finglas, two miles distant from Dublin, on the Feast of
St. Bartholomew, Ann. Dom. 1568.

In the year of our Lord 1584. Sir John Perrot, then Lord Deputy of Ireland,
taking his Progress into the Province of Connaught, there came to his Lordship
a Friar Carmelite named Malachias Malone, by some called O Malone, (Brother
unto Mr. William Eughter) who had been of that Order about 36 years, even from
the beginning of King Edward the Sixth's Reign; this Malachias, and Sir John,
then having had great conference together in private. After which, this Friar
(in the face of a whole Congregation then met together in St. Stephens Church
of Gallway) renounced the Pope's Supremacy, and also the Popish Religion.

At this Recantation he first entered into the Church in his Friars Weeds, The
Friar's actions and speech upon his Conversion.
saying to the Congregation these words, Peccavi contra Deum Creatorem meum,
contra Reginam, and contra Leges Regnorum ejus. Then taking off his Friar's
Weeds, he said, Away with these Cloaks of Sin, I will cloth my self with the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Now, good people, bear witness, from henceforth I
conform my self to the Religion established in these her Majesty's Dominions,
by her Majesty and her Parliaments of England and Ireland.

At this time several of the Roman Catholic Friars and Jesuits lurking about
that City of Gallway, Sir John Perrott's care of Malachias.
had a design against this Convert, which coming to Sir John's ears, he would
not permit him to remain in that Province, but caused special care to be taken
of him, and so brought him before to Dublin, where he was carefully looked
after, and lay amongst my Lord Deputies Servants; the said Lord allowing unto
him a certain allowance for his maintenance during his Government in that her
Majesty's Realm of Ireland.

Sir John being this year absent from Dublin three months and odd days,
returned thither with this Friar upon the 11th. of October following, and so
gave her Majesty and the Lords of the Council here an account of this his
Progress; amongst the rest, this of Malachias was also.

Upon St. Simon and Jude's Feast, being the 28th. of October, and in the same
month of his return to Dublin, Sir John, the Archbishop of Dublin, Lord
Chancellor, the Primate of Armagh, the chief Judges and others of her Majesty's
Council assembled in the Castle of Dublin. This said Malachias (as appears by
their Letters unto the Lords here of her Majesty's Council) having acquainted
Sir John and that Council of several matters and discoveries which he had to
reveal unto them, he was called for to appear before them, at which time he
declared how he had been a grievous Traitor to God, and to her Majesty, and
there declared this declaration in writing following; having got Mr. Fenton to
write the same, that the Lord Deputy and Council might read it the easier.

I Malachias o Malone, born at Bullintobber in the County of Mayo, The Friars
Confession before the Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland.
Anno Christi 1522. in the year of our Lord 1548. upon the Assumption of our
Blessed Lady I received the Order of Mount Carmel, generally called Friars
Carmelites, and became a Member of that Order of the Convent of Ballinsmale in
the said County, continuing therein for the space of 12 years before I departed
from thence. Afterward in the year 1561. I journied toward Cecil in Spain, in
the company of Tho. Lynch, Garrott Fitzgerald of my own Order; also in the
company of my Cousin James Malone, John Bourke, Philip Corwine, and of Thady o
Bryan, who in the City of Sevell took on them the Order of St. Francis. I
tarried at that City about two years, and from thence journied into France,
then coming into the City of Paris, I met with several of my Countrey-folks,
who civily used me; At that time I was employed by Ludovic Freake, one of the
Order of Jesus, for to carry over certain papers of Instructions unto Shane o
Neale, then stirring in the Province of Ulster, which I safely delivered unto
him from Father Freake. The Contents thereof were, to set up his Title, which
his Ancestors claimed in that Province, and not to make any conditions with the
English, unless it were upon great advantage, or in great extremity; for France
and Scotland should both assist him, when he had raised up that Country.

After I had received these Instructions, he produced the Bishop of Rome's Bull
of Indulgence, and liberty unto all those who undertook to succor and assist
that Mother Church of Rome: The Contents be as these:

PIUS the Servant of the Servants of God, Pius Quintus his Bull for
Anathematizing Protestants, that the Undertakers for the advancement of Rome
might not scruple any thing when they are indulged.
etc. Whereas we have found and daily find Heresies increasing in several
Colonies, Principalities, Realms and Countries subject to the sacred See of St.
Peter our Predecessor, and they falling from, and deserting our Jurisdiction
with their blasphemous and railing writings against Us, our Ceremonies, and
Apostolic Jurisdictions and Privileges granted unto Us and our Succcessors
from God, and formerly generally acknowledged by Emperors, Kings and Princes to
be Ours, and our Predecessors due and right.

We therefore in the Name of the holy Trinity, of the Blessed Mother of God,
the Virgin Mary; of St. Peter, of St. Paul; in the name of the holy Host of
Heaven, of the Archangels and Angels, of the holy Apostles, Saints, and
blessed Martyrs, do Anathematize all Heretics lying, trading or traveling in
or amongst the same, wheresoever dispersed over the face of the whole Earth. We
further will and authorize the Wise and learned of our Ecclesiastics, expert
in divine Science, to labor, endeavor and devise all manner of devices to be
devised, to abate, assuage, and confound those Heresies repugnant to our sacred
Laws, that thereby these Heretics might be either recalled to confess their
Errors, and acknowledge our Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, or that a total
infamy may be brought upon them and their posterities by a perpetual discord
and contention amongst themselves, by which means they may either speedily
perish by God's wrath, or continue in eternal difference, to the reproach of
Jew, Turk, Heathen, nay, to the Devils themselves. Given at Rome the 6th. I Would
of May, Primo Pontif.

Pius Quintus.

The Copy of this Bull of Indulgence and Commission was translated unto me into
English by a learned Penman named John Warham Nephew to William Warham some
time Archbishop of Canterbury. After that I had got a Copy of this Bull, Mr.
Freake and I discoursed concerning the same, because I thought it impossible to
overthrow the Protestants, unless it were by force of Arms; but he replied that
it was easy-to do it otherwise, Rome's several sorts of Dispensations for to
ruin the Church of England.
by telling me that this Bull dispensed with the Devisor for devising of new
Tenants, Doctrines and Covenants; nay, that it dispensed to marry after an
Heretical Law; provided that the device intended was to promote the advancement
of Rome, and that Marriage, as they performed it, was no Marriage, but a venial
sin: Then I made answer, In case these men be taken with this kind of life, and
so totally fall from Rome, what will you do then?

He told me after this manner, How Rome gets all her Intelligence and
Knowledge, secrets of Kings, and their Councils.
to the best of my remembrance, that those who undertook to serve the
Mother Church, entered their names in the chief Convents of their several
Orders, and that in their Commissions they have several names, three or four,
in case they be discovered, and that when they have intelligence, they may fly
to another place, and still keep correspondence with the Convents.

I demanded of him which fort had the granting of these Licenses.

He told me that Pope Pius had granted a Commission to the Wisest and most
Learned sort of the Orders of St. Dominick, St. Francis, A demonstration which
of these Orders generally be by the Pope Indulged to put false Doctrines
amongst us Protestants.
and of his own Order, of the Society of Jesus, to keep a general
correspondence, every quarter at least, with the Convents of these Orders,
which testimonies were to be shown upon these general Assemblies, as signal
demonstrations of their fidelity to the Church of Rome. I told him that it was
worth my journey coming out of Ireland for to travel, because I had learned
much experience, and should be cunning for the future.

To this he said, How Popish Zeal is revenged on the Protestant.
you see how we be by the Heretics put to our shifts every day more then
other; therefore we must try our skill to be even with them.

I demanded of him, what could it avail the Church of Rome to set up so many
Heresies, seeing that the Devisers dare not openly acknowledge the Church of
Rome's Supremacy, but be forced to rail at the Pope, and at her.

He replied, A pretty Cheat for disguised Papists to rail at Rome, and yet be
of the Church of Rome.
when they rail at Rome, and their hearts be contrary, it is no sin; they may
mean Rome, and name it, as it was in the ancient Roman days; and also the word
Pope, for that word in Latin Papa, is as much as to say, a Bishop; so that he
may mean one of their Heretic Bishops, and that these mental railings advanced
the Sea of Rome, and furthered their designs in several respects.

This shows how Rome by her Phanaticism hinders uniformity in the Church of
England.
First, as it made Heresies and Schisms amongst Heretics, so it hindered
uniformity in the Church of England.

The Papists all plead they can turn Protestants, by reason there are so many
sorts of them.
Secondly, that it was a great advantage for preventing Roman Catholics to turn
away from their Principles.

Let Dissenters observe this, and how the Papists came to cast the late Plot,
begun Anno 1678. upon them.
And lastly, when ever the Church of Rome shall have a design to destroy
Heresy, she will never want intelligence, having one or more of these wise men
amongst these several sorts of Heretics.

Then I asked, how shall we be able to know her Majesty's secrets, and the
intents of the Church of England?

He said, A warning for Protestants not to match with Papists, or to keep
Popish Servants.
We have also dispensed with that, and several of that Church have either a
Roman Catholic Wife, or the Wife a Roman Catholic Husband, or they, if both
Heretics, perhaps keep Roman Catholic Servants, which are bound to obey the
Mother Church when ever commanded.

I entreated Mr. Freake to give me a Copy of the Heads of the directions that
were given unto those who were licenced to perform what this Bull had
permitted; which was thus: Observe how in Cromwell's days Marriages were
altered for this purpose.
They were permitted to marry upon two accounts; First, because they might not
be suspected; Secondly, Heretical Marriage is no Marriage, if their Matrimonial
Ceremonies be contrary to the Romish Orders.

Several of these so licenced are to take diverse Callings according to their
inclinations, Thus Rome taught Dissension in the late usurped times.
yet to Preach and Expound; and in case they be asked upon what grounds they
came by this Science, they must reply by the Spirit of God, by revelation, and
by searching of the Scriptures.

In case they be asked upon what grounds they take upon them to Preach, In the
usurped days they generally called it Teaching, and not Preaching.
they must reply, We Preach not, but Teach.

But in case they ask, and say, Why do ye then Teach it self? Let Statesmen
consider of this Jesuitical fetch for Teaching.
ye must reply, because the Sons of the Prophets did Teach; so did Jehoshaphat
and his Princes, likewise did the Disciples before Christ's Resurrection, also
the Scribes and Pharisees, and diverse of the Church of Corinth, and these were
not Churchmen.

If they say by this means every man may Preach that lists, A further
Jefuitical fetch to adorn the Schisms of Rome.
you must reply, I could wish we were all Preachers and Prophets, because Moses
wished all the Lords people were Prophets.

If we should make but one or two divisions amongst the English Heretics,
Jesuitical Policies not to permit the Popish Laity to read Scripture.
it were all in vain, and our labor lost; and this the Council of Trent a
little before its dissolution left to our Society to handle, who from Paris,
Rome, and from several places of Italy corresponded with each other, and
concluded that Rome her self had not continued in that splendour as she has
done hitherto, in case her Popes and Council had not brought in novelties to
please peoples fancies, by which means it confounded the capacities of the
Laity and common sort, as they were not permitted to read or search the
Scriptures. How they have deluded the Protestant Laity by misconstruing the
Scripture, knowing they be permitred to read them.
But by reason that the Heretics of England, and other Provinces permitted
them to read, it was necessary before they were well grounded in their
Principles, to preach variety unto them, to some the Doctrine of Free Will; to
some, that Children should not be baptized till they come to Age; to others, a
Monarchy of earthly happiness after this temporal life; to others, that the
righteousness of man depends not upon the Faith of Christ, but upon charity
and affliction; and that any gifted man may either give or receive the
Sacrament. All these and several such like observations as shall daily spring
forth, must ye undertake to perform outwardly with great fervency, for thereby
ye will not be suspected or discovered; for that one method being duly
observed, will absolve ye, and hide your designs designed.

Then receiving these Instructions, I lest Paris, What he delivered to Shane O
Neal from Father Freake whilst he was a Papist.
and journied, and came to Callis, from thence I sailed into Scotland, and so
came for Ireland, where I gave the Papers delivered unto me by Father Freake
unto Shane O Neale, which was in the year of Christ 1564.

Judgments falling upon the Head of Shane O Neal for his Treachery and
Rebellion against our Sovereign Lady the Queen. How he came to be Converted.
I said within my self, God does not prosper these unjust means, yet continuing
still in my profession of the Order of Mount Carmel, I perceived always the
Roman Catholics projects to fail them, which smote my Conscience very often,
so that I resolved to repent, that I might lay my bones in the Grave in peace,
with hopes of a joyful Resurrection, when I and all mankind shall come before
our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, before whose Tribunal all must appear, and
receive according to their works, and Faith in him alone.

Witness my hand this 28th. of October, Anno Dom. 1584 Malachias Malone.

The Original of this was sent to her Majesty and Council from Sir John Perrot
Knight, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, and that Council, as a signal assurance of
this Convert's Reformation to the Protestant Church of England now established.

Although we should have placed these following Memorials before the Conversion
of Mason or Malone, yet happening to cast an eye thereon, being entered amongst my
Fathers Manuscripts, and given unto him from John King some time Dean of Tuum,
I have here set them forth, that the Reader may see how sensible the Lord
Cicell was of the Romish Conspiracies against the Church of England and her
Majesty.

Worthy Sir,
You can assure her Highness of my care and charge which I undertook at my
departing from her Grace and the Honorable Privy Council: I assure you I do
not miss-spend my little time, it being so precious, as you and others can
testify by my former Intelligences sent by the hands of Captain Russel, of
which I was assured came safe to the Council. I intended to have presented this
enclosed with my own hands to her Grace, but her lost message to me has been
the occasion of sending it sooner upon two accounts; it being a matter of
sudden prevention, and likewise having so sure a hand, and the convenience of
Mr. Edward Maxwell's and others of our English Factors here going from hence,
and guarded by her Graces Ship called the Swallow, I shall make all the speed I
can possible, and with God's help see your Worship as cheerful as ever, though
I am somewhat altered by this last Voyage. God preserve your undertakings both
at home and abroad, for the public good of her gracious Majesty, and welfare
of the Nation.

Your assured Servant, E. Dennum.
Venice, April 13th. 1564.

A list of several consultations amongst the Cardinals, Bishops, and others of
the several Orders of Rome now a contriving and conspiring against her gracious
Majesty, and the established Church of England.

Pius having consulted with the Clergy of Italy, and assembling them together,
it was by general consent voted, that the immunity of the Romish Church and her
Jurisdiction is required to be defended by all her Princes, as the principal
Church of God.

And to encourage the same, the Council has voted that Pius should bestow her
Graces Realm on that Prince who shall attempt to conquer it.

There was a Council ordered by way of a Committee, who contain three of the
Cardinals, two of the Archbishops, six of the Bishops, and as many of the late
Order of the Jesuits, who daily increase, and come into great favor with the
Pope of late: These do present weekly methods, ways and contrivances for the
Church of Rome, which hold the great Council for the week following in
employment how to order all things for the advancement of the Romish Faith.
Some of these contrivances coming to my hands by the help of the Silver key, be
as follow:

1. The people of England being much averted from their Mother Church of Rome,
they have thought fit, sounding out their inclinations how the common sort are
taken with the Liturgy in English, for to offer her Grace to confirm it, with
some things altered therein, provided that her Grace and the Council do
acknowledge the same from Rome and her Coucil; which if it be denied, as we
suppose it will, then these are to asperse the Liturgy of England by all ways
and conspiracies imaginable.

2. A License or Dispensation to be granted to any of the Romish Orders to
Preach, speak, or write against the now established Church of England, amongst
other Protesters against Rome, purposely to make England odious to them, and
that they may retain their assistances promised them in case of any Princes
invasion, and the parties so licenced and indulged (dispensed with) to be
seemingly as one of them, and not to be either taxed, checked, or excommunicated
for so doing; and further, for the better assurance of the party so licenced
and indulged, the party to change his name least he be discovered, and to keep
a quarternal correspondence with any of the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, or others of the chief Monasteries, Abbeys, etc. At which
quarternal correspondence shall not only give the Pope intelligence of
Heretical conspiracy, but be a full assurance of their fidelity to Rome.

This proposal was much debated in the Council, which caused some of the
Council to say, how shall we prevent it, in case any of the parties so licenced
flinch from us, and receive a good reward, and fall off from our correspondency.

3. It was then ordered that there should be several appointed for to watch the
parties so licenced and indulged, and to give intelligence to Rome of their
behavior, which parties are sworn not to divulge to any of those so licenced
or indulged what they be, or from whence they came, but to be strange, and to
come in as one of their Converts, so that the party shall be cautious how and
which way he bends.

It was afterward debated how it should be ordered in case any of the
Heretical Ministry of England should become as they who had these Licenses, and
what should be done in that case.

4. It was then answered by the Bishop of Men's, that that was the thing they
aimed at, and that they desired no more than separation amongst the Heretics
of England, and by so doing, in case any animosity be amongst them, the Church
established by the Heretic Queen, (as they so termed her Grace) there would be
the less to oppose the Mother Church of Rome, whenever opportunity served:
This reason of the Bishop pacified the whole Council.

5. It was granted not only Indulgence and Pardon to the party that should
assault her Grace either private or in public; or to any Cook, Brewer, Baker,
Physician, Vintner, Grocer, Surgeon, or any other Calling whatsoever, that
should or did make her away out of this World, a Pardon, but an absolute
Remission of Sins to the Heirs of that parties Family sprang from him, and a
perpetual Annuity to them for ever; and the said Heir to be never beholding to
any of the Fathers for pardon, be they of what Order soever, unless it pleased
himself, and to be one of those Privy Council whosoever Reigned, successively.

6. It was ordered for the better assurance of further intelligence to the Sea
of Rome, to give Licenses to any that shall swear to that Supremacy due
Obedience and Allegiance to her Powers to dispense with Sacraments, Baptism,
Marriages, and other Ceremonies of our now established Church in England, that
the parties so obliged may possess and enjoy any Office or Employment either
Ecclesiastical, Military or Civil, and to take such Oaths as shall be imposed
upon them, provided that the said Oaths be taken with a reserve for to serve
the Mother Church of Rome whenever opportunity serves, and thereby, in so
doing, the Act in Council was passed it was no sin, but meritorious, until
occasion served to the contrary; and that when it was so served for Rome's
advantage, the party was absolved from his Oath.

7. It was also ordered that all the Romish Orders, as well Regular as Secular,
to cherish all the Adherents of the Mother Church of Rome whenever occasion
serves, to be in readiness at the times that shall be appointed, and to
contribute according to their capacities what in them lies for the promotion
of the Romish Cause.

8. It is ordered that the Romish Party shall propose a Match for the Queen of
the Catholic Princes for to further or promote the Romish Faith.

9. It is ordered upon pain of Excommunication, and of a perpetual Curse to
light on the Families and Posterities of all those of the Mother Church of
Rome, who will not promote or assist by means of Money, or otherwise, Mary
Queen of Scotlands pretense to the Crown of England.

10. It is also ordered that every Romish Catholic within England and Ireland,
or any of Englands Territories, to contribute to those Romish Bishops, Parish
Priests, etc. that are privately, or shall be by Rome set over them, to pay all
the Church duties, as if they were in possession, upon pain of Excommunication
of them and their Posterity.

11. It is ordered that the Sea of Rome do dispense with all parties of the
Roman Faith to swear against all Heretics of England as elsewhere, and that
not to be a crime, or an offense against the soul of the party, the Accuser
taking the Oath, with an intention to promote or advance the Roman Catholic
Faith.

The Original being kept private in her Majesty's secret Closet amongst other
Papers of secrecy at that time not to be published, having a Correspondent at
that time in Italy to send her Majesty Intelligence of foreign conspiracies
and contrivances.

This same noble Peer mentions in the same Book of his Memorials this relation,
which is also suitable for our purpose.

In the month of June, A Relation of a Puritan Preacher permitted by the
Jesuits to Preach dissension at Norwich.
Anno 1584. was Francis Throgmorton seized on in London, and several Treasons
were laid to his charge; although he was a Papist, yet he was a great friend to
one Samuel Harper, who several times Preached after a Puritannical manner in
the Town of Norwich: This great conversation of his with this pretended
Minister, caused great suspicions to arise in that Town amongst the
Inhabitants, there being more than ordinary betwixt these two.

It chanced that one Richard Cade an Inhabitant of the same Town being present
then at London, How it came to be discovered.
and at the Trials of Edward Arden and John Summervile, who were both condemned
but the year before for Conspiracy and Treason against the Queens Majesty; at
which Trial he heard Edward Arden confess that this Throgmorton was engaged in
the same Conspiracy. Now this Mr. Cade being well acquainted with Throgmorton,
informed the Lord Mayor of London of what he had heard, who upon this
Information apprehended Throgmorton; but treasonable Papers being found then in
his Pocket, verified Mr. Cade's Evidence. Amongst the Papers was found a Letter
dated at Norwich the second of June from the abovenamed Richard Harper, By
Harper's Enquiry it is plain that the Plot of 1588 was then a hatching.
with these expressions: Let us know how our Friends from Spain and yours in
London do correspond, and whether that King continues his purpose, that the
Engagers may be satisfied, and have notice.

Upon these words expressed, Mr. Cade advised that his Chambers both at Norwich
and in London might be searched, and that Samuel Harper may be seized on, which
was approved of, and so ordered; but Samuel Harper by some notice having
warning, fled not above three hours before the Pursuivant could come to
Norwich, yet several Papers of Treason were found in this Throgmorton's
Chamber, The treasonable Papers that were found in Throgmorton's Chamber.
amongst which there were Licenses and Pardons from the Jesuits Convent at
Sevill. The undertakers were to be of what Trade or Calling soever they
pleased, to teach what Doctrine, to be of what Opinion or Religion soever,
provided that they assembled quarterly together, and keep a monthly
correspondence with that Convent. Papers to the same effect from that Societies
Convents at Paris and at Rome were found dated from thence, How the Jesuits
styled the D. of N.
touching the D. of N. who was only styled by the name of Thomas Howard, Gent.
our very good Friend. Had these Papers been extant at his Trial, they would
have satisfied her Highness and her Council very much; yet being discovered at
this present, they give us great insight how Rome contrived the Wars of
Scotland, and so many Traitors against her Highness, and that Queen Mary of
Scotland was correspondent with them. The Originals her Highness is loath to
have published for several reasons best known to her Majesty.

This Francis Thogmorton being condemned for High Treason, was drawn from
Newgate unto Tyburn, where he was hanged, bowelled, and quartered on the 10th.
of July following; Observe how the Pope licenses Jesuits and Friars to Preach
in a Dissenters Habit to make a faction with Protestants.
before his Execution he confessed that there were in England above a dozen
that he knew who were permitted to Preach by the Jesuits Licenses, purposely to
breed a Faction in these Dominions; but by reason that he was condemned, and to
be hanged, he thought he was not bound to discover their names. This account I
have from the Sheriffs, certified from the Records of Guild Hall, where he was
Tried, and received his Sentence. Many more things of this nature may we bring
during this gracious Queens days; but we shall abbreviate, and draw nearer to
her Successor King James of happy memory.

Pope Clement the 8th. consulting with his Emissaries how this King had married
into a Protestant Monarchy, Pope Clement the 8ths. project to hinder King James
his succession to Queen Elizabeth.
set all his Engines at work to defraud this Monarch of the succession after
Queen Elizabeth; for about the year 1601. this Pope sent his Breves (as they
call them) into England, warning all the Clergy and Laity that professed the
Roman Faith, not to admit after the Queens death any Prince how near soever in
Blood to the King of England, unless he should bind himself by Oath to promote
the Catholic Roman Religion to the utmost of his power. To promote this their
wicked conspiracy, at the same time came into Scotland two factious and wicked
spirited Jesuits, viz. John Hamilton and Edmond Hay, the first especially, for
that he was known to have been a chief Instrument of the Seditions raised in
the City of Paris in the time of the league. King James having intelligence of
their repairing into his Dominion, set forth a Proclamation inhibiting their
resort under the pain of Treason: In which Proclamation, to make them the more
odious, these two were compared to Bothwell and Gowry, his Majesty declaring at
that present that he would judge no otherwise of their Receptors, than of those
that did treasonably pursue his own life; yet notwithstanding this Kings
Proclamation, they found holes to lurk in amongst those of their own Religion
in the Northern parts, and by this means kept in the Country, till after some
years that John Hamilton was apprehended and carried to the Tower of London,
where he died before he came to Trial. Still they continued their projects
against this King, and his Title to England, knowing they had lost all hope of
gaining his affection, or obtaining any promise of the toleration of their
Religion when he should come to that Crown. Thereupon they fell to treat of a
Marriage betwixt the Lady Arabella, and Robert Prince of Savoy; and that not
succeeding then, they proposed a Match betwixt the said Lady and a Grandchild
of the Earl of Hartfords, judging by this conjunction many would befriend them
to the excluding of this King from the succession of the Crown of England; but
the Queens Majesty, who truly favored the Right of this Monarch, though she
would not openly profess so much, dashed all these Jesuitical projects, and so
caused an eye to be kept upon the Lady Arabella, as also upon all who resorted
unto her, by whose Majestic wisdom this high Monarch came peaceably, and was
invited by an unanimous consent of her Majesty's Privy Council to his Crown of
England, as may appear by that Councils proceedings after the Queens death, by
their Letter subscribed by that Council then in being, which Bishop Spotswood
specifies in his History of the Church and State of Scotland, page 473.

This King was scarcely settled in his Throne to settle the affairs of his Realm
of England when this Papal Society contrived to have executed a quick dispatch
of King and State, as appears by their bloody contrivance of the Gunpowder
Plot, which being already set at large to public view, the Narrative we refer
to the Reader, and so omit it. Many more Jesuitical Plots of this nature we
could bring in during this Kings days contrived, as that of Gundymores, and
others, but shall lay them aside, and treat of matters of this nature contrived
during the Reign of his Son Charles the First of happy Memory.

We have already mentioned the Papal contrivance for a Match for the Lady
Arabella, How the Papists thought by the late Kings Marrying of Qu. Mary to
bring in the French Kings Forces into Ireland to invade that Nation, and so to
claim a Title to that Crown.
as a means to defraud the Kings of Scotlands Right to the Crown of England,
the Papists rejoicing at the conjunction of England and France by the Marriage
of Charles the First, and Queen Mary of France, hoping thereby to raise such
another claim to the Crown of Egland as France did in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth by that Match of Mary Queen of Scots; they contrived a way to set
Ireland in an uprore; for King Charles the First was no sooner settled in his
Throne when Ireland was full of the rumor of Lewis the 13ths preparations and
intentions for the invading of the same, as appears as well by the Records of
the Council, if doubted, as also by Sir James Ware's Memorials. The noise of
these preparations caused the Lord Henry Faulkland then Lord Deputy of this
Nation, to advise with the Privy Council what course to take for to oppose
these French intentions. They upon consultation in this affair set forth a
Proclamation that the chief of the Kingdom should meet at Dublin, and then to
demand a general Contribution of the Inhabitants for to raise and maintain
Forces to oppose that King. The Castle of Dublin being first appointed for that
Assembly, St. Patrick's Church in Dublin was afterward ordered for this
Assembly to meet at.

The Papists were upon high terms, The Papists would not assist their King but
upon terms.
and would not contribute toward the safety of this Nation, unless the Lord
Deputy and Council would grant them a toleration for their Religion, and also
leave to build themselves Churches, and pretended Religious Houses as many as
they listed, and where they pleased in all Cities and Corporate Towns.

These their proposals put a stop to these proceedings for the present, so that
this Assembly was for the present dismissed, it being about Michaelmass Term,
anno 1626. And another day was nominated for them to meet again, until they had
acquainted his late Majesty with their demands; yet in the interim James Usher
late Primate of Ardmagh assembled all our Protestant Bishops together, and so
prevented these Popish demands by this their protestation, as follows. The
Protestant Clergy of the Church of Ireland, their protestation against these
Popish terms


The Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous: Their Faith and
Doctrine Enormous and Heretical: Their Church, in respect of both, Apostatical.
To give them therefore a toleration, or to consent that they may freely
exercise their Religion, and profess their Faith and Doctrine, is a grievous
sin, and that in two respects.

For first, it is to make our selves accessory not only to their Superstitions,
Idolatries, Heresies, and in a word, to all the abominations of Popery, but
also (which is a consequent of the former) to the perdition of the seduced
people, which perish in the deluge of the Catholic Apostasy.

For the second, to grant them toleration in respect of any Money to be given,
or Contribution to be made by them, is to set Religion to sale, and with it the
Souls of people, whom Christ our Savior has redeemed with his most precious
Blood. And as it is a great sin, so also a matter of most dangerous
consequence; the consideration whereof we commend to the Wise and Judicious,
beseeching the Great God of Truth to make them who are in Authority, zealous of
God's Glory, and of the advancement of true Religion, zealous, resolute and
courageous against all Popery and Idolatry, Amen.

Signed.

Ja. Armachanus. Anto. Midensis. To. Dunensis and Coronensis. Richard Cork
Cloyn and Roscensis. Tho. Killmorensis and Ardahensis. Mich. Waterfordensis and
Lismorensis. Mal. Cassilensis. Tho Fernensis and Laughlanensis. George
Derensis. Andr. Aladensis. Theo. Dromorensis. Franc. Limiricksensis.
This being confered and agreed upon the 26th. November. Anno 1626.

Upon the 23d. of April following Doctor George Downham then Bishop of Derry
(the next Assembly being then to meet) in the midst of his Sermon in
Christ-Church, Anno 1627. Dr. Downham then Bishop of Derry, his protestation
against these terms in Christ-Church in Dublin.
took occasion to speak something to this purpose, saying, that many amongst us
for gain and outward respects were ready to consent to a toleration of a false
Religion, which if they did, they were guilty of putting to sale not only the
souls of Papists, but their own souls also. This is not my opinion (said he)
only, but the opinion of the Archbishops, Bishops, and of the Protestant Clergy
of his Majesty's whole Kingdom, which I think fit to publish. He had no sooner
uttered these words, when all the Protestants then in that Church cried out
aloud, Amen, Amen. Then making a respit till the people had done crying out,
Amen. I spoke nothing to hinder the Kings Service; for we all of the Clergy
desire not only the sole Army of 5500 men (that being the number) may be
maintained, but also a far greater Army, besides the Trained-Bands, and could
wish that his Majesty would reserve to himself the most of those particular
Graces of late offered and granted to the dishonor of God, and to himself, the
prejudice and impeachment of true Religion, and what was wanting might be
supplied by the Country, to which he exhorted all true Christians and faithful
Subjects. The people upon this cried unanimously, Our Lives and Fortunes be at
his Majesty's command, for the good of the Protestant Faith of England.

The next day the late Lord Primate, Primate Usher his words against the same
toleration.
Usher, Preached before the same Auditory, and took these words for his Text,
Love not the World, nor the things that are in the World: Which words he
applied according to those times. These two Sermons so prevailed with the
Protestants, so strengthened their resolutions, that they proposed so largely
toward a maintenance for an Army to oppose the French King, that these Popish
Proposals (which we have already mentioned) fell, and the Papists much ashamed
and discontented; then the Lord Deputy and Council dismissed this Assembly.

There is one material thing to be observed by the Reader, The Lord Faulklands
Lady known to be a Papist.
that this Lord Faulklands Lady was a great Heiress to an Estate in England,
which caused her Husband to seek all means the more to please her, she being a
fickle minded woman in her judgment. The Papists of this Kingdom depended much
on this Ladies being of their own Religion, although outwardly, whether out of
compliance to her Lord, or by the advice of Popish Policies she went to Church,
but going out of this Kingdom into England, she returned unto her Popish
inclinations, which then was a signal testimony of her Religion all along.

These Jesuitical projects were not sufficient to satisfy a Romish appetite; A
Riot committed by the Popish Clergy, anno 1629
seeing that these devices could take no effect, the Jesuits and Friars of
Dublin, out of spleen, began to Preach Sedition unto the Papist Inhabitants
within that Metropolis; continuing after this method for certain days, it came
at last to Lancelot Buckley, alias Bulkley his ears, then Archbishop of the
same See, who went and related what he had heard touching this seditious
Doctrine, and desired of Adam Loftus Lord Viscount Elye, and Richard Earl of
Cork, then Lords Justices of the Nation, to send a file of Musketeers, and a
Warrant to seize on these Malefactors; but coming to the Friar Carmelites-House
then in Cook-street in Dublin, where these Friars were infusing of Rebellion
into several of the then Popish Aldermen and Citizens of this City, they arose
unanimously joining to confront the Archbishop and his attendance in a very
high nature, by wounding some of the Soldiers, and those who assisted the
Archbishop, that not being sufficient, they went to assault the Bishops person,
who for safety was fain to run through the Streets of Dublin and cry for help,
and so obtained safeguard by running into a House, or otherwise he had been in
danger of his life. This Riot of the Friars was committed about Christmas,
1629.

The Lords Justices upon this committed the Popish Aldermen and others of the
Citizens; amongst which of the Aldermen one Mr. Jyans was one. On the ninth of
January the Lords Justices and Council gave his Majesty and the Lords of the
Council of England an account of these disasters, which coming to those Lords
hands, they returned this answer.

By your Letters dated the ninth of January, The Lords of the Council of
England to the Lords of the Council in Ireland, Jan. 31. 1629.
we understand how the seditious Riot moved by the Friars and their Adherents
at Dublin, has by your good order and resolution been happily suppressed; and we
doubt not, but by this occasion you will consider how much it concerns the
good Government of that Kingdom, to prevent in time the first growing of such
evils: for where such people be permitted to swarm, they will soon grow
licentious, and endure no Government but their own, which cannot otherwise be
restored than by a due and seasonable execution of the Law, and of such
directions as from time to time have been sent from his Majesty and this Board.
Now it redoundeth much to the Honor of his Majesty, that the World shall take
notice of the ability and good-service of his Ministers there, which in person
he has been pleased openly in Council, and in most gracious manner, to approve
and commend, whereby you may be sufficiently encouraged to go on with like
resolution and moderation till the work be fully done, as well in the City, as
in other places of your Kingdom; the carriage whereof we must leave to your
good discretions, whose particular knowledge of the present state of things can
guide you better, when and where to carry a soft or harder hand; only this we
hold necessary to put you in mind of, that you continue in that good agreement
amongst your selves for this and other services, which your Letters do express,
and for which we commend you much, that the good Servants of the King and State
may find encouragement equally from you all, and the ill-affected may find no
support or countenance from any, nor any other contrivances used, but by
general advice, for avoiding of further evils shall be allowed, and such
Magistrates and Officers, if any shall be discovered, that openly or underhand
favor such disorders, or do not their duties in suppressing them, and
committing the offenders, you shall do well to take all fit and safe
advantages, by the punishment or displacing of a few, to make the rest more
cautious. This we write, not as misliking the fair course you have taken, but
to express the concurrency of our judgments with yours, and to assure you of
our assistance in all such occasions wherein, for your future proceedings we
have advised. And his Majesty requires you accordingly to take order, first,
that the house wherein Seminary Friars appeared in their habits, and wherein
the Reverend Archbishop and the Mayor of Dublin received the first affront, be
speedily demolished, and be the mark of terror to the resisters of Authority,
and that the rest of the Houses erected or employed there, or elsewhere, to the
use of suspicious Societies, be converted to Houses of Correction, and to set
the people on work, or to other public uses, for the advancement of Justice,
good Arts or Trades; and further, that you find out the Lands, Leases or
Revenues applied to their uses, and dispose thereof according to the Law, and
that you certify also the places and institutions of all such Monasteries,
Priories, Nunneries, and other Religious Houses, and the names of all such
persons as have put themselves to be Brothers and Sisters therein, especially
such as are of note, to the end such evil Plants be not permitted to take root
any where in that Kingdom, which we require you to take care of.

As for the supply of Munition, which you have reason to desire, we have taken
effectual order that you shall receive it with all convenient speed, and so bid
you heartily farewell.

Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. Lord High
Chamberlain. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Kelly.
Lord Viscount Dorchester. Lord Newbergh. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Cook. Sir William Alexander.
His Majesty beholding and considering how rebellious his Popish Subjects have
hitherto been, The Papists design to take off the Earl of Straffords Head.
as we have already expressed even from the first entrance into his Throne, some
few years after sent over Thomas Lord Wentworth (afterward Created Earl of
Strafford) to Govern his Kingdom of Ireland, who executed that place to that
Kingdoms advantage by civilizing the Inhabitants, and bringing them to an
English Station, as to this day appears by those English Plantations by him
ordered in the Counties of Longford, Wicklow, and other places. These acts or
good deeds of his pleased not some peoples fancies, especially not the sancies
of the Irish Natives of the Popish Religion during this Noble-mans Government.
He obtained a Grant of four Subsidies for the maintenance of an Army, which was
irksome to the ancient Natives of that Land: He being recalled about the year
1640. was not long in England before he was Indicted of High Treason, his
Enemies at that time casting all aspersions imaginable to make him odious to
most men; amongst which aspersions they gave out as if he were inclined to
Popery, but his actions during his Government in Ireland shows yet to the
contrary: He was beheaded in the Month of May 1641. then his Enemies having
removed so great a Pillar of State as this Nobleman was, began to show their
teeth; for upon the 23d. of October following, by their Popish Rebellion they
testified what they aimed at.

And the better to accomplish their design for the Plot of 1641. one White
wrote this Letter following to a Popish Peer of Ireland, that the City of
Dublin might be at that appointed time under a Popish Jurisdiction.

A Letter to a Popish Peer of Ireland, how he may secure the City of Dublin
against the Protestants, at the prefixed time appointed and plotted by the
Irish Papists to rebel in the year 1641. found with other papers at the taking
of Droghedah after the Rout of Remines.
My Lord,
IF you can procure a Patent for the City of Dublin to make their Mayors Lord
Mayors as well as London, This Letter directed to the Lord Viscount G.
their policy will be to offer the Catholic Aldermen to become free of the
same, none being so proper to consult herein as Alderman Jyans, who must
declare to the Table of Aldermen the great affection your Lordship has for
that City, and also tell them how you are going over, and shall tell His
Majesty how much they be his faithful Subjects; and in case they would accept
of your Lordship, you would honor their City to become their first Lord Mayer,
and so procure them Letters Patents for that Dignity, and that it may remain
upon Record how a Noble Peer of the Realm became the first Lord Mayor thereof.
This being broken unto them, and his Majesty's Letters procured for the passing
of this Patent, the work is in a manner perfected. We be in a fair way ere long
to assuage Heresy and her Episcopacy; for Exetor's Book has done more for the
Catholics than they could have done themselves; he having written that
Episcopacy in Office and Jurisdiction is absolutely (Jure Divino) which was the
old quarrel between our Bishops and King Henry the 8th. (during his Heresy)
then disputed upon, which Book does not a little trouble our Adversaries, who
declare this Tenent of Exetor's to be contrary to the Laws of this Land. You
will see a great Oak fall speedily, which formerly shaded poor Ireland's Glory.
All is like to prosper here, so I hope with you there. You shall have no more
from me till we meet at London, which I hope will be shortly.

Your Lordships Humble and True Servant at call, T. White.
London, Feb. 12. 1639. Copia vera ab Originale. Vt fuit cum Hen. Midensis
Episcopo.




In the year 1640. See Mr. Prynne's demonstration, showing how the Papists
contrived the late Kings Murder, and the then Rebellions in Scotland and
England. George Con a Scotch-man being then the Pope's Nuntio. Prynne's Rome's
Masterpiece, pa. 18.
Sir William Boswell being then Agent for his Majesty at the Hague, having
intelligence of a Plot then advising by the Jesuits and the Church of Rome to
take off his Majesty, in case he would not tolerate their Religion, wrote this
discovery unto William Laud then Archbishop of Canterbury, who immediately
showed the same to his Majesty. The Papists upon this account, and also
remembering the overthrow he gave to Fisher the Jesuit, thought they could not
accomplish their evil design unless they took away this Pillar of the Church
also; then under a dissenting disguise they cast aspersions on this holy
Father, knowing nothing could make him more odious to the Commonalty than to
say that he was a Papist, or endeavored to bring in Popery; thus continuing in
the gall of bitterness until he was cut off also.

Rome having accomplished her desires thus far, now begins to aim at a higher
strain: His Majesty being about this time in great distress, wanting Moneys and
other necessaries to support him against Romish and Puritanical policies, made
his application to those Subjects whom he knew he might confide in, who served
him faithfully to the uttermost of their abilities; yet several Judas's
sprinkled amongst them betrayed them with their kisses; for it is well known, as
we shall afterward make it appear from sufficient Authors, how Rome ordered
her affairs underhand. For to propagate this Plot of hers, she divides her
Emissaries thus: She sprinkles some of her Tribe amongst the faithful of the
Church of England, and suffers them openly to declare themselves Protestants,
yet with Oaths and Protestations to pretend to serve their King. Then with the
dissenting party she Jesuitically disguises her self into a Puritanical dress
to serve the adverse party, hereby the better to find out the intentions of
Kings and Princes, and so to play her Game accordingly, by which means they
brought the Head of that glorious Kingly Martyr to the Block.

To prove that Rome was the chief Instrument to draw the Subject into this
horrible Engagement, we will begin to bring that Reverend person Dr. Du Moulyn
for one of our Authors, who in his vindication of the sincerity of the
Protestant Religion writes thus:

When the business of the late bad times are once ripe for an History, How Rome
contrived the late Kings death. See Dr. Dumoulyn. page 58, 59.
and Time, the bringer of Truth, has discovered the mysteries of Iniquity, and
the depths of Satan, which have wrought so much ruin and mischief, it will be
found that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the arts of the Court
of Rome, that Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending on the
Church of England; and Fifth Monarchy men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy, and that in the Committees for the destruction of the King
and the Church, they had their Spies and their Agents. The Roman Priest and
Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our holy King,
and Martyr, flourished with his Sword, and said Now the greatest enemy that we
have in the World is gone. To confirm what this Reverend Divine has written,
we entreat the Readers to cast their eyes on these words, which Mr. Henry
Fowls specifies in his History of the wicked Plots and conspiracies of our
pretended Saints, page 14. His words being thus:

When the late King was murdered, Prynne's brief necessary vindication, page
45.
Mr. Henry Spotswood, riding casually that way just as his Head was cut off,
espied the Queens Confessor there on Horseback, in the habit of a Trooper,
drawing forth his Sword, and flourishing it over his own head in triumph (as
others then did): At which Mr. Spotswood being much amazed, and being
familiarly acquainted with the Confessor, Another testimony showing how Rome
contrived the death of the late King.
rode up to him, and said; O Father! I little thought to have found you here,
or any of your Profession, at such a sad spectacle: To which he answered, that
there were at least forty or more Priests and Jesuits there present on
Horseback, besides himself. The resultancy of this Story is home and pat; and
for the truth of it, I refer you to Mr. Prynne.

Other Authors could we cite, but to rational men knowing these two be
sufficient proofs for our vindication, we shall proceed no further for a
testimony; yet we shall desire the Reader to consider how so soon as these
Priests and Jesuits had perfected this evil fact, to take off the malignity of
it from themselves, they hit it in the teeth of the dissenting Party to this
day; therefore as a warning to the dissenting Party, we shall desire them to
consider how they were gulled and brought into this ignominy: The Papists in a
dissenting disguise first set these people a madding, and after slipped their own
necks out of the halter, reserving those halters at last to hang those whom
they had seduced, by which they suppose themselves not guilty of the Fact, by
reason none of them who were executed for the same declared to be a Papist.

Amongst these Priests and Jesuits then present at that bloody work, there were
two of the late Queens Confessors, one of whom went under the name of Captain
Tho Preston, and had a Command of a Troop of Horse under Oliver the Usurper.
This said Impostor came over into Ireland, and lay for a time at Alderman John
Preston's House in Skinner row in Dublin, his Troop of Horse at that time being
quartered at Athy, a Town distant about 27 miles from that City, to disguise
his Jesuitical policy; and that he might not be suspected, he Married (or at
least kept a Wench as his Wife,) for you have already heard how they esteem the
Marriage of the Church of England Heretical; by which device of theirs they say
it is no Marriage, but a venial sin. This pretended Captain, upon the
Restoration of our now gracious King Charles the Second, laid down his Arms,
and declared what he was, saying, that he would fall to his old Calling; and
being asked what that Calling was, he made answer that he was the Queens
Confessor, and was not ashamed to own it. Several of the City of Dublin have
heard this, and can testify the same.

Sir John Temple, and Doctor Borlace in their Books touching the relation of
the Irish Rebellion begun anno 1641. make mention of a Friar who cruelly tied
or caused to be tied several Protestants back to back, and so to be flung over
Portadowne-Bridge in Ireland. A relation of a Popish Impostor, by Order a
Friar, and he took upon him a Military Employment, and changed his Name to
advance the Church of Rome.
This Friar about the time that Oliver Cromwell came over into Ireland, went
disguised into England, at which time he received one Wards Wife, by whom he
had several Bastards, pretending she was his Wise. Cromwell going back for
England, this Friar (by what means is not known) became very gracious and
conversant with that Usurper, and then went under the name of Captain Holland;
upon this intimacy and acquaintance Oliver Cromwell made use of this Impostor,
and gave him a large allowance per annum to give him Foreign and Domestic
Intelligence, for he would pay upon Post-days above forty shillings and more
for Letters directed to him by the name of Captain Holland; yet it chanced that
upon a certain Speech which Oliver made anno 1654. to this effect, viz. that
there was nothing done in England either of State or Ecclesiastical matters,
but that it was carried on by the Jesuits, and that Rome knew things before
they were past in England, and so bade his then Parliament to look into this
affair; search being made, and things inquired into, some of these Impostors
were discovered, amongst the rest this pretended Captain Holland, and the
Crimes which we have already mentioned laid to his charge, yet Oliver Cromwell
protected him, and would not permit the Witnesses to prosecute any further.
This Holland died within two years after, and left Thurla, Oliver's Secretary,
his Executor, to oversee what he had left for the use of his Whore and
Bastards, which being found to be about 2500 l. Oliver seized on the sum, and
said, The Rogue got it under me, let his Whore and Bastards shift for
themselves. And thus ill-gotten Riches perished.

Doctor Ramsey a Scotch man, and one of his Majesty's Physicians of Scotland,
had two Sons, A relation of one Ramsey a Jesuit, who went under the name of
Captain Right, and an Officer under Oliver Cromwell.
one Ramsey a Captain in Oliver Cromwells Army, who went under the name of
Captain Right; the other Son, Tho. Ramsey, who lately practiced Physic here in
Ireland. As touching the former, he was a Jesuit, and went under that name,
purposely to hide his Function, and also to accomplish his Romish policies,
that he (with others of his Popish Crew) might hit it in the teeth of those
whom these sorts had missled, and say that it was Protestants, and not Papists,
that murdered their King, and fought against him. It chanced one day that this
Jesuit riding in the head of his Troop, that his Father Doctor Ramsey beheld
him, and being between fear and doubt whether it was his Son or no, he enquired
of one of his Troopers whom he was? they returned answer, that it was one
Captain Right; but his Father having heard how he had taken a Jesuits Function
upon him beyond Seas, and not suspecting that he had been in the Kingdom, went
secretly to Cromwell, and related the Story to him how he had a Jesuit an
Officer in his Army, and that his name was Ramsey, though he went under the
name of Captain Right. Upon this description of his Fathers Oliver grants a
Warrant, and had him apprehended: His Quarters being searched where he lay,
there was found Papers of correspondence with that Society. All this being
proved, this Jesuitical Captain was dismounted, to be mounted a step or two
higher, and so sent to Heaven in a String.

As for the other Brother, A confession of Doctor Tho. Ramsey, the other
Ramseys Brother, and how he reformed.
Doctor Tho. Ramsey, he had been a great Traveller, and a great Scholar, well
versed in Physic, and an Excellent Linguist, yet a rank Papist. Some say a
Jesuit, as his Brother was, others say he was only a Lay Brother of that
Society, which sort are permitted to Marry, the better to propagate their
Romish Plots and contrivances. This Thomas was, as I take it, twice Married,
his last Wife yet living; he was of a wild and wandering spirit, very witty, and
always merry, especially in his cups; in which (to his company) he would
disclose several of his mad Pranks. Amongst which, this was one: He being, as
we have already mentioned, a great Linguist, went to Oxford, where he pretended
to be a Jew, and there he taught the Hebrew Tongue to several of the Scholars,
but being suspected to have been an Impostor, they thought to have catechized
him; but he being aware of that, left that University, and went to Cambridge,
where he was tract, and from thence went to London. He lurking disguisedly in
this City, Mr. Prynne having heard of several of his mad Pranks, offered five
Pounds to any man that could bring Ramsey unto him; the Doctor having
intelligence of this design of Mr. Prynnes, he one day puts on an outlandish
dress on him, and over it an old rugged Parsons Gown; then coming to Mr.
Prynne's House, he enquired for him, and coming into his presence, he spoke the
Italian Language, also the German, and Latin, pretending unto him that he was a
poor Bohemian Priest, and had been a Slave in Turkey, but was happily redeemed
by an English Turkey Merchant; then telling of his wants, and how desirous he
was to go to his own Country, in case he could not be preferred in England:
Mr. Prynne began to take compassion on him, and told him that he would procure
gatherings for him, and for the present gave him five Pounds to buy him
Apparel, and bid this poor Bohemian Priest not to be a stranger to his House.
After that he had played this cheat with Mr. Prynne, he wrote within few days
after a Letter to him to this purpose, that he had heard some say that he would
give five Pounds to see him; nay further, that he had given Ramsey himself five
Pounds; and so wrote according to what we have already mentioned.

He several times owned how he was in Cromwells days employed by the Pope, and
by the Jesuits, to advance their affairs as well in England as in Ireland; also
how he had Preached sometimes in an Independent shape, other times in an
Anabaptist and Quakers shape, and had the Pope's Bull for what he did. This
Doctor about three years since, viz. about the year of our Lord 1678 or 1679
died at Derry, yet for some months before his death reformed to the Protestant
Faith of England. It being thought that he was poisoned secretly amongst the
Jesuits, they envying of him for his reforming to our Church; for he being a
jovial companion, cared not what company he went in. Sir William Stewart
Knight, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, can give a further account of this
Doctor; who, as I hear, has some Papers of his Confessions and Reforming,
which had they come to my hands, I had for the public good here inserted; but
for want of them, what we have already mentioned, can be attested by Sir Henry
Pierse Baronet, his Sons William and Henry Pierse Esquires, and Justices of
Peace of the County of Westmeath, and Mr. Mark Pierse of the same, Gent. to
whom he told these like Stories of himself, and many more, he living at
Tristernaugh Town in the said County with them, near a quarter of a year, and
being then their Physician.

Several of his Majesty's Subjects of Ireland being in London upon the death of
Oliver Cromwell the Usurper, Peter Talbott the late Titular Archbisho of Dublin
very intimate with Cromwell.
who were more desirous to see his Funeral Solemnities, than to see him
officiate in his Tyrannical Government, obtained leave to be at a Friends House
at Westminster to behold the Celebration thereof. John King, then Dean of Tuam,
a faithful Subject of his Majesty's, showed to several of the Spectators,
saying, there goes Peter Talbott amongst the Mourners in deep Mourning; which
had not these Spectators seen, they would scarcely have believed that it had
been he. At that time it being the fashion for Mourners not to cast off their
Mourning Cloaks so soon as they do now a days, he was seen by several to walk
in the same Habit, with his Cloak folded under his arm for some months after
this Funeral, walking in the Piazza in Covent Garden, and other of the Streets
of the City of London.

Upon General Monk's rising in England to bring in our now Gracious Sovereign
King Charles the Second into his Throne, this said Peter Talbott went in
company with the then General Lambert, riding to oppose the Duke of Albemarls
designs: For these his good seats, the Pope made him Titular Archbishop of
Dublin; Dean King's Wife, Mrs. Sarah King can testify this for a true
Narrative, if examined, and is yet living.

Since his Majesty's happy Restoration, Hoc factum circa ann. 1670 aut 71.
there came a certain Peer out of England into Ireland, who there bore sway;
and it is well known to the Inhabitants of the City of Dublin, that this mighty
Peer lent a Suit of Arras Hangings, and the best of his Plate, to the above
Peter Talbott, to adorn that Titular Bishops Mass-House, and Altar. This Sir F.
B. a Knight, and Alderman of the said City, and several others of the Citizens
can testify, Satan begins to transform himself into an Angel of Light to
destroy the Church of England.
if demanded, besides the words which the said Peer spoke at the time he lent
these Adornments, which were thus, or to this effect: That he hoped to hear
high Mass within six months in the Cathedral of Christ-Church in Dublin.
Doubtless these were signal demonstrations or forerunners of the late Popish
Conspiracy anno 1678.

Samuel Pullen Doctor of Divinity coming into Ireland before the late Irish
Rebellion, A notable Story of a Jesuit, who pretended to be a Shoemaker, and to
Preach by Inspiration.
he became first Chancellor of Cashel, and Dean of Clonfert; the Irish
Rebellion anno 1641 bursting out, the Papists (about those parts of Ireland)
murdered several of the Protestants, and Protestant Ministers; this Samuel
being at that time in danger, was preserved by Providence by a Jesuit named
James Saul, alias Sall, who (before that Rebellion) had received from the Dean
several favors, which caused James Saul to preserve the Dean from being
murdered for the space of three months, until he could be conducted into
English Quarters.

After this escape the Dean sailed into England, where he became Chaplain to
the then Earl of Oxford, where he tarried for diverse years. It chanced (during
the Deans stay there, and in the time of Usurpation, when several Meetings were
permitted,) that the Earls Countess was dissuaded from her Principles, for to
go to hear those sort of Preachers, amongst whom there was a Shoo-maker much
admired by his Auditory, which occasioned the Countess to extol him unto the
Dean, for a pious and heavenly gifted man, and often urged the Dean to go and
hear him; who, upon several entreaties, as also to comply with the Countess,
the Dean went with her to this Meeting. At his coming thither, he observed the
Shoemaker, and found by his words, that those speeches of his went beyond his
Last, and that he was a man of Parts. Yet although years had changed this
Impostors Physiognomy, as also being altered by his Beard, the Dean recollected
with himself that he had seen this Shoemaker before. At last, the Sermon being
ended, the Countess (his great Admirer) invited him home to Dinner; after which
the Dean and he fell into a Disputation, who finding this Shoemaker had skill
in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Tongues, demanded of him how he came by that
Science? The Shoemaker replied, by the holy Spirit. But (to conclude) the Dean
told him, he knew to the contrary, and that he had reason to know it; thereupon
gave him thanks for preserving of his life in Ireland, and said you are Mr.
Sall; and as you saved mine, I shall save yours. The Dean then speaking unto my
Lord, and to his Countess, said, this man saved my life in Ireland in the
tumultuous days of the Irish Rebellion, therefore I shall make bold to engage
to this my friend, that your Lordship and my Lady shall do him no harm,
provided that he departed thence from that Shire, and not delude the common
people there any longer. This pretended Shoemaker being thus discovered, his
Trade could no longer abscond his Jesuitical Function, and so he craved a
certain time for to depart thence; saying, Pray let me not go in a hurry, lest
I be suspected; which desire of his was easily granted. In the interim he
pretended to the rest of his followers to be warned by the Spirit to go and
teach elsewhere, which did not a little trouble them, especially the poor silly
Women, who could not hold from dropping of tears for the departure of so
heavenly a man. After this warning he left Oxfordshire within three weeks. The
Countess upon this was recalled to the Church of England, to the great
admiration of the rest of this Impostors Followers, who enquiring the reasons
of this sudden change, were all likewise ashamed that they had been thus
deluded. This said Samuel Pullen was (since his Majesty's happy Restoration,
by the means of his Grace the Duke of Ormond) preferred to the Archbishopric
of Tuam in Ireland; several have heard that Right Reverend Father relate this
passage in his life time, and some are yet living to testify the truth of it:
Witness Dean Pearse for one, who has heard something to this purpose.

Mr. John Crook, some time Bookseller in St. Paul's Churchyard at the Ship in
London, and since Stationer and Printer to his most Serene Majesty in Dublin,
told this Story following unto Sir James Ware, Knight, now deceased.

Anno 1656. the Reverend Divine Doctor Henry Hammond being one day in the next
Shop to this said John Crookes, and there reading the Works of S. Ambrose, a
Red-coat casually came in and looked over this Divines shoulder, and there read
the Latin as perfect as himself, which caused the Doctor to admire that a
Red-coat should attain to that Learning; then speaking unto him, he demanded
how he came to that Science? the Red-coat replied, by the holy Spirit; the
Doctor hereupon replied, I will try thee further, and so called for a Greek
Author, which the Read coat not only read, but construed: The Doctor to try him
further, called for the Hebrew-Bible, and so for several other Books, in which
this Read-coat was very expert: At last the Doctor recollecting with himself,
called for a Welch-Bible, and said, if thou be inspired, read me this Book,
and construe it; but the Read-coat being at last caught, replied, I have given
thee satisfaction enough, I will not satisfy thee further, for thou will not
believe though an Angel came from Heaven. The Doctor smelling out this deceit,
caused the Apprentice to go for a Constable, who being brought to the Shop, the
Doctor told the Constable he had something to say against this Red-coat, and
bade him bring him before Oliver Cromwell, then called the Lord Protector. The
Red-coat being brought to White Hall, and examined, he, after a rustic manner,
Quaker-like, thou would and thee'd Oliver; but being suspected, it was demanded
where he quartered, it being found out, at the Devil Tavern. The Doctor
entreated his Chamber might be searched, which was accordingly searched, where
they found an old Chest filled partly with his wearing Apparel, as also with
several Papers, and seditious Popish Books; amongst which, there being a pair
of Boots, and Papers stuffed in one of them, they found a Parchment Bull of
License to this Impostor, granted under several names, to assume what Function
or Calling he pleased. These being brought before Oliver, for what reasons it
is unknown, yet the Red-coat escaped, bringing several proofs of what great
service he had done, and the greatest affliction was laid on him was
Banishment, and what proceeded further we know not.

When Oliver Cromwell routed the Irish Priests and their Clergy out of Ireland,
Father Nowland the Dominican of Gallway his ingenious Confession of himself to
William Muschamp Esquire how he played the part of an Independent in Cromwell's days.
one Father Nolan, alias Nowland, a Dominican Friar of Gallway fled beyond Sea,
who afterward in some space of time came into England, and landing at Plymouth
in a poor mean habit, straggling in that Town till he had got a service. This
Nowland chanced to come to one Mr. Hughs his House, who was in those days a
great Independent Minister, and Preacher in that Town. This Minister hired
Nowland, who at first was underservant to the Gardner, and in little time
became chief Gardner himself. Mr. Hughs, according to the usual custom of
Dissenters, had his weekly Meetings upon week days; where at his House the
Elders and several of his Flock would assemble to Pray, and to Expound. It was
observed that Nowland was very diligent, and would turn to the Texts of
Scripture very readily, which Mr. Hughs perceiving, encouraged Nowland, and in
a short time took him from Gardning, and made him his Butler. Nowland being
thus highly preferred, strove all he could to please his Master, and observing
that his Master would sit up late at his Study, which Study was a little beyond
the Buttery, and that his Master was always to pass by the Buttery-door to go
thither, he had ordered the matter thus; One night hearing his Master locking
of his Study-door, Nowland fell to his Prayers, and had put out the Candle,
which Mr. Hughs hearing, he put out his Candle also, and laid his ear to the
square hole that was cut in the Buttery-door, where he continued whilst Nowland
was at his Prayers; after which he secretly went to his Chamber, considering
with himself, that this poor ignorant man (as he thought) must needs be
inspired. But upon the next Meeting day, Mr. Hughs discoursing with the Elders,
and chief of his Followers of this passage, they all assented that Nowland
should Pray. But Nowland pretended, alas, he knew not how to Pray, poor man,
not he; but it being consented amongst the Brethren that he must Pray, and that
if God had endued him with such a Gift, he sinned if he did not make use of it.
Upon which entreaty Nowland Prayed, acting the gestures, posture and tone as
well as the best of themselves, to their great admiration; for which all the
Meeters gave Nowland a sum of Money to buy him handsome Apparel for those days:
Nowland coming every day more into favor than formerly he was; he begun to
show his Master some observations that he had made upon the Scripture, which so
pleased the Elders, and the people, that Nowland became an Expositor of the
Scripture, and so Expounded upon certain days amongst the Meeters, and was no
longer Butler, but ordered to sit at Mr. Hughs his Table. Thus Nowland
continued in esteem amongst the Independants at Plymouth until the Restoration
of our Gracious Sovereign K. Charles the Second; then pretending for a while he
would go and see his Relations in Ireland, and let them see how God had
provided for him, and that he would return again in a short time. Upon this
promise, taking of his leave, he departed thence, and came into Ireland, where
he has hitherto continued. This Narrative the said Nowland himself confessed
un William Muschamp Esquire now one of his Majesty's Commissioners for the farming
of his Revenues there, who can certify that this Nowland made his brags how he
served the Independants at Plymouth.

There is yet in Ireland a Clergyman of the Church of Rome, Mr. Andrew
Catherwood his Narrative of one Jackson a pretended Saint, yet a Romanist.
one Jackson by name, who has Preached (as we are informed by our Author) for
these several years past, viz. ann. 1668, 1669, and 1670. within and about the
Counnty and City of Limerick, amongst the Nonconformists in those parts. This
Fox when he began to Preach at Limerick, received from those Nonconformists at
one time about fourscore Cobbs for a Sermon then Preached unto them; after
which he invited an acquaintance of his, Mr. Andrew Catherwood, to a Treat, at
which time he spent about twenty shillings of this sum, the said Mr.
Catherwood assuring us, who heard him declare these words, that this said
Jackson was the first that ever brought him to a Bawdy House within that City.

The said Mr. Andrew Catherwood does likewise affirm that this Jackson would
often pretend that he had received Letters from Francis Marsh then Bishop of
Limerick, and would frame these Letters as if they had weekly come from him,
saying, that that Bishop would fain have him to Preach in his Cathedral, but it
was against his Conscience so to Preach; therefore he had rather Preach to his
Flock for Charity, than to the Bishop for Gain. This he framed to cologue with
his Followers, and would show these pretended Letters of his to please them.

Mr. Catherwood also affirms that this Jackson would say Mass disguised to
the common sort in that County upon weekdays; and although he seigned this
outward Godliness amongst the Dissenters at Limerick, that he came up to
Dublin, and there Preached amongst our Ministers in our Churches; and after, to
cologue with the Dissenters in that City, he pretended to them to fall from the
Church of England, and Preached in the Meetings; where (as he the said Jackson
confessed to Mr. Catherwood) he got about 13 l. Sterling. collected by the
Meeting Houses in Dublin.

This Jackson was born at Abberdeen in Scotland; he is a great Scholar, and a
Traveller, for he has traveled into France, Italy, Germany and Spain. In
Spain he taught a School, as being Usher under a public Schoolmaster there; he
still wandreth about this Kingdom of Ireland, and was lately seen in the County
of Mayo: The then Bishop of Limrick, Fran. Marsh, now Archbishop of Dublin, we
suppose may have heard of this Impostors pranks already mentioned, during the
time that his Grace was Bishop of Limrick; which, if testified, would
strengthen this Mr. Catherwoods Evidence, who declared this above Narrative
unto us, whose names hereafter follow, Robert Ware Esquire John Madden Student in
Physic of Trinity-Colledge in Dublin, and before Pearse Welsh, being upon the
25th. of Feb. 1681.

Thus far have we laid before you the practices of Rome, devised to divide the
Protestant Church of England; therefore the dispensations allowed by her Popes
and Clergy be many and large (as appears by what you have already heard)
purposely to drive on, and set forward her impious Plots; she therefore
dispenses with her Adherents to take the shape, yea, even of a member of the
Church of England, not out of love thereunto, but to accomplish her intended
purposes. For example-sake, there was a certain Knight, Sir E. L. well known
over his Majesty's Dominions of England, Scotland and Ireland, who came into
this his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland anno 1670, or thereabouts.

It is not unknown unto the Inhabitants and Citizens of Dublin, that in the
year following 1671, upon the one and twentieth of May there happened a surious
fire in his Majesty's Castle of Dublin; during which flames the Lord John
Butler (afterward created Earl of Gowran, third Son to his Grace James Duke of
Ormond, now Lord Lieutenant of the Nation) took great care and pains to
extinguish the same; which had it been trusted unto the said Knight, we
question whether half the Buildings now there extant would have been seen this
day: For this Knight, under the pretense of saving the rest of the Buildings
within that Castle, would have blown up the great Hall belonging to this
Palace. To execute this project the quicker, he caused a Barrel of Gunpowder to
be placed in the middle of that Hall, and so to have dropped a train of Powder,
and to set fire to the same. But this brave spirited Lord coming in at that
instant, and enquiring why that Barrel was there placed, and having heard the
project, he most courageously (although the flames were over his head) lifted
up the Barrel of Gunpowder, and carried it out on his shoulders, saying, I
approve not of this project.

When this Fire happened, as is generally reported by several of the Citizens of
Dublin, that night the water of the City was stopped, so that the Castle-pipe had
no water but what they were fain to bring in from the Mill-pond in the
Stable-yard without the Castle-walls.

It has been generally reported that this Knight went secretly to Mass at this
time, but whether he did or no, it was observed that he would walk before the
then Lord Lieutenant amongst the Gentry to Church, with his Bible publicly
under his arm to be seen. This posture disguised his Religion, which since is
discovered, although at Church he would seem very zealous, turning to the Texts
of Scripture as fast as they were quoted by the Minister.

There is a Learned Doctor, Doctor Salls testimony concerning this Knight.
some years now past, who turned unto the Church of England, Andrew Sall by
name, formerly an Ecclesiastic of the Church of Rome, who has affirmed how he
had heard formerly, when the Lord J. B. went Ambassador into France, that this
Sir E. L. went with that Lord; and that the French King being taken with the
Knights humors, he and that King covenanted together after this manner.

This Knight was to give intelligence to the French King, The Covenants between
the French King and this Knight.
acting underhand for him, making this Proviso for himself, that in case he
should be discovered, and thereby incur the King of Englands displeasure, if he
fled into France, he should be there succored, and the French King there to
provide a place for him.

Several others besides this Divine have heard the same, besides what the
Letters of News have mentioned to this effect. For the perfecting of this
Covenant, it is visible and known how he has been accused to be one of the
Conspirators in the late Popish Plot anno 1678, for which he was clapped up; but
afterward being released upon Bail, he fled into France, where he is not only
succored to this day, but likewise provided for, and there preferred to be an
Abbot in Paris, where several of his Majesty's Subjects have seen him ranting
with his Coach and Horses.

Whilst this Knight tarried in Ireland to find out the affairs of the
Metropolis of this Kingdom, How this Knight thrust out Sir William Davies to
bring in himself Recorder of this City.
he cajoled several of the Aldermen and Citizens of Dublin, by breeding
animosities between them and the Recorder, Sir William Davies, purposely to
make place for himself, and to expulse Sir William. This Knight being
ambitious, not only to know the modes and manners of the City, but also to
change the ancient Rules and customs according to his fancy. To further this
his purpose, he made the Lord Berkley to procure the Recorders Place, which
Place he once taking possession of, he began to change the old Rules and
Customs aforesaid, which bred much clashing amongst the Aldermen and Commons of
the City; but he then having the ear of the Lord Berkley, bore all before him,
hectoring after this manner.

Several of the Aldermen being discontented with these actions of his, His
first pranks after he became Recorder.
complained, but all to no purpose; for which complaint of theirs, by this
Knights means, and by the new stamp which he had raised to assist him, these
Aldermen whose names follow were expulsed, and razed out of the roll of
Aldermen; Alderman Richard Tigh, Daniel Hutchinson, Lewis Desminieres, Enoch
Reader, Mark Quin, Joshua Allen, and Francis Bruster, the two last Aldermen
being since Knighted.

In lieu of these then expulsed Aldermen for to make up a Table of his own gang
and creatures, This Recorders new Aldermen.
by reason they voted to his will and pleasure, this Gentleman preferred
William Gresingham, Nathanael Philpot, and one Brooks, who has been since one
of the Informers of the late Popish Plot; Peter Ward, who has been since Lord
Mayor of Dublin; and others were offered at the same time to be made Aldermen
also, but refused. The Government of this City continuing under this tuition of
their new Recorder and change of Aldermen, until the Government of this Nation
was changed, to make way for the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Essex.

This Honorable Peer was scarce fetled in the Lieutenancy when the grievances
of these mutations (which we have already mentioned) came before his Lordship
and this Honorable Board, The Earl of Essex and the Privy Council their
verdict in this matter; the seven Aldermen restored, and the three degraded.
showing before them the former passages and enormities committed by this
Knight, and his Adherents: These Grievances took up ten or eleven hours debate
upon hearing the same. Then after some days considerations between this Noble
Peer and the Privy Council, they appointed a day for the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs
and Aldermen to hear their Judgment and Opinion: At which time it was ordered
Sir Ellis to be expulsed, and Sir William to be restored; the seven aforesaid
Aldermen to take their places as formerly, and the other three new ones to be
degraded. Upon this Order the Knight being thus deprived of his prey, fled to
seek it elsewhere, being too well known in this City for to tarry longer, and
so departed hence into England.

Whereas you have read already how it was the Jesuits, and other the Emissaries
of Rome, who contrived the cutting off the two Pillars of our Church and State,
the better for their evil purposes to contrive a way for to murder our late
Gracious Sovereign and Godly Martyr Charles the First. And also whereas you
have had a relation of the Papal Conspiracies, and of the correspondence
between the Papists of Ireland, and of France, for the invading of Ireland; so
likewise we humbly lay before you the Papal contrivances of their Brethren and
Popish Fathers in England at the same time working against his Sacred Majesty,
and the welfare of the Church and State of England, as shall here appear by a
copy of a Letter written from a Jesuit to his Correspondent at Bruxels, as
follows.

A Copy of a Letter from a Jesuit.
LEt not the damp of astonishment seize upon your ardent and zealous Soul in
apprehending the sudden and unexpected calling of a Parliament: We have not
opposed, but rather furthered it; so that we hope as much in this Parliament,
as ever we feared any in Queen Elizabeth's days.

You must know the Council is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative,
in case the Parliamentary way should fail. You shall see this Parliament will
resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to dig out with her beak her own
bowels.

The Election of Knights and Burgesses have been in such confusion of apparent
Faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much art and
industry, (when the Spanish Match was in Treaty) now breaks out naturally as a
Botch or Boil, and spits and spues out its own rankor and venom.

You remember how that famous and immortal Statesman the Count of Gondomar fed
King James his fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft sweet sound of Peace,
to keep up the Spanish Treaty. Likewise we were much bound to some Statesmen of
our own Country, for gaining time by procuring those most advantageous
cessations of Arms in the Palatinate, and advancing the Honor and Integrity of
the Spanish Nation, and vilifying the Hollanders; remonstrating to King James,
that that State was most ungrateful both to his Predecessor Queen Elizabeth,
and his Sacred Majesty; that the States were more obnoxious than the Turk, and
perpetually injured his Majesty's loving Subjects in the East Indies, and
likewise they have usurped from his Majesty the Regality and unvaluable profit
of the Narrow Seas in fishing upon the English Coast, etc.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good designs, which was to set on King James, that none but the Puritan
Faction, which plotted nothing but Anarchy, and his confusion, were averse to
this most happy Union. We steered on the same course, and have made great use
of this Anarchical Election, and have prejudicated and anticipated the Great
one, that none but the Kings Enemies, and his, are chosen of this Parliament,
etc.

We have now many strings to our Bow, and have strongly fortified our Faction,
and have added two Bulwarks more: For when King James lived (you know) he was
very violent against Arminianism, and interrupted (with his pestilent Wit, and
deep Learning) our strong designs in Holland, and was a great friend to that
old Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange.

Now we have planted that Sovereign Drug Arminianism, which we hope will purge
the Protestants from their Heresy; and it flourishes, and bears fruit in due
season.

The materials which build up our Bulwark, are the Projectors and Beggars of
all Ranks and Qualities: Howsoever, both these Factions cooperate to destroy
the Parliament, and to introduce a new species and form of Government, which is
Oligarchy.

Those serve as direct Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is the
universal Catholic Monarchy. Our foundation must be Mutation, and Mutation
will cause a Relaxation, which will serve as so many violent Diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy distraction of our perpetual and insufferable
anguish of body, which is worse than death it self.

We proceed now by Council and mature deliberation, how and when to work upon
the Dukes jealousy and revenge; and in this we give the Honor to those which
merit it, which are the Church Catholics.

There is another matter of consequence which we take much into our
consideration and tender care, which is to stave off Puritans, that they hang
not in the Dukes ears, they are impudent subtle people.

And it is to be feared lest they should negotiate a Reconciliation between the
Duke and the Parliament at Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our selves
we have so handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament are irreconcilable.

For the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already locked
up the Dukes ears; and we have those of our own Religion, which stand
continually at the Dukes Chamber to see who goes in and out: We cannot be too
circumspect and careful in this regard. I cannot choose but laugh to see how
some of our own Coat have accoutred themselves, you would scarce know them if
you saw them: And it is admirable, how in speech and gesture they act the
Puritans. The Cambridge Scholars, to their wosul experience, shall see we can
act the Puritans a little better than they have done the Jesuits: They have
abused our Sacred Patron, Saint Ignatius, in jest; but we will make them smart
for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression; for I confess
unto you, I am at this time transported with joy to see how happily all
instruments and means, as well great as less, cooperate unto our purposes. But
to return unto the main Fabric; our Foundation is Arminianism, the Arminians
and Projectors, as it appears in the premises, affect mutation. This we
second, and enforce by probable arguments. In the first place we take into
consideration the Kings Honor, and present necessity; and we show how the King
may free himself of his Ward, as Lewis the Eleventh did. And for his great
splendour and luster, he may raise a vast Revenue, and not be beholden to his
Subjects, which is by way of imposition of Excise: Then our Church Catholics
proceed to show the means how to settle this Excise, which must be by a
Mercenary Army of Horse and Foot. For the Horse, we have made that sure, they
shall be Foreigners, and Germans, who will eat up the Kings Revenues, and
spoil the Country wheresoever they come, though they should be well paid; what
havoc will they make then, when they get no pay, or are not duly paid? They
will do more mischief than we hope the Army will do.

We are provident and careful that this Mercinary Army of two thousand Horse,
and twenty thousand Foot, shall be taken on, and in pay, before the Excise be
settled. In forming the Excise, the Country is most likely to rise: If the
Mercenary Army subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and Projectors shall
be paid out of the confiscations; if the Country be too hard for the
Soldiers, then they must consequently mutiny, which is equally advantageous
unto us. Our superlative design is, to work the Protestants as well as the
Catholics to welcome in a Conqueror, and that is by this means: We hope
instantly to dissolve Trade, and hinder the building of Shipping, in devising
probable designs, and putting on the State upon Expeditions, as that of Cadiz
was, in taking away the Merchants Ships, so that they may not easily catch, and
light upon the West India Fleet, etc.

This Account was sent unto the Lord Deputy Falkland from some Members of his
Majesty's Council of England, viz. from Suffolk, Salisbury, Morton, and the
Bishop of Durbam; together with this Epistle following.
My Lord,
KNowing that his Sacred Majesty and his Privy Council assembled for the
calling of this Parliament, have formerly given you the reasons and urgent
necessities for the same, we omit it; but by this late discovery here enclosed,
we are jealous that most of the Members herein chosen be of a factious crew,
and so you will find by the Copy of the discovery at Clarken-well, there being
taken amongst an Assembly of Recusants diverse Jesuits, amongst whom several
treasonable Papers were found, this being one amongst the rest; in which you
may perceive the Papists great spleen to his Grace the Duke, also the
treasonable Conspiracies against his Majesty Foreign and Domestic;
notwithstanding the discovery hereof, for diverse reasons we have not set this
enclosed to public view, his Grace and some others having acquainted his
Majesty that they will undertake to find out the bottom of this mystery, and
thereby politickly have advised his Majesty to permit the sitting of this
Parliament, from the seventeenth of this instant, the better to find out their
inclinations, and how they be affected according to this discovery.

We are sensible now Ireland was in some danger of an Invasion by the French
Papists, and that the Papists of Ireland and they have correspondence together.
The Jesuits be not only a subtle Society, but also an audacious sort of people
fearing no punishment, no, not the Halter it self; The D. B. his advice how to
banish Friars and Jesuits out of these Dominions.
so that we are at a nonplus how to devise a means to banish these Wasps from
His Majesty's Dominions; his Grace the Duke propounded in Council the other
day, no punishment fitter for the driving out of these sorts of Cattle, than
gelding them, and gave very good reasons for it; one of them was shame ever
after to show their faces; the other was, being guelded, they could not execute
their Priestly Function according to the Ecclesiastic laws, wanting their
members. Your Clergy of Ireland in opposing the Popish offertures made unto
his Majesty, (which your Lordship unto us have signified) have not only through
Gods Blessing protected that Dominion, The Bishops and Clergy of Ireland
commended for not tolerating of Popery.
but also saved His Majesty and this Nation from future Broils. Thus
concluding, We bid your Lordship heartily farewell:

Your Lordships Humble Servants, Suffolk, Salisbury, Morton, Durham

White Hall, March 2. 1627.
The better to confirm the Letter directed to the Rector aforesaid, this Letter
is also entered and Printed amongst Mr. John Rushworth's Historical Collections,
page 474. Nothing excepting (to be discerned in our Copy) saving in the
conclusion of the Letter, these words, Join Prayers with us, imploring the
Blessed Virgin, and all the Host of Angels and holy Martyrs to intercede for
us. Thus hoping to see Count Tylley and Marquess Spynola here about July come a
twelvemonth, I rest: In the mean time we pray for an happy success in Germany,
and the Low Countries.

Your Loving Friend, etc.


This conclusion is wanting in Rushworth's Collections in the Letter to the
Rector aforesaid.

When the Original of this Jesuitical Lord was seized on amongst other Papers,
it was supposed to have been written by one Winter a Jesuit, and Nephew to the
same Winter, who was executed for the Gunpowder-Treason in King James his days,
now about 77 years since.

This Parliament sat upon the day appointed, being upon the 17th. of March
1627. Sir John Finch the Queens Attorney then being chosen Speaker of the House
of Commons; at which Assembly his late Gracious Majesty saluted both the Lords
and other Members thus:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THese times are for Action, The Kings Speech.
for Action, I say, not for words, therefore I shall use but a few; and (as
Kings are said to be exemplary to their Subjects, so) I would wish you would
imitate me in this, and use as few, falling upon speedy consultation. No man
is, I conceive, such a stranger to the common necessity, as to expostulate the
cause of this meeting, and not to think supply to be the end of it; and as this
necessity is the product and consequent of your advice, so the true Religion,
the Laws and Liberties of this State, and just Desence of our Friends and
Allies, being so considerably concerned, will be, I hope, arguments enough to
persuade to supply; for if it be, as most true it is, both my duty and yours to
preserve this Church and Commonwealth, this exigent time certainly requires it.

In this time of common danger, I have taken the most ancient, speedy, and best
way for supply, by calling you together. If (which God forbid) in not
contributing what may answer the quality of my occasions, you do not your
duties, it shall suffice I have done mine; in the conscience whereof I shall
rest content, and take some other course, for which God has empowered me, to
save that which the folly of particular men might hazard to lose.

Take not this as a menace, (for I scorn to threaten my inferiors) but as an
admonition from him who is tied, both by nature and duty, to provide for your
preservations; and I hope, though I thus speak, your demeanors will be such as
shall oblige me in thankfulness to meet you oftener; than which, nothing shall
be more pleasing to me.

Remembering the distractions of our last meeting, you may suppose I have no
confidence of good success at this time; but be assured I shall freely forget
and forgive what is past, hoping you will follow that sacred advice lately
inculcated, To maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

This Speech of his Gracious Majesty to the moderate Members was acceptable; to
the Factious or Puritanical sort, an amasement; and to the Papal sort so
affected, a terror, or guilt of conscience, making them look asquint upon
themselves; and were it not for shame, they would have run on their old course
with violence, which the Jesuits had plotted, as the Letter taken at
Clarken-well aforesaid specifieth; yet to smother their private future
intentions, they concorded with the moderate sort to grant his Majesty some
Subsidies.

The Court of Rome by their Emissaries sprinkled here, having intelligence of
the seizure of these Papers, (to slip their necks out of the Halter) consulted
with those whom they had made sure, as appears by the Letter, in these words;
We have not opposed it (meaning the calling of this Parliament) but rather
furthered it; so that we hope as much in this Parliament, as ever we feared any
in Queen Elizabeth's days. How the Jesuits laid their contrivance on the Church
of England.
Then smelling how the Duke had discovered their Romish Policies, they began
the better to gloss their intentions, to lay before the House several
grievances touching Religion, aspersing at that time Neale the then Bishop of
Winchester, and Laud then Bishop of Bath and Wells, to be the two Supporters of
Arminianism; whereas the Letter shows it was their own act and contrivance.
Also in this Grievance they lay all their mischief by them devised upon the
Duke of Buckingham, saying he was the cause of these vexations. Therefore for
the better satisfaction of the Reader, Vide page 113, and 114.
we shall lay before you the heads of these Grievances then presented in
Parliament, as William Sanderson in his History of the Reign of King Charles
the First sets them down.

The Grievances being thus.
1. THe danger, and innovation, and alteration in Religion. This occasioned by,
1st, The great esteem and favors many Professors of the Romish Religion
receive at Court. 2 dly, Their public resort to Mass at Denmark-House,
contrary to his Majesty's answer to the Parliaments Petition at Oxford. 3 dly,
The Letter for stay of proceedings against them. Lastly, the daily growth of
the Arminian Faction favored and protected by Nele Bishop of Winchester, and
Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, whilst the Orthodox parts are silenced or
discountenanced. 2. The danger of Innovation, and alteration in Government
occasioned by the billetting of Soldiers, by the Commission for procuring one
thousand German Horse and Riders, as for the defense of the Kingdom, by a
standing Commission granted to the Duke to be General at Land in times of
Peace. 3. Disasters of our designs, as the expedition to the Isle of The, and
that lately to Rochel, wherein the English have purchased their dishonor with
the wast of a million of treasure. 4. The want of Ammunition, occasioned by the
late selling away of thirty six last of Powder. 5. The decay of Trade by the
loss of three hundred Ships taken by the Dunkyrkers and Pirates within these
three last years. 6. The not guarding the Narrow-Seas, whereby his Majesty has
almost lost his Regality.
Of all which evils and dangers, the principal cause is the Duke of Buckingham
his excessive power, and abuse of that power. And therefore they humbly submit
it to his Majesty's wisdom, whether it can be safe for himself, or his Kingdom,
that so great power both by Sea and Land, as rests in him, should be trusted in
the hands of any one Subject whatsoever.

These Jesuitical contrivances not being able to dissuade the late King from
his tender affections unto the Duke, How the Jesuits contrived the Duke of
Buckinghams death.
but rather encouraged his Grace more, which the Jesuits perceiving, they
contrived his death; whereupon the 23d. of August following he was stabbed by
one John Felton, who in his examination being asked why he killed the Duke, he
replied, I shall be brief, I killed him for the cause of God and my Country.
Yet that the Reader may the better compare the Leter directed to the Father
Rector at Bruxels, and also the heads of the grievances before mentioned, with
the Confession of John Felton, we here lay before him, as the same Author sets
it at large; in these words.

And after some discourse, Feltons Confession. See Sanders, page 122, 123.
Sir (said he) I shall be brief, I killed him for the cause of God and my
Country. Nay, said the other, there may be hope of his life, the Surgeon
said so. It is impossible, (he replied) I had the force of forty men, assisted
by him that guided my hand. And being interrogated to several questions, he
made these answers: That he was named John Felton, heretofore Lieutenant to a
Foot-Company under Sir James Ramsey. That he had endeavored for a Commission
to be Captain in this Expedition, and failed therein, but without any regret
upon the Duke, (from whom he had found respect) nor for any private interest
whatsoever; that the late Remonstrance of Parliament published the Duke so
odious, that he appeared to him deserving death, which no Justice durst
execute. That it was not many days since he resolved to kill him; but finding
the Duke so closely attended, that it should be his business to pass a
Voluntier, and do it in this Voyage. Somewhat he said of a Sermon at St. Faiths
Church under Paul's, where the Preacher spoke in justification of every man in a
good cause to be Judge and Executioner of Sin, which he interpreted to be him.
That passing out at the Postern-Gate upon Tower Hill, he espied that fatal
Knife in a Cutlers Glass-case, which he bought for sixteen pence. It was the
point end of a tuff Blade stuck into a cross Haft; the whole length, handle and
all, not twelve inches, fastened to his right pocket; and from that time he
resolved therewith to stab him. That some days after he followed the Train to
Portsmouth, and coming by a Cross erected in the Highway, he sharpened the
point thereof upon the Stone, believing it more proper in Justice to advantage
his design, than for the Idolatrous intent it was first erected. That he found
continual trouble and disquiet in mind until he should perform this Fact, and
came to Town but that morning. That no Soul living was accessory with him by
any ways or means of the Dukes execution. That he was assured his Fact was
justified, and he the Redeemer of the peoples sufferings, under the power of
the Dukes Usurpations, etc. And his Paper tackt in the Crown of his Hat, seemed
to satisfy his Conscience that he was thereof well pleased.

This unhappy Murder caused great distractions, especially in State Affairs;
so that the House of Parliament and his Majesty differed very much in settling
the Customs and other matters, which in conclusion was the chief Instrument or
cause of this Parliaments dissolution.

Anno 1652. There chanced to come unto Colonel Richard Lawrence, then
Governor of Waterford under Oliver Cromwell, one Nugent, who seemed to be a
fair conditioned man, and so was hired by the Colonel to work in his Garden;
but knowing the Colonels temper and Principles in Religion, he strove to
please him all he could, not missing Prayers in the Family or Meetings
whenever appointed. Thus he continued with the Colonel for several years: At
last it chanced that Justice John Cook, who was executed for the late Kings
Murder, took a great liking to this Nugent, and begged of the Colonel for to
let him go over with him into England, which the Colonel easily granted to
oblige Justice Cook. Nugent staying for a while with Justice Cook, returned
into Ireland, and came to his old Master Colonel Lawrence, where he remained
for a while, and upon the Kings happy Restoration this Nugent became the
Popish Confessor and Priest at Leislepp some 6 or 7 miles distant from Dublin,
and has seen the Colonel several times since, and laughs at him to this day
when he sees him, considering how he had played the Dissembler with him, as if
he had been one of the Colonels Fraternity, which is of the Anabaptists. Thus
it is evident how Dissenters have been mightily gulled since the years 1640,
and 1641. especially by the Church of Rome, purposely to make Separation in the
Church of England. This the Colonel himself cannot deny; for he told the
Author this Story on the 28th. day of March 1682. besides to others yet living
in the City of Dublin, who can testify this Narrative for a truth.

Hitherto we have showed how the Papists have acted under the disguised habits
of Presbyterians and Independants, with a design to ruin the Church of
England: It will not be now unseasonable to show further how they have
assembled themselves among the Quakers, and Preached in their Meeting Houses,
with a design of enlarging and continuing the divisions of Protestants: To
which purpose I shall subjoin a passage out of a small Pamphlet published by
Mr. Prynne, called The Quakers unmasked. Which runs thus:

The Information of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol aforesaid
Ironmonger, taken the 22th. day of January, 1654.
WHo informs on his Oath, that in the Month of September ber last, this
Informant had some discourse in Bristol with one Coppinger, an Irishman,
formerly a Schoolfellow of his, that came purposely thither for his passage
into Ireland; who told this Informant, that he he had lived in Rome and Italy
eight or nine years, and had taken upon him the Order of a Friar of the
Franciscan Company: And he told this Informant, that he had been at London
lately for some months; and whilst he was there, he had been at all the
Churches and Meetings public and private that he could hear of, and that none
came so near him as the Quakers: And being at a Meeting of the Quakers, he
there met with two of his acquaintance in Rome, ( the which two persons were of
the same Franciscan Order and Company) that were now become chief Speakers
amongst the Quakers, and he himself had spoke among the Quakers in London about
thirty times, and was well approved of amongst them. And this Informant further
says, that the said Mr. Coppinger asked him what kinds of opinions in Religion
there were in Bristol? And this Informant told him that there were several
opinions and judgments: and not naming any opinions of the Quakers; the said
Mr. Coppinger asked him whether there had been any Quakers in Bristol? And the
Informant answered him, No. Whereupon the said Mr. Coppinger told him the said
Informant two or three times, that if he did love his Religion and his Soul, he
should not hear them: Whereupon this Informant told him, that he thought none
of them would come to Bristol: Who expressly replied, that if this Informant
would give him five Pounds, he would make it five hundred Pounds, if some
Quakers did not come to Bristol within three weeks or a month then following.
And on the morrow following the said Coppinger departed this City for Ireland,
his native place, and about eighteen days after there came to this City [Most
likely his two fellow Franciscan Friars forementioned, who have there done
much hurt, and gained many disciples, some whereof disturbed two of the
Ministers publicly in the Church, and assaulted and reviled one of them in the
Streets very lately] two persons that bear the name of Quakers.

This is a true Copy of the original Information taken upon Oath at Bristol, as
aforesaid, the 22th. of January last: From whence the Reader and whole Nation
may take notice, especially those in present Power, who should prevent such
dangerous growing mischiefs with greatest care, not connive at them any longer.

1. See Cromwells Speech in the Painted Chamber, Sept. 4.1654, p. 16, 17.
That there are multitudes of Romish Emissaries and Vermin now residing and
wandering up and down freely amongst us, to seduce and divide the people, by
setting up new Sects, and Separate Congregations in all places, and broaching
new Notions and Opinions of all sorts, or old Heresies or Blasphemies; not
saying Masses, praying to Saints and Images, or crying up the Popes Supremacy,
etc. as heretofore.

2. That they are the chief Speakers and Rulers in most Separate Congregations,
and particularly amongst the Quakers, amongst whom the Franciscan Friars act
their parts as well as the Jesuits.

3. That they have their several Missions and Directions into all parts from
their Generals and Superiors, of their respective Orders, residing commonly in
London, ( Cromwell's Speech, p. 16, 17.
where they have a Consistory and Council sitting, that rules all the affairs
of the things of England,) besides fixed Officers in every Diocese) and are all
fore-acquainted both with the places and times of their several Missions;
seeing Coppinger could so certainly predict the time of their Mission, and
coming to Bristol, where they have done much harm, and assaulted and disturbed
the Ministers both in public and private.

4. See Thomas Campanella de Monarchia Hispanica, c. 25.27.
That the Popes and these his Emissaries chief endeavors are to draw the people
from our Churches, public Congregations, Ordinances, Ministers, and Religion,
and to divide and tumble us into as many Sects and Separate Conventicles as
they have Popish Orders; and thereby into as many civil Parties and Factions as
possibly they can, to ruin us thereby, Matthew. 12.25, 27.

5. That by this their new Stratagem and Liberty, they have (under the
disguises of being Quakers, Seekers, Anabaptists, Independents, Ranters,
Dippers, Anti-Trinitarians, Anti-Scripturists, and the like) gained more
Proselytes and Disciples, and done more harm in eight or nine years space to
the Church and Realm of England, more prejudice, dishonor and scandal to our
Religion and Ministers, than ever they did by saying Mass, or Preaching,
Printing, or any point of the grossest Popery in 80 years time heretofore. And
if not speedily, diligently, restrained, repressed, will soon utterly overturne
both our Church, Religion, Ministry, and State too in conclusion, having
already brought them to sad confusions and distractions.

Now that which gives great cause of suspicion, See Regula Fratrum minorum sub
Francisco Militantium. Ven. 1500.
that these Quakers are either disguised Franciscan Friars, or their seduced
Disciples and Emissaries, is

1. Their rambling about from place to place by two and two together to vent
and spread their Errors; as the Franciscan Friars use by the Sea Regula Fratrum
minorum sub Francisco Militantium, Ven. 1500.
Rules of their Order are bound to do, and the Queens Franciscans did here of
late.

2. Their use of vile and course Array, and condemning not only all Pride and
Luxury, but lawful decency in Apparel in themselves and their Proselytes, in
imitation of the Sea Surius and Ribadeniera, in vita and Regula Fratrum Minorum
Sancti Francisci.
Franciscans.

3. Their persuading people to desert their lawful Callings and Employments, to
embrace a kind of idle, monkish, lasy life, and ramble about from place to
place to vent their pretended Visions, Revelations, Prophecies, Messages, and
New Lights; a practice usual with Franciscan Friars, and St. Francis their
Founder.

4. Their rude and uncivil behavior in refusing to salute, or show any
reverential respect, honor, or humble deportment toward Magistrates, or other
persons of what quality soever, either in words or gestures, (of which the rude
Cynical Franciscans are most guilty of all other Popish Orders) contrary to
express Scripture Precepts and Presidents. Exodus 20.12. Deutr. 5.19. Matthew.
15.4. Ephesians. 6.2, 5. Romans 13.1, 2, 7. Hebr. 12.9. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17, 18. (an
observable Text against them) Tit. 3.1, 2. 1 Timothy 6. v. 1, 2, 3. (a notable
Text) Ephesians. 5.33. Genesis 18.2, 3. c. 19. 1, 2. c. 23.7. c. 24. v. 31. c. 27.19.
c. 33.3, 4, 6, 7. c. 37.9, 10. c. 41.43. c. 42.6. c. 43.26, 28, 29. c. 48.12.
c. 49.8. Exodus 11.8. Ruth 2.10. 1 Samuel 20.41. c. 24.8. c. 25. v. 23, 24, 25,
41. c. 28.14. 2 Samuel 9.8. c. 14.22, 23. 1 King. 1.16, 23, 31, 47. c. 2.19. 2
King. 2.15. c. 4.26, 27, 37. 1 Chronicles. 21.21. Est. 3.2. which compared with
Matthew. 10.12. c. 5.4. Mar. 9.15. Lu. 1.40. Acts 18.22. c. 21.7. c. 25.13. 1
Cor. 16.21. 2 Cor. 13.13. Phil. 4.21, 22. Col. 4.10, 12, 15, 18. Romans 16.15.7,
9. to 17. 2 These. 3.17. may teach these rude Quakers and their Disciples far
better manners and civility, both in their gestures, behaviors, and words,
than now they exercise.

5. Their Doctrines, that the Saints are perfectly holy in this life, and do
not sin, being able to stand perfect in their own power: That they are as
equally holy, just, good and free from sin as Christ and God himself:
maintained by The perfect Pharisee, p. 1, 2, 11, 14.
Fox, Naylor affirmed of St. Francis, the Father of the Franciscans, and
justified by them in their Writings: as you may read in Surius and Ribadeniera
in the Life of St. Francis, and the blasphemous Book Conformitatum Beati
Francisci ad vitam Jesu Christi, l. 3. cum addition. Heir. Bucchii. Bon. 1590.
first writ by Bartholemaeus de Pisa, and approved by a General Chapter of the
Franciscans held at Assise Aug. 2. 1389. and ratified by their Popes. Antonini
Chronicon. Tit. 24. c. 1, 2. Vincentius Belvacensis. Speculum Hist. lib. 3. c.
97. and Mornay his Mystery of Iniquity. London. 1612. p. 347, 348.

It is the observation of many learned intelligent And of G. Emmot a late
reclaimed Quaker in his Northern Blast.
Protestants, who have pryed into the Opinions and Practices of all our late
New Sects, That in their Books, Writings, Speakings, Preachments, Witness
Extreme Unction, used by many Separate Congregations, and their recusancy to
hear our Ministers, or come to our public Ordinances, and the like.
Practices, are interlarded, and mixed with some Jesuitical and Popish Tenants,
Opinions, Ceremonies and Practices; by which we may as visibly discover a
Jesuit, a Popish Priest or Friar in them, as we may a Lion by his paw. And
nothing (in my judgment, more clearly detects the Popish Friars, Priests, and
Jesuits, to be the principal inventers, erectors of, Actors, Rulers, Speakers
amongst our Quakers, and other New Sects; then their pretended, See G. Emmot
his Northern Blast, with Gilpin's book, both relenting Quakers.
extraordinary sudden extravagant Agonies, Trances, Quakings, Shaking,
Raptures, Visions, Apparitions, Conflicts with Satan, Revelations,
Illuminations, Instructions in new divine Mysteries and Seraphical Divinity,
whereof they pretend they were wholly ignorant before, being illiterate
persons; their intimate familiarity and immediate communion with God and Jesus
Christ, in, and after their agonies and ecstasies; their extraordinaay Callings
Missions, Messages to such and such particular orders, fects, places, persons;
their sudden speaking, understanding of several Languages which they pretend
they never learned, but got by inspiration: all which are the very same in form
and substance with those ridiculous lying Enthusiasms, Impostures, Cheats,
Agonies, See Wierus de Praestigiis Daemonum. l. 1. c. 10. and 17. in Jo Gerson
de Probatione Spirituum.
Revelations, Visions, Raptures, Illuminations, Inspirations, Apparitions, etc.
of Popish Saints, Friars, Priests, Jesuits, Nuns, recorded in the lying Legends
and Lives of their Romish canonized SAINTS, by Capgrave, Surius, Lippomanes,
Ribadeniera, Mafeus, and other of their fraternity, especially in the Lives of
St. Francis, Ignatius Loyola (the Founders of the Franciscans and Jesuits
Orders, the principal Actors, Speakers amongst the Quakers, and other late
Enthusiasts, if fully examined) and of St. Dominick, for Men: and of St.
Katherine of Sienna, and St. Imitated by some women Quakers.
Bridget of Sweden, for Women. Out of this St. Bridgets Life and Revelations,
printed in Folio at Nuremberg, Ann. 1524. most of our Male and Female Quakers
extravagant new Revelations and Impostures are extracted, as those who will but
compare them may at first discern. And though they conceal their Jesuitisme and
grossest points of Popery from their Disciples at first, baiting their hooks
only with pleasing Novelties, shows of superlative Sanctity, and See G. Emmot
his Northern Blast p. 1.13, 14. The perfect Pharisee, p. 9.10, 11, 14, 29, 35,
etc.
invectives against our Ministers, Ordinances, Church, Tithes, Government, and
the like; that so they may more easily catch the silly people; yet they
discover their Jesuitical Positions and Popish Doctrines, more openly by
degrees; at last, (as Evangelical Perfection, Justification by our own inherent
Righteousness and Holiness, etc. crying them up for new Gospel Light amongst
the ignorant vulgar; and crying down our Protestant Ministers, Ordinances,
Sacraments, the Articles of our Creed, Church Liturgies, Gods Ten Commandments,
the Lords Prayer, our Churches, and sometimes the Letter of the old and new
Testament as Popish and The Jesuits, Popish Priests and Friars condemned our
Ministers heretofore as unlawful Ministers because they derived not their
Ordination from the Church of Rome: now they turn the scales, and affirm them
to be no lawful Ministers, but Antichristian and Popish upon this false
pretext, That they derive their Ordination and Ministry from the Pope and
Church of Rome.
Antichristian: as the Friars and Jesuits did heretofore in their Books and
Discourses in their very Language. And it is evident by some late instances
that they are Anti-magistratical as well as Anti-ministerial. Yea that these
See John Gilpin's and others (...) conce^^^^^ the Quakers in the North.
Quakers use enchanted Potions, Bracelets, Ribons, Sorcery and Witchcraft, to
intoxicate their Novices and draw them to their party; As Simon Magus bewitched
the people of Samaria with his Sorceries, Act. 6.9, 11. and other seducing
false Teachers, bewitched the foolish Galatians, that they should not obey the
truth, Gal. 3.1.
which Enchantments, Sorceries, Charms, Fascinations and Exorcismes are very
frequent amongst Popes, and Popish Priests, Menks, Friars, Jesuits, as you may
read at large in Joannes Wierus de Praestigiis Daemonum and Incantationibus.
Basilae. 1568. especially l. 2. c. 7. l. 5. c. 2, 3, etc. Platina, Benno,
Cardinalis, Baleus, and others in the Lives of Pope Silvester 2. Benedict 9.
John 20 and 21. and other Popes, who were all most infamous Magicians,
Sorcerers, and Inchanters, by which black art they got the Papacy. And Del Rio
his Disquisitio Magie, and John Jee his Foot out of the Snare, London, 1624.
will prove the Jesuits and Priests in England are still accustomed to them, to
win and seduce their Proselytes. Whence we find this Scripture expression
concerning Romish Babylon Rev. 18.23. By thy SORCERIES were ALL THE NATIONS
DECEIVED.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed.
A Judgment of the Comet, which be came first generally visible to us in
Dublin, December. the 13th. 1680. By a person of Quality. Interest of Ireland in
its Trade and Manufacture, etc.

