The Noble Gallant; Or, An Answer to Long Days of Absence, etc.
He all those jealous Doubts of hers removes,
And now unto this fair one constant proves,
He tells her he is hers, none shall possess
Him, but her self, such love he does express;
He gives her all content that can be spoken,
And chears her heart, which once was almost broken;
What e're she asks she has, BEAUTY rules all,
It can a Lovers heart make rise or fall.
To a pleasant New Tune: called, the German Princesses farewell.


THink not my Dear thou shall be absent long,
My heart to thine is tied most firm and strong,
None of thy Rivals ever shall out do thee.
They are not fit to be compared unto thee.
What need I care for wealth it is but dross,
Want of a beauty is the greater loss;
Though constancy with men is out of fashion,
A Woman ought in love to show true passion.
Perhaps with others I may sport and play,
But what thou long'st for i will not give away;
Thou shall have all the pleasure I can give thee,
Then fear me not, for I will never leave thee.
Thou shall not loose one smile, what I can grant
My pretty wanton thou shall never want,
Thy flames Iown, and dying will embrace thee,
The Willow Garland never shall disgrace thee.
The second Part,
To the same Tune.


IF all the World should dare to Laugh, and say
My mind on beauty often goes a stray;
Yet she that willingly affords me pleasure,
Shall have at her command a Mint of treasure.
I know for wit and beauty never a Lass,
In all the world my dearest can surpass;
One Kiss one smile, one Hug, I then am dying,
Ask what thou will, there can be no denying.
thou needst not force thy soul, for thou have charms
Are able to resist cold deaths alarm's:
There can be no decay in thee I am sure,
Natures rare works for ages must endure.
Thy bows I hear, thou art my hearts delight,
I find no joy but when I am in thy sight;
And this thou shall assure thy self, I love thee
No woman in my heart shall rule above thee:
I know that thou art brisk, merry, and young,
thou can strike dead with thy al-charming tongue
If that to dance or sing thou does desire,
All flesh is dumb, and ^^lently admire.
I Will rest content with thee, and never more,
Strange faces, nor proud looks will I adore:
Be true to me, and all things I Will do for thee,
But if unkind and false, then I Will abhor-thee.
When I behold those pretty wanton eyes,
The thoughts of any other I despise:
Then be not jealous, for i will always mind thee,
I le catch thee in my arms where ever I find thee
Talk not of Death thou art not born to Dye,
He Will court thee when he does that face espy:
Come kiss me bow my Dear, and don't repent thee
For naked every night I will content thee.
Printed for I. H. and sold by F. Coals, T. Vere, I. Wright, and I. Clarke.


