THE PROCEEDINGS Before the House of Lords, Between the Duke and Duchess OF
NORFOLK, etc.

His GRACE the Duke of Norfolk's CHARGE Against the DUCHESS, BEFORE THE House
of Lords, AND THE Dutchesses Answer. With the Depositions at large, of the
Witnesses that were Examined on both Sides.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1692.

The Charge which Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, does Exhibit
against his Wife Mary, Duchess of Norfolk, before the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, in Parliament Assembled, (pursuant to their Lordships Order of the
14th of January, 1691.) Is for the Crime of Adultery.
THE Person Charged to commit the said Crime with the said Duchess, is one
German of the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster. The Times and Places where
the said Crime was committed, were at White Hall, in the Months of June, July,
and August, some or one of them in the Year 1685. At Windsor in the Months of
July, August, or September, some or one of them in the said Year, 1685. In the
Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, March, April, May, June, some or one of
them in the Year of our Lord 1690. And in the said Parish of St. Margarets
Westminister, in the Months of July, or August 1690. In the Parish of Lambeth,
in the County of Surry, in the Months of May, June, July, August, some or one
of them in the Year 1691.

Served by Thomas Bowen, 19 January, before Six of the Clock. Norfolk and
Marshal.

THE DEPOSITIONS OF THE DUKES Witnesses That were Examined.
ROwland Owen says, that Mr. Reymer about Six Years since, being the Duke of
Norfolks Butler, ordered him to carry the things out, the Lodgings being open,
he saw Mr. Germain in Bed with the Duchess of Norfolk; the Duchess leapt out
of the Bed, and put on a Morning Gown, and German hid himself in Bed, this was
between five and six of the Clock in the Evening, about a fortnight before
Bartholomew-Day; he did not tell the Duke, he is sure it was German, he saw
him often, twice or thrice a day, the outward door of the Lodgings were shut,
but he opened it with a Key he had.

MArgaret Ellwood says, she had a Company to see the Lodgings at Windsor, in
the first Year of King James, about three or four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, a Woman told her my Lady was not there, but she opening the door,
saw my Lady upon the Stools in an ill Posture, Mr. Germaine's Breeches were
down, he pulled them up, and laid his hand on his Sword, saying, God Damn you
for a Whore, how have you the Impudence to come here? my Lady bid him kick me
down, he scattered some concerns, that is, Man's Nature on the Boards. She saw
no Nakedness but her Knee, or a little above; another time after, she found
Germaine's Handkerchief and Ruffles in my Ladies Bed; my Ladies Woman said,
there was Germain's Name upon them. Another time she saw Mr. Cornwall let Mr.
German out of my Ladies Closet; She saw Germains Legs within hers when she
came the first time into the Room, and his Breeches were about his heels: The
first time was in Bartholomew-Fair time, Mrs. Knifton told her, it was Germains
Linen.

THOMAS Hudson says, That the Duke of Norfolk being at Portsmouth, he was
Butler at Windsor, when German, the Duchess, and Cornwall went to Play,
German sent his Footman for clean Linen, which he brought next Morning. Mrs.
Gwyn said to the Duchess, the Dog would have layn with me, but she would not
lie with the Dog where the Deer laid, for she knew my Lady Duchess would
accept of him; after that, he saw a Shirt and Wastecoat in the Closet, which my
Ladies Woman, and Ann Burton took away. My Lord being absent, we murmured
amongst our Selves, that my Lord was wronged, I told my Lord, whereupon my
Master Cragg had me to Lord Peterborough's Lodgings, and threatened me, that he
would prefer me to his Brother Richards, who turned me off in Germany; this was
he thinks in December or September, 1685 Mrs. Gwyn spoke this in the
Green-Room, and he was in a Closet hard by, and the Door open, and so heard it.

ANN Burton says, She was Servant to the Duke and Duchess of Norfolk, when
the Duke was gone to Portsmouth, she was at Windsor; and my Lady went to London
with German, when my Lady came home, after Supper, she was in great haste to
go to Bed, when she was Undrest, she said she would Lock us out, because she
would not be disturbed before Eleven a Clock the next Morning, though the King
or Queen should come: Hudson told her, German was still in the House,
whereupon we laid Chairs on the Back-stairs, that we might hear him if he came
down; the Chairs were not removed next Morning, when Germains Man came with the
Linen, he said, his Master was there. My Lady ordered a Fire to be made in my
Lords Room, where, when she was come, Mrs. Nelly Gwynn came in, and asked her,
how she liked her Nights Rest, and being asked for German, she said, she knew
nothing of him. My Lady complaining of her Hair being out of Order, Nelly
answered, it was a hot Night with her, enough to put her Hair out of Powder and
Curl too: Presently after Cornwell came in and asked for German, and my Lady
saying, she knew nothing of him, Nelly Gwynn said, I question not but he will
come out by and by like a drowned Ratt; with that whilst I was cleaning the
Dining Room, Mrs. Kifton called me, and showed me in the Closet, Germans
Shirt and Wastcoat; and afterward, making my Ladies Bed, saw there were two
Prints had laid, the Shirt and Wastcoat were sent by the Duke to the Lord
Peterboroug, she says she is a single Woman, and was never Married, this was
about Bartholomew-Tide about six Years since, she supposes the Bed was stained
both by a Man and Woman.

SImon Varelst says, that he was at Windsor to draw the Duchess of Norfolks
Picture about six Years since, and had the Dukes Closet to put his Pictures in;
when he had done, and had been at home two or three days, German came to him
much concerned, and said, you can do the Duchess an extraordinary kindness,
and will oblige the Lord and Lady Peterborough in the highest degree; then he
showed me a Letter from the Duchess to me, and read it to me, before that he
told me there was a Shirt and Waiscoat, and they are known to be his. He said,
I desire you to save the Duchess Honor, I desire that you will be so much a
Gentleman, as to own them to be yours, and that you left them there. I
answered, I was much concerned there should be such a trouble, but I desired to
be excused, I could not do it without prejudice. He told me, the Lord and Lady
Peterborough had discoursed the Duke of Norfolk upon it, and if it were but my
Linen, their discourse had wrought so much on him, that if there came but any
Evidence to assist them, he would leave off the Pursuit: I refusing still, he
offered me a Purse of Gold, and told me, I should have my Fortune by it, but I
still refusing Mr. German, he went away very much discontented, my own Wife
being in the next Room, overheard the discourse between German and me, and
told it, and spoke of it, else I had not been here now.

THOMAS Foster says, that he was Coachman to Mr. German, and carried the
Duchess of Norfolk often, about two Years since in his Coach, and brought her
home, and the Footmen have had four Half-Crowns given them, and Martin a
Dutchman his helper, called it Hush-Money. It was by Night against a Light,
that he saw her Face in the Coach, it was about Seven or Eight of the Clock at
Night, about this Time a Year he has seen her Face once in the Daytime, she
looking out of a Sash-Window two Stories high in Germain's House in
Park-Street, he knows her Face well enough; he has seen her before, and since
she was Married.

EDieth Sawbridge says, that the Tuesday following, this unhappy Discourse
concerning the Duchess of Norfolk, Mrs. Sturton came into her Chamber, and she
telling her what had happened at Windsor, Mrs. Sturton replied, this was
nothing but what she expected before now; the Witness replied, that if she the
Witness had been as near the Duchess as the said Mrs. Sturton, she would have
prevented all this, to which Mrs. Sturton said, would you have had me whipped at
the Carts-Arss; The Discourse we had, was, that Mrs. Knifton told her, when I
came from London, on Friday Night, that she told me she was glad I was come,
for she expected her Throat to be cut every Night since my Lord Duke went to
Fortsmouth, I asked her the Reason of her Fear, she answered, Germain had said
with my Lady Duchess ever since my Lord Duke went to Portsmouth, that when he
came Home, he would hear of it, and he would kick her for a Bawd; and if she
should tell my Lord, Germain would cut her Throat: I bid her have a Care what
she said, for these were dangerous Words, how can you prove this, she said, it
was very true, the Witness asking her (Mrs. Knifton) how she knew this, she
said, Germain instead of going Home, went into the Closet; The Witness cannot
say that she said all this to Mrs. Sturton, but the greatest Part she did say;
Mrs. Sturton said, this was nothing but what she expected before, this was the
Tuesday after my Lord Duke came from Portsmouth; This was about
Bartholomew-Tide, in the First Year of King James's Reign.

Her Grace the Duchess of Norfolks Answer to the Lords in Parliament, against
a Divorce.
I MARY, Duchess of Norfolk, under Protestation, that the pretendid Charge of
Adultery against me* in the Honorable House of Peers, was and is generally
Insufficient, and such as I humbly conceive, I am not bound by Law to give
answer unto; yet knowing my own Innocence, and that I am not guilty of the
pretended Crimes, (this Protestation being showed to me) I shall and do under
the Matters and Qualifications hereafter Mentioned, answer, and say, hereby
affirming that having been married to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk for near
Fifteen Years, he never did (till the pretended Charge given against me) in the
least pretend or intimate unto me that I had injured his Bed, but did always
Treat me with great Kindness and respect: About the Year 1685, at his Request
and Desire, I did go with him from London to France, and there continued with
him some Time, where his Grace being under an Indisposition, and continuing so
for some Time, he showed so great Affection to me, and put so great Trust and
Confidence in me, that all such things as were administered to him, in Order to
his Recovery, he did not, non would receive any of them, but what came from my
Hands, and did with great Care attend him; and being recovered, he told me, his
Occasions required him to go for England, but he would return to me in France
in some short Time, and bring me home for England; and at his parting with me,
he showed great Affection to me, with Tears in his Eyes, said, he had a
Thousand Pardons to ask me, desiring my Patience, and that I should return into
England to him in some short Time; and after his Graces return into England, he
having Notice from me, that my Lodgings was inconvenient, and desiring his
Leave to change the same, he wrote me Word, very affectionately, that God
forbid he should constrain me to any Incon^eniency, and left me to my Liberty
therein; before his Parting with me in France, as a Testimony of his Love and
Affection to me, he ordered 400 Pounds Yearly to be paid me out of his own
Estate, by Quarterly Payment, over and above the separate Maintenance settled
upon me by my Father, upon my Marriage with him, and that after his Arrival in
England, he made several Visits to my Mother, the Countess of Peterborough, and
with great Observance and Respect, asked her Blessing, and told her, that he
had left me well and safe in France, and then said, his own Debts were pressing
upon him, that if her Daughter (meaning my Self,) would consent that the Manor
of Drayton and other Estates should be settled on him, and his Heirs, he should
thereby be made a happy Man; and I coming into England, his Grace having put
off Housekeeping and dwelling in the Countess of Peterboroughs Lodgings in St.
James's for about Two Years; and in Suing him for Alimony, the said Four
Hundred a Year not being paid unto me, he did not during that Suit, object any
Crime against me, which had been proper for him to have done to avoid any
Alimony, if I had been guilty; and I the said Mary, Duchess of Norfolk, being
at Drayton in Northamptonshire, his Grace did write very Affectionately unto
me, and that Disturbances happening in Northamptonshire, and those Parts in
November 1688, I left Drayton, and with the Consent of the Duke, went beyond
Seas, and there continued until sent for by my Father and Mother, and then
returned to England, which was in or about October. 1691. with the Dukes consent,
and then application being made to me, by the Duke my Husband, to join with him
in the Sale of Castle-Rising, and other Estate, I being advised that would be
injurious to me, would not join therein, which I humbly apprehend to be the
true Cause and occasion of this proceeding against my Honor, on the Duke my
Husbands part.

And I the said Mary, Duchess of Norfolk, adhering to my Protestation of my
Innocense, and denying that I am guilty of the pretended Crime charged against
me, and being unwilling to Impeach my Husband of any Crime whatsoever, yet
being advised, that by the Laws of the Land, a Husband Suing a Divorce for the
Adultery of his Wife, he ought not to obtain any sentence of Divorce if he be
proved guilty of the same.

Wherefore, the Respondent does aver, and is ready to prove, that the Duke her
Husband, was, and is guilty of the Adultery, and has continued in the course
of Adultery for this Ten years last past, and does so continue.

My Lords,
IT is Misfortune and Dishonor enough to be thus Accused, I had rather stand
charged for High Treason before your Lordships, than with this Ignominious
Crime: in the Charge for High Treason, the manner of Trials, the ways of
Proceedings are known, so is the Punishment in this Case against me.

Your Lordships are now creating New ways of Proceeding against me, and a New
Law to Punish me, and this for a Crime supposed, and alleged, and to be
committed near Seven years past in another Reign after public Indemnity in
the Session of Parliament; many sittings of the Parliament, and desolution of
others, without mentioning this Crime against me: My Councils are to seek how
to Advise my Defense in the Proceeding, being altogether strange and without
Precedent or Example.

I find my Prosecution now to be very violent, and the Proceeding very swift
upon me, having had but one night to prepare my Answer to this general Charge.
I do in this place publicly declare, I am Innocent of what is objected to me,
and am not guilty of defiling my Husbands Bed: I am not guilty of the Crime
charged against me: I hope (being thus accused) I may without Vanity, and
Vainglory, say, what is well known, that I am not only the Lord Duke of
Norfolks Wife, but also Born and Descended from Parents and Ancestors of the
Ancient Nobility; and that your Lordships Ancestors, and my Ancestors, who Sat
in this House, knew no such Proceeding, it is with regret that I bring this
Answer for my Self and against my Husband, being my Defense, I hope you will
excuse me.

And if your Lordships shall in your great Wisdom proceed farther in this
Matter, I hope, and do most humbly Pray, that I may hereafter have convenient
time to make my Proofs, and full Defense, and then I doubt not of your
Lordships Justice for as much as for my Husband, who sits and Votes with your
Lordships.

Mary Norfolk.

The Depositions of the Witnesses on the behalf of Her Grace the Duchess of
Norfolk.
ALexander Herman, says, that he served Mr. German, he has left his service
a year and a half, about eight Weeks after he came from Ireland with the King;
He served him a Year and a half, Mr. German was in Ireland with the King, in
the Summer, in the Year 1690. He went to Ireland two days before the King that
Summer, he continued there Four Months, he believes he went the last of May, or
the last of June; He came back with the King, he the Witness served him all
that time in Ireland, and saw him every hour and every day, and never stirred
from him from Ireland he came in the same Ship with the Lord Villiers the Earl
of Manchester and Mr. Felton, and he went to Ireland in the Monmouth Yatch with
the Envoys of Holland and Brandenburgh, and the Marquess Mampevillion; He
says, Mr. Germain was at Brussels in Flanders in May last, he saw him there,
and speak with him there, he saw the Lord Villiers and the Lord Lumley there
with him, he Lodged with him in the same Tavern, there with him for four days,
and saw him not after; He the Witness coming then for England left him there;
He never k^ew him wear his own Hair, his own Hair is dark Brown, he never knew
him appear abroad without a Wigg, his Hair is about half a Finger long, he wore
a Fair Wigg, he says, he the Witness was Quartered in a place behind him in
Ireland, he could not stir but he heard him; he says, that Four Weeks after
he saw him in Brussels, he saw him walking in St. James's Park*

ANthony Moore says, he was Barbar to Mr. German, the first time he shawed
him was five or six Years since, his own Hair is Brown, he shaved his head very
often, he shaved him before he went to Holland, and since he came home, he
never saw his Hair long enough to cover his Ears, nor saw him ever wear his own
Hair but a Periwigg, he shaved him for a Year and a half before, and since he
went for Ireland, he shaved him always at his house near the Park, he or his
man shaved him ever since he came from Holland to this day, he or his man
shaved him the night before the King went for Holland; he says, that Mr.
German when he went away, said it would be a Month or two before he should
come back, but he knew not how long it was. This was at his house next door to
the Cockpitt, he shaved him Yearly since the King came into England, he says,
the Campaigne was almost done when he first shaved him after he came from
Flanders.

GRace Cook says, that she knows Jane Wadsworth, she has lived near her Four
Years, she came into the Witnesses house with a paper in her hand, and ask't
her who left it, saying, she knew nothing of it; She said, that she had said,
that she had seen the Duchess of Norfolk in Master Germans House, but she
had not seen her a great while, and now that she had seen her, she was
satisfied that it was not her, and she wished that she might burn in the Fire,
and never go home to her Children, if she would take her Oath of it: The Paper
was to warn her to this house, it was the first night that the Papers came out
that she said this, Hosea Grimes, John Hall and Margaret, were present when she
said this, she says, she lives next door but one to Jane Wadsworth.

JOhn Hall says, that he has known Jane Wadsworth above a year, about a
Fortnight since she came into Mrs. Cooks with an Order in her hand, but knew
not who left it, and said she could say nothing to it, Mrs. Cook saying again,
you must say something to it, else you had not had this Order from the House;
then she said she had been at the Duke of Norfolks and had told the Duke that
she had chanced to go into Captain Germanies for a Pint Pott, and she said she
chanced to see the Duchess of Norfolk, but she said she might be mistaken, for
she had not seen her in seven Years before, but she had seen her once or twice
since she came from France, and that was none of the Duchess of Norfolk which
she saw in Captain Germanies Stairs, whereupon Hosea Grimsley asking her if she
was sure it was not she, she said she was sure it was not she, wishing that she
might Burn and never go home to her Children if she would Swear it, for she
could not swear it. Hosea Grimsley, Grace Cook, and two other women were
present in Grace Cooks house when this discourse happened, which was the very
night the Order came out, he says, he wrought in Mr. Germanies house, he saw
twice or thrice Ladies there in Masks, one of the Ladies in the Mask gave
Orders to take down a partition, she was reported to be Captain Germans Sister.

MArgaret Coney says, that she knows Jane Wadswort^* who come into Mrs. Cooks
the first time she was Subpena'd, and asked her who left the Paper in her hand
for her, she went to Mr. Germain^s for a Pott, she thought she saw the Duchess
of Norfolk there, but she saw her since her coming from France, and she was
well satisfied it was not her, and wished she might neversee her Children, and
Burn if ever she saw her there.

ALexander Herman says, that he knows Jane Wadsworth well, he never had any
Discourse with her concerning the Duchess of Norfolks, being in Mr. Germans
house, he says, he has drunk often at Wadworths house, but he never had any
Discourse with her concerning the Duchess of Norfolk, nor never saw this Woman
in his Masters house in all his life, he waited on his Master at Table, and in
his Chamber all the time of his service, which was a Year and a half, he never
saw a Lady in a Mask in his Masters house.

MAry Pennington says that she knows Jane Wadsworth, she was her Servant, but
not long, for she was not honest, she the Witness being gone out, at her
return, she met her going away with her the Witnesses Linen and her Husbands
Bundled up, this was about a 11 Years since.

FRances Knight says, that she knows not Jane Wadsworth, nor never
Discoursed with her, nor never saw her at Master Germans house, nor did the
Witness ever carry any Letters thither.

JVdith Stourton says, that she was Servant to the Duchess of Norfolk when
the Report was of the Duchess and Mr. Germain, which was about a week before
the Duke and Duchess went to France, she was asked by the Lord Peterborough in
the presence of the Duke of Norfolk in the Dukes house in St. James's Square
(where they shut the Door) as she would answer it before Almighty God, if she
did not know whether his Daughter was an Adulteress? Her answer was, as she
hoped to see God in Heaven, the Duchess was as Virtuous as any woman alive,
for ought I know, she says, that what she then said is true, and if she should
pretend to say any other, she should wrong her self, she says, that no one was
present beside the Lord Peterborough and the Duke, when they Examined her, and
that she saw no Shirt or VVastcoat at that time, and that she does not Remember
that she said to Mrs. Webb any thing concerning the Duchess and Mr. German,
and thinks she never spoke with Mrs. Webb, and she was not at Windsor when the
Duke was at Portsmouth, she says, there was a Report of Scandalls which she
was sorry for.

ELizabeth Camel says, that she went with the Duke and Duchess of Norfolk
into France, they went together very lovingly, and parted so, she thinks the
Duke staid with her about a fortnight, the Dukes Eye was ill, and my Lady went
often to him, and when she did so we retired, my Lady dressed his Eye, they Eat
and Drank together every day, they did not Lodge together that she knows: My
Lord told her at parting at the Grate in the Monastery, that he would fetch her
away suddenly, and they parted kindly, Mrs. Lawson was in the Monastery with
the Duchess; The Witness continued there about 13 Months, my Lord Expressed a
great deal of kindness to my Lady in going, and while he was there, there were
Tears on both sides at parting; when my Lord and Lady were together in the
house called, Loten de Tarran at Paris, we used to withdraw, not knowing what
they had to say together.

MAtthew Scot says, that he has paid several Sums to the Duchess from the
Duke in May 88, he paid 125 l. for the Duchess to Mr. Cray, he paid 2 or 300
l. into France when the Duke and Duchess was there, he cannot say he remitted
any Money into France after the Duke came home, he knows not that any Money was
paid to Mr. Morton for my Lady by the Dukes Order.

MRs. Judith Stourton (Examined before on the Duchess behalf) says that she
saw Mrs. Sawbridge once in the Dukes house in St. James's Square, and they talk
of the Scandal of Mr. Germain and the Duchess of Norfolk; She says, she the
Witness never heard Mrs. Sawbridge say that Mrs. Knifton should say, that Mr.
Germain laid with the Duchess every night at Windsor, she denis that she said
to Mrs. Sawbridge that she expected to hear of that before now, she never said
to Mrs. Sawbridge, would you have had me whipped at the Carts Arse, she says,
she remembers not that Mrs. Sawbridge told her that Mrs. Knifton said, that she
was afraid that her Throat would have been cut when the Duke was at Portsmouth,
she Remembers not that she asked Mrs. Sawbridge the Reason of Mrs. Kniftons
fear, or that she told her any thing of Mrs. Kniftons saying, that Mr. Germain
laid with my Lady every night at Windsor, she saw Mrs. Sawbridge and Discoursed
with her, but she connot say what Discouse she had with her.

FINIS.

