CHAP. I. Of the Med^^^ and Coins of Scotland.
THere are not many Scotch Coins found on the Borders of the Two Kingdoms,
notwithstanding the frequent Conflicts that have happened there: And one great
Reason, why they are more rarely met with than the English, is because (as our
Edward the Second observed in his J. Major, Hist. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Speech) the Kings of Scotland used not, in old Time, to pay their Armies, but
every Man followed at his own Expense, and carried his own Provisions. He that
wrote the short Catalogue of the King's prefixed to H. Boethius's History (I
speak thus doubtingly of it, because it could not be written by that Historian
himself, since it concludes with Queen Mary's two Husbands) affirms roundly
that there was no coined Money in the Days of K. Reutha; but that all manner of
Payments, of Wages or Prices, were made in Corn or Beef. In the H. Boeth. lib.
2. fol. 10. a.
History it self this King is said to have ordered the Salaries of Men of
different Professions in a certain and critical manner; so as that a Counselor
at Law was to have the Ox's Tongue, the Physician two Ribs out of each of his
sides, etc. Bishop Hist. Scot. lib. ^. p. 8^.
Lesley indeed reports this matter much otherwise; and assures us that King
Reutha coined Money of Leather, Numum ex corio bubulo cudi jussit: But, long
after this, the Brigantes are H. Boeth. lib. 3. fol. 46. a.
said to have been Strangers to the Use of any sort of Coin, their whole
Treasure (in aractacus's Reign being in re pecuaria, in their Stocks of Cattle.

Picts.
We are told that H. Boeth. Lib. 10. fol. 194. a.
Brudus King of the Picts, sent a considerable Sum [ missa ad eum ingenti
pecuniae vi] to the Saxon King Edwine, as his Stipendiary against the Scots:
But, whether this was of his own or some foreign Coin, we are not informed.

K. Donald.
It Is probable enough that some sort of coined Money they had, even long before
that Time, if their Neighbors the Scots were made acquainted with the Thing as
early as K. Donald the First's Days. And so says Id. Lib. 5. fol. 86. b. Lesl.
lib. 2. p. 109. and Buchanan (Lib. 6. p. m. 175.) says Sterling-Money was first
coined by Donald the Fifth about the middle of the Ninth Century.
H. Boethius, whose very expressions are mostly transcribed by the following
Historians, and are these: Donaldus, primus omnium Scotorum Regum, ut in
Nostris Annalibus proditum est memoriae, Nummum Argenteum Aureumque signavit,
una part salutiferae Crucis, altera sui ipsius Effigy expressa, quo suscepta
a se primum inter Scotos Reges Christianae pietatis memoriam ad posteros
propagaret. Enimvero Nostrates antea aut nulla pecunia signata, sed ejus loco
Mercibus Commmutationis Causa, aut Romana aut Britannica, in Commerciis
utebantur. He proves the latter part of this Story from great Quantities of
Roman Money found in Fife and other Parts of the Kingdom; but his Authorities
for the rest, which is of chief Concern to us are omitted.

Malcolm II
I do not much doubt but that these Parts of Great Britain have all along
maintained their Commerce (and may they ever continue to do so!) in the same
Methods and Fashion with those that are more Southern: So that the Value of
Money, and the Prices of Goods, have generally been at a par amongst the
several Nations which anciently inhabited this Island. An early Instance we
have of this in the LL. Malc. 2. capp. 3.7, 8.
Laws of King Malcolm the Second, wherein a Colpindach (or young Heifer) is
valued at Thirty Pence; the very same Price which is set on an Ox in some of
our Vid. L L. ASS. Edit. Wheloc. p. 95.
Saxon Laws, which are supposd to have been Enacted about the same Time.

CHAP. II. Of the Scottish Gold Coins.
HOW long the Scots have coined Gold is very uncrtain; though, I think, we may
(in the Gross) venture to affirm that they hardly did it before the English:
And we have elsewhere ascribed the Beginning of the Matter there to K. Edward
the Third. What the H. Boeth. lib. 3. fol. 35. a.
Nummus Aureus was which Macolm Camnoir appointed to be paid in Lieu of that
obscenc Privilege given to the Grandees of Scotland by Euenus the Third, upon
the Marriage of their Tenants and Vassals, I cannot certainly tell; though my
Author says 'twas of the same kind with what (in his own Time) was well enough
kown by the Name of Marcheta. Dimidiata Argenti Marca is the Expression he Id.
lib. 12. fol. 260. a. Vid. and Reg. Majest. lib. 4. cap. 31.
elsewhere uses; and I suppose this may suit the Thing better than Nummus
Aureus.. The five last Chapters in the Regiam Majestatem are observed to be of
a suspected Authority; or, otherwise, we might seem to have a pretty good
Evidence of K. David the Firsts coining of Gold: For thus runs one of the Laws,
Reg. Majest. lib. 4. cap. 40. v. 7.
Pro Vulnere in facie vulnerans dabit unam peciam Auri, videlicet, unam
Imaginem Auri. These are all Uncertainties.

Before we enter upon the Times wherein we have better Light, it will be
convenient to to observe two Things to the Reader: 1. That the Proportion
betwixt Gold and Silver, in the Kingdom of Scotland, has usually been as One to
Twelve; so that when the Ounce of Gold was at three Pounds, the Ounce of Silver
went at five Shillings, etc. This is more particularly cleared in a Manuscript
Note of Penes D. Rob. Sibbald.
Sir James Balfour's, which he had called Prysses of the Cunzie in the hail
time of Ja. 1. Ja. 2. Ja. 3. Ja 4. Ja. 5. and Queine Marey. A. D. 1437. (says
that Note) K. James the First at his Death, had a Standard equal to that of
England: Silver was at 5 s. (Scots) the Ounce, and Gold at 3 l. A. D. 1440. K.
James the Second raised Silver to 8 s. the Ounce; and Gold to 4 l. 19 s. A. D.
1466. James the Third raised the Silver (first) to 10 s. 8 d. and the Gold to 5
l. 12 s. afterward he again mounted the Ounce of Silver to 12 s. in November,
1475. but (in February 1483.) he reduced it to 11 s. 8 d. The Gold he advanced
to 6 l. A. D. 1489. James the Fourth kept both at the last mentioned Value.
There are no remaining Acts of Council, concerning Coinage, in K. James the
Fifth's Time; though great Alterations were made in that Reign. The
Douglas-Groats (of 10 d. fine) and Babies (of 3 d. fine) were then brought in
use; as were likewise the Bonnet-pieces of Gold. He left the Ounce of Silver at
19 s. 9 d. and Gold at 12 l. A. D. 1542. In Q. Mary's time the Ounce of Silver
rose to 30 s. and she coined Placks (of only 2 d. fine) at 4 l. 16 s. the Ounce
2. Another Thing whereof I am to admonish the Reader is, that he will find the
Weight of the Gold and Silver (in the following Account of the Coins of both
Metals) computed by different Standards. In the former is observed that of the
Goldsmiths of Edinburgh; who divide their Ounce into sixteen Drops, and their
Drop into 36 Grains, 27 of their Grains making our Penny-weight. In weighing of
the Silver Coins, I have kept to our common English Weights; by Ounces,
Penny-weights and Grains. The Reason of this Difference, is, because all the
Golden Coins are now in the Possession of (my worthy and communicative Friend)
Mr. James Southerland; who was pleased nicely to examine their several Weights
by the Standard of his own Country. Most of the Silver-pieces are in the Hands
of the most Reverend Father in GOD, the present Lord Archbishop of York; and
his Grace, among the many generous Acts of Favor which I have had from him,
has kindly obliged me with his own most learned and curious Remarks upon 'em.
These two Things premised, I begin the Scottish Coins in Gold.

These, as I take it, K. Rob. II.
cannot be carried higher than the Sovereignty of the Royal Family of the
Stewarts; the eldest Golden Coin of Scotland seeming to be no older than the
Reign of K. Robert the Second. To this Prince, I suppose, belong the Three
following:

1. The Scotch Lion within a Shield crowned, a small Circle about the Shield,
and Robertus Dei Gracia Rex Scot. Rev. St. Andrew on the Cross, betwixt two
Flower-de-Lys's, with Dns. Protector MS. and Libera. Weight 1 Dr. 9 Gr.

2. Another differs only in the Words Liberato and Scoto, and the Weight is but
1 Dr.

3. The Scotch Lion in a Shield not crowned. Robertus Dei G. Rex Sco. R. St.
Andrew's Cross, with two Flower-de-Lys and two Trefoils. Dns. Protector MS. W.
20 Gr.

The five next I guess to belong to Robert the Third; Rob. III
since they carry a Motto, on the Reverse, which was not (I think) more early
in this Isle. K. Henry the Fifth was the first that bore it in England. It Is
true Traite Historique des Monnoyes de France. 4to. Amsterd 1692. 54.
Le Blanc gives this Motto on a Coin which he ascribes to K. Lewis the VII.
which would carry the Antiquity of an Inscription somewhat higher: But he that
curiously examines that Coin will find the Shield of the Royal Arms enclosed in
a Rose not used in England before Edward the Third's Time: And, if the Fashions
of Money were brought from France hither (as perhaps every Body will allow) yet
I think all agree that we followed their Example pretty early, as the Scots did
ours. So that it may be worth the considering anew, whether this Coin be truly
so old as Le Blanc puts it.

1. The Scotch Lion within a Shield crowned, Robertus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R.
St. Andrew stretched upon his Cross, XPC. Regnat. XPC. Vincit. XPC. imp. W. 2
Dr.

2. Different only from the former in Robertus Dei Gratia Rex Sco. W. 1 Dr. 4
Gr.

3. The Shield not crowned, Robertus Dei G. Rex Scoto. R. as above. W. 1 Dr.

4. The Shield as before, Robertus Rex Scotorum. The Reverse the same with the
two last mentioned. W. 34 Gr.

5. About the Shield (not crowned) a Garniture somewhat representing a Rose,
Robertus Dei Gratia Rex co. R. as before. W. 34 Gr.

A 6th without co.

James I.
King James the First may probably challenge the two next, being of a near
Resemblance to some of those of his immediate Predecessor.

1. The Scotch Lion in a Shield crowned, betwixt two Flower-de-Lys's, Jacobus
Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. St. Andrew stretched on the Cross, XPC. Regnat. etc.
W. 1 Dr. 24 Gr.

2. A small Crown on each Side of the Shield, Jacobus D. Gratia Rex Scotor. R.
The Flower-de-Lys's not crowned as in the former, Salvum fac populum tuum. W. 1
Dr. 24 Gr.

In the Fourteenth Year of King Parl. 8. Ja. 2. cap. 33. Oct. 25. 1451.
James the Second, James II.
it was enacted in Parliament, That there should be stricken a new Penny in
Gold, called a Lion, with the Print of the Lion on the ane Side, and the Image
of St. Andrew on the other Side, with a side Coat even to his Fute, halding the
samin Weight of the Half English Noble. This was to go at 6 s. 8 d. and its
Half at 3 s. 4 d. exactly at the same Rates with the Demi and Half Demi.
Afterward, in his Parl. 13. cap. 29. Oct. 19: 1455.
Eighteenth Year, the Demi and new Lion were ordered to go at 10 s. Of one Sort
or other of these are the six following.

1. The Scotch Shield crowned, with a crowned Flower-de-Lys on each Side, and
Jacobus Dei Gracia Rex Sco. R. St. Andrew as above, Salvum fac Pplum. W. 27 Gr.

2. The Flower-de-Lys's on the Sides of the Shield not crowned, Jacobus Dei
Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. St. Andrew on the Cross, with Flowers uncrown'd, Salvum
fac Pplum Domine. W. 27 Gr.

3. St. Andrew carrying his Cross, Jacobus Dei Gratia Rex Sco. R. The Lion in a
Shield crowned, Salvum fac Populum tuum Domine. W. 1 Dr. 20 Gr.

4. The Lion within a Shield in Form of a Lozenge, with a small Crown over it,
Jacobus Dei Gratia Rex Sc. R. A small St. Andrew's Cross betwixt two small
Flower-de-Lys's, within a pretty hexagonal Star, each Point ending in a
Flower-de-Lys, with a small Rose betwixt every two Points, Salvum fac Populum
tuum Do. W. 1 Dr. 27 Gr.

5. A Piece of the same Size and Stamp with the last mentioned. W. 1 Dr. 18 Gr.

6. Another of the same Stamp, but somewhat smaller Size. W. 30 Gr.

James III.
James the Third, in his Oct. 12. 1467. cap. 18.
third Parliament, ordered the Demi and Lion to be raised to 12 s. but, in the
Parl. 4: cap. 23.
next he held, which happend to be within a very few Months, they both returned
to their old Value of 10 s. In his Nov. 20. 1475. cap. 67.
Eighth, the Demi is set at 13 s. 4 d. and the Scottis Crown (which, I imagine,
is only another Name for the Lion) at 13. In his Feb. 24. 1483. cap. 93.
Thirteenth, a fine Penny of Gold is ordered to be stricken of the Weight and
Fineness of the Rose-Noble, which is to pass at the Value of 30 new Groats, of
ten in the Ounce of fine Silver. Another Penny of Gold, of the same
Inscription, to go for 20 Groats; and a third for 10. Of the two latter Kinds,
I suppose, are these two:

1. An Unicorn holding a Shield with the Scotch Lion, a small St. Andrew's
Cross under the Unicorn's Feet, and Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. A Cross
Flory, charged with a great blazing Star, Exurgat De. and dissipent. Nimici ej.
W. 2 Dr.

2. A Piece of the same Stamp, but smaller Size. W. 33 Gr.

James IV.
James the Fourth, in his very A. D. 1488. Parl. 1. Jac. 4. cap. a. Vide and
Ejusd. Parl. 4. cap: 40.
first Year, coined Money (both of Gold and Silver) of the same Weight and
Fineness with that of his Father; and some of 'em seem to have carried the very
same Impression. The following four may probably belong to this King:

1. One exactly stamped as those two are which we have allotted to the
foregoing Reign, varying only the first Legend thus: Jacobus 4. Dei Gra. Rex
Scotorum. W. 2 Dr.

2. The King on Horseback in Armor holding a Sword, circumscribed Jacobus Dei
Gra. Rex Scotor. R. The Scotch Lion in a Shield crowned, with a great Cross
reaching the outer Ring of the Piece, Salvum fac populum tuum Domine. W. 2 Dr.
18 Gr.

3. The same with the former, saving that the Legends are transposed. Jacobus,
etc. being about the Shield. W. 1 Dr. 18 Gr.

4. A lesser Piece of the same Stamp with the last. W. 22 Gr.

In the old 8vo Antverp. 1575.
Ordinance of the King of Spain, there is a Piece (called the Croone van
Schotlandt) which seems to be of this King's coining. It bears the Shield of
Scotland crowned, and Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum IIII. R. St. Andrew on the
Cross, and Salvum fac populum tuum Domine. Its Weight is set at 2 Dr. 16 Gr.

Betwixt this King and his Son (and Successor) King James the Fifth, we ought
to place a Noble Medal in Gold, J. Duke of Albany.
struck by John Duke of Albany the great Governor of Scotland in the young
King's Minority. It bears the Duke and Dutchess's Arms in a Shield crowned with
a Ducal Crown, a large Cross throughout the Field, and Joannis Albaniae Duc.
Gubern. R. A Dove spreading her Wings on the Top of another Shield with the
Duke's own Coat of Arms, 1524. and circumscribed Sub Umbra Tuarum. Weight 7 Dr.

There are also some Pieces of James the Fifth himself, James V.
which seem to be of the Medal-kind, rather than intended for an ordinary
current Coin. Such I take the three following to be:

1. A massy one (as broad as a new English Half-crown, and very thick) bearing
the Scotch Shield crowned betwixt two small Crosses, with Jacobus 5. Dei Gra.
Rex Scotorum. R. A Cross Floree, with, with four Thistle-heads, inscribed
Crucis Arma sequamur. W. 1 Ounce. 2 Dr. 30 Gr.

2. A smaller of the same Stamp with the former. W. 1 Dr. 24 Gr.

3. The King in Bust, crowned, Jacobus 5. Dei Gra. Rex Scotor. R. The Scotch
Lyion in a Shield not crowned, with a large Cross through it, inscribed Villa
Edinbrugh. W. 7 Dr. 27 Gr.

Indeed the common Golden Coins of this Reign (well known by the Name of
Bonnet-pieces, and said to have been coined out of Gold found in the Kingdom of
Scotland) are extremely beautiful, and little inferior to the finest Medals.
Of these they have the four following:

1. The King in Bust, with a Scotch Bonnet on his Head, Jacobus 5. Dei G. R.
Scotorum, 1539. R. The Scotch Shield crowned, Honor Regis Judicium diligit. W.
3 Dr.

2. The same exactly, 1540.

3. Another, a Third less, 1540. W. 2 Dr.

4. Half of the last mentioned, 1540. W. 1 Dr.

The same Year with the first of these, there was another Piece coined, of the
same Weight and Size with the Bonnet, carrying the Scotch Shield crowned and
incircled with a Chain of Thistle-heads; the Inscription, JACOBUS 5. DEI G. R.
SCOTORV. 1539. R. A large St. Andrew's Cross, charged with a Crown betwixt J
and R, in the upper Quarter a Thistle-head, and in the lower a Flower-de-Lys,
inscribed, HONOR REGIS IVDICIVM DILIGIT. It Is a curious Rarity; and very lately
communicated to me by Mr. Sutherland.

Q. Mary
Queen Mary's Life (in all the several Stages of it) was so full of wonderful
Circumstances, that no Reign afforded more copious Matter for Medals than hers;
and yet I have seen none in Gold that respects her History. Mr. Sutherland
indeed informs me, that he has seen one with the same Stamp of the first of her
Coins, exactly of the Weight with the first mentioned Medals of her Father:
Which I take to have been struck (as his also probably was) at the first
opening of her Mint. Her ordinary Coins, in that Metal, are these:

1. The Scotch Shield crowned, betwixt two Stars, with Maria Dei Gra. Regina
Scotorum. R. A Cross Flory, with a Thistle-head in each Quarter, and Crucis
Arma sequamur. W. 1 Dr. 24 Gr.

2. The Shield as above, Maria D. G. R. Scotorum, 1543. R. MR. with a Crown
above, and a Star below, Ecce Ancilla Domini. W. 1 Dr. 16 Gr.

3. The Shield crowned betwixt the Letters J. and G. Maria D. G. Scotorum
Regina. R. A Cipher including all the Letters of Maria Regina, with a Crown
above and a Star on each side, Diligite Justitiam, 1553. W. 2 Dr. 18 Gr. The
Letters J and G. show James Earl of Murray to have been Governor when the
Piece was coined.

4. Half of the same. W. 1 Dr. 9 Gr.

5. The Queen's Effigies, with her Head in Dress, Maria D. G. Scotorum Regina.
R. The Scotch Shield crowned, Justus fide vivit, 1555. W. 4 Dr.

6, 7. Two more, of the same Stamp and Weight, coined in the Years 1557 and
1558.

8. Half of the forementioned, of the same Stamp, coined in 1555. W. 1 Dr. 32
Gr.

9, 10. Two more, of the Weight, etc. last mentioned, coined in 1557 and 1558.

11. Francis and Mary, Face to Face, with a large Crown above their Heads,
Fran. and Ma. D. G. R. R. Scotor. Delphin. Vien. R. Four Pair of Dolphins
linked together and crowned, a Cross of Lorrain betwixt every two Pair, and a
St. Andrew's Cross in the middle, Horum tuta fides, 1558. W. 4 Dr.

James VI.
The largest and most valuable of King James the Sixth's Golden Coins, is the
Rose-Noble of Scotland, of the same Weight with that of England. On the one
Side are the Arms of Scotland crowned, in a Ship with two Flags, betwixt the
Letter J and the Figure 6, with a Rose on one Side of the Ship, Jacobus 6. Dei
Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. Two Scepters or Batoons, put in the Form of a St.
Andrew's Cross, each End of 'em crowned; in the Quarters of which are four
Lions Rampant crowned. All this is in a large Rose, between every Leaf whereof
there is a Thistle; as there is also in the center of the Cross. The Legend,
Florent Sceptra Piis. Regna his Jova dat numerari. W. 4 Dr. I call this the
largest of that King's Golden Coins; beause I reckon the four following (all of
that Metal) to be properly Medals.

1. The King in Bust, crowned, holding a Sword in one Hand, and an Olive Branch
in the other, beneath which In utrumque paratus, 1575. Circumscribed, Jacobus
6. Dei Gra. Rex Scotor. R. The Scotch Shield crowned, Parcere subjectis and
debellare superbos. W. 1 Ounce.

2. Another of the same Stamp, Size and Weight, struck in 1576.

3. The King's Effigies laureat, Jacobus 6. D. G. R. Scotorum. R. A branched
Thistle with six Heads (the uppermost crowned) betwixt the two Letters of J and
R both crowned, under the Thistle the Figure 6. Nemo me impune lacesset, 1590.
W. 1 Ounce.

4. The King and Queen with a Crown above their Heads, Jacobus 6. and Anna D.
G. Scotorum Rex and Regina. R. The whole Arms and Achievement of the Kingdom
of Scotland. In Defense. W. 2 Oun. 12 Dr.

The other (more ordinary and current) Golden Coins of this Reign, are:

1. The King bare-headed, Jacobus 6. Dei Gra. Ren Scotorum. R. The Scotch
Shield crowned betwixt 15 and 80. Exurgat Deus, and dissip. Inimici ejus. W. 3
Dr.

2. J R with a Crown above, placed four times in the Field, cross-wise, with
the Letter S in the Center, Deus Judicium tuum Regi da. 1 88 R. The Scottish
Crest, being a Lion crowned holding a Sword and Scepter, Post 5. and 100* Proa.
Invicta manent has. W. 2 Dr. 18 Gr.

3. Half of this, coined in 1584. W. 1 Dr. 27 Gr.

4. Another of the like, coined in 1587. W. 1 Dr. 21 Gr.

5. A Quarter of the same, 1584, W. 27 Gr.

6. The King in a strange Cap, behind a Thistle-head, Jacobus 6. D. G. R.
Scotorum. R. A. Lion crowned, holding up a Scepter to the Clouds, in which are
the Hebrew Letters of Jehovah, Te solum Vereor, 1591. W. 2 Dr. 9 Gr.

7. Another of the same Size, Weight and Stamp, coined in 1593.

8. The King on Horseback, in Armor, under his Horse 1593. Jacobus 6. D. G.
R. Scotorum, R. The Scotch Shield crowned, Spero Meliora. W. 2 Dr. 18 Gr. This
is what (in the Dutch Books of Ordinances for Money, and elsewhere) is called
the Scotch Rider; and was long the most common Gold Coin of this Country,
Pieces of the same Weight, Impression, etc. with this (as likewise half of the
same) having been coined in 1594, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 1600 and 1601. To these
the Statute of his Fifteenth Dec. 19, 1597. cap. 249.
Parliament refers, which ordains, That fine Gold (of 22 Carats fine) pass at
30 l. the Ounce; and that, out of every such Ounce, there be coined six
Five-pound-pieces, or twelve Fifty-shilling-pieces.

9. The Scotch Shield crowned, Jacobus 6. D. G. R. Scotorum. R. A Sword and
Scepter placed cross-wise. In the upper Quarter, a Crown, a Thistle-head in
each of the next, and 1601 in the lowest Salus Populi Suprema Lex. W. 2 Dr. 18
Gr. Though this Piece (commonly called the Scotch Angel) be of the same Weight
and intrinsic Value with the Former, yet it was coined to go at 6 l. the Value
of Silver being now risen from 50 s. to 60 s. by the Ounce; which of Necessity,
enhanc'd the Rate of Gold in the like Proportion.

10. The Half of these (W. 1 Dr. 9 Gr.) carrying the same Impression. This was
the last Gold coined before the happy Union of the Crowns in King James VI. and
we are not (for the Present) to bring our Enquiries any lower. I have seen an
MS. in Bibl. ICC. Edinb.
Extract of the Register of the Mint, from December 1601, to December 1602,
whereby it appears, That there was that Year coined at Edinburgh 119 Stone of
Gold and 986 Stone of Silver. I have also read, That in the In Atchison's MS.
Tr. of Metals.
Beginning of this King's Reign, a golden Basin (of the Contents of four
English Quarts) was presented by the Regent Morton to the French King, filled
with coined Pieces of Gold called Unicorns; both the Money and the Vessel being
made of the native Gold of Scotland. Such Pieces I never saw.

To one that considers how few English Coins we have of about Half a Score of
our Kings next after the Conquest, it. Silver.
will not look strange that the Silver-money of our neighboring Kingdom (of
the like Age) is not now very plentiful The oldest that even Mr. Sutherland
himself has been hitherto able to discover, is a Penny of Alexander the
First's; which yet (he is not very sure, but it) may belong to one of the other
two Princes of that Name. For the better and more skilful distinguishing the
ancient Silver Coins of Scotland, these Preliminary Cautions (which I have from
a very RR. D, D. Archiep. Ebor.
great Hand) will be found to be of mighty Use. 1. The Merchants Weights in
Scotland are different from ours, sixteen Pounds Troy (as several Acts of
Parliament have provided) going to the Stone, and every such Pound being
divided into sixteen Ounces: But their Silver-weights are the same, their
Ounce-pieces exactly agreeing with ours. How their Standard (or the Fineness of
the Metal) has varied from ours, or agreed with it, will be observed in the
several Reigns below. 2. The Sums by which the Scots always computed, and do
still compute, are the same with ours, they reckoning by Farthings, Halfpence,
Pence, Shillings, Merks and Pounds, as we do; and all those Sums bearing the
same Proportion to one another, as ours do; That is, a Shilling contains twelve
Pennies, a Merk thirteen Shillings and four Pence, a Pound twenty Shilling,
etc. But there has been a great Difference in the two Nations (at several
Seasons as to the value of those Sums. At first, perhaps, the Scotch Pieces
being of the same Weight and Denomination with the English) might also be
current at the same Rate with ours: But from the Beginning of King James the
First's Reign (which is as high as their printed Statutes will carry us) it was
otherwise; and the Difference increased in the following Reigns, as will appear
presently. 3. There Is no doubt but that, for a long Time, the coined Pieces of
Silver in Scotland (as well as England) were only Pence and Halfpence: After
which came in Groats and Half-groats; and, by Degrees, larger Pieces of even an
Ounce, two Thirds of an Ounce, etc.

David I.
I have a small Pieee which I take to be a Halfpenny of David the First's: It
weighs 14 Grains; which seems to come very near the Standard of that Time: For
thus (if the Authority be good) the Matter stands adjusted, Assis. R. Dav. 1.
cap. 1.
Sterlingus debet ponderare, 32 Gr. Uncia, 21 d. Libra, 26 s. 4 d. It bears a
clumsy Half-face, Crown and Scepter, and David Dei Gratia^ And the Reverse has
Rex Scoturum about four hexagonal Stars. The Regiam Majestatem, if any thing,
will acquaint us with the Value of such a Piece; when Reg. Majest, Lib. 4. cap.
40. v. 17,
twenty five Shillings were the Price of six Cows, and LL. Burg. cap. 121.
four Pence the Worth of a Pair of Shoes.

In William the First's Reign, William I.
Money seems to have been pretty plentiful; since the Nobility of Scotland
agreed to pay a H. Boeth. lib. 13. Fol. 272. b.
Hundred thousand Pound Sterling (whereof half was to be in ready Cash) to our
Henry the Second, for the Redemption of that Prince. Nor had this so far
exhausted the public Treasure, but that he was able (not long after) to lend
Two Ibid. Fol. 277. a.
thousand Merks to Richard the Third, on his Return (in Poverty and Thraldom)
from the Holy Land. Notwithstanding his great Glut of Money, which he appears
to have been Master of, there are not many of his Pence to be met with at this
Day. In some of the best Penes RR. D. D. Archiep. Ebor. and D. R. Ihoresbi.
Collections of our English Coins, there is one (which has been supposed to
belong to either the Conqueror or his Son Rufus) that bears a Side-face and a
Scepter; and whereon the King looks finer, and younger, than on any of the
rest. This, with humble Submission, I should rather place amongst the Coins of
Scotland; and guess to belong to King William the First of that Kingdom. Two
more I have p. D. Ja. Sutherland.
seen, which may possibly belong to this King: The one has Le Rey Willem, the
other Willelmus Rex, and both have Walter for the Coiner's Name on the Reverse,
after which (on one) comes On Ber. which whether it be for Berwick or Perth
(sometimes called Bertha) will need an Enquiry. That there was Money coined in
his Reign, is pretty plainly asserted by the Chronicle of Mailros: Chron.
Melross. ad An. 1195.
Willielmus Rex Scotorum innovavit monetam suam.

In Alexander the Stat. Gild. capp. 18.24, 26.
Third's Time, Alex. III*
a good Horse for the War was valued at twenty Shillings; a whole Carcass of
Mutton, the highest Rate sixteen Pence, and the lowest eight Pence; a Flagon of
Beer (better and worse) Twopence and a Penny. A Couple of these Pennies, of
the very same Impression, Size and Weight, I have in my small Collection;
bearing the King's Head, half-faced, with a Scepter, and Alexander Dei Gra. On
the Reverse, Rex Scotorum about four hexagonal Mullets, or Stars. W. 21 Gr.
Half of the same.

K. John.
King John's is likewise Half-faced, with a Crown and Scepter, and Johannis Dei
Gra. R. Rex Scotorum, etc. as before: And the Weight the same. His Halfpenny
weighs 9 Gr. Half of the same.

Rob. I.
Money, of some sort or other, could not be very scarce in the Reign of Robert
the Bruce; who H. Boeth. lib. 14. fol. 308. b.
agreed to pay our Edward the Third 30000 Merks in ready Money: And Hist. Scot.
lib. 7. p. 237.
Lesly assures us the Merks were Sterling. His Penny, P. D. J. Sutherland.
Halfpenny and Farthing, are to be seen: Much of the some Shape with those of
his Predecessors. Robertus Dei Gra. R. Rex Scotorum.

David II
In the Year 1366. (the latter End of David the Second's Reign) it was Vid.
Stat. Dav. 2. capp. 38. and 46.
Enacted in Parliament that the Money should be equal in Goodness to that of
England; and the next Year the Coinage was further regulated, a Pound of fine
Silver making 29 s. 4 d. Et fiat, says the Statute, in ipsa Signum Notabile,
per quod possit ab omni alia prius fabricata evidenter cognosci. I think he was
the first King of Scotlond that coined Groats. They give him crowned and
side-fac'd, with a Scepter erect, and David Dei Gratia Rex Scotorum. R. Dns
Protector MS. and Liberator MS. on an outer Circle; and Villa Edinburgh, about
four Mullets, in an inner. His half Groat has the same Inscription. W. 1 Dr.
His Penny weighs 14 Gr. and has only Villa Edinburgh on the Reverse. There Is p.
D. Sutherland.
another which has Villa Aberden on the Reverse: And those of Edinburgh have
been minted at several Times. There are Half and a Third of these; and Pennies
of both Kinds.

Robert the Second's Groat is much of the same Shape, Rob. II.
Weight and Size, with that of his Predecessor. It shows the King half-faced,
with a Crown and Scepter erect, and Robertus Dei Gra^ Rex Scotorum. R. Dnus.
Protector MS. and Liberator MS. on the outer Circle; and Villa de Perth, about
four small Stars, on the inner. Another of 'em has Villa Edinburgh; and a Third
Dundee. And I have seen p. Eundem.
Halfs of all these.

The first open faced Groat is that of Robert the Third. Rob. III.
It gives the King's Picture (crowned, but without a Scepter) in such a kind of
Rose as we have on most of our old English Groats. The Inscription is Robertus
Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. On the Reverse are three Globules in each Quarter of the
Cross: In the inner Circle Villa Edinburgh, and on the outer, Dnus Protector
MS. and Liberator MS. W. 1 Dr. 7 Gr. Mr. Sutherland has three other Varieties
with Villa de Perth, Villa de Aberd... and Villa Dumbertan; and the Half of the
first of these, and those of Villa Edinburgh, as likewise Pennies of both
kinds, and Villa de Aberde --

In the first Year of King James the First's Reign 'twas enacted that Parl. 1
Jac. 1. cap. 23. Mar. 26. 1424.
our Lord the King gar mend his Money, James I.
and gar stryke it in like Wecht and Fineness to the Money of England. A little
before this, the States of the Kingdom had agreed to H. Boeth. lib. 17. Fol.
346.
pay (to our K. Henry the Sixth) the Sum of 100000 Merks, for this King's
Ransom; whereof 50000 were to be paid in ready Money. These (though of such a
Standard as then passed for Vid. Lesl. Hist. Scot. lib. 7. cap. 261.
Sterling) might probably be found to carry too great an Allay, when they came
to be tendered in England; and this might, as probably, give Occasion for the
forementioned Statute. His Groat is full-faced, with Crown and Scepter, and
Jacobus Dei Gracia Rex Scot. R. In the Quarters of the Cross are two
Flower-de-Lis's and twice three little Balls (or Globuli) countercharg'd within
an anner Circle bearing Villa Edinburgh, and an outer with Dnus Protector MS,
etc. There Is p: RR: D: D: Archiep: Ebor.
another (which I take to belong likewise to this King, and to be of somewhat
more Age than the former) whereon the Inscription is Jacobus Dei Gra.
Rex-Scotorum; and its Reverse, in all Points, agrees with that of Robert the
Third. The Weight of the former is 1 Dr. 9 Gr. and, of this, 1 Dr. 4 Gr. There
are p: M: J: Sutherland.
others coined at Perth, Aberdeen, Linlithgow and Stirling; with the Half of
that of Edinburgh.

James II.
The Parliament, in the 4th Year of K. James the Second, thought it expedient,
Parl: 8: Ja: 2: cap: 33: Oct: 25: 1451.
for diverse Causes, that there be stricken new Money, conform even in Weicht
to the Money of England, with the quilk this Realm hes part of Commoning: And
that there be stricken of the Ounce of burnt Silver, or Bulzeon of that Fines,
aucht Groates; and of the samin matter and weicht, as Effeiris, Half-groate,
Penny, Half-pennie and Farding. In his Parl: 13: Ja: 2: cap: 29: Oct: 19: 1455.
Eighteenth Year this New Groat is ordered to go for Twelve Pennies; and the
Six-penny Groat (which appears to have been of a scandalously base Allay,
because the Mint-Masters are forbidden, on pain of Death, to coin any more of
'em) is ordained till have Course as it hes. What Value that was, its very Name
sufficiently shows; and I take this to be the same Piece which (in the Parl: 1:
Ja: 3: cap: 23.
next Reign) is called the Sex-Penny-Groat of the Flower de Luce. This raising
of their New Groat (which was of the very same Weight and Fineness with the
English Groat) brought the Computation of the Sums in Scotland to Tripple what
they bore in England: So that their Pound was no more than our Noble, their
Shilling than our Groat or Four Pence, etc. The said Groat gives this King
full-faced, with an Imperial Crown, and Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scot. R. Dnus.
Protector, etc. on an outer Circle, and Villa Edinburgh (about two Crowns
intercharg'd with twice three little Balls and a small Annulet) on the inner.
W. 2 Dr. Half of this. Another (of the Groats) has Villa p. D. J. Sutherland.
Aberdie, on its Reverse.

The first Parliament of K. James the Third ordains that Oct. 9. 1466. cap. 9.
, James III.
for the Ease and Sustentation of the Kingis Lieges and almous Deed to be done
to puir Folk, there be cuinzied Mr. Sutherland has Samples of these and some
(of the like Kinds) in the following Reigns.
Copper Money, four to the Penny, havand on the ane Part the Croce of S.
Andrew, and the Crown on the other Part; with Subscription of Edinburgh on the
ane Part, and an R. with James on the other Part. [These are the same Pieces
which were continued by his Successors, and (in the Reign of Ja. VI.) got the
Name of Atcheson's from one Atcheson a Coiner and Author of the Book of Metals
mentioned in the first Chapter of this Historical Library: Some of which were
of common Currency (for four Bothwels, or Eight Pennies Scotch) even in the
late Reign of K. Charles the Second, but are now wholly disused.] In his Parl.
3. Ja. 3. Oct. 12. 1467. cap. 18.
Third Parliament the Groat of the Crown is ordered to have Course for Fourteen
Pennies; and the strikeing of the Black Pennies to be ceased. These Black
Pennies were a different Sort of Money from the Copper-Farthings
abovementioned; and were for some Time forced in Payments, till (at last) the
People unanimously refused to take them: Upon which the last Earl of Douglas
reflecting, made this Answer to the King, when requested (in his extreme old
age to be his Lieutenant General against the Rebels: D. Hume Hist. of Dugl. p.
206.
Sir, you have kept me and your black Coffer in Sterlin too long. Neither of us
can do you any good. We find it also amongst the Articles objected to his
Favorites, by the Earl of Angus and others, that they had persuaded him to
Ibid. Par. 2. 226. Vid. etiam Lesl. Hist. Scot. lib. 8. p. 309. and J. Ferrer.
Append. ad H. Boeth. Fol. 395. a and G. Buchan. lib. 12. p. m. 444.
coin a Brass Coin of no Value, which the People called the Black Coin, which
Fact of all other was most odious to the Vulgar: For (as it follows in the
History) a great Dearth ensued upon the Project, since every Body chose to let
their Corn rather rot than to give it away so much below the intrinsic Value.
In the very next Parliament of this Reign, called within a Parl. 4. Ja. 3. in
Jan. 1467. cap. 23.
few Months of the former, the Groat of the Crown is reduced to 12 d. and the
lesser Pieces to proportionable Values. In this King's May, 6. 1471. cap. 46.
Sixth Parliament the New allayed Groat is ordered to go for Six Pennies, and
the Half-Groat for three: And, in his Nov. 20. 1475. cap. 64.
Eighth, Twelve Groats are appointed to be stricken out of an Ounce of burnt
Silver, as also Pennies, (to go at 3 d.) and Half-pennies of the same Fineness.
In his Feb. 24. 1483. cap. 93.
Thirteenth a new Penny of Silver, as fine as the old English Groat, is ordered
to be coined; ten whereof are to make an Ounce, and to go at 14 d. each. At the
same Time Counterfeit Placks, at 2 d. a Piece, were called in. His Groat
represents him full-faced and crowned (without a Scepter) with this
Inscription, Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. Villa Edinburg. on the inner
Circle, about the Crowns and Globuli, as on his Fathers, but without the
Annulets; and Dnus. Protector, etc. on the outer. W. 2 Dr. 8 G. The like are p.
M. J. Sutherland.
coined at Aberdeen, Sterling and Roxburgh; and a Half-Groats at Edinburgh.
Some of his Groats and Half-Groats (on the Reverse) has a Mullet in each
Quarter of the Cross; and, in the inner Circle, Villa Berwici. In other Points
it agrees with the whole Groat. This Piece, being stamped at Berwick, must
assuredly belong to this King; who was Master of that Town Twenty-one Years,
and is the only Prince (of his Name and Nation, before the Union) that ever was
so.

It appears that, in King James the Fourth's Time, James IV.
there were Groats of somewhat different Stamps; as being minted by several
Coiners: And the Parl. 1. Ja. 4. A. D. 1488. cap. 2.
Act of Parliament particularly mentions those (whereof the last mentioned is
half) struck by Gilbert Pish, commonly called Barwick-Groats, others by
Alexander Levingstoun, and a third Sort by John Currour. These, being all of
equal Fineness, were made equally Current. One Groat I have, which I believe to
be of this King's own coining. It gives his Face open, and a Crown on his Head,
with Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. Villa Edinburgh (about two hexagonal
Mullets, and twice three Balls, countercharg'd) on the inner Circle, and Dn^s
Protector MS. etc. on the outer. W. 1 Dw. In the abovementioned Ordnance of the
King of Spain I find two more, which are there called Schotsche Stooter; and
which one would imagine to be both of this King's coining. The one of these
differs very little from that already described; faving that, in the outer
Circle on the Reverse, the Legend is Salvum fac Populum tuum Do^e. The like to
which I have seen in Mr. Sutherland's Collection, having (on the other Side)
four IIII, and a small Crown after the Word Scotorum: Another (instead of the
four IIII) has Q. T. and a third QRA; all signifying the Word Quartus. Half of
the first of these, is likewise there. The only Medal (as far as I yet have
learned) which was struck by this King, is that which is fairly described and
accounted for by the Learned Numism. p. 88.
Mr. Evelyn; who observes that it was coined in the last and fatal Year of his
Reign. The other begins its first Inscription with Jacobus 4. but the Figure is
undoubtedly misprinted for that of of 5, the Piece being the very same which we
shall presently present the Reader with, as the proper Groat of the next Reign.

James V.
King James the Fifth, as far as appears by the Statutes of his Time, made no
manner of Alteration in the Standard of the Coin: And yet toward the End of
his Reign, or the Beginning of his Daughters, a mighty Change did happen, both
in the naming of the Scottish Pieces of Money, and in the Computation of their
Sums; as we shall see anon. The eldest of his Coins (Groat and Half-groat) give
him Side-faced with Jacobus Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. Cross Floree, two
Thistle-heads and two Spur-Rowels (for they are hexagonal and pierced in the
Center) with Villa Edinburgh. His later Groat gives him in Bust, side-faced,
with short lank Hair crowned, Jacobus 5. Dei Gra. Rex Scotorum. R. The Scotch
Shield on a Cross, circumscribed Oppidum Edinburgi. Others (which seem the
elder) have Villa, etc. W. 1 Dr. 18 Gr.

Q. Mary.
After his Death, we hear no more of any Groats, Half-Groats, Pennies or
Half-pennies, coined in Scotland; nor any of their Names so much as once
mentioned in any of the subsequent Acts of Parliament. It Is Ita. RR. D. D.
Archiep. Ebor.
supposed that, by this Time, the Price of Silver was so risen (or rather the
Scots, like the French, had so raised the Accounts of their Sums) that the old
smaller Silver Coins, which took their Denomination from Pennies, grew into
disuse; and the Pieces, that were from henceforward coined, took theirs from
Shillings and Merks. Thus, in France, the Deniers perished and were forgotten;
and the Sols and Livres succeeded in their Room. We do not indeed meet with the
Name of Testoons (in the public Statutes of the Realm) before the Beginning of
James the Sixth's Reign: But it is more than probable that the Name was common
enough in his Mother's Time; that the Pieces so called, were coined in
Imitation of our English Shillings; and that their current Value was Five
Shillings Scotch. Many of these, and other Coins of this Reign, are still to be
seen in the Cabinets of the Curious: And I shall give the Reader an Account of
such of 'em as have com'd to my Knowledge in the same Order wherein they were
minted.

1. The eldest of these bears the p. D. Sutherland.
Queen side-faced and crowned with Maria Dei Gra. R. Scotorum. R. The Shield of
Scotland crowned betwixt two Mullets, and Da pacem Domine, 1553. The Second
bears the Letter M. crowned and supported with two crowned Thistles, inscribed
Maria Dei G. Scotorum Regina, 1555. R. The Scotch Shield on a Cross,
circumscribed Deliciae Domini Cor bumile. W. 5 Dr. 3 Gr. Half of the same.

2. Another of the same Year carries her Head with Maria Dei G. Scotor. Regina.
R. A crowned Shield, and Justus fide vivit, 1555. W. 3 Dr. 13 Gr.

3. The Scotch Shield, supported by the Letters M and R, Maria Dei G. Scotor.
Regina, 1556. R. A large Cross, with Four less in its Quarters, Virtute tua
libera me. W. 4 Dr. 4 Gr.

4. The Half of this, of the same Year, etc.

5. Differs nothing from the Third, excepting in its Weight and Date; for it is
said to be coined in 1558, and weighs only 3 Dr. 20 Gr.

6. F and M in a Cipher crowned, supported with double Crosslets, Fecit utraque
unum, 1558. R. The Arms of the Dauphine and Scotland, with Franciscus and Mar.
D. G. R. R. Scotor. D. D. Vien. W. 4 Dr. 2 Gr. Immediately upon the Death of
Queen Mary of England (this Year) King Henry the Second of France Lesl. Hist.
Sot. lib. 10. p. 503.
caused his Daughter-in-Law to be declared Queen of England, Scotland and
Ireland, in the Parliament of Paris; and ordered the Arms of England to be put
on all her Plate, Tapestry, etc. It should seem that this was her common Style
ever after, till the Treaty of Leith cut her short; For thus runs the first
Lesl. Hist. Scot. p. 528.
Article there: Ut nec Franciae Rex, nec ipsius Conjunx Scotiae Regina, Angliae
Hiberniaeve Titulos sibi deinceps usurparent; Insignia Anglicana ex tota sua
suppellectile delerent; Diplomata, in quibus Titulus Angliae and Hiberniae
Ipsis tribuebatur, supprimi. curarent. It Is much that, in all this Time, none
of their Money bore the Arms and Title of England, and yet I never saw nor read
of any that did. It Is true, Mr. Evelyn Numism. 93.
mentions her assuming the Arms of England and Scotland in a Medal; but that
which he has given us, and which he seems to think concerns the Story of our
renowned Queen Elizabeth, has not a Stroke in it which looks this Way. The
Queen indeed pleaded for Archb. Spotsey. Hist. of Chapter of Scotl. lib. 4. p. 177.
herself, afterward, that she was constrained to this Usurpation by her
Husband and Father-in-Law; and that, after their Death, she never practiced any
such Matter: And so, I suppose, her suffering a Medal to be struck (in the Year
1560) is to be accounted for. On this we have the Arms of France, Scotland and
England, quarterly, circumscribed Maria D. G. Francorum Scotorum Reg. etc. On
the Reverse, two Crowns on a Level, with a Third in the Clouds, inscribed
Altamque Moratur 1566.

7. Another of the same Weight, Stamp, etc. with the last; but coined in 1559.
One of the Articles wherewith the Lords of the Congregation (this very Year)
charged the Queen-Regent, was, B. Burnet, Hist. of Reform. Vol. 2. p. 412.
that she had embas'd the Coin to maintain her [French] Soldiers. The last
mentioned is not referred to in this Charge, but some p. ^. Sutherland.
baser Pieces, and smaller; which carry the Cipher crowned, etc. but the
Reverse has this Inscription on a Square, Jam non sunt duo sed una caro, 1558
and 1559.

8. Arms of France and Scotland crowned, on a Cross Crosslet, Fra. and Ma. D.
G. R. R. Franc. Scotor. q. R. F and M in a Cipher crowned, supported by a
Flower-de-Lys and Thistle crowned, Vicit Leo de Tribu Juda, 1560. W. 4 Dr. 2
Gr. and 1561.

9. Half of the same.

10. The Queen dressed in her Hair, Maria Dei Gra. Scotorum Regina, 1561 and
1562. R. Arms of France half effaced by those of Scotland, the Shield crowned
and supported by two M M crowned. Salvum fac populum tuum Domine. Half Ibid.
of both these.

11. After her Return out of France, she coined the large Pieces of an Ounce
Weight. On the first of these is the Shield of Scotland crowned, and supported
by two Thistles, Maria and Henrics. Dei Gra. R. and. R. Scotorum. R. A
Palm Tree crowned, with this Motto (on a Schedule hung in it) Dat Gloria Vires,
and subscribed 1565, and circumscribed Exurgat Deus, Dissipentr. inimici ejus.
The same in 1566. Some call the Tree on the Reverse an Yew-Tree; and report
that there grew a famous one of that Kind in the Park (or Garden) of the Earl
of Lennox, which gave Occasion to the Impress: Wherein the Tree, being crowned,
denotes the Advancement of the Lennox-Family by Henry Lord Darnley's Marriage
with the Queen; and the Lemma of Dat gloria vires is observed to comport very
well with the Device. This Piece went for Thirty Shillings; there were at the
same Time coined Pieces of two Thirds of an Ounce, which went at 20 s. with
some smaller of 10 s. and 5 s. All of 'em had the same Impression.

12. After her second Husband's Death, she coined other new Pieces of an Ounce
Weight, etc. which agreed with the other in the Impression and every other
Matter, save that Henricus was now left out of the Style, and the Date 1567,
which we shall find to be same with the first coined Pieces of her Son. There
are several Medals in Silver struck in Remembrance of some great Passages of
this Queen's Life: One carries the Arms of France and Scotland crowned with
Maria D. G. Scotor. Regina Fran. Dot. R. A Hand out of the Clouds, pruneing off
a dried Branch, and Virescit Vulnere Virtus. Another differs not from this, on
the Reverse; but has the Scotch Shield single. A Third bears as the first: But
the Reverse shows a Jugg of Water poured from the Clouds upon half a Tree
flourishing, the other half being dried and perished, with Mea sic mihi
prosunt, subscribed 1579, A Fourth (of the same Year) carries a Ship in a Storm
on a rough Sea, with Sails rent and Masts broken, but keeping steady; with
Nunquam nisi Rectam. In other Parts not differing from the former. A Cum 4.
praemissir, p. D. Sutherland.
Fifth (of about two Ounceweight) with the Queen's Picture to the Waste; with a
Breviary in her Hand, inscribed, O God grant Patience, in that I suffer vrang.
The Reverse has this Inscription, Quho can compare with me in Grief. I die and
dar nocht seile Relief. Circumscribed (after one Hand, with a Heart in it,
ready to join with another) Hourt not the Heart. Quhois Joy thou art.

In the very Beginning of King James the Sixth's Reign, James VI*
a Complaint is made in Parliament, Parl. 1. Ja. 6. cap. 13.
Of the great Scarcity of good Money in Scotland, the good Silver, as Testons
and other old Silver, being utterly melted and destroyed, so that the Ounce of
Silver is at double the Price it wont to be at; whereupon it is declared, that
the King, with the Advice of his Regent, may coin Gold and Silver of such
Fineness as other Countries do, etc. Accordingly, among his Coins, we have,

1. The Thirty-Shilling-Piece of an Ounce Weight, whereon is the Shield of
Scotland crowned, and supported by the Letters J and R crowned, with Jacobus 6.
Dei Gratia Rex Scotorum. R. A drawn Sword with a Crown on its Point, a Hand
pointing to Three XXX for the Number of Shillings, and the Date of 1567 set
below, and circumscribed with (that generous Saying of the brave Trajan, upon
the Delivery of the Praetor's Sword) Pro me. Si mereor, in me. This is, on all
Hands, agreed to be the Conceit of his Tutor, G. Buchanan. The like Pieces
(with those of 20 s. 10 s. and 5 s. differing only in a proportionable Weight
and Size, and their proper Figures of XX, X and V) were coined in the Years
1568, 69, 70 and 71.

2. A Scotch Shield crowned, with the Figures 3 and 4 on the Sides, Jacobus 6.
Dei Gratia Rex Scotorum. R. Four capital IIII crowned, with two Crowns and two
Thistles countercharg'd in the Quarters, Salvum fac populum tuum Dne. 1572. W.
2 Dr. 2 Gr. This is only half of one with the same Inscription in Mr.
Sutherland's Collection; only, his has the Figures 6 and 8, which shows it to
have been coined for a Noble, whereas the other is only a Ten-Groat-Piece, or 3
s. 4 d. continued yearly to 1577.

3. Shield crowned, and Jacobus 6. D. G. R. Scotorum, 1591, 1592. R. A naked
Sword and Balance, His differt Rege Tyrannus. W. 2 Dw. 14 Gr. Half of the same.

4. The Royal Shield of Scotland crowned, with the usual Inscription of Jacobus
6. Dei Gra. 1578 to 1581. On the Reverse the Thistle, Some of these have the
Letter J and R on the Sides of the Thistle; but the most want 'em.
with Nemo me impune lacesset. W. 6 Dw. 19 Gr. The Mark-pieces of this Coin,
(which were coined Twenty Years after this, and were long current in England at
the Rate of Thirteen-pence-half-penny) want a Third of this Weight; which 'twas
necessary they should do, when the Ounce of Silver went at 60 s. Scotch,
whereas now it was only valued at 40 s. For, this very Year, Thomas Acheson and
others are empowered to coin Ten-shilling-pieces, Four in the Ounce of
Eleven-penny fine Silver. [From this Mint-master the Copper-pieces, of
Eight-pennies or Four Both-wel's Value, pretty common in this and the former
Reign, had the Name of Achesons given them. These, in the Year 1587, were So
the MS. Calderwood in the Library at Glasgow, Vol. 4. ad An. 87.
cried down by Proclamation, because Counterfeit in England and other foreign
Parts: But their Currency was afterward revived, and continued (on the English
Borders, as well as in Scotland) even within my own Memory. The Scots (says
Itio. Par. 1. p. 283.
Fynes Moryson) have of long Time had small Brass Coins, which they say of late
[his Book was printed in 1617] are taken away: Namely Babees, esteemed by them
of old for Sixpence, whereof two make an English Penny; also Placks, which
they esteemed for Four-pence, but three of them make an English Penny; also
Hard-Heads, esteemed by them at one Penny halfpenny, whereof Eight made an
English Penny.]

5. And the same Act directs, that these new Pieces be such as are Parl. 7. Ja.
6. Oct. 24. 1581. cap. 106.
havand on the ane Side the Portrature of his Majesty's Body, armed, with ane
Crown upon his Head, and ane Sword in his Hand, with this Cirucmscription,
JACOBVS. VI. DEI. GRATIA. REX. SCOTORVM. and on the uther Side, his Hieness
Arms in ane Scheild, with an Crown above the same Scheild, with the Dait of the
Zeir, upon ane of the Sides, with this Circumscription, HONOR. REGIS. IVDICIVM.
DILIGIT. There are 30 s. 20 s. and 5 s. Pieces (as well as those here mentioned
of 10 s.) which were made in Pursuance of this Act, and answer its Directions
as to their proportionable Weight and Circumscription: But furthermore, on
their Reverse, they have the Letters J and R on the Sides of the Shield, and a
little under XL s. XXX s. XX s. etc. according to the respective Value of the
Piece.

6. In the Thirty first Year of this Reign, there was another Parl. 15. Ja. 6.
Dec. 19, 1597. cap. 249.
Act passed about Coinage, wherein (after a Complaint of the vile Practices of
all Sorts of People, in exorbitantly-raising the Value of Gold and Silver) it
is ordered that the Ounce of Silver coined in Ten-shilling-pieces, etc.
according to the last recited, shall stand at 50 s. and the old 30 s. Pieces
(that is, the Ounce-pieces of Queen Mary and King James) at the same Price; and
the new Thirty-shillings-pieces (being three Quarters of an Ounce) at 37 s. 6
d. This teaches us to discover the true Value of a Piece of this King's Coin,
of the exact Weight of one of our English Shillings, bearing the King's Head
without a Crown, and Jacobus 6. D. Gra. etc. R. A Thistle crowned, with Nemo me
impune lacesset, 1594. There is no Ita RR. D. D. Archiep. Ebor.
Doubt but this Piece was coined to go for Ten Shillings; the Weight of it
exactly answering that Value at the Rate of 50 s. in the Ounce. Nor is it any
Objection that this Piece was coined three Years before the passing of the said
Act: For Silver was raised to this Value before the Act, as appears by its
Preface; and 'twas its Design to hinder the farther raising of it, by fixing it
at the Price it then stood at. I have the Half, a Quarter, and an Eighth, of
this Coin.

7. Notwithstanding the Provision of this Act, the Price of the Ounce of Silver
was (within Four Years) advanced to Sixty Shillings: For the Merk-pieces, which
were coined in 1601 (to 1604) are proportioned to that Rate. They have, on one
Side, the Shield of Scotland crowned with Jacobus 6. D. Gra. Scotorum: And, on
the Reverse, the Thistle crowned with Regem Jova Protegit. W. 4 Dw. 9 Gr. There
was also Half-merks and Quarter-merks of the same Coin; the former passing at 6
s. 8 d. and the other at 3 s. 4 d. Nay, there was also the Eighth of a
Merk-piece, which is the least Piece of coined Silver which (I think) was ever
minted in the Kingdom of Scotland: It weighs about Three-half pence of our
English Money, and goes for 20 d. Scotch, which is one Sixth short of our
Twopence. And these Merks, with their Subdivisions, were the last Silver-money
coined by King James the Sixth, before he left Edinburgh, and removed to London.

FINIS.

