The Nine MUSES. OR, POEMS Upon the Death of the late Famous JOHN DRYDEN, Esquire

The Nine MUSES. OR, POEMS WRITTEN By Nine several Ladies Upon the Death of the
late Famous JOHN DRYDEN, Esquire

As Earth thy Body keeps, thy Soul the Sky,
So shall this Verse preserve thy Memory,
For thou shall make it live, because it Sings of thee,
Mr. Dryden's Elegy on Lady Abington.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Basset, at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, 1700.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Charles Montague, Esquire Auditor of His Majesty's
Exchequer; and One of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
AS You are justly Entitled to the greatest share of the Muses favors, so
Poems that are done by those who give themselves the Honor of being their
Representatives, could not fix on on a more deserving Patron.

The Sex, which the Authors are of, is an excuse for their performance, and as
commendation to Your Acceptance, and though to fall under Your Censure, is to
be examined by the nicest of Judges, yet to have Recourse to a Gentleman, who
is continually employed in Pardoning the Defects of Authors, and giving 'em
Encouragement to Write something Worthy of His Acceptance, takes off from the
Apprehension of Your Displeasure, which I might otherwise Labor under.

The Ladies, indeed themselves, might have had a better Plea for Your
Reception; but since the modesty which is Natural to the Sex they are of, will
not suffer em to do that Violence to their Tempers, I think my self Obliged to
make a Present of what is Written in Honor of the most Consummate POET amongst
our English Dead to the most Distinguishing amongst the Living. You have been
pleased already to show Your Respect to his Memory, in contributing so largely
toward His Burial notwithstanding He had that unhappiness of Conduct, when
alive, to give you Cause to Disclaim the Protection of Him.

And though it may look something like innovation, upon the Practice of Men of
my Profession, to take what is the business of Authors upon 'em, yet since I am
not the first Bookseller that has Broken out off the Road, which is marked out
for those of my Trade, I humbly beg leave to advance the Credit of the Papers
which are my Property, by prefixing a Name which must needs stamp Authority
upon em, and the Honor of Subscribing,

SIR, Your most Obedient, and most Devoted Servant Ric. Basset.

To my Friend, Upon his Publishing the following POEMS, Written by Nine Ladies,
personating the MUSES.
WHen Ladies venture forth in search of Fame,
And represent the Justice of their Claim,
The tempting Goddess reaches out the Bays,
And entertains the Sex with Draughts of Praise;
As every Muse does in their Favor rise,
And every Grace sits sparkling in their Eyes.
Our Sex would then, if Silent, much abuse,
And show it self unworthy of a Muse,
Should we not Wit with Beauty joined approve,
When Beauty without Wit has forced our Love.
Believe me, Friend, and think my Censure true,
I feel the Lover, and the Rival too,
Raptured with Joys which all my Soul possess,
Yet could almost have wished the Pleasure less;
Since in their Lines I feel that strength of Thought,
Which I could never reach the' daily sought.
It Is true, the Men their Tears have duly paid,
And, (...) kept the Shade:
But oh! What God would listen to our Call?
What Goddess lend us Strains to mourn his Fall?
Phoebus had fixed his longing Ears and Eyes,
And dwell'd upon more acceptable Cries.
Hence issues forth a (...) delightful Song,
Fair as their Sex, and as their Judgment strong,
Moving its Force, and tempting in its Ease,
Secured of Fame, unknowing to displease,
In every word like Aganippe clear*
And close its meaning, and its Sense severe,
As virtuous Thoughts with chaste Expressions join,
And make 'em truly what They feign, divine.
Nor shall this Work be wanting to success,
While Beauty's Deity, shall Beauty bless*
While Dryden's Name, deduced to future Times,
Shall give and take a luster from its Rhimes,
While Noble Montague's auspicious Name,
Shall add to its Merit, and preserve its Fame.
Philomusus.

Melpomene: The Tragic Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. M --
COME all my Sisters now in Consort join,
Each weep her Favrite's loss with Tears Divine:
Fill all the Space with your immortal Sighs,
The vaulted Heavens return your louder Cries.
Ye Loves and Graces-hang your Heads, and weep,
And every God a decent Silence keep;
That I may Grieve my fill, for Dryden's gone,
Well may I now the mourning Vail put on:
Well may I now with Cypress load my Brow,
For who like him can ever invoke me now?
Who sang fair Killigrew's untimely fall,
And more than Roman made her Funeral.
Inspired by Me, for me, he could Command,
Bright Abington's rich Monument shall stand
For evermore, the Wonder of the Land.
Oldham he snatched from an ignoble Fate,
Changed his cross Star for a more fortunate.
For who would not with Pride resign his Breath,
To be so Loved, to be so Blessed in Death.
Cromwell's great Genius here was greater shown,
Well might such Virtues for one Vice atone;
If vast Ambition can be reckoned Vice,
Which to great Jove gave the Imperial Skies.
The Monarch CHARLES he has Divinely Sung,
Well I remember, when my Graces hung
On each enchanting Accent of his Tongue.
Then a whole Hecatomb of Vows he made,
And I, the Offering, gratefully repaid;
For this alone he has deserved the Prize,
As Ranelagh, for her Victorious Eyes,
When on the Tragic Theme my Hero wrote,
I lent him all my Fire, and every Thought;
How Artfully he does the Passions move,
How at his Voice we Languish* Weep; or Love*
Even I, a Maid, of so untouched a Fame,
At Cleopatra's Grief must pity more than blame.
St. Catherine's Martyrdom has greater Charms,
Than the lewd Prince, imagined from her Arms.
Whilst Dorax and Sebastian both contend*
To show the generous Enemy and Friend*
O, I should never cease, should I repeat
Each lesser part, of that which forms the great.
Fixed, like the Sun, Superior and alone,
His Glories over inferior Beings shone.
Pale twinkling Stars all other Writers seem,
Nor warms, nor lights, though they are in Numbers seen.
In him alone all Attributes were found,
And he the Universal God renowned,
Unfollow'd drove, through all his own Immortal round.
Melpomene.

Urania: The Divine Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By the Honorable the Lady P --
WHEN through the Universe with Horror spread,
A sacred Voice pronounced Great PAN was dead,
All Nature trembled at the direful Fate,
And Atlas sunk beneatl his ponderous weight;
The mournful Muses h^ng their heads with woe,
While every Deity regrets the Blow,
And to the holy Oracles, deny
All farther Inspects of futurity;
The Earth did under strong Convulsions groan,
And Heaven did echo back the dreadful moan:
With no less grief, with no less pain oppressed,
Britania felt the wound within her Breast,
When through the murmuring Crowd sad Accents bore
The fatal News, that Dryden was no more:
No more, to charm the listening World with Lays,
But fled to sing his great Creator's praise*
No more with artful Numbers, to bestow
An universal Influence below:
No more with all discerning Truth, to tell
How they should act, and how distinguish well,
But Summoned by Apollo's sacred Lyre,
Now chaunts his Raptures in the Heavenly Choir.
Loud were the Clamours, and the moving Cries,
Which cut the yielding Air, and pierced the Skies;
While on Parnassus, 'twas the Muses care
Fresh Garlands for their Darling to prepare;
I searched the Treasures of the Powers above,
And formed an Anthem on Seraphick Love:
New Themes we chose, not more polite than he
Has left already to Posterity;
But those for which the Island does repine,
For which they still invoke his awful Shrine,
And with transported Sorrow loudly cry,
Virgil, the Roman Eagles taught to fly,
But Dryden mounts their Pinions to the Sky!
To him proud Greece and Italy must bow,
And his sublime Authority allow,
Who by his never dying Works, weisee
Merits, and gives an Immortality
Oh give us Homer yet, thou glorious Bard;
But if this last Petition cannot be heard,
Yet like that Prophet, winged by strong desire,
Who broke from Earth, wrapped in Celestial fire,
Confer thy Spirit on the blooming Son,
And bless the Progress he so well begun;
Let Garth inherit all thy generous Flame,
Garth, who alone can justify the Claim.
He, whom the God of Wisdom did fore-doom,
And stock with Eloquence to pay thy Tomb,
The most triumphant Rites of ancient Rome.
It Is this that fills Urania's Eyes with Tears.
It Is this ungrateful Sound that racks my Ears,
Who now to thee, Melpomene, repair,
To mix my Sorrows with thy anxious care;
Unite us all within thy gloomy Breast,
Where downy Peace, and Pleasure find no rest;
There let us drink the Floods thou shed'st, and then
A deluge of Despair pour out again.
What if our Tears should drown the World a new,
The Sacrifice were to his Manes due.
Who now of Heroes, or of Gods can sing!
Who their Credentials from Apollo bring!
Where shall Urania now bestow her aid!
Or who great Dryden's Province dare invade!
Ah none such lofty Subjects can pursue;
The Muses have, alas! no more to do,
Than sing his Elogies, and so expire,
In the cold Urn of his extinguished Fire.
But stay, a sudden Thought does now revive
My drooping heart, and keep my hopes alive;
Behold in Albion lately did appear
A learned Bard, to Esculapius dear,
Well knowing in the Secrets of his Skill,
And surely fostered on Parnassus's Hill,
Nor does the Crystal Helicon bestow
A clearer Stream, than from his Numbers flow:
On him already all the Graces smile,
In him survive new Trophies for the Isle;
More I Will not urge, but know our Wishes can
No higher Soar, since Garth's the Glorious Man;
Him let us Constitute in Dryden's stead,
Let Laurels ever flourish on his head,
And let us to Apollo make our Prayer
To Nominate him his Vice-regent, there;
By this Britannia shall her Joys retreive,
Nor find that Dryden's dead, while Garth does live.
Erato: The Amorous Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. S. F.
IN the wished close of Evening's welcome gloom,
My longing Steps reached an inviting bloom;
Whose untrod paths the sad'ning Cypress graced,
And in small Plats were softer Myrtles placed;
The lofty Cedars with extended Arms,
Twine to keep off the force of Roughest Storms,
And numerous Towering Arbourets they made,
The Solemn Glory of the pleasing shade.
On Verdant Moss Natures rich Cloth of State,
By a clear Thrilling stream supine I late.
Upon my Hand, my thoughtful Head Reclined,
Sad, soft Ideas entertained my Mind,
And I to Sing some Lovers fate inclined.
But strait Erato whom I did invoke,
Forbid my choice her Speech abruptly broke,
At last in Sighs the interdiction spoke.
Ye shall no more Write tender moving strains,
To please the Nymphs and melt the wishing Swains,
But to the World my Sorrows you shall tell,
How I have grieved since the lost Hero fell,
My Darling Dryden whom I loy'd so well*
He who has done such Glorys to my Name,
Immortal as my self has made my Fame.
Watchful as Lovers I first saw his Fate,
With rageing Sounds Parnassus's loss relate.
Called all my Sisters with my Frantic Cries,
And every God to join in the Obsequies,
With Tears made Helcyon Brackish as the Seas.
Like a deserted Maid in Wild despair,
I tore my Myrtle Wreath and flowing Hair,
My Mantle rent and shattered in the Air.
And in loose Cipress Veiled my useless Charms,
Sighed till I turned our Ether into Storms.
No more I Will wanton on our mountains Brow,
Nor curious pains upon my Locks bestow.
In amorous folds my azure Mantle twine,
And sooth soft languishments in Airs divine;
But careless throw me in some dusky Shade,
Which Willows, Cypress, Yew has awful made;
There to my Votress, Echo, I Will complain,
Whose Complaisance reverberates again,
My piercing Groans through every Wood and Plain.
Thus I and She in an Eternal round,
Will my Celestial Griefs for Dryden's Death resound.
Dryden, who with such ardour did invoke,
That I through him my greatest Raptures spoke,
Whispered at thousand tender melting things,
Till he writ Lays moving as Orpheu's Strings.
Often I for Ink did radiant Nectar bring.
And gave him Quills from Infant Cupid's Wing,
Whose tender force did as Victorious prove,
As if they would been the Immortal Shafts of Love;
Warmed every Breast with a surprising Fire,
And in the Nicest softest Thoughts inspire:
Such luster still graced his Magnetic Line,
It was both irresistless and Divine.
With what Celestial cadence does he tell,
The pristine Joys of Love e're Mankind fell:
When in the blooming Grove the first kind pair,
With amorous Sighs fan'd the Ambrosial Air;
Smiling on flowery Banks supinely laid,
The ardent Youth pressed the unblushing Maid,
In his soft Lines such Ecstasies they boast,
To hear their Loves, Rivals the Bliss they lost.
When Cleopatra's passion he adorns,
How nobly Anthony the Empire scorns,
Dissolved in her kind Arms transported lay,
For Love's soft Joys gave the rough Crown away.
Such Realms of Bliss the Hero still possessed,
Sighing fond Vows on her returning Breast;
Who reads their Languishments their Passions feel,
Intranc'd in Joy too exquisite to tell.
When an incestuous Flame his Theme has bin,
He almost charms us to forgive the Sin.
My favorite Ovid's strains, I did improve,
And taught my Dryden tenderer Arts of Love.
Such Arts had our addressing Phoebus known,
Daphne, though coy, had not unconquered flown,
But brought the Hero forth, and not their Crown.
He so advanced what ever I bestowed;
I was Love's Muse, but he himself the God.
Euterpe: The Lyrick Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire An O. D. E.
By Mrs. J. H.
I.
I Soft Euterpe, sweetest of the Nine,
The most Inspiring, and the most Divine,
By my own Lyre rais*d to extatick Joy
Full of kind Influence expecting sat*
When tuneful Dryden would my Aid implore,
Who with gay Transports did my Gifts employ,
And meanest Thoughts above my Notes did soar.
But strait a dismal, and unwelcome Sound,
Filled all the Aetherial Courts around,
Great Dryden is no more.
But like the common things in mortal State,
Lost in the impartial Gulf of an inevitable Fate.
At the dread News grief all my Luster veiled,
I broke my harmonious Harp and Lute,
Threw by my softning ever-charming Flute,
Not the least glympse of Joy appears,
No radiant Nymphs about my Palace wait,
Nor drink I any Nectar but my Tears.
II.
I with profoundest Cause, and Sorrow mourn,
Over my Dryden's sacred Urn:
He was my greatest Glory, only boast,
Through him I let ungrateful Mankind know,
What mighty Wonders I could do,
But now, like him, to the inferior World I Am lost.
I taught Him all the softer Airs of Love,
And Anthems so divine; he will find the same above.
With an auspicious Pride I did dispense
My mighty Favors, when He did implore,
From my pregnant unexhausted Store,
Of tuneful Fancies, and harmonious Sense.
When I with gentle Fire have warmed the Breast,
The Soul with pleasing Raptures bles't,
The sacred Flame in every part does shine,
The Product, like the Source, is all divine,
And an immortal Luster graces every Line.
Poetry's not the effect of Art, or Wine, or Love,
Though They sometimes the Gift improve,
Nor is the warmth that Poets does inspire,
Vinum Daemonum, but Celestial Fire.
A God-like Ray enlightening from above;
As decent Measures, reg'lar Motions be
Through all the tuneful Universe,
And speak in all a glorious Harmony,
Even so the mystic Numbers of melodious Verse,
Are of the intellectual World the sacred Symmetry.
III.
Dryden I chose of all the tuneful Throng,
His Soul with ardour filled fit for immortal Song;
Learned him all Lyrick Arts of Poetry,
Such as might with Celestial Notes agree;
Which his Industry did approve,
In Celebrations, Elegies and Love,
And every Theme which his commanding Pen would try
With strength of Judgment, and profoundest sense,
With sparkling Wit, gay Fancy, Eloquence,
His Verse did all abound:
In him alone was found
The much desired, aimed at Excellence.
In every Line magnificent or sweet,
Like OVID soft, or else like VIRGIL great.
Orpheus's magnetic Harp less power could boast,
All Rage, unless in Love when ever he sung was lost.
Above 'em all he raised his matchless Lays,
Glory of Britain, and Wits Empire too,
Which though the Subjects are but Few,
Did justly wreath him with deserved Bays:
The verdant Diadem which Laureat Crown,
Never looked so fresh as when he put it on,
Then like his Lines with Godlike-lustre shone.
IV.
With a Superior and victorious Grace
The Sacred Place,
He did almost unenvied assume,
I, pleased to see the Branches spread
Over his triumphant Head,
From the Helicon Spring
Did Water bring,
Sprinkled them often that they might ever bloom.
But, oh! they could not stand the Rage,
Of an ill-natured and Lethargick Age,
Who spite of Wit would stupidly be Wise,
All noble Raptures, Ecstasies despise,
And only Plodders after Sense will Prize.
They from his meritorious Brow
The Laurel tear*
Which none but he could justly wear,
And He must suffer Abdication too.
V.
With Him they did suppress all lofty flights of Poetry.
All melting Airs, and rapt'ring Harmony,
But this Revenge, let Mankind take from me.
If any dare on Dryden's Death to Write,
Not to express their Grief, but show their Wit,
I the Ambitious purpose will Reverse,
Deny my Aid,
And so shall each inspiring Maid.
Resolving ungrateful Man who could contemn
Such Noble excellence in Him.
Shall never more the blessing know,
We'll never again our influence bestow.
Though it is pretended to adorn His Hearse.
(Unless the generous Montague implore,
Then in him shall all our Glories shine as heretofore.)
But to express our own immortal Love,
We'll Solemnize His Obsequies above,
Our grief such Emphasis shall bear,
As no Corporeal Organs can declare,
And one Eternal Sigh spread through the Extending Air.
Thalia: The Comic Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire A PASTORAL.
By Mrs. M --
Alexis, Daphne, Aminta, Thalia. Alex. IF falling Tears and Sighs too deep for
Art,
Can paint the sufferings of a Bleeding Heart.
If all your looks so much of sorrow wears,
That they can speak, unaided by your Tears,
Why since my absence, are thy beauties lost,
What Cruel Grief, has thus thy Charms ingrost.
Say Daphne, tell Alexis why you Mourn,
Why this dejected Mien, why thus forlorn,
Is there a Swain you love without return.

Daph. That Staff and Scrip, speak your arrival new,
But you will not long, be unconcerned as now.
Why do I seem as chose by angry fate,
To give you Grief, whilst I my own relate.
For sure the Cause is common of our woe,
Judge what you will feel, by what I undergo,
Since even your loved return can bring no Joy,
That Rival Grief, does every Beam destroy.
Our Bard is lost, our great Apollo's Dead,
Immortal Dryden's to the Immortal fled.
Here let me Veil my grief, I can no more,
Until some Aiding God, my Powers restore.

Am. See poor Alexis turns aside to Mourn,
The first assaults of grief, are hardest born.
Nor asks he how his Flocks, and Pastures fare,
Sing, Daphne Sing, to ease the Shepherd's Care.
For sweetness to thy Voice, and strains belong,
Sing to his Praise, of Dryden be thy Song.

Daph. Could I like Waller Praise, his Praise would be
A Theme fit for my Muse, my Muse for thee.
Could I like Waller mourn, with unbound Hair,
And Flowing Tears, the Daughter of Despair.
Each Towering Hill, and every humble Plain,
Should Echo to my Voice, in such a strain,
As through the Ear should wound the listening Swaih,
Then his unequaled worth, I Would boldly Name,
And whilst I gave receive a Deathless Fame;
For could she e're a juster Wreath dispense,
Than for excelling in such Excellence?

Alex. Cease Daphne, cease, no Musick's in thy Song,
Our Griefs so moving, and the Sense so strong,
As not to be expressed by Mortal tongue.

Daph. I know my humble Muse, untaught by Art
Must only hope to touch some easy heart:
But if Sincerity be more approved
Than Eloquence, by Interest moved,
I best can know to mourn, who best have loved.
Could but the Earth be Summoned at my Call,
High from his Funeral Pile, I Would speak to all
With gushing Tears, torn Robes, and stretched out Arms,
Invoke Melpomene with all her doleful Charms,
And thus bespeak the wondering World with Cries,
Deep Groans, and intermissionary Sighs.

Tha. See, Daphne, see, Thalia now appears,
Called by thy powerful Voice, her Heaven forbears.
For passions often to Swains in Shades have shown,
That but in Name, ours differ from their Own.
My Dryden's loss, our self with Swains will Sing,
And Flowers and Garlands to his Triumphs bring*
My Blissful Soul, that Loves with Joy to swell,
Would Mourn indeed, but not on Sorrow dwell*
For this I left my deathless Sister's cries,
To sing with mortal Nimphs his Obsequies.
That once performed, our self we will return,
The gay Thalia can no longer mourn:
Bring here the Spring, and throw fresh Garlands on,
With all the Flowers that wait the rising Sun;
These ever greens true Emblems of his Soul,
Take Daphne these, and scatter through the whole,
Whilst the Eternal Dryden's Worth I tell,
My lovely Bard that so lamented fell.
Such true delight his Comic Muse adorn,
Here you are shown the Vices you should scorn.
Poor ridiculed Melantha bears her part,
Her native Beauty's spoiled by foreign Art.
Gomez, the old, past any use of Life*
To all his less Diseases adds a Wife,
Who does not then Elvira's Youth excuse,
When gay Lorenzo offers the Abuse*
But most I laugh, when Dominich is shown
Such Hipocrites, Religion should disown.
Bring here the Spring, and throw fresh Garlands on,
With all the Flowers that wait the rising Sun;
These ever greens true Emblems of his Soul,
Take Daphne these, and scatter through the whole;
Whilst the Eternal Dryden's Worth I tell,
My lovely Bard, that so lamented fell.
Shepherds, the Sun declines, or I could show
Over all his well-drest Scenes how Nature flows,
What Strength, what Wit, what Learning in each part,
Here to the Soul he speaks, there to the Heart:
Though you attend with an unwearied Ear,
Your Flocks and Herds seem to require your care;
Here let us now our last sad Tears combine,
Here let us all in solemn Mourning join.
Bring here the Spring, and throw fresh Garlands on,
With all the Flowers that wait the Rising Sun;
These ever greens true Emblems of his Soul*
Take Daphne these, and scatter through the whole,
Whilst the Immortal Dryden' s Worth I tell,
My lovely Bard, that so lamented fell.

Clio: The Historick Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. M. P.
IMmortal Clio thou my Breast inspire,
And set my Numbers to thy tuneful Lyre,
Whilst I a Requiem sing to Dryden's Name,
The fore-most Bard, and Eldest Son of Fame.
Ye tender Loves, in mumuring Sighs deplore,
Him, whose soft strain adorned the British Shore.
Whose Charming Verse was Sung through all the Plains,
Moved the Coy Nimphs, and fired the Amorous Swains.
From Fields, from Silver Streams, and Grotto's come,
Bring all their Flowers to Deck your Master's Tomb.
Enrich his Hearse, with Balm of Eloquence,
Sweet as his Numbers, Lofty as his Sense.
Say how you flag'd your Wings in that dark Day,
That snatched from Mortal (...), your Fa^ away,
Say this and more, too much you cannot say.
Weep all with melting Strains in Comfort join,
In Solemn Woe, to assist the Mourning Nine.
But when ye 'ave paid or Grief the mighty Score,
When pitying Gods man did you Weep no more.
Sing their Immortal praise, from Pole to Pole,
That gave our Maro so Divine a (...),
Whose Verses shined like (...), and as (...),
As Milton Soared, or any Muse can fly,
Of Love, of War, when e're his (...)
All listened to the Music of his Song,
And useless Flutes, upon the Willows hung.
But who on Earth can Boast of true Repose,
Pale Envy from her Snaky Bed arose,
In thousand Shapes his Merit to oppose.
As when conspiring Nations vainly joined,
Against some Hero's mighty Strength, and mightier mind.
Like Hercules the more his Glory grows,
And still survives the malice of his Foes;
New Labors add to his triumphant Bays,
And every Victim sounds his deathless Praise:
Thus Virtue higher flies oppressed with pains,
And Valor brightest shines in dusty Plains.
Stop here, my Muse, no more thy Office boast,
This drop of Praise is in an Ocean lost;
His Works alone are Trumpets of his Fame,
And every Line will Chronicle his Name.
Calliope: The Heroic Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. C. T.
CEase all my tuneful Sisters, now restrain
Your sacred Fire, you lavish it in vain,
At least no grateful Vows I e're shall hear again.
Dryden's no more! Who with such Ardour prayed,
And such rich Incense at our Altars paid.
He charmed us to his Will, each strove which best
Our Votary could inspire, he all addressed,
And was by all with Emulation blessed.
Who now such Offerings for our Gifts can bring;
Now sad Melpomene alone may sing,
Or we by her inspr'd, each break her Lyre,
And all be ever styled, The mournful Quire.
Yet you, my happier Sisters, still inflame
Some favorite Bard, who well invokes your Name;
Vanbrugh, the Comic Muse has Graced with Praise;
Granvill, whose well wrought Scenes the Passions raise,
In Tragic Strains shall long adorn the Stage;
And Garth, in pointed Satyr, lash the Age.
Each equal to his Theme, my loftier flight
Not daring yet t'attempt. Bl -- re in spite
Of me, and Nature, still presumes to write;
Heavy, and doz'd, crawls out the tedious length,
Unfit to soar, drags on with Peasant strength
The weight he cannot raise; be his alone
The Glory of a Work which I disown;
Heroic Dullness eternize his Fame,
Maevius forgot, Proverbial be his Name;
Scarce was I more enraged against the Three
Assassins, Chapman, Hobbs and Ogilby;
The last my Virgil had defaced in vain,
To all his Charms, by Dryden, raised again;
But still my mangled Homer's Wounds remain.
With Envy he beheld fresh Laurels spread,
On the Triumphing Mantuan's sacred head;
Who with Majestic mein (his Crown retreiv'd)
The Britain's Homage awfully received.
I take, he said, these Honors as my own,
Graced justly with the Prize which Dryden won;
Let this, my Son, my grateful Tribute be,
That I am proud of Praise, I owe to thee.
That I confess thou make my Genius shine,
In my own Numbers Dressed, not more Divine.
Thus lively were the Images I drew,
Thus Romans saw Old Troy in Flames a new,
Thus interrested in Aeneas Fate,
Share all the joys, or hardships, I relate:
Thus join my Battles, feel the Wounds I paint,
Thus fought my Hero, and thus Went my Saint.
Beloved and pitty'd thus, Brave Turnus fell;
Both Vanquished by our selves, we drew so well,
The lovely Youth, all grieve his Fate to see,
And less applaud our Hero's Victory.
With Virgil, Chaucer sings Great Dryden's Name,
Who gave new luster to his darkened Fame;
Dispel'd the Clouds by which he was concealed,
And to his native Isle the Bard revealed;
Not blessed enough in his own glorious State,
Till he to them a part Communicate.
Of all great Actions by his bounteous Flame,
The inciter and Reward: Now you who aim
With fading Power, at bright immortal Fame.
Ambitious Monarchs, all whom Glory warms,
Cease your vain toil, throw down your conquering Arms,
Your active Souls confine, since you must dye
Like vulgar Men, your Names and Actions lie
Where Trojan Heroes, had not Homer lived,
Had lain forgot, nor ruined Troy survived;
No more their Glories I can e're retrieve,
For Nature can no second Dryden give.
Terpsichore: A Lyrick Muse.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. L. D. ex tempore.
JUST as the Gods were listening to my Strains,
And thousand Loves danced over the Ethereal Plains.
(With my own radiant Hair my Harp I strung,
And in glad Consort all my Sisters sung,
An universal Harmony above,
Inspired us all with Gaiety and Love.)
A horrid Sound dashed our immortal Mirth,
Wafted by Sighs from the unlucky Earth.
Who'd (...) Celestial Forms should Sorrows know,
Or simpathize with sad Events below;
But by our great Immortal Selves we do:
For when the loud unwelcome Message spread,
With dismal Accents tuneful Dryden's Dead,
All our gay Joys in have affrighted fled.
A sullen Gloom seized all the Gods around,
My feeble hand no more the Lyre could sound;
And all the soft young Loves, with drooping Wings
Lisp't their concern, and my neglected Strings
Trembled themselves into a mournful Air,
Then sight and hushed into a sad despair;
There let them ever unregardedly
Apollo's too, does cease its Harmony.
He with as sacred Nimphs profusely mourns,
With us the least desire of Respite scorns
Entire eternal Grief; our Beings seize
For him who best could us and Mankind* please.
Great Dryden, in whose yast capacious Mind*
Our utmost power did fit reception find;
Which Favors he did generously dispense*
Joy'd the glad World with his amazing Sense,
And like us too diffused his Influence;
His Genius would such Inspiration bear,
That his Illustrious Lines did not appear
As if our Product, but our Selves were there.
Mourn ye forsaken Worlds, you never again*
Be blessed with so Divine, so great a Swain.
In you no more let tuneful Mirth be found,
The very Spheres shall cease wonted Sound,
And every Orb stop its harmonious round:
All Nature hush as if intranc't she lay,
Sunk in old Chao^ e're the inlight'ning Ray
Of Heaven awaked her in the firstborn Day.
With such still Horror, lets our Sorrows bear,
Least Sighs in time Harmonious should appear,
If e're to Write again, is Man's intent,
Uncalled on let us silently Lament
And take his Works for an Eternal President.
Polimnia: Of Rhetoric.
On the Death of John Dryden, Esquire
By Mrs. D. E.
Called by my Grief, Melpomene I come,
With Radiant Tears, to Grace my Dryden's Tome*
Me my imperial Father Jove has made*
Of powerful Rhetoric, the Glorio^^ Maid.
But since my Heavenly Birth did never inspire,
Nor Found a Soul Capacious of such Fire.
Pleased with the mortal Wonder, I looked down,
And on his Brows fixed an Immortal Crown.
With Lovers hands, I la visht all my Charms,
Gave up my self, to his more Lovely Arms*
Which his unequaled Works so loudly Sound*
Where Energy, and Rhetoric abound,
And every Grace that is in Minerva found*
Ah Mournful Sister, thou my Grief must share,
A loss so vast, no single Breast can bear.
Wreath me in my Dark Robes, I Will watch thy Eyes,
Mingle our Tears and Echo to thy Sighs,
Of Eloquence no more, the use I Will Boast*
That all Arts, are in my Lover Lost.
Incessant Groans, be all my Rhetoric now,
My Immortality, I would forgo,
Rather than drag this Chain of endless Woe.
O mighty Father, hear a Daughter's Prayer,
Cure me by Death, from deathless sad Despair.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Basset at the Mitre, against Chancery Lane in
Fleetstreet.
POetae Britannici. A Poem, Satirical and Panegyrical, upon our English Poets.
By Mr. Cob of Trinity College in Cambridge, price One Shilling.

The Skeptical Muse; Or, a Paradox upon Humane Understanding. A Poem. By Mr.
Dove, of Catharine-Hall. Price 6 d.

The Polite Gentleman; or, Reflections upon the several kinds of Wit, viz. in
Books, Conversation, and Affairs of the World. By Mr. Barker, 120. Price 1 s. 6
d.

The French Spy; or, the Memoirs of John Baptist de la Fontaine, Lord of Savoy,
and Fontenai, late Brigadeer and Surveyor of the French King's Army, now a
Prisoner in the Bastile; containing many Secret Transactions relating both to
England and France, 8vo. p. 5 s.

Travels over England, Scotland and Wales, giving a True and exact Description
of the Chiefest Cities, Towns and Corporations, together with the Antiquities
of diverse other Places, with the most famous Cathedrals, and other Eminent
Structres of several Remarkable Caves and Wells, with many other Divertive
Passages, never before Published. By James Brom, M. A. Rector of Cheriton in
Kent, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Romney, 8vo. p. 4 s.

The Works of the Learned and Valliant Josephus, Epitomized from the Greek
Original, and the History Prefery'd in what is material and substantial, only
by Contracting things of Lesser Moment, Digesting the matter closer, and
Avoiding Useless Repetitions; to which are added, Josephus's Two Books against
Appion, his Rule of Reason, or the Martyrdom of the Macchabees, and the Embassy
of Philo Judaeus, to the Emperor Caius Caligula, 8vo. p. 6 s.

Memorirs of Denmark; containing the Life and Reign of the late King of
Denmark, Norway, etc. Christian the 5th, together with an Ezact Account of
those Differences now on Foot, betwixt the Houses of Denm^^k and Holstein
Gottorp, with all the remarkable Circumstances thereunto belonging, taken from
Authentic Letters and Records, with the Copies of the Treaties of
Fountainbleeu, Altena and Pinenburg, by J. Crull, M. D. F. R. S. and a Member
of the College of Physicians.

The Innocent Mistress, a Comedy.

Ibrahim the 13th Emperor of the Turks, a Tragedy.

The Spanish Wives a Farce.

The Deceiver Deceived, a Comedy.

Queen-Catharine: Or, the Ruins of Love, a Tragedy. All Written by Mrs. Pix.

The Unnatural Mother, the Scene in the Kingdom, of Siam, a Tragi-Comedy.
Written by a Young Lady.

The Beau Defeated; or Lucky Younger Brother, a Comedy.

Xerxes* a Tragedy. Written by Mr. Cibber.


