David's HARP Strung and Tuned: Or, an easy ANALYSIS Of the whole BOOK of
PSALMS: Cast into such a Method, that the Sum of every Psalm may quickly be
collected and remembered.

With a Devout MEDITATION or PRAYER At the end of every Psalm, framed for the
most part out of the words of the Psalm, and fitted for several Occasions.

By the Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM, by the Divine providence, Lord Bishop
of Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at the sign of the Crown
in Fleet Street, between the two Temple-Gates. 1662.

To the Right Honorable, EDWARD EARL of CLARENDON, Viscount Combury, Baron of
Hyndon, Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND, and Chancellor of the University of
OXFORD, and one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
A KING and a Prophet greet you well. And yet it is the same Person under two
names, who under either notion I presume shall be welcome. For you have a King
in your heart, and admit the Prophet into your bosom. The great services you
perform to the one, and the great affections you bear, and real courtesies you
do the other, has embol^^ed me to present these my Meditations unto your
protection, I shall less fear the rigid Censures of others, if in your
Lordships deep judgment I have contributed the least mite that may help forward
devotion. You are the great Moderator of the rigor of the Law, and therefore
what I cannot claim in justice, I humbly beg in equity, that is, a favorable
sentence for exposing these my crude conceptions under your Name, and I am
enough honored, if no dishonor be cast upon you, by fixing your Honors name
to a Work so unworthy.

This indeed I had not done, had not your Lordships favor in particular
obliged me to it. It Is by your Lordships influence upon me, that I glimmer as a
little Star in the Church, and that I yield a more vigorous luster is your
Lordships endeavor, for which I have little to return but thanks in this poor
acknowledgment. That you are a Patron to the Muses in general, is too large;
and universal Propositions are as Catholica, Catholic medicines, that cure
few. That you have been a Patron to my studies, puts life into my old blood not
to be faint and weary. A vice to which old age is subject, that is, to waste
and go out, except there be oil in the Lamp.

That I no sooner meddled with this subject, was, because I durst not: The
Mysteries herein contained, and the Art in the delivery were so superlative,
that I always held them fit for a mature judgment, which by length of years and
observation is heightened in old men, till they wrack upon dotage. Besides, I
have observed, that the best of Expositors have presented their thoughts upon
the Psalms in their riper years, and made them one of their last works.
Heavenly raptures they met with in this Book, which raised their spirits and
hearts, and beforehand prepared them to that place, to which they did approach.
I have therefore written after their Copy, and brought it to light, as the
child of my old age, and then, it is supposed there may be many infirmities in
it, which that your Lordship cover with your mantle, will be a signal Act of
charity.

The Motive that chiefly was most powerful with me to undergo this task, were
those Meditations and Devotions of others, which I used and perused upon these
Hymns, These to my judgment (weak I confess) relished more of the Composers
own Cenius, than of David's spirit To remedy this, I conceived no better way,
than to compose the Prayer in David's words, which for the most part is here
done, and though the order of the Verses be here often inverted, yet this is
done for the better Connection of the whole. The scope and intent of the
Psalmist is strictly observed.

Pray and Sing we ought with understanding, and that is not possible till we
understand, what we Pray or Sing: Now to beget this knowledge in those, whom I
do desire to animate and render devout in those duties, the easiest way I could
think on, was, to present the whole Sum of every Psalm in a brief Synopsis.
This consideration produced that Analysis, which I here offer. How happily or
unhappily this is performed, I leave it to your Lordships exacter judgment.

And yet there was another reason, which cast me on this Subject. The face of
the times were sad and cloudy, and our Mother the Church in a mourning weed, as
Rachel lamenting for her children, because they were not: and yet upon the
promises of God there was hope of a resurrection. As then those, who accompany
their dearest friends to their last home, though covered over with vests of
sadness, yet mourn not as men without hope: So I in this doleful and general
funeral, as it were, of this our Mother, followed her to the grave (as the
bitter and enraged enemies of hers hoped and boasted) with a sad heart and
waterish eye: and yet in this depth of sorrow I received this comfortable
assurance, that the day of resurrection would appear for Zion, that her walls
would be rebuilt and flourish; which beyond my expectation, (God be blessed for
it) I have lived to see, and by your Lordships favor enjoy a large and
honorable portion in it.

Now that I might have somewhat suitable, and at hand ready to express both
these passions. I could not find any part of Scripture so apt and pertinent, as
this little Epitom of the whole. By which I have been taught to grieve and
hope, to lament and joy, to complain to my God, and comfort my self in the
deepest of those complaints with those lively and inspiriting encouragements,
which this Swan of Bethlehem has left, to be sung by all the good people of
God in their extremities. The whole is David's, the Method only mine, and if it
shall find a Candid interpretation from others, and a favorable acceptance
from your Honor, you shall oblige me to remain, what I am,

Your Lordships, in all due observance WILL. GLOUCESTER.

A PREFACE To the EXPOSITION of the Psalms.
THERE is no way by which Man may learn, but by the same God vouchsafes to
teach him; There is Liber Naturae, and Liber Scripturae; The Book of his
Creatures, and his Book of Scriptures: The Book of his Creatures, is as it
were, a great Commonplace Book, written in Folio, for all Nations and
Languages, and able to Catechize all men in these two Principles, That there is
a God, and that he is to be worshipped.

2. Sect. But his Book of Scriptures, is as it were, his own Book of Statutes,
written for his own peculiar people, the Church; wherein, by Precepts, he
instructs; by Requests, he exhorts; by Promises, he allures; by Threats, he
terrifies; and therefore has he sent his servants for the attaining of these
ends, with diverse qualities: Some, like Moses, to teach; some, like Esau, to
comfort; some, like Jeremy, to mourn, but David, with his Harp, to do all this.
So that of Cassiadore is true, That the Book of the Psalms is a spiritual
Library of most kind of Doctrines, fit for Meditations, etc. As Ambrose,
Commune quoddam Medicinae promptuarium.

3. Sect. The whole is (...), and came from one and the same Fountain. One Word
and Wisdom of God; revealed these words to the sons of men; one Holy Ghost
indicted them; one Blood of the Lamb sealed them; one Spirit of Inspiration
moved in the Penmen that set them down; one Spouse of Christ has received
them, and preserved them; so that we may not, nor dare not prefer one Prophet
before another, nor Evangelist before Evangelist, or Apostle before Apostle: In
this House they are all Vessels of equal Honor and Authority; Moses is no
better than Samuel; David (a King) than Amos the Heardsman; not Peter than
Luke, or Luke than Paul.

4. Sect. Notwithstanding, as the parcels of this Book were published and
delivered by diverse Notaries, in diverse Ages, and on diverse Occasions; so also
may they serve for diverse ends and purposes, though all to make the Man of God
perfect. Precepts of Life and Worship, we read in Moses; Examples of Virtue and
Piety, in the Histories; Predictions, Promises and Threats in the Prophets; the
plain and true Doctrine of Salvation, in the Evangelists and Epistles.

5. Sect. But the Book of the Psalms is so composed, that it comprehends
whatsoever may be useful in all these; so that it is much like the Israelites
Manna, which tasted and relished according to every man's desire and necessity:
Prophesies we find here to settle, Promises to stay the wavering spirit. In
brief, many Stories to delight a curious Reader; Examples of Virtue, enough and
enough, Rules for practice good store; Dehortations from Vice, Exhortations to
Virtue, Judgments brought on the wicked, Mercies multiplied upon the righteous,
In a word, A whole Treasury of Divine Truth.

6. Sect. The Temptations and Afflictions of good men cannot be so many, but in
these Psalms they may find ease and remedy; nor their Affections in Piety so
inflamed, but here they may find Forms to express them.

1. Sect. For, do our sins lie as a weight of Lead upon our souls? or does the
heavy wrath of God sadden and molest the Conscience? Here are words to be
found, that being sent up to God with David's spirit, may ease it: Do Tyrants
oppress us? Does the malice of man pursue us? Do friends (in this case) forsake
us? nay, which is more than all this, Does God from Heaven seem to write bitter
things against us? Whence can we fetch more ready and certain comfort, than
from this little Manual?

2. Sect. Would you meditate on Gods Benefits, keep a Record of his Providence?
Need you Exhortations to Piety? Are your hearts inflamed to pray to, or to
praise God? Not a Book of the Old or New Testament that can sooner, and to more
effect, satisfy your desires, than this.

What is it, I pray, that you may not learn out of the Psalms? Here you may
find ready made a Buckler of Fortitude, the exact Scale of Justice, a Rule for
grave Temperance, absolute Prudence; the way of Repentance, the Rules of
Patience, some of these may be fetched out of other Authors; but not upon such
grounds, never instilled from the like spirit.

3. Sect. But I am yet too low: Here you may learn the great Mysteries of
Christianity, and that stupendous good Will of God to all Mankind, the whole
work of man's Redemption, the Incarnation, the Passion, the Resurrection, the
Ascension of the Son of God, is so lively in diverse Psalms expressed, as if
David had been an Eyewitness, rather than a Prophet; and to write a Story,
rather than a Prediction.

Sect. To collect all, If our Patience be to be strengthened in our Afflictions;
if we are to call and cry to God for his help in Extremities; if our Hope be to
be under-prop'd; if our Love and Piety be to be inflamed; if our Faith to be
confirmed about the great Mysteries of our Redemption; if (...) to be given to
God (in the exercise of which, all the power of Religion does consist) every
good and pious man ought to betake himself to this rich Treasury, destined by
God to these uses, and yet left to us for those uses, that we should not be to
seek for comfort when we need, nor for Forms of Thanksgiving when we have
received.

2. Sect. Now that all these advantages might the better be apprehended by us,
and have the deeper impression in us, it has pleased the Spirit of God to
convey unto us in Poetry and Musical Numbers, all this; for God saw how hardly
man would be drawn to that which is good, and how prone we are to that which
delights; and therefore as skilful Physicians lap up their bitter Pills in
sugar, lest the sick Patient should be averse to what will restore and recover
him; so has God by the smoothness of Music, conveyed his Precepts to the ear,
that listening to what we delight in, we might at the same time learn what might
do us good.

Sect. Scarce any Prophetical Prediction, or Prophetical Precept, is by the
Vulgar remembered beyond the Church-door; but the tune of the Psalms, and the
words too, are longer lived. Pueri modulantur domi, vivi foro circumferunt:
That was the use in Basil's time, and would it were in use still; our Lives
would be more holy, and our Passions more calm.

For a Psalm does calm the waves of our passions, and quiet the soul; it
pacifies the anger of the mind, and cools the flames of wantonness. A Psalm
unites friends, reconciles enemies, knits together disagreeing souls; for who
can think that man his enemy, with whom he has joined his voice in singing a
Psalm to his God? Charity is the chiefest good amongst men, of which the
consent of the voice puts us in mind: A Discord we make in this heavenly
Music, so often as there is not an union of souls as well as voices; in this
Quire he sings out of Tune, that is not in Charity.

Sect. This Symphony drives away evil spirits, this Harmony brings the Angels
to our help, this is our Armor in the darkness of the night, with this we ease
the labor of the day. A Psalm is an Ornament in the mouths of children and
young men, a comfort to the aged, the best dress for women, an honor to
Virgins; it is the work of the Angels, the study of the Saints, a spiritual
sacrifice, and a shadow of your future happiness; this, this Symphony
beautifies our Festivals, and graces all our Service.

To Beginners in Religion, it is a Rudiment; to Proficients, an increase in
grace; to perfect men, a foundation. The voice of the whole Church being in
harmony, and but one, sets babes and sucklings to learn Hosanna; better
Scholars to go on in their praise, and old M^asons to rejoice that their God
should be thus honored with many voices, but one heart.

When the soul is pleased, it is hereby dilated with joy; and when it is sadned
with godly sorrow, it is hereby resolved into tears; for a Psalm will fetch
this water sometimes even from a heart of stone. Aug. Confess. 9.33.
Professes, That he had so tender a heart, that he melted into teats, when he
heard the Psalms sung in the Church of Milan; and Musculus the like of himself
at Auspurge.

Oh! the Wisdom of our heavenly Master, who took care, Ut eadem opera cantemus
and res addiscamus: That found a way to steal in his necessary Documents into
our minds; for that Doctrine which by violence and much difficulty is beat into
us, as easily slips out again, and is forgotten; but what (...) drunk with
delight and content, stays with us, and is fixed in our memory.

Philoxenus was wont to say, Carnes esse suavissimas non carnes, and pisces non
pisces; his meaning was, That that flesh and fish had the best savor, which
were so delicately cooked and dressed, that the sauce took away from them the
natural Relish which might offend. Precepts and Rules of Virtue and Piety have
to humane palates but a harsh taste, and they go down, and are digested very
hardly; but being contrived into a Poem, and conveyed into the ear by Music,
the rigor and severity is much abated, and we are pleased insensibly with the
food, by the Art with which it is seasoned. God knew well our queasie and
nauseous stomachs, and therefore has served us our Diet in a Psalm.

Sect. Many good Precepts I have taught you, many Rules of life out of Moses
and the Prophets, many Rules of Faith out of the Evangelists and Apostles.

More than these nine years I have spent my time in the preparation of this
spiritual food; but I fear me, the meat has been too strong, or else your
digestion has not been so good as I desired; so little fruit appears in your
lives, that there be, who say, you have little Faith; Pudet haec opprobria
nobis, etc. A shame it is that it should be objected, but more a grief that it
is not easy to answer it.

The Evil is spreading, and the Disease very dangerous, and I began to think
how I might help it: At last, I thought to bring you the same meat in the Psalm
of David, and to try whether Faith and Repentance dressed up in Numbers, might
be effectual to amend your Lives, and confirm your Belief.

These Hymns are yet left you to serve God, these, when you meet every Sabbath,
you read; these, when you come to this place, you sing; and it shall be the
labor of my old Age, that the Lessons which are here taught, as well as the
Music and Meeter in which they are set forth, be brought to your ears, would I
could say your hearts.

And thither they would be brought, and there they would rest, and have their
effect, could you but sing them with David's spirit; that is, with a soul truly
affected with what you read, and what you sing. Eadem est verborum sententia,
quocunque modo proferantur; sed multum refert, quo Spiritu, and quibus coram
Deo proferuntur Affectibus.

Sect. Mirth, sorrow, hope and fear divide your lives, and these are the
Plummets of the soul that move it to honest actions. Present a future evil, men
fear; a present danger, they grieve; let good be present, they rejoice; to
come, and they hope to attain it.

And it cannot be said, how much power these have over the soul of man, neither
is it possible to contain them, but they will break out. My heart (says David)
was hot within me, at last I spoke with my tongue, Psalm. 88.

Sect. David was a man of much experience this way, he had whereof to rejoice;
wherefore to grieve, he had sufficient cause to fear, more to hope; and as
these passions took their turns, so did his Psalms; for now he rejoices,
sometimes he mourns; one while he expresses his Fear, at another time his
Hope; and all in such pathetical Rhetoric, that no Eloquence is able to come
near it: He sets himself before his God, opens unto him all his secrets, speaks
of God, to God, with his God, and poures forth his affections of Faith, Hope
and Love, in such quick and powerful words, that who shall lay them aside, and
make choice of his own, shall find them waterish, cold, frozen. I have lately
seen some Meditations. Vows, Soliloquies of an afflicted soul, composed with
David's spirit, and David's words, and it makes my soul in my body become like
melting wax.

Sect. That then we read or sing these Psalms with hard hearts, and dry eyes,
it is because we want David's affections, we rejoice not in God, we grieve not
that he is deported from us, we fear not his Power and Majesty, nor yet hope in
the stedfastness of his Promises. Quicken but your affections upon David's
grounds, and you shall find there are no such prayers, no such praises, as
these of David.

Never let any man fear that these words will not fit the affections of any
pious and devout soul, since an egg is not more like an egg, nor a man a man,
than the Spirit of God is conformable to it self, in all the Elect sons of God.

Have these words united David's soul to God? Have they made him familiar with
Heaven? Doubt not but they may have the same effect in you; your confidence may
be the more, when you commence the same Petitions to the same God, in the same
words which he has heard and granted already.

Does he in these express his joy, his grief, his fear, his hopes? Be bold also
to do the like, and then expect the like effect.

But perhaps it may be said, That they may be of singular use, when the heart
is dilated with joy, and opened with that which pleases, unfit they are
altogether for a sad and oppressed soul; for who shall sing? who rejoice? who
exult? Is not this proper for cheerful souls? Is any man merry, let him sing
Psalms? says the Apostle, James 5. What mirth can there be in pious men by
which they are called upon to sing to God? when they are obnoxious to so many
storms of troubles; such variety of temptation in this life, that a man would
think they should have little mind to sing any other Song than that of David,
Multae afflictiones Justorum; and are Psalms fit for sorrow or mourning. Quis
enim ignorant musicam rebus tristibus parum accommodam? All this is most true,
for no sad and sorrowful heart sings sweetly, rather he mourns as a Dove, and
chatters as a Swallow, he sighs; he laments, he grieves. Neither do I deny that
the best of Gods servants have always sufficient reasons to water their Couch,
and bedew their cheeks with showers of tears.

When therefore they sing, this is done out of experience, or assured hope, and
both resolves them into mirth within: A trial they have of their Fathers love,
that he has saved them from the Jaw of the Lion, and the Paw of the Bear; or
else in the midst of their afflictions, an inward sense and persuasion of Gods
good will and love to them, with which being content, they can sing even in the
Prison, and rejoice under the Whip. No man is able to express, but he that
feels it, the joy and content of that soul which is fully persuaded that he
has peace with God; load such a man with chains, tear his flesh with Whips,
threaten Fire, Swords, Rack^ Halters; present him with the grim face of Death
he smiles and laughs, and rejoices, That he may be accounted worthy to suffer
for Chris^s sake: And has not such a soul reason to sing in misery?

David had experience of both: No man in greater troubles, no man more
strangely delivered; he might well then sing Psalms, for that in the greatest
of his dangers he had a full assurance of Gods love and good will to him; and
this enlarged his heart to sing, Thy Statutes have been my Songs in the house
of my Pilgrimage.

This difference then the Book of Psalms has from other parts of Scripture,
That whereas they may be read and repeated even by carnal minds, these can
never be heartily sung, except by spiritual men, and such who have had
experience of Gods good will, either in their deliverance, or else the sense of
comforts in their greatest extremities: They then are unapt to sing these
spiritual Songs, who are no more affected with what David sings, than as if
Gods Providence, Protection, Love and Goodness did no way concern them.

Sect. Enough I hope I have said to make you in love with this Book; for if
either the utility or profit of it can move you, or the sweetness of the
harmony in it work upon you, then you cannot choose but prize it, as a Celler
full of precious Oil, whereby all your necessities may be provided for; or a
Tree, or rather a whole Paradise of Trees of life, which bring forth fruits
every Month, nay, every day and hour, whose fruit is fit for meat, and leaves
for medicine.

And what marvel? the Original thereof being from Heaven, not Earth; the Author
God, not man; the Indicter, the Holy Spirit, not the wit of David; the Matter,
verity, piety, purity, uprightness; the Form, Gods Word, the Word of Truth, the
Word of Salvation; the Effects, light of understanding, stableness of
persuasion, repentance from dead works, newness of life, holiness, joy, peace
in the Holy Ghost. Lastly, the end and reward, and study thereof, fellowship
with the Saints, participation of the heavenly Nature, fruition of an immortal
Inheritance that never shall fade away. Happy is that man that delights in the
Scriptures, in this Scripture; and thrice happy is that man, who meditates in
it day and night.

Now that your Meditations may be more fruitful, it will not be amiss, that you
know before hand that these things about this holy Book, The Authority, the
Author, the Sense, the Division, or Order of this Book.

DE AUTHORITATE.
1. Sect. Of the Authority I shall need say but very little, since our Savior
himself has given it an ample Testimony, Luke 24.44. These were the words that
I spoke unto you while I was with you, That all things must be fulfilled which
were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms
concerning me: Where you see that the old Testament is integrale totum; it
admits of three limbs, The Pentateuch writ by Moses, the greater part writ by
the Prophets, and the Psalms writ by David; and all these testify of Christ,
and the Psalms especially, there being not any one Book out of which more
Testimonies are produced, and therefore was always, and must be continued in
the Canon.

DE AUTHORE.
And you may remember, that I but now said David was the Author of them, which
may not yet be so understood, as if he penned them all, for some of them were
penned in and after the Captivity; but his they are said to be, a part
praestantiori, as denominations use to run, because he composed the greatest
part of them, and was so excellent in expressing himself this way, that he
alone was called the Psalmist.

DE DIVISIONE and ORDINE.
These, as it is conceived, Esdras after the Captivity collected, and cast them
into that Order they now stand: One Book he composed of them, which by the
Jews was (for what reason I know not) subdivided into five Tracts: The first,
from Psalm. 1. to 42. The second, from 42. to 73. The third, from 73. to 90. The
fourth, from 90. to 107. The fifth, to the end. At the end of each there is an
Hallelujah, Amen, hoc primum, medium, ultimum. The whole contains One hundred
and fifty Psalms, so say, Herom, Remigins, August, the Master of the Sentences,
for some mystery in the Number; but as Chrysostom thought in the Honor of the
Trinity; but Rupert for the Trinity of the three Theological Virtues, Faith,
Hope and Charity; to which three Graces he reduces all the Psalms.

But Thomas has another conceit, This was done, says he, to show the
threefold state of Gods faithful people; they are in a state of Repentance,
Righteousness, Glory; Penitents they are, and that state enas in Psalm. 50.
Miserere mei Deus, Psalm. 51. Justified persons they are, and that has the
limit at the 100. Misericordiam and Judicium; and in their Glory they are, and
then they sing to the end; Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum: But the best Division
of these, is that of Villa Vincentius, who for use reduces them to these six
Classes or Heads.

1. Sect. Some of them are simply Didactici, or Paranaetici, which teach what
we are to follow, what to avoid: According to the letter of Moses Law, Vice
they condemn, and de finibus bonorum disserunt; as the 1, 11, 14, 15, 32, 36,
49, 50, 51, 62, 73, 77, 78, 84, 90, 99, 101, 119, 127, 130, 131, 133, 134.

2. Sect. Some of them are Prophetical, and contain Predictions of Christ, of
the different state of the Church and Saints, of their Persecutions, and their
liberty and deliverance, and the utter destruction of their Enemies; as Psalm.
2, 5, 8, 9, 16, 19, 21, 22, 24, 29, 40, 41, 45, 47, 53, 59, 67, 68, 72, 87, 89,
93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 100, 113, 117, 145.

3. Sect. Some are (...) precatorii, in which the Prophet, and all depressed
souls do implore the mercy of God, seek remission of sins, and deliverance from
danger, and preservation of the Church, 3, 8, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 17, 20, 25, 26,
28, 31, 35, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 61, 63, 64, 69, 70, 71, 74,
79, 80, 81, 83, 85, 86, 88, 94, 102, 119, 120, 123, 132, 133, 140, 141, 142,
143.

4. Sect. Others are Consolatory, speaking of Repentance, of the expectation of
deliverance of good men, of the Promises, Goodness, Justice, Judgments of God,
and of that ruin that will fall upon ill men, as the 4, 31, 37, 39, 52, 58,
68, 75, 77, 82, 84, 91, 92, 112, 119, 121, 128.

5. Sect. Some are (...), in which, after deliverance from danger, after
enemies subdued, after benefits received, and evils averted, thanks are
returned to God; as, 18, 23, 27, 30, 31, 33, 34, 46, 48, 60, 65, 66, 76, 103,
104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 111, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 122, 124, 125, 126, 129,
135, 136, 138, 139, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150.

Sect. Lastly, Some there are which are of a mixed Nature, for they consist
partly of prayers, partly of comforts, partly of thanksgiving, partly of
admonitions, partly of doctrine, partly of exhortations; so that we may truly
call this Book of Psalms the Epitom of the whole Bible, and an absolute Anatomy
of a Christian man; in which, whatsoever is necessary for a devout soul, may be
fully found.

4. DE SENSU.
Sect. Now that we may sing these Psalms with understanding, necessary it is
that we do know that there is in many of them (as in other Scriptures) a double
sense; there is a literal, and there is a spiritual and mystical sense, and one
is subservient to the other.

Sect. 1. The literal sense is that which the Author first intends, in what
words soever his mind be expressed, whether proper or tropical.

Sect. 2. The spiritual and mystical sense is, when the words being true
literally in the Type, yet are referred to another matter, to Christ or the
Church as the Antitype.

And the Reason of this diversity is, because that the Old Testament was a
Figure of the New, and the New of our future Glory; we must then in very many
places of this Book look further than David, have one eye upon him, and another
eye upon Christ our Savior.

Sect. This our Prophet was so lively a Type of Christ, that in diverse places
of the Prophets, Christ is in express terms called David, as Jer. 30. Servient
Domino suo and Davidi Regi suo, quem suscitaberis. Ezekiel. 47. Suscitabo inquit
Dominus super ea, pastorem unum, qui pascat eam, servum meum David. Hos. 3.
Posthaec revertentur filii Israel, and quaerent Dominum Deum suum, and Davidem
Regem suum.

When then we find in the Psalms a double sense, the literal and mystical; that
of the letter must first be found out, though our mind run upon the mystical,
as that which is the chief, and principally intended; for that must wait upon
this, as Hagar did upon Sarah; and until the letter be well known, the mystery
contained under that letter, will never be well and fully understood.

He that would rightly understand the true Analogy betwixt the Levitical
sacrifices, and the sacrifice of our Saviors soul for the sin of the whole
World, must first be well acquainted with those Mosaical Rites; and so he that
would exactly judge of those things which in the Psalms are mystically spoken
of Christ, must first see how they agree to David.

And as that man reads all the Ceremonial Law to very little purpose, who
dwells upon those shadows and figures, and arises not to Christ, whom they
signified; so does not he study and interpret these Psalms to any great
purpose, who confines his thoughts in David or Solomon, or any other, and takes
not occasion by the figure to search out the Truth.

Sect. Two sorts of men there have been very much mistaken in the Explication
of the Psalms.

Sect. 1. The first are the Jews and Judaizants, that refer whatsoever they
find here to David, and to that Age; they make little or no account of Christ,
and the Church collected by him, and under his Government.

Sect. 2. The other, who setting by David as but a Cipher, interpret every
verse and sentence of Christ alone, and of Christians.

That therefore both these Rocks, as Scylla and Charibdis may be avoided, I
intend (Deo Auspice) to go in a middle way, and as occasion shall be offered,
first to explain the literal sense, and show the truth of the words in David,
because that is the Basis and Key to the Mystery; and then this literal sense
being explained with all possible brevity, to open unto you the spiritual, and
show what respect any Psalm has to Christ, that so you may have an absolute,
full and perfect understanding of these spiritual Songs.

Quod quaedam, etiam in iis Psalmis, quae in Novo Testamento ad Christum
referuntur, sunt in literali sensu vera, in Davide, demonstrat Jansenius. in
Epist. Dedic. ante Psalmos, quem consulas.

DAVID'S HARP strung and tuned.
PSALM. I. The (...) in this Psalm, is, Who is the happy man? Who happy? this
resolved.
or what may make a man happy?
THIS Question the Prophet resolves in the two first Verses.

1. Negatively. It is he, 1. Negatively.
That walks not in the counsel of the ungodly. 2. That stands not in the way of
sinners. 3. That sits not in the seat of the scornful. 2. Positively. It is he,
1. Affirmatively.
Whose delight is in the Law of the Lord. 2. Who does meditate in the Law day
and night.
2. This happiness of the good man is illustrated two ways. 1. The good man's
happiness illustrated.
By a similitude. 2. By comparing him with a wicked man.

1. The similitude he makes choice, is, that of a Tree, not every Tree neither,
By the similitude of a Tree, that, 1. is planted.
but that which has these eminencies.

1. It is planted, it grows not of it self, neither is wild. 2. Planted by the
Rivers of waters, it wants not moisture to fructify. 3. It does fructify, It
brings forth fruit, it is no barren Tree. 4. The fruit it brings, is
seasonable; fruit in its season. That brings forth seasonable fruit.
5. It is always green, Winter and Summer; the leaves wither not.
Clearly without any Trope: Whatsoever this good man does, or takes in hand,
And prospers.
it shall prosper.

2. He shows this good man's happiness, by comparing him with a wicked man, By
comparing him with a wicked man.
in whom you shall find all contrary.

First, In general: Not so. As for the ungodly it is not so with them; With him
it is not so, he is not happy.
not so in the plantation, in the place, in the seasonable fruit, in the
greenness, in the prosperity; so far from being like a Tree, that they are
like, 1. Chafe, a light and empty thing. 2. Chafe which the wind whiffles up
and down. He is like Chafe.
3. Chafe which the wind scatters, or drives away. 4. And never leaves
scattering, till it has driven it from the face of the Earth. Septuag. Arab.


Secondly, Shall not stand in judgment.
in plain terms he threatens to them, 1. Damnation at the great day: They shall
not stand in judgment; though some refer this clause to this life. When he is
judged by men, causa cadet; he shall be condemned. 2. Exclusion from the
company of the just. Sinners shall not stand in the Congregation of the
righteous.


3. The cause of both.
In the close, he shows the cause why the godly is happy, the wicked unhappy.

1. Because the way of the righteous is known to God, approved by him, and
defended. 2. But the way, studies, plots, counsels of the wicked shall perish.
The Prayer out of the first Psalm.
O Almighty and most merciful God, who have taught us by thy holy Word, that
the only way to obtain felicity, to walk in the counsels of the ungodly, nor to
stand in the way of sinners, nor to acquiesce and sit down, and rest in the
Chair of the Deriders of Religion and Piety:

By nature I am a wild Tree,

O Lord, thou know my frailties, no Tree more subject to the violence of
tempests, than I am to the fury and rage of enemies, who, if they may have
their will, will not leave one leaf upon me, they will deprive me of my juice,
and divest me of my greenness. O let not then the scorching heat of any
temptation wither, nor the storm of a winter persecution beat off a leaf of
grace with which thou have beautified my soul; but in the midst of this fiery
trial let me still flourish, and in the coldest blast let me retain my life and
fresh vigor; that howsoever I seem to men to be in an unhappy condition, yet I
may have the testimony of thy Spirit within, that thou, who disposest all
things to the best for those who love thee, wilt make me prosper. Prosper me
therefore in my ways, prosper me in my actions, prosper me in my afflictions,
prosper me in life, prosper me in my death; whatsoever I do, let it prosper.

Should I sell my self to work wickedness, consent to ungodly counsels, or
settle upon the lees of sin, and sit down in the Chair of the scornful, I can
expect no such success from thy hand;

But thou, O Lord, art a sure protection for thy people; Grant therefore O
Lord, Amen.

PSALM. II. The prime Subject of this Psalm, is Christ, the Type, David.
THE persons we are chiefly to reflect on, are three, which make three parts of
the Psalm; The Enemies of Christ. Christ the Lord. The Princes and Judges of
the earth.


1. The enemies to Christ are great men, who are described here, The first
part. The enemies of Christ described.
partly from their wickedness, and partly from their weakness.

First, Their wickedness is apparent. 1. They furiously rage. 2. They
tumultuously assemble. 3. They set themselves, stand up, By their wickedness.
and take counsel against the Lord, and against his Anointed. 4. They encourage
themselves in mischief, saying, Come, and let us cast away their cords from us.
Why? Secondly, Their weakness; Their weakness for their plots vain.
in that they shall never be able to bring their plots and conspiracies against
Christ and his Kingdom to pass; for, 1. What they imagine, is but a vain thing.
2. He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, and have them in derision. 3. He shall
speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. 4. For
maugre all their plots, God has set up his King upon his holy hill of Zion.

2. At ver. 6. begins the exaltation of Christ to his Kingdom, The second part.
Christ by God exalted to be King.
which is the second part of the Psalm; in which, the Prophet by a (...),
brings in God the Father speaking, and the Son answering.

First, The words of the Father are, Vnxi te in Regem, I have set my King; His
inauguration.
Secondly, The answer of the Son, I will preach the Law; which sets forth his
willing obedience to publish and proclaim the Laws of the Kingdom; Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. His willing obedience.
Thirdly, The reply of the Father, His reward.
containing the reward that Christ was to have upon the publication of the
Gospel, which was, 1. An addition to his Empire, by the conversion and access
of the Gentiles: The amplification of his Kingdom.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost ends of the Earth for thy possession. 2. And the confusion of his
Enemies; Thou shall break them, The confusion of his enemies.
who would not have thee reign, that did rage and stand up against thee, with a
Rod of iron, and break them in pieces as a potters vessel.

3. In the third part, the Prophet descends to his Exhortation and Admonition,
The third part. The Prophet exhorts.
and that very aptly; for is Christ a King? is he a King anointed by God? is he
a great King, a powerful King? so great, that the Nations are his Subjects?
Kings. 1. to
is he the only begotten Son of God? Be wise therefore O ye Kings; in which, 1.
The persons to whom this fair Caveat is given, Kings and Judges. Know their
Duty.
2. What they are here taught. To do their Duty.
First, To know their Duty; Be wise, be learned. Secondly, To do their Duty;
Serve the Lord in fear, rejoice with trembling, Without delay; and that,

3. The time when this is to be done, even Now; the Reason double. 1. Drawn
from his wrath, and the consequent punishment: Lest he be angry, and destroy
them.
Lest he be angry, and ye perish from the right way. 2. From the happy
condition of those who learn to know him, and fear, Because they are happy that
trust in him.
and serve, and adore him: For if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him.



The Prayer collected out of the second Psalm.
O Blessed God unto whom all hearts are open, and from whom no secrets are hid,
whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, and pass through the
World, and behold all the thoughts and conspiracies, and actions of men:
Incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and see the attempts of Satan, and
wicked men: The Heathen have raged furiously, and the people have tumultuously
assembled, imagine vain things; yea, the Kings of the Earth have risen
together, they have taken counsel, and joined their power against God, and
against him, who is thy Anointed. These many in number, saying, Come, let us
break off these Bonds of Laws and Religion from off our necks, by which they
would yoke us, and cast away their cords in which they would bind us; for we
will not that he or his Anointed reign over us.

For of a truth Lord against thee and thy holy child Jesus whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate: with the Gentiles, and the Nation of
the Jews, have gathered themselves together, and do whatsoever thy hand and
thy Counsel determined before to be done. And now O Lord behold their
threatenings for thy Names sake, for thy Sons sake, for thy Promise sake, let
not the gates of Hell prevail against thy Church. Thou which art the most High,
have them in derision, speak unto them in thy wrath, and vex them in thy sore
displeasure.

Raise up thy power, Set thy King upon thy holy Hill of Zion; and yet was
content for our Redemption to humble himself to the womb, and be born and made
of a woman that he might preach thy Law, and make known the glad tidings of
salvation to all people, Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate
nothing that thou have made, nor would the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should be converted, and live; have mercy upon all Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and Heretics, and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart,
and contempt of thy Word, and fetch them home blessed Lord to thy stock, that
they may be saved among the remnant of thy true Israelites, that there may be
but one Fold, and one Shepherd.

As for such who obstinately and wilfully, and maliciously stop their ears that
they may not hear, and shut their eyes that they may not see, lest they should
hear with their ears, and see with their eyes, and thou should heal them:
These are the men, O Lord, who will not have thee reign over them, pour
therefore thy indignation upon them, and bring them down in their pride and
obstinacy, of which being broken into smaller parcels, there is no use, nor
hope or possibility of reparation.

Gracious God, Kings and Rulers of the Earth; give them those gifts that may
make them wise, and those graces that may make them good, let them learn their
Duties, serve thee in fear, rejoice before thee with reverence, that we kiss,
bow down, and adore thy Son, submit and be obedient to him, receive his
Doctrine, and acquiesce in his Laws, and never be at rest till our heart assure
us, that thou art reconciled unto us through him.

O who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry, we tremble therefore to feel
at this time the effect of thy hot wrath upon us, reverence, nor bowed our
knees and been obedient to thy Son:

Call us, O Lord, to thy truth, justify us by thy Sons blood, sanctify us by
his Spirit, and make us of that number to whom thou will say at the last day,
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. Amen. Amen.

PSALM. III. The occasion of this Psalm, was Absalons rebellion.
DAVID being deserted by his subjects, railed upon by Shimei, pursued for his
Crown and life by his ungracious son, and not finding to whom to make his moan,
betakes himself to his God, and before him he expostulates his wrong,
confesses his faith, and makes his prayer.

There be then three strains of this accurate Psalm.

1. His complaint. 2. The confession of his confidence. 3. His Petition. The
first part. David's complaint of his enemies.


1. He begins with a sad and bitter complaint, amplified 1. By the Number and
Multitude of his enemies. That they were Multi, Many; Multi valde, very many;
that they were multiplicati, That many.
multiplied and increased. So many they were, that he could not on a sudden
number them. For all Israel was gathered from Dan to Beersheba, as the sand of
the Sea for multitude, 2 Samuel 17.11. 2. From their malice. They came together
to do him a mischief. That malicious.
They rose up not for him, but against him; not to honor him, but to trouble
him; not to defend him, as they ought, but to take away his Crown and life, 2 Samuel 17.2. 3. From their insultation and Sarcasm. It was not Shimei only, That
insulters and scoffers.
but many that said it. Many there be that say unto my soul,


2. The second part of the Psalm sets forth David's confidence. The second part.
David's confidence in God.
1. To their maltitude, he opposes one God. But thou, O Lord. 2. To their
malicious insurrection, Jehovah; who, he believed 1. Would be a Buckler to
receive all the arrows they shot against him. 2. His glory, to honor, though
they went about to dishonor him. 3. The lifter up of his head, which they
would lay low enough.
3. To their vain boast of desertion; There is no help for him in his God; I
cried unto the Lord, and he heard me out of his holly hill. 4. By whose
protection being sustained and secured, he deposes all care, Which quiets his
soul, and gives him rest.
and fear, all anxiety, and distraction. 1. He sleeps with a quiet mind, I laid
me down and slept, I awoke. 2. He sings a Requiem, I will not fear, The third
part. He prays that God would deliver him as hitherto he had.




3. In the close or third part he Petitions and prays, notwithstanding his
security, Arise, O Lord; Save me, O my God. To move God to grant his request,
he thankfully remembers him of what he had done before.

1. Arise and save me, bone, For to him alone Salvation belongs.
thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. Thou art the same God, do then the
same work, be as good to thy servant, as ever thou have been. 2. Salvation
belongs to the Lord. Which he desires may be extended to his people also.
As if he had said, It Is thy property and peculiar, O Lord, to save. If thou
save not, I expect it from no other. 3. Lastly, as a good King should, in his
prayers he remembers his Subjects, Thy blessing be upon the people.
The Prayer collected out of the third Psalm.
O Omnipotent and wise Jehovah, without whose providence nothing falls out in
this world, that broughtst thy own people through the red Sea and Wilderness
before thou gave them rest in the land of Canaan: We acknowledge, that thy
wrath is just, and that all the punishments brought upon thy people, proceeds
from thy righteous hand, and that we have deserved for our disobedience, and
rebellion, to be cast out of thy sight, and to have thy Candlestick removed
from us. But gracious God, cast us not off as a people in whom thou have no
delight, once more make trial of us, whether we will not serve thee with more
fear, rejoice before thee with more reverence, and give kisses of love and
obedience unto thy Son. So sanctify all afflictions unto us, that they may be
a means to bring us to rest.

Behold, There is no help for us in our God. Will the Lord absent himself
forever? and will he be no more entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever?
and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to
be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? And I
said, It is mine own infirmity, but I will remember the years of the right hand
of the most high. I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy
wonders of old time. Our fathers, O God, our fathers trusted in thee, and thou
did deliver them.

With their voice they cried unto thee, afraid of the ten thousands of enemies,
that have set themselves against us round about. Put them in fear, that they
may know themselves to be but men. Repress their Serceness, and break their
strength, who, more cruel than brute beasts, seek to devour us.

Whom have we in heaven but thee? Israel many times by their sins provoked
thine anger, and thou punishedst them by thy just judgment: yet though their
sins were never so grievous, if they once returned from their iniquity, thou
receivedst them to mercy: We therefore wretched sinners bewail our manifold
sins, and earnestly repent us of our former wickedness, and ungodly behavior
toward thee; and whereas we cannot of our selves purchase thy pardon and
blessing, yet we humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy
upon us, and to receive us again to thy favor. Let the smell of his garment
ascend into thy nostrils, and through him let thy blessing be upon the people.

Let our sons be as the young plants, and our daughters as the polish'^ corners
of the Temple, let our garners be plenteous with all manner of store, let our
sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets, let our oxen be
strong to labor, that there be no decay, no leading into captavity, no
complaining in our streets.

O good Father, impart to us so great a share of thy blessing, that we may be
fully persuaded, that our help and salvation depends upon thee alone.
Ungracious children we are, and deserve it not, yet out of thy mere mercy we
humbly beseech thee to bestow thy benediction upon us, for his sake, whom thou
have sent to bless us, Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

PSALM IV. The occasion, Trouble from enemies.
THERE be three parts of it.

1. An entrance or petition for Audience, verse. 1. 2. An Apostrophe to his
enemies, which is Reprehensive. 2, 3. Admonitory. 4, 5
3. A Petition for himself and Gods people, verse. 6, 7, 8. The first part.

1. He proposes his request and suit for Audience. Hear me when I call, or be
gra^ious unto me, and hear my prayer. He prays for audience and mercy upon
four grounds.
And he seeks to win attention from God by an insinuation implicitly
containing four Arguments.

1. Gods Covenant with man, who has promised to hear when we call, Gods
promise.
Call upon me in trouble, and I will hear thee. I call; Hear me therefore when
I call. 2. His own innocence. He suffered without fault, 2 His innnocence.
God is the Judge and Revenger of innocents. Hear me therefore, O God of my
righteousness. 3. He requests no more, Gods former goodness to him.
than what God had done for him at other times when he was in distress. Thou
have enlarged me in trouble, and why not now? 4. It was mercy and favor to
answer him then, And his mercy.
and it will be mercy and favor to do it again. Have mercy upon me, or be
gracious to me.
2. His Petition being thus headed and ended, The second part.
he descends to the doctrinal part of the Psalm, and turning himself to his
enemies, he 1. Sharply Reproves them. 2. Then warns them, and gives them good
counsel.

1. He turns his speech from God to men, the chiefest, but the worst of men. He
reproves his enemies.
Filii Enosh. O ye sons Virorum. No Plebeians, Nobles and chief men. The charge
he lays to them, is, 1. That they turned his glory into shame. That they fought
against Gods decree.
They went about to dishonor him, that God had called and anointed to the
Kingdom. 2. That they loved vanity. A vain attempt they were in love with. That
in vain
3. That they sought after leasing. That liars.
They pursued that which would deceive them; they would find at last, that
treachery and iniquity lied unto it self; for God had said he should reign, and
he must reign, whatsoever they conceived to the contrary, was but a lie. 4.
That this his charge might have the more life, That obdurate in their rebellion.
he figures it with a stinging interrogation, Vsque quo? it is not, Quare, Why?
but Usque quo? How long? By which he does aggravate their sins. It had malice,
and pertinacy in it. They did persist and continue in mischief. And he asks,
How long they would do it? But he would have them know, that God had chosen,
and would hear him.
What never give over to prosecute him?
2. And that they might, if possible, be drawn from their attempts, he sends
them a Noverint to read, which has two clauses. 1. Let them know, That God
has set apart him that is godly for himself. 2. That God will hear, when I, or
any good man, calls upon him.
2. He gives them good counsel.
The Reproof both of Vanity and Malice of their attempts and ignorance being
ended; He gives them good counsel. 1. That they sin not by their anger.
That though they be angry, yet that they let not the Sun go down upon their
wrath. That they stand in awe of God, and sin not in their anger. 2. That they
seclude their passions and interests.
That they commune with their own hearts, their own conscience, that they do it
in their bed, a fit time, a fit place, when retired from all Conspiratours,
that they be still then, and seclude their passions and interests. Then they
should rightly judge, whether they were not in an error, their anger causless,
and their prosecution vain and unjust. 3. That they serve God with an honest
heart.
That they offer the sacrifice of righteousness. That they serve and worship
God with an honest, sincere, and contrite heart, which is the best sacrifice.
4. That they trust in God.
That they put their trust in the Lord. They trust no more to their Lies, nor
love their Vanities, but rely upon Gods promises. For then they would depose
all their vain attempts.
3. The third part. Verse. 6. The Question answered de Summo Bono.
The third part of the Psalm begins at the sixth verse, with this Question of
those men that David reproves and counsels, There be many that say, Who will
show us any good? And some Interpreters refer it 1. To their malice. As if
they had said, Who will show us the good that we so much desire and long for?
When shall we see David dead and confounded, that which is so good in our eyes?
2. Others make them words of insultation, in great distress David now was, and
many said, Who is there now that will stand by him, and take his part, and show
him and his any good, any kindness, favor or assistance? 2. Which consists in
the light of Gods countenance.
But Interpreters generally make it a serious question, and a disquisition de
summo bono. Who will show us, that good, which will make us happy? To which
David returns his answer in effect, that it is not Bona animi, nor bona
fortunae, nor bona corporis: but the light of Gods countenance; and therefore
3. His Petition or Prayer for it.
He preferres his Petition. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us. Gods countenance is his grace, his favor, his love: and the light of
his countenance the exhibition and expression of this grace, favor, The
effects of it are
love, in which alone lies all the happiness of man. Of which David expresses
two effects. Gladness, and Security. 1. Gladness.
Gladness and joy, far beyond that, which may be had from any temporal
blessings. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time, that
their corn, and wine, and oil increased. Gladness beyond the joy in harvest,
and this joy is from the light of Gods countenance. For tu posuisti. Thou
putt'st: Thou signally. 2. Security.
Security, expressed under the Metaphor of sleep, I will lay me down in peace,
and sleep; Just as in a time of peace, and sleeping as securely, as if there
were at this time nor trumpet, nor drum, nor clashing of armor rattling in
his ears. 3. For this safety God assured him.
To which he adds the reason. For thou Lord alone, make me dwell in safety.

The Prayer collected out of the fourth Psalm.
O Most merciful and loving Father, merciful in promising, and faithful in
performing thy promises, which have commanded us to call upon thee in time of
trouble, of our righteousness, hear us when we call, enlarge us in distress,
have mercy upon us, be gracious unto us, and hear our praper.

How long shall the sons of men turn our glory into shame?

The Ark is departed from Irsael, and shame has covered our faces, and will thou also turn away thy face for ever? Return, O Shulamite, return, return,
that we may look upon thee. Then perhaps those who now despite and hate us,
may be reconciled unto us, and turn their anger into love, and their rage into
sorrow, that they persecuted them, whom thou have smitten. Move all our hearts,
good God, that we map stand in awe, and sin no more, that we may recollect our
ways, and examine our own consciences upon our beds, that so out of
compunction and godly sorrow, we may lament our furious thoughts toward our
brethren, and hereafter bear more peaceable and quiet minds one toward another.

And because no sacrifice can please thee,

There is not any thing, O Lord, but desires its own good and happiness.

The joy of harvest, the content of new wine, the plenty of oil, are but
fading pleasures in comparison of thy love. Never then so let us set our hearts
upon them that we forget thee, but from these gifts let us rise to love thee,
which art the giver, and be better pleased with the light of thy countenance,
in which there is solid and eternal joy, than when our corn, and oil, and wine
is inceased. So let us love these, that we live in thee.

In thee alone is rest, in thee security, in thee tranquillity, Amen.

PSALM. V. By occasion of his enemies. It consists of five parts.
1. AN introduction in which he petitions to be heard, and professes his
earnestness about it, verse. 1, 2, 3. and his confidence of audience. 2. He
delivers his Petition, verse. 8. and the reason of it: His enemies, ver. 8. 3.
These his enemies he describes to the life, verse. 9. 4. He prays against them,
that God would destroy them, verse. 10. 5. He prays for the Church, that God
would preserve it, verse. 11, 12.
1. The first part. He prays for audience.
In the entrance he prays very earnestly for audience; And the very Congeries
shows, that he meant to be earnest and fervent in it. He chooses such a Copy
and variety of words to express the same thing, Auxesis in them, give ear. Very
earnestly.
2. Then to consider. 3. To hearken to him. He gives ear, that would understand
what the Supplicant means. He considers, that weighs the justice of the cause.
He attends and hearkens to, that intends to satisfy the Petitioner. This
therefore David desires earnestly, that his words be understood; his cause,
suit and meditation considered; and his voice, and cry heard, granted,
satisfied.

2. Three reasons for it.
The reasons he uses here to beget audience, are very considerable.

1. Thou art my King, and my God. 2. His relation to God.
That he would sue to no other, To thee will I pray. Which he illustrates 1. To
him alone he would sue.
From the time. A morning Petition, which the epikeuxis makes Emphatick. 2.
From the composure of it, it was a well composed and ordered prayer. 3. My
voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct,
dirigam disponam, my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

3. Who hears good men, not sinners.
The third reason taken from the nature of God, to wit, whom he will, and whom
he will not hear. Sinners God will not regard, to good men he is ready to look,
delighted in wickedness, evil, Now 'twas not likely that God would hear such.
These he describes. And shows his own conditions
For thou art not a God who has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil
dwell with thee. These should not stand in his sight. These he hated. These he
would destroy. These he did abhor. 2. But he on the contrary was a faithful
soul, that relied on his God; a fearful soul, Notwithstanding which, he relies
on Gods mercy.
In thy fear will I worship; And yet not relying so much upon himself, as in
the goodness and mercy of God, he professes verse. 7. As for me, I will come
into thy house upon the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy Holy Temple. In which observe 1. A difference betwixt bad and good
men. In their ways and hope. As for me. 2. And shows his demeanor in Gods
service.
That David would come to Gods house, the place of prayer. 3. But not
presumptuously, or Pharisaically: Upon hope of mercy. 4. There he would
worship, I will worship. 5. But with reverence, In thy fear I will worship.


And thus David having petitioned for audience, The second part. David's
Petition.
and delivered the grounds of his confidence, he brings forth his Petition.
That his life be holy and innocent.

1. Lead me forth in thy righteousness. 2. Make thy way strait before me: of
which he gives this reason, Because of his enemies, which daily laid wait to
entrap him, and subvert him in his goings.
These his enemies he describes to the life. The third part. He farther
describes his enemies.
By their Mouth. Heart. Throat. Tongue.


1. There is no faithfulness in his mouth. 2. Their inward parts are very
wickedness. 3. Their throat is an open Sepulcher. 4. They flatter with their
tongue.
And then he falls to prayer again. 1. Against his enemies. 2. The fourth part.
He again prays against them.
Then for Gods people or the Church. 1. Against his enemies.

1. Destroy thou them, O God. 2. Let them fall by their own counsels. 3. Cast
them out in the multitude of their transgressions: For they be Rebels. For they
have rebelled against thee. Rebels, not against David, but against God; for he
that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God. They have not rejected
thee, but they have rejectect me. The fifth part. And for Gods people.

The Conclusion contains his Prayer for Gods people, whom he here describes,
and calls, The righteous. 2. They that put their trust in God. 3. They that
love his Name. And he prays for them, that 1. They may rejoice, that they may
shout for joy. 2. They may be joyful in God. And he adds this reason, Whom he
knows God will favor.
Because thou defend'st them, thou will bless them, and with thy favor thou will compass them, as with a shield.


The Prayer collected out of the fifth Psalm.
O Most Gracious and Holy God, who have saught us, that thou art not a God, We
a sinful Nation pressed with the weight of these grievous sins, and sensible of
thy heavy judgments: to come into thy house upon the multitude of thy mercies,
and in thy fear to worship toward thy holy Temple.

We beseech thee to give us a true sight and sense of these our heinous
transgressions, that so our true repentance and amendment may move thee to
repent of all the evil thou have brought upon us.

Enemies, O good God, we have too many, in whose mouth there is no
faithfulness: Enemies, Roaring enemies, whose throat is an open Sepulcher to
devour us: Lying crafty enemies, who flatter with their lips for to deceive us.
Frustrate, Gracious God, their counsels, destroy their power and forces, cast
all those out in the multitude of their transgressions, who have rebelled
against thee.

Give ear, expecting thy comfort and help from heaven to descend upon us.

O let us then hear the voice of joy and deliverance be^ime in the morning,

Arise, compass us with thy loving kindness as with a shield. Confirm us in
faith and hope, that we may rejoice; make us love thy name, that we may once
more shout for joy. Impute unto us thy righteousness, that may make us just;
and give us the graces of thy holy Spirit, that may make us righteous in our
generation, so that thou may be moved to bless us in this valley of tears,
and to crown us with blessings in the life to come; where we may live an
everlasting blessed life of love and holiness with thee, O Father of mercies,
and with thy Son, and holy Spirit for ever.

PSALM. IV. Which is the first of the Penitentials, and is fit for a Penitent
afflicted under Gods hand.
THE streins of this Psalm are two in general.

1. A Petition to God for himself contained in the seven first verses. ^. An
insultation over his enemies contained in the three last.
The Petition stands upon two legs, 1. A deprecation of evil. 2. A petition of
good.


First he prays to God to avert his wrath, The first part. He prays that God
avert his wrath.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chasten me in thy heavy displeasure.

Secondly, he entreats to be partaker of Gods favor, Have mercy upon me.

1. Heal me, O Lord. 2. Then to his soul, Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh
save me. Show mercy.


And this his Petition he inforceth upon diverse and weighty reasons.

1. This he inforceth 1. From the greatness of his calamity.
From the quantity and degrees of his calamity, which he shows to be very great
from the effects.

1. In general: he was in a languishing disease, I am weak. 2. In particular, a
sharp pain in his bones, My bones are vexed. 3. My soul also is sore troubled.
2. From the continuance of it.
if I had any comfort from heaven. But thou, O Lord, how long? This makes me a
man of sorrows, that thou, my Lord, seems to have withdrawn thy countenance
long, long from thy servant, Lord, how long?

3. From the consequence, viz. Death.
From the consequence that was like to follow, death, and the event upon it.
It Is my intention to celebrate thee, and praise thy name. This the living only
can do, therefore let me live: For in death no man remembers thee, and who will
give thee thanks in the pit?

4. And that to Deaths-door he was now brought, he shows by three apparent
symptoms.

1. Sighs and groans, which had almost broke his heart, The symptoms of it.
being the companions of a perpetual grief; with these he was oppressed, even
to weariness: I am weary of my groaning. 2. The abundance of tears which fell
from him, had even dried and washed his body; these fell in such showers, and
so continual, That he made his bed to ^wim, and watered his couch with his
tears. 3. His eyes also melted away, and grew dim; so that he seemed old before
his time; for grief preys upon the vital spirits, and dries up the bones: My
eye is consumed because of grief, it waxes old.
5. And that which increased his grief, and added to his sorrow, was, From the
joy his enemies took at it.
that he had many ill-willers, who did laugh and boast, and insult over him in
this his extremity; My eye is waxen old because of mine enemies.

Secondly, But at last receiving comfort and joy from his penitential tears,
The second part. His insultation over his enemies. These he rejects with scorns.
he begins to look up, and from his complaint he turns upon his enemies, who
gaped after his death, and over them he insults in the three last verses.

1. He rejects these Reprobates from him with scorn and indignation; you looked
for my end, and expected my ruin, but all in vain, and therefore now deluded
of your hopes. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

2. He assings the cause in effect, Because God had heard his prayer.
that he comes over it again and again, thrice for failing.

1. For the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. 2. The Lord has heard my
supplication. 3. The Lord will receive my prayer.
3. Then in the close there follows his imprecation, His imprecation; that,
which is made up of these three ingredients, which he prays may light upon
them.

1. Shame and confusion: Let them be confounded, to see their hope frustrate.
Shame.
2. Vexation: Let them be vexed, that they suffer by the hand of justice. 3.
Eversion. Let them return with shame enough, Vexation.
that their plots come to nothing. Eversion, may befall them.

And these two last he aggravates by the weight and speed; for he desires that
their punishment might begreat and speedy. Grievously.


1. That their vexation should be nor easy, nor mild, but very sore; let them
be sorely vexed. 2. That their shame and overthrow linger not, but be present,
hasty, Suddenly.
and sudden: Let them be turned back, and put to shame in a moment, or
suddenly.
The Prayer collected out of the sixth Psalm.
O Omnipotent, holy, and just Lord, to whose commands we owe obedience, and
whose will ought to be our Law. I wretched sinner and disobedient Caitiff, do
confess that for my disobedience I have deserved thy just displeasure. I have
provoked thy wrath, and done evil before thee: O Lord I have sinned, and
multiplied my iniquities. Now therefore I vow the knees of my heart, and humbly
beleech thee to forgive, and not to destroy me with my iniquities. O Lord
rebuke me not in thine anger, I tremble O dear Father, and am even out of
heart, when I remember my great offenses, and feel thy severe justice.

My soul is sore vexed, and the pains of Hell have overtaken me: But thou, how
long will thou turn away thy face from me, and set me up as a mark to shoot at?
how long Lord will thou be absent, for ever? and shall thy jealousy burn like
fire? how long shall I take counsel in my soul, and be thus vexed in my heart?
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thy enemy? will thou break a
leaf driven too and fro with the wind, and will thou pursue the dry stubble?
For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the sins of my
youth. The eye of my mind is darkened at the sense of thy revenge, and the eye
of my body grown dim, and consumed with grief.

Have mercy upon me, and for thine own sake remit my sin, and heal the running
ulcers of my soul with thy grace; for I am weak, and unable to any good; heal
me from this my infirmity, and the wounds of my transgressions, Return O Lord,
who art now justly turned away from me for my sin, and be propitious to me,
deliver my soul from the fear of thy judgment, and eternal death, and save him,
who has deserved to be cast away, for thy mercy sake.

I said in the cutting off my days, For in death no man remembers thee, and
in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Will thou show wonders among the dead?
or shall the dead arise, and praise thee? shall thy wonders be known in the
dark? or thy righteousness in the land where all things are forgotten? But unto
thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.
Lord, why castest thou out my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me? I am
afflicted, and ready to dye, yea, from my youth up, thy terrors have I
suffered with a troubled mind; thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy displeasure
has cut me off.

This is the desire of my enemies, so would we have it.

But I will praise the Lord for that he has done, I will wait on thy name, for
thy Saints like it well; Depart from me, for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping; (which I repeat with joy and comfort) has heard the voice of my
supplication; the Lord has received, and graciously answered my prayer.

So let thine enemies perish, even as many as are adversaries to thy Church and
thy Glory. Amen.

PSALM. VII. The occasion, A slander and accusation laid against him by Cush
the son of Jemini, that he sought to kill Saul; from which he frees himself
before God.
THree parts there are of this Psalm.

1. His Appeal to God by way of Petition, ver. 1.2, 6. 2. The Reasons of it,
set down through the whole Psalm. 3. The first part. David's Appeal to God by
way of petition; to which he desires God to be,
The Doxology, or his Thanksgiving, ver. 17.
1. He begins his Appeal with a Petition for freedom and deliverance from his
Persecutors, Save me, deliver me, ver. 1. in which he desires God to be, 1.
Attentive to him; first, upon the Relation that was betwixt them; for he was
his Lord, his God; secondly, He trusted in him; O Lord my God I trust in thee,
2. Attentive.
Benevolous.
Benevolous: For he was now in danger of death; he had, 1. Enemies. 2. Many
Enemies. 3. Persecuting Enemies. 4. But one above the rest, a Lion, who sought
first to catch, then to tear and rend him to pieces; so that if God forsook
him, he would do it. Save me from those that persecute me, and deliver me,
least he catch my soul as a Lion, and tear it in pieces, while there is none to
deliver, ver. 2. The second part. His reasons of Appeal.



2. And then he gives his Reasons why he does appeal to his God, which are, his
own Innocence, and Gods Justice.

1. He makes before God a protestation of his Innocence: Accused he was, His
innocence.
that he lay in wait, and plotted for Readiness life and Kingdom; but he purges
himself, shows the impossibility of it, and that with a fearful imprecation. 1.
O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing as they object? if ther^ be
iniquity in my hands? if I have rewarded evil t^ him that was at peace with me!
ver. 3, 4. (which was indeed an impossible matter; And imprecates evil to
himself, if it were not so.
for I have delivered him, that without any cause is my enemy, as Saul in the
Cave, 1 Samuel 24.) 2. Upon which he falls to a fearful imprecation to light upon
himself, if he were any way guilty: Then let my enemy persecute my soul, and
take it: In effect thus; then let my enemy have his will upon me, take both my
life, and my honor, dearer than my life from me, lay all in the dust: Kingdom,
Life, Fortunes, whatsoever thou have promised me, and I expect.
2. And which is the second Reason of his Appeal, being thus innocent, 2 Gods
justice.
he call to God for justice; Arise, O Lord, in thy anger, lift up thy self, 1.
The rage of my enemies is great. 2. The judgment was thine, that chose me from
my Brethren to be King of thy people Israel: Thou command Samuel to anoint
me; Arise thou therefore, lift up thy self, and awake for me. 3. Besides, this
will be for thy Honor, and E^ification of thy Church: Gods glory.
The Congregation of thy people shall compass thee, not me about, for their
sakes therefore return thou on High; Ascend the Tribunal, and do justice.

Now upon this Argument of Gods justice, He stays upon Gods justice.
he dwells and insists till the last verse of the Psalm; and he implores it
upon the ingemination of his own innocence, and the impiety of his enemies. God
the Judge.


1. He avows God to be the Judge, not of his cause alone, but of the whole
world: The Lord shall judge the people. 2. Then he importunes him to do justice
to him, and to wicked men. He implores his justice.
1. To him, an innocent and upright person. To him an innocent.
Judge me O Lord according to my righteousness, and according to the integrity
that is in me. 2. To the wicked: O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an
end.
3. And yet again he prays over the same thing, but not only for himself, Upon
the wicked. In God, all the properties of a a good Judge. 1. Knowledge. 2.
Prudence. 3. To save.
but all good men: Establish the just; and adds his Reason, that God is (...).
He knows not only the words and deeds, but the heart also: The righteous Lord
tries the very hearts and reins; and therefore fittest to be a Judge, in whom
is required knowledge and prudence. 4. The other two properties of a Judge, are
to save, to punish; and the triumph of his faith is, that he knows he will do
both. 1. He will save the just and upright in heart, he will judge the
righteous; his defense is in God. 2. He will punish the wicked; for he is angry
with the wicked every day: To punish.
he stays for their conversion; he whets, bends, sharpens, prepares his
instruments of death; he cuts them not down, shoots not till-there is no
remedy: Clemency.
Marry, If they will not turn, he will whet his Sword,
5. But mercy showed unto the wicked, it seems will not mend and better him;
nor David's innocence, But forbearance mends not the wicked; of which he
complains.
nor Gods forbearance, would not better Saul: He grew worse and worse; Behold
he travelleth with mischief, as a woman with child, and has conceived
iniquity, and brought forth falsehood and ungodliness; he has made and dug a
pit, and is fallen into the ditch which he has made, David prays, that the
just God would revenge his cause, and retaliate the injury; and he is fully
persuaded it would so fall out. His mischief shall-return upon his own head,

And in faith prophesies his ruin. The third part. A Doxology.

3. The close of the Psalm is a Doxology, thanks, that a true, just, and
merciful God, would judge for the righteous, save those who are true of heart,
establish the just, and take revenge upon the wicked; for this, says David:



The Prayer collected out of the seventh Psalm.
O Lord God, by whose power all things do subsist, and before whose Majesty all
creatures tremble, I at this time beset with cruel enemies, do fly so thee for
succor and deliverance. O Lord, thou art my God and Savior, be not then
absent from me in this needful time of trouble,

Against thee only have I sinned, that they lay to my charge,

But thou, O Lord, beholdest their craft and fury against me a poor innocent;
Thou see how they, travelleth with iniquity; how they conceive in their
hearts false and mischievous ways to destroy me; and that the mischief that
they have conceived, they bring forth, and bring to effect, so much as lies in
their power.

Be not therefore O Lord, Samuel to make choice of me, and to anoint me King of
Israel; his judgment was thy judgment; that judgment which thou have decreed
and given, then awake for me, and let my enemies fall into the ditch that they
have made;

O Lord, let not the impiety of wicked men longer continue. angry with the
wicked every day; and though thou art a God of much patience and longanimity,
will not turn from his wicked way, make them know that thou have whet thy
sword, and art ready to strike them; that thou have bent thy bow, and art
prepared to shoot them; have set thy arrow to the string, and art aiming to
pieres them; In a word, that thou have prepared the instruments of death,
weapons inflamed with wrath, hatred, and fury against the persecutours of thy
Church and people.

O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just.
Restore thy Church to its prestine condition, Religion, which is now almost
extinct, shall again flourish and thy worship which is now dishonored with
scandals and profaneness, shall again recover its ancient luster, by the
meeting of thy people in thy house, and joyful praises sent up to thee in the
great Congregation. For thy own Namesake therefore, and for thy honor exa^t
thy power, and show thy strength, and come amongst us.

Our sole defense is in thee, O God, He has kept, defended, protected me in so
great dangers. He will take a just reve^ge upon my enemies. To his name
therefore I give all honor, glory, laud, and praise, through Iesue Christ my
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

PSALM. VIII. This Hymn is a Meditation of Gods excellent goodness and glory
shining in his Creatures, especially in man.
IT begins and ends with a general proposition, David admires Gads greatness,
goodness, etc.
figured by an exclamation, which contains an Admiration, for he does admire
what he cannot perfectly comprehend. O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy
Name in all the world? Such is the glory of thy Divinity, power, Of which he
gives diverse instances.


This general being premised, Of which he gives diverse instances.
the Prophet descends to some particular instances, in which the excellency of
Gods name does appear; and he gives forth three. First, Infants. Secondly, The
heavens, and the Luminaries therein. Thirdly, Man himself.

1. The excellency of Gods power, divinity and goodness, appears in infants; In
infants,
Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength. 1. Lord
our Governor? 2. Or the innocent babes that dyed for him by Herod's hand were
Martyrs, and declared his strength. 3. Or the children that cried Hosanna. 4.
Or by Babes is meant, such as the worldly wise repute no better than children
and fools; by simple Prophets, ignorant fishermen, humble confessors, has he
perfected his praise, and stilled the enemy, and the avenger; confounded the
wisest Philosophers, and stopped the mouth of Devils.

2. The next instance, In the heavens.
in which the glory and excellency of Gods name is manifested, is, the Heavens,
Moon, Stars. These are the works of his fingers: Thy heavens. Whose amplitude
is great, order and Orbs wonderful, beauty admirable, matter durable, motion
various, yet stable: Together with the stars, whose multitude is numerous,
magnitude various, order admirable, influences secret and wonderful; and the
constant course of the Moon, and the other great Luminary, all which thou have
ordered and ordained. When, I say, I consider this, then I think with my self,

What is man, In Man.
which is his third instance, to manifest the excellency of Gods providence and
government of the world. In which he reflects upon man in his baseness, and his
dignity.

1. Whose vileness the Prophet considering,
In his baseness, vileness and misery; signified by the question, What is man?
as if he should say, What a poor creature? how miserable? what except dust and
ashes, when he was at the best? for he was taken from the dust of the ground,
even then, when God created him after his own image. But now miserable dust,
while he lives; and to dust he shall return when he dies. What then is this
miserable creature, of what worth, of what value, that thou so great, so
immense a Creator of all other things, that dwell above the stars, and
celestial Orbs, should vouchsafe to visit, and have a care of him?

2. Admires the love and care of God to him.
For that is his Dignity, that above all other creatures thy love is greatest
to man. This thou have showed these ways.

1. In visiting him.
In visiting him. Thou visitest him, and art mindful of him. 1. Thou visitest
him, by conferring many temporal blessings on him. 2. Thou were mindful of him,
and visitedst him first by thy Prophets, then in person by thy dear Son, that
brought Redemption to him when he was utterly lost.
2. In making him little lower than the Angels.
Thou made him a little lower than the Angels; Lower indeed according to his
body and bodily necessities, but in the faculties of his soul resembling those
celestial Spirits. 3. In adorning him with glory and worship.
In creating him after thy own image: which when he had lost, thou again
repairedst and restoredst it, making him a partaker of the Divine Nature in thy
Son. And so did compass, invest and adorn him with glory and worship. 4. Thou
made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, In making him Lord of
all creatures.
and putt'st all things under his feet, that they should all obey, serve him,
as their Lord, and turn to his use and profit; which though true of man, yet it
especially belongs to Christ when he took our humane nature; for he was heir of
all things. And we in Christ are restored to our dominion over the creatures.
Which the Prophet illustrates and amplifies in particular. 1. All sheep and
oxen, yea and the beasts of the field. 2. The fowls of the air, the fishes of
the sea, etc.

He closes the Psalm with that (...) he began, The (...)
O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world?

The Meditation or Prayer collected out of the eighth Psalm.
O Lord our God and governor, how ecxellent is thy Name not only in Judea, but
in all the earth? Our words are too flat to express, our senses and reason too
weak to comprehend the wisdom of thy ways, the immensity of thy goodness,
which thou have showed to the children of men. Thy name and thy will thou have
made known in thy Word, thy name thou have magnified in thy works, both which
as often as we consider, we are put into astonishment and admiration. From this
earth we cast up our eyes to heaven, and in that Arch we behold nothing but
matters of wonder, for thou have set thy glory above the heavens. There is thy
Seat and Throne of Majesty, there the Angels and Saints praise thee, there the
Sun and the Moon with all the stars, proclaim thy glory. O Lord our God, how
excellent is thy Name in all the earth? thou have set thy glory above the
heavens.

And though this thy goodness is diffused, and may be seen in all things, yet
it is in nothing more admirable, than in thy providence for infants and
sucklings, The child is no sooner born, but thou have ordained a teat for it to
suck, and a strange instinct to seek after it: The young of any creature is no
sooner brought forth, but thou have provided for it milk and nourishment, by
which it should live, grow up, increase, and become strong: So great is thy
care, thy love, thy provision for all creatures.

But, which is yet more wonderful, these very infants and sucklings could no
sooner speak, but thou have taught their tongues to sound forth Hosannah to the
Son of David. What were all thy Prophets, and Apostles, but, as it were, babes
and sucklings, rude and illiterate men? and yet in their mouths thou did
perfect the praise. It was not by the power of arms, it was not by strength, it
was not by humane wisdom and prudence, that thou did convert the world, and
gather thy Church, but thou did make choice of those ignorant and weak men,
by whose mouths no better than Babes and Sucklings thou would still that
enemy of our souls the Devil, and put to silence that avenger of our sins,
Satan, who by thee is appointed to take, and is well pleased that he may take a
just and cruel revenge upon us for our disobedience.

Thou had more glorious creatures in heaven to set thy love upon, those great
wheels which are the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars, And these are
not, nor ever were disobedient to thy word, they do their duties, they move in
a constant course, and send forth their light and influences, they set and
rise, and rise and set by that perpetual law that thou have prescribed. Whereas
Man is a rebellious creature, that disobeys thy word, and daily provokes thee
to displeasure, the imaginations of his heart being evil continually.

What is man therefore, that thou should be mindful of him, Thou art potent,
man is weak; thou wise, man foolish; thou the Lord of all, man poor and in
want; thou inhabitest eternity, man is a mortal; thou art glorious, man base
and vile, from the dust, and to return to the dust; thou holy, and man sinful,
and will thou open thy eye upon such an one? will thou keep him in mind? will thou remember so vile and disobedient a wretch for good? and visit him with thy
grace and mercy? Was it a small thing, that thou should create him after
thine own image, that thou should cloth, feed and sustain him in this life,
but that when he had wilfully defaced this thy image, and was utterly lost,
thou should send thine own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh to visit and
redeem him?

The Angels are the most glorious of thy creatures, He fell from this high
dignity, became destitute of grace, subject to sin, vanity, misery, and
punishment, but in this forlorn condition thou did not forsake him, but have
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou honouredst him that deserved to lie
under disgrace and ignominy; thou restoredst him to life, that deserved to dye;
thou made him partaker of the Divine Nature, who had blotted out the Divine
Character from his soul; in a word, of a servant and have of sin, thou framedst
him anew, and made him a Lord, and preparedst a Crown of glory for him.

To enjoy that, Lord, is our hope and expectation, because it is thy promise;
Thou have given him Sheep to cloth him, Oxen to labor for him, the beasts of
the field to obey and fear him, the fowls of the air, and fishes of the Sea,
and whatsoever walks through the paths of the Seas for varieties, and
dainties to feed and supply him.

The consideration of this thy bounty to mankind, that deserved it, not
enforces from me, O Lord, O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy Name in
all the earth?

O our God, since thou have been so mindful of us, never suffer us to be
unmindful of thee: since thou have showed thy mercy in visiting and redeeming
us, never let us show ourselves unthankful for this thy visitation and
redemption. Suffer us not to abuse thy creatures which thou have given us for
food, nor thy gifts bestowed for clothing, nor wantonly and cruelly to make use
of our dominion. But give us grace so highly to esteem of thy rich mercies, and
with such temperance and sobriety to use thy creatures, that thy Name thereby
may still be the more magnified, thy bounty exalted, thy providence more
declared, thy honor enlarged, thy person glorified, and our souls at last
saved by the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM. IX. This is a Psalm of thanksgiving for a victory over his Enemies.
IT consists of five chief parts.

1. David's thanksgiving, or profession of praise, verse. 1, 2. which is
amplified, and illustrated, and continued till the tenth verse. 2. An
exhortation to others to do the like, verse. 11. and a reason given for it,
verse. 12. 3. A Petition for himself, verse. 13. and the reason for it, verse. 14.
4. A remembrance of Gods goodness in the overthrow of his enemies, for which he
exults, and sings a Song of Triumph, from verse. 15. to verse. 19. 5. The
conclusion, which is petitory, verse. 19, 20.
1. The first part. David's profession of praise.
His profession of praise is set down in the two first verses, in which we may
observe 1. The matter of it, with the extent, All the mavelous works of God.
2. As if he could never express these enough, how he varies the Synonima's, I
will praise thee, I will show forth, I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will
sing praise to thy name, In which words there is an Incrementum or Climax. 3.
The principle whence this praise flowed. Not from the lips, but from the heart.
2. From the whole heart, I will praise thee with my whole heart.


This he amplifies from the cause, Which he first amplifies from the causes.
which is double.

1. The (...), that which outwardly moved him, and gave him a just occasion to
do so, The overthrow of his enemies.
The overthrow of his enemies; when my enemies are turned back, which were not
overcome by my strength and valor, but by the presence of thy power. 2. They
shall fall and perish at thy presence. Thou were the chief and principal cause
of this victory, That God alone did it.
^^d therefore deserve the thanks. Of this the Prophet makes a full Narrative
in the two next verses, setting God, as it were, upon the Bench, and doing the
Office of a Judge. 1. Thou maintainest my right and my cause. 2. Thou satest in
the Throne judging right. 3. Thou have rebuked the Heathen. 4. Thou have
destroyed the wicked, thou have put out their name for ever and ever. In a
word, thou art a just Judge, that defend'st the innocent, and punishest their
oppressors, and therefore I will praise thee.
3. For this he insults over his enemies.
O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end. Thy power of hurting
and destroying is taken away, and the fortified Cities in which thou dwell'st,
are overthrown, And shows the super-eminency of Gods power.
and their and thy memory is perished. 4. Next to make his assertion clearer,
to the Enemies power he opposes Gods, his Kingdom to their Kingdom. But the
Lord. 1. Eternal, The Lord shall endure for ever. 2. His Office to be Judge, He
has prepared his Throne for judgment. 3. He is an universal Judge, He shall
judge the whole world. 4. He is a just Judge, He shall judge in righteousness,
Which begets a confidence in his people.
he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness. 5. He is a merciful
Judge to his people, For the Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge
in time of trouble.
5. The effect or consequent upon this his execution of justice: which is the
confidence thence arising in the hearts of his people, which are here described
by their knowledge of God. 2. Seeking him. They that know thy name, will put
their trust in thee, for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee.
2. An Exhortation to others to praise God, 2 He exhorts others to praise God.
Sing praises to the Lord that dwells in Zion, that is in the midst of his
people and Church to defend them. Declare among the people his doings. The
second part.


Of which he assigns the reason, that he is a just God, and will require their
blood at the hands of those that oppressed and slew them. And when he makes
inquisition for blood, For his justice.
he remembers them, the innocent unjustly oppressed and slain,

3. A Petition for himself, that God would show him mercy, He Petitions for
favor.
and look upon his affliction, Have mercy upon me, O Lord; The third part.
consider the trouble of them that hate me, thou that lifts me up from the
gates, that is, the power of death.

And the Reason or Argument by which he persuades God to hear him, and show
mercy, is drawn from the final cause, That he may have just cause to praise
God; which he vows.


That I may show thy praise. 2. All thy praise. 3. In thy Church, in the gates
of the daughter of Zion. 4. That I may do it with joyful lips. 5. Which I will
do, I will rejoice in thy salvation.

4. And then, as if he were showing forth this praise in the Congregation, The
fourth part.
he sings forth his Song of Triumph, his (...) over his enemies: in Metaphors.
And performs in a Song of Triumph.


1. The heathen are sunk down into the pit that they made. 2. In the net which
they hid, is their own foot taken. 3. This is the Lords doing. now the Lord is
known by the judgment he executes: For, 4. The wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands. Higgaion. Selah. Which is a thing exceedingly to be meditated
on, and not forgotten. 5. The wicked shall be turned to hell, and all the
people that forget God; The fifth part is, A Petition.
and proceeds from Gods justice, and his goodness toward the innocent unjustly
oppressed, For the needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of the
poor shall not perish for ever. Their hope shall not be frustrate.
5. The Conclusion is Petitory. Arise, O Lord. Against the enemies of the
Church.


1. Let not man prevail over thy people. 2. Let the heathen be judged in thy
sight. 3. Put them in fear, O Lord; now they fear nothing, That they may fear.
being in their height and prosperity; they are insolent and proud; manifest
thy divine presence to their terror: For then 4. And know themselves to be but
men.
They will know themselves to be but men: infirm and mortal creatures, and not
insult over thy people, and glory upon their own strength and prosperity.
The Prayer and Hymn out of the ninth Psalm for the Church in affliction,
persecuted and oppressed by enemies.
I Will praise thee, and I will make known to others, as much as in me lies,
those wonderful works which thou have done for thy people in all ages.

For thou,

Have mercy upon me, Make inquisition for that innocent blood of thy servants,
which they have poured out like water, that cannot be gathered up again, and
forget not the voice of Abels blood that yet from the earth cries unto thee.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them,
thou have destroyed the wicked, and rebuked the heathen, and put out their name
for ever and ever. that they are not God, but weak, infirm and mortal men. Now
they are proud of their victories, and puffed up with their successes, O break
the hardness of their heart with some calamities, and fearful disasters, that
being brought to consider their own frail condition, and intolerable insolence,
they may cease to pride it against thee and thy Church.

O thou enemy, but thy destructions shall come to a perpetual end, Thou shall
be brought to the sides of the pit, thou, without repentance, shall be turned
into hell, with all the people that forget God.

And therefore all ye servants of God, show forth all his praise in the gates
of the daughter of Zion, and rejoice in his salvation.

So they,

PSALM. X. A Prayer to God to destroy the enemies of the Church, and the
oppressors of his people.
THERE be three parts of this Psalm.

1. A Complaint. 2. A Narration of his enemies malice. 3. A Petition to be
delivered from them. The first part is a Complaint
1. The Complaint is contained in the two first verses, Of Gods absence.
1. Of Gods absence, which is quickened by an (...). Why stand thou so far
off, O Lord? 2. Why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? Of his enemies.
2. Then he complains of his enemies, Whose Characters are.
The wicked in his pride does persercute the poor. These he describes by many
Characters. 2. The first is Insolency, Pride; and the effect, persecution of
good men. The second part.
They being gotten to dignity, places of honor, and enriched, Pride. Insolency
and persecution.
This occasions an imprecation against them, Let them be taken in the devices
they have imagined. They conspire, and make Leagues to oppress good men, let
them be taken when they least think of it. 2. The second Note of this wicked
man, is, that he gloryeth in mischief: Boasting in wickedness.
which is a sign of extreme malice; The wicked boasts of his hearts desire.
3. A third, is, that he applauds, encourages others in their rapine,
Encouragement of others in mischief.
plunder and spoil, to which they are moved by their covetousness, He blesses
the covetous, whom God abhors. 4. A fourth is his Contempt of God and man:
and Perseverance in evil. 1. Man he contemns. His ways prosper, all succeeds
well with him, A contempt
he never thinks to be called to an account. Of Man.
Thy judgments are far out of his sight, and therefore in scorn he slights and
puffs at all his enemies. 2. And God he reverenceth not; Through the pride of
his countenance he will not seek after God, And God.
neither is God in all his thoughts.
5. The fifth Note is his profane security, He says in his heart, Profane
security.
Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere. 6. The sixth Note is his falsehood,
His mouth is full of cursing, Falsehood.
Verborum faditas.
He will not stick at an Oath, and curse himself, and imprecate God to be a
revenger if he perform it not, that so under the color of Religion and Piety
he may deceive. 7. The seventh is his Cruelty, set out in the ninth and tenth
verses, Cruelty and Hypocrisy. Factoru^ rabies.
where he is compared to a Thief, an Archer, a Lion, Vbi non valet vellis
leomnia, assuit vulpinam, for, he falls down, croucheth and humbles himself,
He is animo, verse. 6. Ore, verse. 7. Opere malus, verse. 8, 9, 10. 8. The eighth
Note upon him, is, that he is a close Atheist. Atheism.
He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides away his face, A
petition to be freed from this wicked man.
and will never see it: Which is the cause of his Cruelty, Falsehood, Security,
etc.
The third part of the Psalm is a Petition to be freed from this wicked man;
The third part.
Arise, O Lord, lift up my hand, forget not the humble.

To persuade which, he uses two Arguments.

1. Wherefore do the wicked contemn God, while he does say in his heart, Thou will not require it? 2. Surely thou have seen it, for, etc. verse 14.
Then he returns to his prayer, That God would set an end to his power.
and enforces his second Argument taken from the justice and office of God. 1.
That he would out this wicked man from his power and strength, Break thou the
arm of the wicked and the evil man: Till thou find none to punish, let none
escape. Let them appear no more. 2. That he would hear and defend the
righteous: as he had formerly.
1. The Lord is King for ever and ever. 2. He had expelled the Canaanites
before them, The heathen are perished out of the land. 3. Thou have heard the
desire of the humble.


Upon which he concludes with the expression of his confidence full of much
comfort. Of which he is confident.


1. Thou will prepare the heart of the humble to wait on thee. 2. Thou will
cause thine ear to hear. 3. To the safety of the oppressed. To judge the
fatherless and poor. 4. That the man of the earth may no more oppress.
The Prayer collected out of the tenth Psalm, for deliverance from tyrannous
and oppressive enemies.
O Almighty and Merciful God, whose eyes go through the world, and do see to
how many dangers thy poor Church is exposed, and the rage and tyranny of wicked
men against thy people, we grievous sinners, yet thy humble servants, justly at
this time for our transgressions against thee environed with cruel enemies, and
ready to be swallowed up by oppressing tyrants, do prostrate our selves before
thy Throne of mercy,

O Lord, why stand thou so far off, as if thou had deposed all care of us,
and had quite forgotten us? why hidest thou thy self, and withdrawest thy
eye, thy hand, thy help in this needful time of trouble when our present
calamities are so great, that now we stand in most need of thy aid and succor.

The wicked being exalted to dignity and power, Through the pride of his
countenance he snuffeth at thee, he says in his heart, There is no God. No God
that will regard, therefore he goes on securely, and puffs at, contemns,
derides, and with the breath of his mouth thinks to blow away all those he
counts his enemies. Requiem to his soul, He has said in his heart, I shall
never be removed, I shall never be cast down from this state and honor,
dignity and power, from generation to generation, I shall not be in adversity.
Yea, He is of a fraudulent and insidious nature, and that he may the easilier
cover this his craft and subtilty to deceive the imprudent, he will not stick
to bind himself with a vow, an oath, a curse, when under these fair and
religious words there lies nothing but vanity, mischief and poison. And at
last, when all these frauds and deceits break forth, as a high-way-man, (as
those of an Archer) are privily levelling and aiming at the goods and life of
the poor. What by his For-like fraud he cannot compass, he will do by violence,
for he lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his Den; he lies in wait to catch
the poor harmless man, when he takes him in his net, he destroy him. He fasts,
he prays, O God his impiety, his pride, his covetousness, his cruelty, his
hypocrisy, his perjury is so great, God has forgotten, he hides his face, and
will never see it.

Arise, O Lord, lift up thy hand; hitherto thy hand has seemed remiss and
feeble in our protection, but now, O God, declare thy power, and show the
strength of thy arm, and smite these our enemies on the cheek-bone, let it
never be cast in our teeth, that thou have forgotten the humble. Why should he
dare with his blasphemies thus to contemn and revile thee? Why should he say in
his heart, Thou will not require it, that thou carest not for things below,

The imaginations of man's heart are but vain; for surely thou have seen it,
thou weighest the mischievous actions and spiteful dealings of the wicked
against the innocent,

Break thou the arm and power of the wicked and evil man: that there may remain
no sign or step of his impiety, punish him, till thou find nothing to punish,
being condemned let him perish, and come to eternal ignominy and contempt.

So shall thy people have reason to bless thee, The Lord is King for ever and
ever, and the wicked are perished out of the good land which he has given to
his people for an inheritance. They are rooted out of the land of the living.

Thou, O Lord, art a gracious God,

So shall thy afflicted people sing of thy mercies, and return thee due praises
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XI. In this Psalm David manifests his confidence in God in the midst of
his extremities.
IT is composed Dialogue-wise, betwixt David, and those his Counselors that
persuaded to fly to some place of safety from Saul's fury, which if he did not,
he was in a desperate condition.

It has two parts.

1. He brings in his Counselors words; verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. To which he returns
his answer, verse. 1. and confirms it, verse. 4. ad 7.
1. The first part. The advice of David's Counselors.
You my Counselors whether of good or bad will I know not tempt me, that
deposing all hope of the Kingdom, I go into perpetual banishment, (such you say
Saul's fury is against me) Thus you advise, Flee as a bird unto the mountain;
and your Arguments are, 1. For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready
their arrow upon the string, Their reasons.
that they may privily shoot at upright in heart. The great danger.
2. The want of aid and assistance. There was no hope of help; For the
foundations were cast down. had broken all Leagues and Covenants he had made
with him. The want of assistance.
The Priests were slain with the Sword. His fortresses taken from him. His
outward estate destroyed. Laws subverted. If he staid, perish he must, some few
righteous men are left. But what can the righteous do?


2. The second part.
To these their Arguments and counsel, David returns his answer in a sharp
reprehension. I tell you, 1. David's answer
I trust in God, In the Lord put I my trust. How say you then to my soul? That
he trusts in God.
1. What say you, the foundations are cast down? yet I despair not, for God is
sufficient. Who is sufficient.
1. Present in his holy Temple. He can defend. 2. and his Throne is in heaven.
3. Nothing is hid from him, His eyes behold, and his eyelids try the children
of men. 4. Just.
He is a just God, which is seen in his proceeding both to just and unjust. 1.
He tries the righteous by a Fatherly and gentle correction. 2. But the wicked,
and him that loves violence, his soul hates.




These two last Propositions he expounds per partis, and begins with the wicked.

1. Upon the ungodly he will rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest, For he will punish the wicked.
this shall be the portion of their cup. 1. Pluet. He shall rain upon them when
they least think of it, even in the midst of their jollity. As rain falls on a
fair day. 2. Or he shall rain down the vengeance when he sees good, for it
rains not always. Though he defers it, yet it will rain. 3. The punishment
comes to their utter subversion, as Sodoms fire. 4. This is the portion of
their cup; that which they must expect from him.
2. For the righteous God loves righteousness; his countenance does behold the
upright. And reward the just.
He bears him good will, and is careful to defend him.
The Prayer collected out of the eleventh Psalm.
IT is not unknown to thee, O merciful Father, to how many dangers, to how many
enemies thy elect people are exposed.

Our enemies drive us from our dwellings, and say unto our souls, as Fowlers
they pursue us, and suffer us in no place to build, or to be at rest. And when
they have chased us from house to home, even in this obscure place they give us
no respite, To those streits and miseries we are brought, that we know not what
to do. All our fortunes are decayed, all our strong holds taken, all outward
helps fall us, the very foundations of our hope and help is perished, when that
Religion, truth, and service, in which we were wont to glory and rejoice, is
taken from us. Yea, those very Leagues, Oaths, Covenants, which they have given
us for our security, they have nulled and broken off from their necks, and cast
away thy cords from them.

O Lord, what shall the righteous do? what shall he say?

O Lord, thou art my God, in thee will I trust, who art able to do all things,
try, and gently correct the righteous, but the wicked, and him that loves
violence, thy soul hates.

For as the fairest day is overcast with clouds, and thunder, and lightning
suddenly break out from abova, and affright, and involde the world in an
unexpected Tempest. So will thou, O Lord, though thou defer thine anger, rain
down vengeance on the wicked in their greatest jollities, when they think not
of it, and promise to themselves the fairest days, and are in greatest
security. Thou will cast down snares and take them, a sudden fire and brimstone
shall destroy them, as it did Sodom, the storm and tempest of thy fury shall
overwhelm them. This is the portion, this their reward, this their lot, which
thou have measured to them out of thy cup.

But I know thou art in thy Temple, love righteousness, and thy countenance
does behold the upright. A just God thou art, and a lover of justice and just
men, and thou will set thy face to do good to those who are upright in thy
eyes. These thou will love, their cause thou will defend, their persons thou will protect, for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PSALM. XII. The Sum is, A prayer of David to God to save and help him, and
keep him from the deceits and contagion of the wicked, of which the world is
too full.
THERE be four parts of this Psalm.

1. A Prayer, and the reasons of it, verse. 1, 2. 2. A Prophecy of the fall of
the wicked, or an Imprecation, verse. 3. whose arrogance he describes, verse. 4.
3. Gods answer to David's Petition, with a promise full of comfort, verse. 5. for
it is tatified, verse. 6. 4. A Petitory Conclusion, Keep them, thy people; or a
confident affirmation, That God will keep them from the contagion of the
wicked, verse. 7. Of which there are too many, verse. 8.
1. The first part. He calls for help.
His Petition is brief and jaculatory, for he breaks upon God with one word,
Help, or Save Lord, verse. 1. Of which he gives two reasons, 1. Because good men
are few.
The penury and scarsity of good men: For the godly man cease, for the
faithful fail from among the children of men. There is neither piety nor
fidelity among men. 2. The bad many.
The great abundance of the wicked, the licentious times, the perfidiousness,
hypocrisy, and dissimulation of the men with whom he lived: They speak vanity
every one with his neighbor: And those double hearted.
They mind not to perform what they say.


2. The second part.
The Prophecy shows what shall be the end of their dissembling: The Lord shall
cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things: Or if
it be the Imperative Mood, And Atheists, whom God will cut off.
it is an Imprecation, Let the Lord cut off, etc.

And in the fourth verse he depaints their pride, and sets out this tongue,
speaking Magnifica. Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips
are our own, who is Lord over us? we acknowledge no Superior.

3. The third part. For God answers, that
Gods answer to David's Prayer, Help Lord, Save Lord. Is it so, that the wicked
are thus numerous, thus tyrannous, so proud, so arrogant?

1. I will arise, says the Lord. 2. I will not delay. Now I will arise. 3. And
I will set him, my servant, in safety from him that puffs at him. He will
help the oppressed.
4. And that which moves me to it, is, the pitiful condition he is in, his
sighs, his groans. For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the
needy now I will arise, etc. 5. And of this no doubt to be made. For his word
is passed for it, in which no fallacy.
Has he said it, and will he not do it? There Is a Probatum upon all he has
spoken. The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, purified seven times. There can be no more fallacy in what he has
spoken, than there is dross in the purest silver. I am confident then the
answer he has given in the former verse, he will perform.
4. The fourth part. David Prays, or is confident
The Conclusion is Petitory, as some read it, Keep them, O Lord, preserve them.
Others read it in the future tense, Thou shall keep them; and then intimates
David's confidence of Gods care and protection over his people, that in the
overflowings of wickedness they shall be kept from contagion.

1. That God will keep his.
Keep them. For, without God keep them, they will be infected. 2. Keep them
from this generation. For there be a generation of Vipers. 3. For ever make
them persevere. For without thy aid they will fall. From the wicked that then
bore sway.
4. And keep them. For the power, and pride, and tentation of impious men is
great. 1. The wicked walk on every side. As Wolves, they seek whom they may
devour. 2. And wickedness is the way to preferment. The vilest men are exalted.

The Prayer collected out of the twelfth Psalm.
O Heavenly Father, since we must have our conversation in this world where
there is a penury and want of good and pious men, but great multitudes and
plenty of wicked and ungodly wretches, suffer us not, as we deserve, to be
corrupted by their vices and manners, to be drawn into any sinful and base
action by their examples, or oppressed by their malice and fury. They speak
vain words every one to his Neighbor, whom he is bound to love as himself, and
not deceive, they flatter men to sin, and to cast in their lot with them, with
their lips are deceitful, and they dissemble with their double heart, speaking
one thing, and intending clean another. This they do to gain a party, and to
keep up their power; But having compassed their desires, then they swell with
pride, and do what they list; they say, With our tongues,

Now, O Lord, for the oppression of the poor,

The promises of men are like themselves, fallacious and vain, but thou can
not lie. Have thou said, and will thou not do it? Thy words are pure words,
farther from deceit, than silver is from dross, which is tried in a furnace of
earth, and purified seven times in the fire. Make good then thy Word, and
ratify thy promise.

Help us then now, O Lord, and save us; keep thy people, Amen.

PSALM. XIII. This Psalm is a fit Prayer for a soul that is sensible of Gods
Desertion.
THere be three parts of this Psalm.

1. A heavy and bitter complaint for Gods absence, ver. 1, 2. 2. An earnest
Petition for Gods return, ver. 3. the Reason, ver. 4. 3. A profession of his
faith and confidence, and joy in God, with his thanksgiving, ver. 5, 6.
1. The first part. He complains that God was displeased with him.
He bitterly complains, and aggravates it.

1. That God had forgotten him: Will thou forget me? 2. That he hid his face
from him: Will thou hide thy face? 3. That he was distracted with many cares,
what way to take, and what counsel to follow, I take counsel in my soul, having
sorrow in my heart. 4. His enemy was exalted, triumphed, and insulted over him.
And that his enemy insulted over him. And that yet God delayed his help.
5. And lastly, complains of the delay, which is quickened by the Erotesis, and
the Anaphora: Quousque, quousque, quousque! How long! what for ever?
2. The second part. He petitions that,
His Petition set down in the third verse; of which there be three degrees
opposed to the parts of his complaint, ver. 1, 2.

1. God would look on him.
Look upon me, or consider me; Thou have hitherto seemed to turn away thy face,
but once behold me, and show me one good look. 2. Hear him.
Hear me; Thou have seemed to have forgotten, but now I pray thee remember me,
3. Illuminate him.
Lighten my eyes; I have been vexed in my soul, and agitated various counsels
to recover thy favor; but do thou instruct me, and illuminate me, what course
I shall take.
Now that this his Petition might be the sooner heard, This Petition he
enforces:
he presses many Arguments.

1. From the relation betwixt God and him.
From that Relation that was betwixt him and God; O Lord my God hear me. 2.
From the event. 1. Death.
From a bitter event that was like to follow upon the repulse and delay, if God
heard him not, he should die, his heart failing him: Lest I sleep the sleep of
death. 3. viz. the boasting and insultation of his enemies; Insultation of the
enemy.
Lest my enemy say, I have prevailed against him, and those that trouble me
rejoice when I am removed: But though he were delayed, yet he despairs not;
for,
3. The third part. He yet despairs not.
In the close, the Prophet professes his faith, joy, thankfulness.

1. His faith; I have trusted in thy mercy. 2. My heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation. 3. I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with
me.
The Prayer collected out of the thirteenth Psalm.
Lord how long will thou so carry thyself toward me, as if thou had
altogether blotted me out of thy Memory; How long O Lord, as if thou were
angry, do thou hide thy face, and turn thy countenance from me, seeming to
have no care of me, or to show me the least favorable aspect? How long shall I
be in a doubt what to do, sadness and sorrow in my heart, while nothing
presents it self to my mind, that may ease my grief: Besides, my enemy thinks
that he has gotten the upper hand over me; O Lord, how long, shall he exalt
himself, insult, and cruelly, and proudly triumph over me?

It Is enough, it is enough, O Lord, that thou have turned away thine eyes from
me; it is enough,

In these great evils, in this agony of soul,

But, O Lord, though hitherto I behold outwardly no other things,

PSALM. XIV. Which is, Practical Atheists Character.
TWO parts there are of this Psalm.

1. The Description of the Practical Atheist, from ver. 1. to 7. 2. A Petition
for the Church, ver. 7.
1. The Atheist is here noted out to us diverse ways. The first part. The
practical Atheist described.


1. From his name, Nabal, a Fool, or rather a Churl; By his name.
no natural Fool, but a sinful; a Fool, in what he should be wise. 2. His
hypocrisy or cunning; He says, but he will not have it known, By his name.
it is to himself; he says in his heart; he is a close politic Fool. His
hypocrisy.
3. His saying, or his chief and prime principle, There is no God. His
principle, No God, which is manifested:
4. From his practice, confessing God in his words, for some politic
advantages, yet in his works he denies him; for, 1. His heart is wicked and
unregenerate; They are corrupt. By his corrupt heart.
2. He is guilty of the sin of Commission in a very high degree; They have done
abominable works. By his works, which are abominable.
3. And he is guilty of the sin of Omission; There is none that does good. This
in general, after the Prophet descends to some particulars. Never good. David's
conviction of the Atheist.


2. David demonstrates what he said, three ways, and convinces them.

1. By the testimony of God himself; for he brings him in as a witness against
them, and such a witness that cannot be deceived; for he is, 1. An eyewitness;
Prospectat, He looks on. By God, who is an eyewitness.
2. He is in Heaven above them, and by that advantage may see all; He looks
down from Heaven. 3. And all he sees, and is diligent to enquire, He looks from
Heaven upon the children of men. From heaven sees all.
4. And enquires into his actions.
And the end is, to enquire into their Religion, To see if there were any that
would understand, and seek after God.
2. They are all gone aside, And gives this testimony,
they are all become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. 3. In
general, that not one good.
And then in the next verse, he reckons up two especial sins of which they were
guilty, Injustice and Impiety. 1. For they eat up his people as bread. 2. That
they are guilty.
Impiety: For they call not upon God.
4. Of injustice.
Now that his testimony is true, he convinces them, 1. Of impiety.
By the light of their own conscience: An non sibi sunt conscii? Have they no
knowledge? By the testimony of their own conscience, which is naught, as,
Does not their own heart tell them all this is true? 2. By the effect, that
which follows an evil conscience, an extreme fear and horror: Trepidarunt,
trepidatione; They are always in an extreme fear; which shows, that all is not
well: They said there was no God: But for all that, The effects show, by which
he also convicts them.
their heart tells them, That God is in the Generation of the Righteous, and
they shall dearly answer for the eating up of his people. 3. An extreme fear
and horror.
that the man (whom they esteemed poor and contemptible) gave them: If any man
who had the fear of God before his eyes, chanced to say unto them, Their
desperate contempt of good counsel.
O my Brethren do not so wickedly, they scoffed at it, they made a mock at it,
and did all they could to shame him for it; if he replied, That God was his
Refuge; he, whatever they said to the contrary, 'trusted in God: They made
light of it, and were apt to return, He trusted in God, Nay, of God himself.
if he will have him: Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord
is his Refuge.

The second part of the Psalm, The second part.
contains a Petition for the Church, and an exaltation upon the favor
exhibited.

1. He prays for the Church.
Out of Zion, because Christ was set a King upon the holy hill of Zion, that
is, the Church. O that the salvation of Israel were out of Zion. 2. Of which
the consequent would be the joy of his people.
For then the consequent would be, the joy and rejoicing of his people for
their deliverance from captivity, spiritual and temporal.
When the Lord turns the captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice,
and Israel shall be right glad.

The Prayer out of the fourteenth Psalm.
O Most holy and undefiled Majesty, in comparison of whose purity, all other
things are impure, we miserable wretches conceived in sin, and born in
iniquity, do confess and acknowledge that we are laden with those fruits
growing from that bitter root; and that till we are born again by thy Spirit,
we are wholly corrupt in thy sight; the faculties of our souls are very much
wounded, There is no God; no God that knows, cares for, or will judge the
actions of men in this World; so averted we are from thee in our wills; that we
bear no affection at all to that which is good; though, to compass our own
ends, we profess to know thee in words, yet in deeds we deny thee; and such as
sends up a stinking savor into thy nostrils; there is not one of us that does
the good thou have commanded, not a man that understands, as thou have revealed
thy self in thy Word; or seek to honor thee, to fear thee, to put his whole
trust and confidence in thee; not a man that she we that love he ought to his
Neighbor.

O Lord, if thou shall look down from Heaven, Thou shall not see a wise man
amongst us; not a man that sets his heart seriously to enquire, and religiously
to seek after God: For we are all gone aside, we have been swayed by our
desires and lusts, and turned from thy ways to our own; workers of iniquity,
against the light of our conscience; we have oppressed thy people, and with
delight devoured them, as a man would eat bread, daily, easily, greedily: No
religious Bond is able to restrain us, for that God whom we should call upon,
we invoke not; that God whom we should honor, we worship not: Impious wretches
we are, and leaving then the Well of living water, we have dug to our selves
Pits that will hold no water, sacrificing to our own inventions, our own arm,
our own net.

For this our wickedness, thy just judgment has overtaken us, we tremble, and
are afraid, lest thou should utterly forsake us; thy presence is indeed in the
generation and company of the righteous; these thou do defend, and keep
secure from fear; but our conscience does so sharply accuse us, and the guilt
of our malicious wickedness so far load us, that we have just reason to fear
rejection from thy face, and the extremest of thy wrath and indignation:

But O Just God,

Send thy Israel salvation out of Zion, that place over which thy Son is King;
from the prison and bondage of sin, and from the cruel yoke which the Oppressor
has laid upon their necks; so shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

PSALM. XV. (...) Or, A Psalm of Doctrine, in which we have the Character of a
sound Christian.
TWO parts it has.

1. The first delivered in form of a Dialogue betwixt the Prophet and God, from
ver. 1. to 5. The first part. David's question, Who shall dwell?
2. The Epiphonema, in the end of the last verse.
1. The question proposed by David to God.

1. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? 2. Who shall rest upon thy holy
Hill? That is, because all are not Israel, Israel; therefore David asks of God,
The answer made by God, containing the Notes of a good man.
who shall dwell as a true Member in the Tabernacle, or the Church Militant?
and who shall rest in the Church Triumphant?
2. To which question God returns him this answer, containing very remarkable
Notes of a lively Member of the Church. In general.
1. In general; he is such a man, who is, Upright.
1. Upright in thought, has an honest heart: He that walks uprightly. Just.
2. Just in his deed: He works righteousness. True.
3. True in his word: He speaks the truth in his heart. Who eschews evil; for
he is not:

2. In particular; he is such a man who escheweth evil: 1. In himself: 1. He
back-bites not with his tongue. 2. A slanderer, etc.
He is no wrong doer; Nor does evil to his Neighbor. 3. He takes not up a
reproach, etc. 4. He is no favourer of sin; in whose eyes a vile person is
contemned. 5. He loves good men.
He is no oppressor or extortioner; He puts not his money out to his poor
brother to usury. 6. He takes no reward against the innocent.
2. He keeps his word.
Such a man he is, That honors them that fear the Lord. 3. The second part.
His reward, eternal salvation.
That swears to his own hurt, and changes not: He will be sure to keep his
word; Piety and Charity is his Character.



2. The Epiphonema has it in these two points.

1. He that does these things: For the doers of the Law shall be justified: 2.
Haec omnia haec. 2. The promise made to him; He shall never fall: The life of
Grace, is the way to the life of Glory. Potest in momentum movere, sed non in
aternum. Resurget.
The Prayer out of the fifteenth Psalm, that we may lead a life worthy of a
Christian.
O Merciful and Bountiful God, thou sole giver of Grace and Glory, who have
made thy Tabernacle on Earth,

Give us Grace,

Suffer us not with our tongues to detract from any man's good name and
reputation;

Never let us respect any man's person if wicked, highly honor and love all
those that fear the Lord.

Make us faithful in our promises,

Since those that do these things shall never fall, or be removed from thy
favor and presence, vouchsafe to give us thy grace, that our poor souls (being
purified from vicious habits, and adorned with these Robes of Justice, Truth
and Charity, and sanctified by the merits of thy dear Son) may live with thee
eternally in Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XVI. Mictham David; David's precious Jewel, or Psalm of Gold, literally
to be understood of David, but primarily and principally of Christ, Acts 2.
whom he calls Chasid, Gods Holy One, ver. 10. and foretells his Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, ver. 9, 10, 11.
TWO parts there are of this Psalm in general: 1. A Petition, ver. 1. The first
part. David's Petition for conservation.
2. A Thanksgiving, ver. 7.


1. The Petition begins the Psalm, it is for preservation: Preserve me O God; He
persuades it.
guard me, guide me, keep me: To persuade God to this, he produces his Reasons.

1. His confidence: For in thee I trust, this is a powerful plea; By his
confidence in God. 2. That his God
for to trust God, is the highest honor we can do him, it sets the Crown on
his head. 2. His relation: O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, 3. For this
I would show my self thankful, and return thee best of my best: But what can I
give, save (...). My goods, or goodness; my benificence, or bounty, is nothing
unto thee: By his charity to the Saints.
Sacrifice thou need not, Psalm. 50.8. Nor art delighted in them; but mercy
thou requirest, Hosea 6. 4. Then I will seek out thy Receivers, Thy Saints that
are in the earth. David's bounty, and his delight: In whom he delights.
Illustratur a contrario. But not in wicked men and Idolaters.
But my liberality and charity shall extend to the Saints that are in the
earth, and unto such as are excellent, in whom is all my delight. 5. But as for
wicked men and Idolaters, I have no delight in them, they shall not partake of
my bounty and goodness, rather the contrary. 1. They hasten after another god,
or endow another god; They spare no cost, but are lavish in endowing their
gods: Israel part with Jewels, etc. 2. They offer their children to Moloch;
therefore, 1. Their sorrows shall be multiplied: I will punish them. 2. I will
not partake with them: Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer. To the
Saints he would be liberal, because God had dealt liberally with him.
3. But detest them: I will not take up their names with approbation within my
lips, ver. 4.

6. And yet he gives another Reason, why he would show himself so thankful to
God, and bountiful, and liberal to his Saints; it was Gods great bounty and
liberality to him. 1. That God had set him out his portion, and it was
satisfactory: The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, and my cup. 2. That
God defended him in it: Thou maintainest my lot; ad corroborandum. 3. And it
was a fair portion: The lines are fallen unto me in a fair ground, or pleasant
places: yea, I have a goodly heritage: Goodly indeed, for it was a Crown.

2. The second part of this golden Psalm, is, David's Thanksgiving; it begins,
The second part. David gives thanks.
I will bless the Lord, not only for those temporal blessings formerly
mentioned, but rather for these spiritual following.

1. For illumination.
For the illumination of my mind, that I may understand the thing that is
right. I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel. 2. For Sanctification.
For my sanctification: My reins instruct me in the night seasons, when I am
most retired; This is the way, walk in it. 3. For his perseverance.
For my confidence and perseverance; I say, the eye of my faith full upon him,
without irregular affections and passions. 1. I have set the Lord always
before me; I do not forget him. 2. Because he is at my right hand; to help me,
that I fall not. 3. I shall not be moved. Satan may stand at my right hand to
resist and trouble me, Zach. 3.1. But God is on my right hand to assist and
deliver me,
4. His joy in it.
For that joy I find in me; I am in a good plight, as much as heart can wish,
or need require; therefore my heart is glad; wicked men rejoice in appearance,
And for his assurance: 1. Of the Resurrection by Christ.
their joy is but skin-deep, but David's is deeper, his heart, glory, flesh
rejoices, spirit, soul, body overjoyed; the cause is, The Resurrection of the
Body. Resurgam. 1. My flesh shall rest in hope, or dwell: In this world, as in
diversorio; in the grave, as repositorio; in heaven, as in (...), a Mansion. 2.
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell. My body, say some, in the grave, but there
is more in it. 3. Neither will thou suffer, Chasid, Thy Holy One, to see
Corruption; the Messiah, that is to come out of my loi^s. Christ's Resurrection,
is the cause, Job 19.25.
5. And eternal life, which he illustrates.
The promise of a future life, which is here illustrated. 1. From the quantity;
Fullness of joy. 2. From the quality; Pleasures. 3. From the constancy and
honor done us; At thy right hand; and his hand is strong, and none can take us
out of it. 4. From the perpetuity, duration, continuance; for evermore. 5. From
the cause; the presence, sight, beatifical vision.

Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and
at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

The Prayer out of the sixteenth Psalm.
O God, thou have been a merciful God unto me through my whole life, and
bestowed upon me many spiritual and temporal blessings, which thou have denied
to many of thy better servants;

But upon these outward things I set not my heart, for can a man be profitable
to his God, as a man that is wise, is profitable to himself? The sole way that
I can honor thee with these outward blessings, is, by doing good to the
Household of faith; make me therefore carry a charitable mind, set my delight
upon the Saints that are in the earth, and upon such as excel in virtue; for
these thy Son has suffered, for their salvation he shed his blood, in these
thou delightest, and let it be my delight then to do them good.

Increase to that end, that I may yield to thy holy inspirations, let thy
Spirit, that continual spring of comfort and counsel, dictate and suggest unto
me what I ought to do, and to choose that good part that shall never be taken
from me.

I know, O Lord, that they who depend upon lying vanities, join with them in
their bloody offerings, nor let their names be mentioned by me, or come within
my lips with approbation and honor; These are enemies unto thee, O Lord
preserve me from them; and I know thou will preserve me, I put my trust in
thee; Thou art my Lord, I have set thee always before me,

So shall I have cause to bless thee, and rejoice in thee: while I remain in
the Land of the living: And when this Tabernacle in which I sojourn shall be
taken down, and I gathered to my Fathers, in hope of a joyful Resurrection; for
I am assured, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, I am a Member of that Body
whereof he is the Head, he the Redeemer, I one of those that he has redeemed,
and therefore I hope to see God in my flesh, and to see him, not with other,
but with these same eyes.

Confirm me in this hope, strengthen me in this faith, the path of life; while
I live here, conduct me in the way of grace that leads to glory, where in thy
presence I shall have fullness of joy; I shall see thee face to face, and enjoy
that happiness in a full measure, which nor eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither can enter into the heart of man to understand; neither shall this joy
admit of any end or satiety; for at thy right hand there is pleasures for
evermore. This happiness O Lord is only in thy power to bestow, vouchsafe
therefore to give it unto us we beseech thee, for the merits of thy only Son
our Savior Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XVII. David's Appeal to God in justification of himself; and his Petition
for defense against his Enemies.
THERE be three parts of the Psalm.

1. A Petition; 1. For Audience, ver. 1. ver. 6. 2. For perseverance in good,
ver. 5. 3. For special favor, ver. 7, 8. 4. For deliverance at this time
especially, v. 13, 14.


2. A Narration, in which we meet with. 1. His Appeal to God, and his own
justification ver. 2, 3, 4. 2. The Reasons of it, his Enemies, and their
Character, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.


3. A Conclusion, which has two parts; one belonging to this life, and the
other to the future, ver. 15.

1. He begins with a Petition, and it is for Audience; The first part. He
petitions for Audience.
and he persuades it upon two Reasons: 1. The justice of his cause: 2. The
sincerity of his heart: 1. Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear
unto my prayer: 2. That goes not out of feigned lips; it comes from a sincere
heart, and not from the lips only, And gives the Reasons.
therefore hear it.

2. Then again there be other Reasons why I desired to be heard.

1. I am apt to slip and fall from thee, Hold up my goings, etc. 2. The danger
I am in, is great; and it must be a strange miracle, Show thy mavelous loving
kindness. 3. My Enemies insolent and mighty, and thy Sword only can deliver me;
The second part. He appeals to God as his Judge.
Arise O Lord, disappoint him, and cast him down, etc. ver. 13, 14.
2. His Appeal to God; since a verdict must pass upon me, Let my sentence come
forth from thy presence; for I know that thou art a just Judge, swayed with no
prejudice; Let thine eyes behold the things that is equal; and then I am
assured it will go well with me: For thou have before this time taken me to
task, Being conscious of his innocence.
and have found nothing, and I am resolved that thou shall find nothing;
nothing as touching that cause that my Enemies allege against me.

1. Nothing in my heart: Thou have proved my heart. 2. Nothing in my tongue:
For I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. 3. For concerning the
works of men, which are mischievous, by the words of thy lips; I have had so
great regard to that which thou have expressly in thy Word prohibited, That I
have kept my self from the paths and wicked ways of the Destroyer; of him,
that to satisfy his own lusts, breaks all Laws: Perfasque, nefasque, ruit. 4.
And yet desires assistance.
I confess indeed, that I am a poor, weak, and infirm creature, apt to fall as
other men, Hold up my goings in thy paths, that I slip not.
And this first Petition he renews again, He renews his Petition.
I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me O God: Incline thine ear to me,
and hear my speech. And he puts in a special Petition, which has two parts or
clauses.

1. Show thy mavelous loving kindnesses: More than ordinary, which he
persuades from the person of God: O thou that savest by thy right hand them
that put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them. 2. Keep me
as the apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
And to persuade this, And persuades it from the quality of his enemies.
wicked men, deadly enemies, whom he describes.

1. Capital enemies they were, and they oppressed him, They compassed him
about. 2. Men enclosed in their own Fat, with their mouth they speak proudly:
They insult and threaten him. 3. Their counsels were fixed, and bent to ruin
him: Figentes lumine terram. 4. like a Lion, etc. ver. 12. 5. ver. 14. They are
men of this World. 2. They have their portion, and look for no other in this
life. 3. Their bellies are filled. 4. Their children are many. 5. And they
leave off their substance to their Babes. Therefore he petitions the third
time, ver. 13. Arise O Lord, disappoint him, He petitions yet again. The third
part. 1. Faith.
etc.
3. The Conclusion, containing the expectation of David, opposed to his enemies
felicity.

1. In the life: As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness. 2. In this
life to come; when I awake up; i. e. rise from the dead, after thy likeness, I
shall be satisfied with it.
The Prayer collected out of the seventeenth Psalm.
I Have called unto thee, O Lord, be not deaf to my prayer, but attend to my
cry, be favorable to the justice of my cause, and grant my petition which I
make unto thee from the bottom of my heart, and offer unto thee, not with
feigned and dissembling lips.

I know that thou art a just Judge, who art swayed with no prejudice, to thee
therefore I do appeal: Let my sentence come forth then from thy presence, and
look upon that which is equal betwixt me and my accusers.

For my innocence is not unknown to thee; for thou have proved my heart,
whether it were sincere or no, thon have visited me, by a night of crosses and
temptations; and often spoken unto me, and searched me out by many thoughtful
cogitations, which thou have sent into my soul, when deep sleep falls upon man:
Thou have tried me, as gold in the fire, by many a sharp tribulation, and yet
have not found any perfidiousness or malicious falsehood in me; for I have
purposed, notwithstanding the provocations and great pride and injuries which
cruel men have laid upon me, that my mouth shall not offend and blaspheme: And
though it be a difficult thing for flesh and blood, not to wish, and speak, and
return ill to such impious and injurious Malefactors; yet in all my life I have
had an eye to thy Commandments, and by the words of thy lips, I have kept my
self from the ways and works, and paths of those, who attempt to corrupt thy
Truth, and destroy thy Law.

But I do not impute this my innocence, Pharisee, proud ot it; for whatsoever
is in me good and virtuous, I attribute it wholly to thy grace and benignity: I
am a weak creature, as apt to fall and sin as any; I beseech thee therefore,
who by thy preventing grace have caused me to enter into the way of thy
Commandment, go along with me by thy concomitant grace in it: Uphold my goings
in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not; that nor my desires nor actions
deviate from the right way, and so I become worthy that thy talent of grace be
taken from me.

So many enemies I have, that lay wait to subvert me in this way, Let me be a^
dear unto th^e, and as safely kept, as the apple of the eye, protect and hide
me under the shadow of thy wings, with thy merciful care and tenderness, more
than the kind Hen does her little Chickens from the coldest showers, or the
scorching Sun, or the greedy Hawk or Vulture.

For behold, O Lord, our enemies breathing nothing but fury and death, with
their nets and snares, to catch and destroy us: On this only they fasten their
eyes, and bend their thoughts and counsels,

But thou, O Lord, have seemed overlong to sleep, Arise now therefore O Lord,
and show thy power, and come amongst us; Disappoint them, and cast them down,
and deliver our souls from the ungodly, who is thy Sword, and the Rod of thy
wrath, with which thou do punish thy disobedient and rebellious children.

Deliver us, O Lord, from the men of thy hand, for they shall receive their
portion in this world, in this short life; and though their mind is unsatiable,
yet their bellies are filled; their belly is their God, and their belly thou
fill'st with thy hid and choicest pleasures; they flow and abound in wealth and
delights, they have enough, and to spare, a multitude of children, to whom they
leave their superfluities and ill-gotten goods. And in this they place their
greatest happiness.

But, Amen.

PSALM. XVIII. Is David's (...), or Song of Triumph after his Conquest of all his
enemies, 2 Samuel 22.
IN which, He expresses what God is to him.
he first expresses what God is to his servants, to him especially. My Rock, my
Fortress, my Deliverer, etc.

2. The first part.
The effect it wrought upon him. 1. Love. I will love the Lord. The effect it
wrought in him.
2. Confidence. In him will I trust. 3. Invocation. I will call on the Lord.
The fruit of which was his safety. So shall I be saved from my enemies.

2.

1. The second part.
His danger was great. Sorrows of death, floods of ungodly men, sorrows of
hell, snares of death, these compassed him, made him afraid, prevented him,
came upon him at unawares, The danger he was in.
verse. 4, 5.

2. Very great. He flies to God.
He betook him to God. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my
God.

3. He shows the goodness of God to him, and his readiness to help him. He
heard me out of his Holy Temple,

4. Gods goodness for his escape. From Verse. 7. The manner, to Verse. 16. Verse.
16, 17, 18.
and testified his presence in a strong way, by Concussion of the earth.
Thunders, winds, tempests, darkness, thick clouds, hailstones, coals of fire,
lightnings, strange inundations.

5. He reckons up his deliverance, with the manner, and the causes.

1. He took, he drew me; and when the danger was greatest, for it was out of
many waters, from my strong enemy, from them that hated me, were too mighty for
me, that sought at unawares to surprise me. 2. He did it in a strange way. For
he sent from above. He brought me into a large place. 3. But then he was my
stay. And the causes that moved him to it, were, 1. Because he delighted in me.
2. verse. 20. to verse. 25.

6. Which extends to all good men.
And then ab hypothesi, from his own particular case, he takes occasion to
discourse in Thesi, that this is not true only in David's person, but shall be
verified of all, that are Innocent, as he was. Which he proves from the nature
and usual manner of Gods proceeding with good and bad men, from verse. 27.

With the merciful, thou will show thy self merciful, and with an upright man
thou will show thy self upright:

The third part. David's Victory amplified.
Now follows David's glorious victory. 2. The consequent upon it, from verse. 28.
to 46.

1. His victory, he expresses and amplifies many ways.

1. From the opposition that he conquered. Nor troops, 2. From Gods singular
protection. He was his Buckler. His Rock. 3. From the Armor, the nimbleness,
the military discipline and science, 4. from the safe custody, that in the
battle he received no wound. 5. From the success of the battle. He had his
enemies in chase, 6. From the greatness of his Victory, they fell under his
feet, subdues, their necks brought down, 7. From the cause, in which he takes
nothing ^o himself, Thou have girded me, etc. Thou have subdued. Thou have
given me the necks of my enemies. Which is indeed acknowledged through the
whole Psalm.
2. The Consequent upon this Victory, The consequent of the Victory, viz. The
enlargement of his Kingdom.
was the propagation and enlargement of David's Kingdom.

1. That before these Victories there was murmuring at him by the people, but
now being a Conqueror, they were all quiet. Thou have delivered me from the
strivings of the people. His Crown was quiet. 2. He was exalted to be the head
of heathen, Moabites, Ammonites, etc. served him. 3. Nay, a people whom I have
not known, Aliens shall serve me; nay, as soon as they hear of me, they shall
obey me, etc. 4. It Is true indeed, they shall dissemble in it, and do it for
fear, more than love, and take every occasion to fall off, and fade away: But
yet however, they shall do it, submit, and be content to serve me. The fourth
part. David's Doxology for his Victories.

The last part contains the main Scope and intent of David in this Psalm; which
is to celebrate and extol the Name and Mercy of God for his Victories: And it
has two parts. 1. His present thanksgiving. 2. And his profession for the
future.

1. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, verses he makes mention again of
his Victories, and attributes the whole success to God. 2. And he professes
that he will never cease to do it, Therefore I will give thanks to thee among
the heathen, 3. And he professes that he had great reason to do it. Great
deliverance gives he to his King. His, one of his own chaise. And shows
mercy to his Anointed. Uncto suo, to David: And not to David a lone, but to his
seed for evermore.
An (...), or Thanksgiving for some great Victory, collected out of Psalm 18.
O Lord, whose eyes are brighter ten thousand times than the Sun, thou, who
beholdest all the ways of the children of men, and wilt reward every man
according to his doings, We thy afflicted people have in the depth of our
sorrows cried unto thee, and thou have out of thy goodness saved us, and have
brought down the high looks of the proud.

The sorrows of imminent death, and the incursions of furious men, like
torrents of water, the snares they laid for us, made us afraid,

Lord, when thou wentest out against our enemies, when thou marchedst out into
the field against Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the Lord
also thundered from heaven, and the highest gave his thunder, hailstones, and
coals of fire. From Verse. 7. to 15.
He fought from Heaven, the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. O
my soul, thou have trodden down strength. For, O Lord, the Earth, the Heavens,
the Mountains, the lightning, the thunder, the dark and thick clouds, the wind
and rain, the bail-stones, and tempests, all have obeyed thy voice, and
conspired at thy command to the destruction of our enemies, to tear them, to
scatter them, to discomfit them. They were too strong for us,

What shall we give unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto us?
Assist us with thy Grace, and we will from henceforth keep thy ways, and not
depart from our God, His judgments shall always be before us, even from the
temptation of that bosome-sin with which we have been hitherto defiled. that
the Lord will reward us after our righteous dealing and integrity, according to
the cleanness of our hearts and hands in his eyesight.

We will therefore love thee, It is God that has girded and armed us with
strength, shut up in inexecrable difficulties, but thou have enlarged our
steps, and in these slippry places not suffered our feet to flide. In thy name
and power it is, that we have pursued our enemies, that our feet being not
wearied in the pursuit, we have overtaken them, that we have not turned again,
till we have destroyed them and consumed them; that we have wounded them, And
that we should do thus valiantly, it is not our strength and skill in War,
but thy goodness.

In their trouble and distress they cried to the Lord, we beat them as small as
the dust, which the wind whiffles away from the face of the earth, we cast them
out as dirt of the streets, which is trodden to nothing by the feet of every
passenger.

O Lord, deliver our King from the strivings, and tumults,

The Lord who lives, be His Rock, and blessed be His name, and let the God of
His Salvation be exalted. Avenge Him, Israelites, that bear any good will to
Zion, celebrate thee, O Lord, who art foorthy to be praised, and give thanks
unto thee among the people, and sing praises to thy name.

O Lord, send deliverance to the King, show mercy to thy Andinted, to restore
Him to His Throne and people, bless Him in His person, and bless Him in His
posterity for evermore. Amen.

PSALM. XIX. This Psalm is Doctrinal, and teaches us the way to know God. His
Glory is the Subject.
THERE be two parts of it. The first is Doctrinal. 2. Penitential. The
Doctrinal parts ^ath two Members.

1. The first member teaches us to know God by natural reason, even from the
book of the Creatures, from verse. 1. to verse. 7. 2. But because this way is
unsufficient to save a soul, therefore in the second part we have a better way
prescribed, which is, The Book of the Scriptures, whose excellencies are
described from verse. 7. to verse. 11.
The Penitential part begins at the twelfth verse. For since the reward to be
expected proceeds from the keeping of Gods Law, and David's heart told him he
had not kept it, therefore he beggs pardon and grace, from verse. 12. to 14.

By the Glory of God understand his Goodness, The first part. The Declaration
of God from the creatures, especially the heavens.
his Wisdom, his Power, in a word, all his Attributes, of which we have a
double Declaration.

1. A testimony from the Creatures, but especially the Heavens, whose
Magnitude, Beauty, Order, variety, perpetual motion, light, influences, etc.
declare that there is an Omnipotent, wise, good God, and Creator of them.
David begins, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows
his handy work. 2. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge, etc. 1. The Heavens then are diligent Preachers, for they preach all
day and all night without intermission. One day tells another, and one night
certifies another. 2. For there is nor speech, nor language, but their voices
are heard among them. 3. Their sound is gone through all the earth, and their
words to the end of the world.
3. the Sun, for which God in heaven has set a Throne, The Sun.
or Tabernacle, makes the fairest and clearest evidence or declaration, and
that three ways especially. 1. as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber. By
his splendor.
2. By his motion.
Germain Miles, as Math maticians teach. He rejoiceth as a strong man to run
his race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit is to
the end of it: and yet is not tired, nor weary. 3. By his heat. The second part.
By his strange and miraculous heat, that pierces even to the Minerals,
concocts, matures, enlives all things. Sol and homo generant hominem. Nothing
is hid from the heat thereof.

2. The Declaration by his Word. Which is commended
But because this Declaration is not sufficient to make man happy, therefore
has God made a farther Declaration, and revealed himself in his Word, the
Scripture, called here, The Law, which is here commended,

1. It is the Law of the Lord. 2. In many respects.
From the Sufficiency thereof. It is perfect. 3. From the Utility It converts
the soul, gives wisdom to the simple. 4. From the Infallibility. The Testimony
of the Lord is sure. 5. The Statutes of the Lord are right. Without
perplexities, ambiguities, sophisms, windings, turnings. 6. From the effect it
breeds in the Soul, it quiets the troubled conscience. They rejoice the heart.
Justificati pacem habemus. 7. From the purity of it. The Commandments of the
Lord are pure: they admit no feces of foul Opinions, nor give countenance to
any sin. 8. It enlighteneth the eyes, for it dispells all ignorance, doubting
of God, carnal security, diffidence, false worship. And makes us understand our
own deformities, defects, etc. 9. The fear of the Lord is clean. Other
Religions are polluted with humane inventions, strange Ceremonies, Sacrifices,
Worships, Lusts, Wickedness, gods. This not so, but the contrary. 10. From the
continuance of it. It is to be a perpetual standing Law. It endures for ever.
Aeternum Evangelium. 11. And therefore both.
From the truth and equity contained in it. True and righteous altogether.
Out of all which David concludes that it is both precious and sweet.

1. The price of it beyond the best gold: More to be desired it is than gold,
Precious. Sweet.
yea, than much fine gold; obrizo, the gold of Ophir. 2. The sweetness thereof,
beyond honey, than the honeycomb. 3. Yea, and besides all this, Moreover, by
them is thy servant taught; probatum est. 4. Nay, such is the fruit, benefit,
use of it, Beneficial to those that keep it.
That the observers of it are like to be well rewarded; no man shall serve God
for naught: For in keeping of them, there is Merces, a reward: 2. Ampla Merces,
a great reward.
3. But these last words set David to his prayers, What a reward, The third
part. Yea, but David kept it not.
a great reward, only to those who keep Gods Law? My conscience then tells me,
that the reward belongs not to me, for I cannot plead this observance; In many
things we sin all, and I among the many: There were but these ways to help
him, Confession, Petition for Grace and Faith, and these he makes use of.

1. An offender he was, known sins he had too many, This he confesses.
desiring to be quit of them, not only from the guilt, but the filth; Who can
tell or understand his Errors? Asks pardon.
Cleanse thou me from secret faults. 2. However so long as he carried about him
this body of sin, Begs grace against presumption.
yet he petitions for so much grace, that he may not maliciously offend: Keep
back also thy servant from presumptuous sins. 1. Because the effect would be
lamentable, sin would become a King, For then sin would domineer and reign in
him:
and reign in his mortal body, which is inconsistent with grace: Keep back,
etc. Ne, lest they get the dominion, the upper hand over me; command, rule, and
I obey, and become a drudge, a slave, a vassal to sin. 2. This is the great
offense, a sin not of a small size; And make him guilty of the great offense.
therefore keep back thy servant from these sins, and then however I be a
sinner, and guilty, yet I shall be innocent from the great offense.
3. Lastly, that his prayer be heard, he begs also; he prays for his prayer,
Let the words of my mouth, That God would accept his prayer:
and the meditations of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight.
And that which put him in heart, notwithstanding his many Errors, to do it,
to pray, to trust, to confess, was, because the Lord was his Strength, Who was
his Strength and Redeemer.
his Redeemer.

1. His Strength, his Rock, to keep him that he fell not. 2. His Redeemer, if
he did fall. In the words he coucheth two benefits: 1. Conservation: 2.
Acceptance of his person through Christ; and expresses his faith.
The Prayer out of the nineteenth Psalm.
O God thou art a gracious God to the sons of men, and because this is life
Eternal to know thee to be the only God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ; That man perish not in his ignorance, Thou have revealed thy self unto
him in the Book of Nature, and in the Scripture.

The Heavens declare the Glory, the Wisdom, the Goodness, and that ample wheel
of the Firmament bestudded with infinite variety of Stars of several
Magnitudes, does manifest, that they are the work of thy hands, and not of any
inferior power: They speak to us day after day, The constant and perpetual
succession of times and seasons caused by the uncessant motion of those great
luminaries, inform us, that there is a wise and infinite power that overrules
them: Neither do they speak thy glory in an unknown tongue, or whisper thy
power and wisdom in a low voice, or to some people only, but they proclaim it
in every Language and Idiom, they roar it louder than the voice of Thunder in
all men's ears; their constant and perpetual motion, their efficacy and general
influence is so admirable, and well known, that their direction is gone out
through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World.

But among all those celestial bodies, there is not any, which does so clearly
set forth thy Majesty, as that bright Globe of the Sun, in which thou have, as
it were, whose luster and splendor being far more beautiful than that of a
Bridegroom, whose motion is so swift, that in a few hours it comes from one
end of Heaven to another, and runs to the end of it again; whose heat is so
vigorous, that there is nothing hid from the power and virtue of it, proclaim
and preach to the World, that there is a wise and potent God, who by his power
made, and by his wise providence disposes, rules, and orders all things in
Heaven and Earth.

Thou then, O God, have not left thy self without witness, for the invisible
things of thee from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, even thy
eternal Power and Godhead being understood by the things that are made; whence
we confess, that we are left without excuse: For we ought to have been
persuaded by the authority and obedience of these thy Creatures, to love, to
honor, to fear thee, and to adhere unto thee alone; but wrethes as we are,
little regarding these good instructions, and instructors, we have followed the
counsels of our own hearts, and been seduced by our own vain imaginations, with
the Fool, we have said privately to our selves, There is no God.

But such was thy goodness and care of us an ungrateful Generation, that in
mercy pitying this our carelessness, and that which followed upon it, our
misery and deviation from thee, thou have set us over a better Tutour; from
whom we might not only learn to know thee, but a way to live well here, and a
way to live for ever; which is a perfect Master, and able to convert the soul,
this is a sure Teacher, and can make wise the simple: These thy Commandments
are pure, and admit no admixtion of false-doctrine, false-worship, These thy
Commandments are right, and rejoice the heart, settling a quiet conscience:
These teach us thy fear in sincerity and Truth, and they teach it for ever;
They enlighten the eyes, and keep us from the darkness of sin and ignorance.

Good God, so affect my heart with the love of thy Law, that I may desire it
more than gold, Grant good Lord, that I who desire to be thy servant, may be
taught by it, my reward, and have my reward in this present life, security, and
peace of conscience, and be refreshed by the comforts of thy holy Spirit, and
in the life to come live with thee in those Mansions, which thou have prepared
for those who keep thy Law, for ever.

But thou, O Lord, know the frailty of my flesh, how weak my endeavors are,
how imperfect my obedience: If none but the observers of thy Law shall be
rewarded, I must needs despair of a blessing, either in this, or another life;
in that the Errors of my life, which I know are very many, and those which I
know not, are numberless: How often do I commit that wickedness, which I ought
to leave undone, and omit those Duties which I ought to have done? How often
does vice steal upon me in the clothes of virtue; and Error and Falsehood in the
shape of Truth? Who can tell how often he offends? Therefore, O my good God, I
beseech thee of thy infinite mercy, cleanse me, and wash often these secret spots
of my soul with the rest, of which in particular I have no knowledge, yet my
conscience in general tells me, that of such I am guilty. And however so long
as I carry about me this body of flesh, keep me from presumptuous sins, never
suffer my will to be so overborn, that I sin against thee with a high hand;
though it dwell, yet let it not reign; though it remain, yet let it not
domineer and tyrannize in my mortal body: Thy servant, Lord, I desire to be,
and no vassal, drudge, and slave to sin; never then suffer it to have the
dominion over me; This is that great offense which is inconsistent with grace,
that turns thee to be our enemy, that excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven,
never, never O Lord, suffer me to be guilty of it.

Thou that hear prayers, to thee shall all flesh come; Let these words of my
mouth, and the meditation of my heart be always pleasing and acceptable to
thee: O Lord thou art my Rock, my Strength, hold me up, that through weakness I
fall not from thee. Thou, O sweet Jesus, art my Redeemer, and have bought my
soul with a dear price, that of thy precious blood; free me from the power of
sin, the sorrows of death, the power of Satan, and pains of Hell, and bring me
by thy Merits and Passion to everlasting life, that I may reign with thee for
ever.

PSALM. XX. Is a Form of Prayer delivered by David to the People, to be used by
them for the King, when he went out to Battle against his Enemies.
THERE be three parts of it.

1. A Vote, or Benediction of the People for their King, from ver. 1. to 5. 2.
A Congratulation, or Triumph of the People after the victory supposed to be
obtained, from ver. 5. to 9. 3. A Petition, ver. 9.
1. The Vote and Congratulation is directed to David's person, The first part.
by form of Acclamation; the particulars are, that he may have, 1. Audience in
his necessity: The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble. The vote of the people
for the King.
2. Protection: The Name of the God of Jacob defend thee. 3. Help and Strength
in the Battle: Send thee help, strengthen thee; Out of the Sanctuary, out of
Zion; either from the Sanctuary where prayers were made for him, so that they
desire their prayers may be heard for him; or, E Coelo. 4. Acceptance of his
person, offerings and sacrifices, as that of Abel, Oderetur omnia munera tua,
and holocaustum tuum in cinerem redigat. 5. Answer, concession and grant of his
Petitions: Grant thee according to thy own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel;
which is plainly set down in the next verse, The Lord fulfill all thy Petitions.
Which granted, they vow thanks.



The Vote being ended, they persuade that it may be granted, because it will
redound to Gods glory; for then they would show themselves thankful, and honor
him for the victory. 1. We will rejoice in thy salvation; or as some read it,
Do this O Lord, ut exultemus, That we may rejoice. In tua salute, referring it
to God, as the Author; or to the King, as saved. 2. And in the Name of our God
will we set up our Banners: Joyfully will we enter into the City, with
displayed Ensigns, and erect them triumphantly, as Trophies of the victory, to
the honor of our God.


2. Now follows the Congratulation and Triumph of their faith; The second part.
for they give thanks, as for a victory already obtained, for to their faith it
was certain. Before they prayed for Audience and Protection, They comfort
themselves by faith, that God will grant what they ask of him,
Now know I.

1. Of Protection: Now know I that the Lord will save his Anointed. 2. Of
Audience: He will hear him from his holy Heaven. 3. Of Help: Helping him with
the saving strength of his right hand.
And the certainty of their victory proceeded solely from their confidence in
God; to him they impute it wholly in the former verse, such was their
gratitude; which that it might be the clearer, they illustrate it by an
Argument drawn, a dissimili; they were not as the common sort of Soldiers,
that trust more to their Arms, than to their Prayers.

1. Amd the rather, because they trust not in their Ammunition: As most men do.
Hi in curru and in equis. Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in
Horses, as the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.6. 2. But we do not so, We will remember
the Name of the Lord our God. The use of Arms is common and lawful to good and
bad men, but the difference lies in the confidence: Here is an elegant
Antithesis. 2. And therefore the success was according, their confidence in
their Armor and Ammunition destroyed, They are brought down and fallen, The
third part. A short ejaculation.
but we are risen, and stand upright.
The whole sum of the Psalm, is repeated in this Epiphonema.

1. Save Lord. 2. Let the King, that is, Christ, bear us when we call.
The Prayer collected from the twentieth Psalm.
O Lord, which art King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and yet have commanded us to
make intercession for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: Hear the prayers of thy
Church which we send up unto thee for our King now in the day of his trouble;
Jacob from the fury of his brother Esau, protect him, and set him on high in a
safe place: Send him help from thy Sanctuary, strengthen and support him by
those prayers that are offered out of Zion for him: Remember, O Lord, those
fervent supplications and intercessions that are daily offered at thy Throne of
grace in his behalf, Grant unto him according to his own hearts desire, and
whatsoever he, for the advance of thy glory, piety, justice, and the good of
his people, shall request, that be pleased to hear, and deny him not the
request of his lips.

Our enemies put their trust in their Arms and Ammunition, being assured, that
a Horse is but a vain thing to save a man, neither shall he deliver any man by
his great strength; it is not these humane helps we put our trust in, but in
thy Name alone: Truly when thou shall perform this for us, as we trust thou will, then will we rejoice in thy salvation, and in the Name of our God will we
set up our Trophies of victory.

O let his enemies be brought down, That the Lord will save his Anointed, that
he has heard him, and the prayers that have been offered for him from his holy
heaven, and that he has restored him by the saving strength of his right hand.

Save Lord, save the King, the Church, and thy People: Let the King of Heaven,
thy Christ, our Jesus, whom thou have exalted to be Lord and King, hear us when
we call. Amen.

PSALM. XXI. The Peoples (...), or Carmen Triumphale.
THIS Psalm is the Peoples Thanksgiving after the Victory: In the former Psalm
they prayed for David when he went out to War; in this they praise God for the
Conquest God gave him over his enemies, and the singular mercies God bestowed
on him.

Three parts there are of it.

1. A general Proposition in ver. 1.

2. A Narration, which is twofold, from ver. 1. to 4.

1. An enumeration of the particular blessings bestowed on David, from ver. 1.
to 6. 2. An account how God would deal with his enemies, from ver. 6. to 13.
3. A Vow or Acclamation, ver. 14.

The Sum of the Psalm is contained in the first verse: The King shall joy, The
first part.
the King shall be exceeding glad: The joy of the King in Gods salvation.


1. The rise or object of it: The strength of God, the salvation of God.

1. His strength, by which he did subdue his enemies, contemn dangers. 2. His
salvation, by which he escaped dangers, fell not in battle.
2. The second part.
Then they make a large Narration of the goodness of God to David's person in
particular, of which the severals are these following.

1. God granted to the King what he asked with his heart and mouth: Gods
goodness to David.
Thou have given his hearts desire, and have not witholden the requests of his
lips. 2. He granted unto him more than he asked, was more ready to give, David
to pray: Thou preventedst him with the blessings of goodness. 3. He chose him
to be King: Thou have set a Crown of pure gold upon his head; in which God
prevented him, chosen him, when he thought not of it. 4. When he went to War,
He asked his life, which is most true in Christ, who was the Son of David, in
him his life and Kingdom is immortal. 5. A great accession of Glory, Honor,
Majesty; he was no poor, obscure King, now as at first; nor contemptible in the
eyes of the people, Saul or any King of Israel that followed; of which yet he
was not to boast, not in his power, not in his riches, wisdom, but in Gods
goodness: His glory is great, but in thy salvation, Honor and Majesty have
thou laid upon him.
All which are sum'd up under the word Blessing, in the next verse: And added
this to the blessing, that thou have given him a heart to rejoice in it: Thou
have made him exceeding glad with thy countenance.

6. The continuance of these blessings, which is another favor, David's
confidence in God: The cause, his trust in God.
For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most High he
shall not be moved.

2. Hitherto is the first part of the Narrative that concerned David's person in
particular; now follows the effects of Gods goodness to him, ab extra, and the
whole Kingdom in the overthrow of his enemies; The overthrow of his enemies by
God.
and necessary it was to add this, since no Kingdom, though abounding with good
Laws, Wealth, Subjects, prudently governed, can be happy, except it be
defended, and safe from enemies abroad. Now here their ruin and destruction is
described, and the cause.

1. God by David's hand would do it: Thine hand, the Sword of God and Gideon. 2.
He would certainly do it; Thy hand shall find out all thy enemies, and thy
right hand shall find out all that hate thee. 3. Thou shall make them as a
fiery Oven in the time of thy wrath, the Lord shall swallow them, etc. 4. Their
fruit shall thou destroy from the Earth, and their seed from among the children
of men. 5. Thou shall make them turn their back, when thou shall make ready
thine Arrows upon the siring against the face of them.
And at last the cause is added of this severity against them; The cause.
oppressed people, and the sharp revenge he will take upon their enemies: For
they intended evil against, and imagined a mischievous device, which they were
not able to perform: A great comfort this.

The Epilogue is an Acclamation, The third part. A Vote to Gods glory.
and it has two parts. 1. A Petition. 2. A Profession.

1. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thy own strength: Show thy self more powerful
than all Men or Devils in destroying the enemies of thy Church. 2. Their
thankfulness.
And we will be a thankful people; So will we sing, and praise thy power: 1.
Serva Regem and Populum. 2. Nos agemus gratias.
A Prayer for Kings, and all in Authority, collected out of the twenty first
Psalm.
O Lord, show thy mercy to the King that is now in great distress, and cast
aside by a stubborn, rebellious, and self-ended people: Call for him again, to
rejoice in thy strength, and to be exceeding glad of that salvation, which thou
alone, now he is deserted of all men, art able to send him against his
malicious enemies. Thou art the Lord of Hosts, and victory and success proceed
from thee; fight for him, O Lord, and fight with him, that he may be safe; and
being saved, rejoice; and rejoicing, ^^ng of thy Name all the day long.

With instant and fervent prayers he, what he shall desire with his heart, and
deny him not the request of his lips: With heart and tongue Petitions are
presented to thy Throne for him; hear, O Lord, length of days; let him live to
a good old Age, but of thy salvation, goodness and deliverance only: Set him a
blessing for ever to his people, and make him exceeding glad with thy favor
and countenance.

He has had often experience, that the help of man is but vain, that they are
all but weak and broken reeds, his trust only in thee; Thou art his God, and
the God of his Father, whose blood was shed to maintain thy Truth, through the
mercy then of thee the most High God; let him not be moved, much less removed,
as he places his trust in thee, so place him again in his Fathers Seat.

As thou have heretofore showed thy Power against thy enemies, and sly in the
day of Battle, and yet so let them not escape; for even then make thou ready
the arrow upon the string, and set them as a Butt to shoot at; prepare thy Bow
against the face of them, let them see with great grief the faces of those thou
have saved, and feel their arm.

For by their Treason and Rebellion against thy King, they are not able to
perform: Frustrate, O Lord, their counsels, and never let them be able to
perform them.

Raise up thy power, O Lord, and come amongst us; show thy self more potent
than all Devils and Men, who rejected our Kings, and do eat up, and oppress thy
people; so shall we sing and praise thy power.

PSALM. XXII. De Messia, ejus Passione and Regno.
THIS Psalm, though in some sense it may be applied to David, as a Type, yet
Christ is the thing signified, and therefore it is primarily and principally
verified of and in him; for he is brought in here speaking: First, complaining
of his dereliction; then showing his Passion, and the cruelty of his Enemies:
Thridly, entreating ease and deliverance from them: Lastly, Promising to his
Father thanks, foretelling the preaching of the Gospel, and the enlargement of
his Kingdom, by the accession of all Nations.

There be three chief parts of this Psalm.

1. Our Saviors complaint, and the causes of it, lively and prophetically
expressing his sufferings, almost through the whole Psalm.

2. His Petition and Prayer, that God would not absent himself, but deliver and
save him, ver. 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21.

3. His Thanksgiving, from ver. 22. to the end. David's, and in him Christ's
complaint of dereliction.


1. He begins with a heavy complaint of Dereliction in his extremity, and that
he could not be heard, though he roared and cried; which is thus pathetically
expressed and ingeminated; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The first
part.
why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring?

2. And that he might seem to have the more just reason to complain for this
desertion, God carried himself to him after an unusual manner; when other his
Saints called upon him, he heard them, he sent them comfort, which in this
distress he afforded not him. Martyrs si non eripuit tum non deseruit: His
case then was more grievous than any before: Nunquam dolor sicut; verses, Call
on me in the time of trouble, thee. For of this they that went before had
experience, and he was the same God still, and why then should not he be heard
and eased, why only deserted and cast aside.

1. God heard his other servants in extremity.
Thou continuest Holy, i. e. propitious and benevolous, O thou that inhabitest
the praises of Israel, dwell among the Israelites, help'st them, and thence
give them an occasion to praise thee.

2. Christ deserted.
Our Fathers trusted in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

3. They cried unto thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were
not confounded.

But it seems my case is worse than any man's. Vermis ego, non homo. And then he
expresses the extremity of his miseries by parcels.

1. Scoffed.
The scoffs and scorns put upon him. I am become the reproach of men, and the
despised among the people. 2. They express their scorns by words and gesture.
All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, and shake
their head, saying. 3. Insulted over. The second part. Yet trusts in God.
He trusted in the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, since
he delighted in him.
Now here he breaks off the Narration of his sufferings: and converts his
speech to God. Refutes their Irony, shows his confidence in God, and prays
assistance, by three Arguments drawn from Gods goodness to him.

1. Thou art he that tookest me out of my mothers womb. 2. That did make me
hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb,
thou art my God from my mothers belly. My Savior, Protector, Preserver. 3.
Trouble it near, and there is none to help: Therefore, Be not far from me.
And now he returns to the Narration or Story of the passion again. The second
part of the first part.
In which he sets forth the despite, cruelty, and rage of the Jews toward him,
whom he compares to Bulls, verse. 16.

1. The Jews rage toward him.
They apprehended him; to that end, as many Bulls they compassed him, strong
Bulls of Basan beset him round. 2. They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a
ravening and roaring Lion. 3. The Rulers.
Bulls and Lions, the chief Rulers, toward him, And people.
and now follows the Ravin of the Dogs the multitude: the people, they were
caetus malignantium, the assembly of the wicked; and being stirred up by the
chief Priests and Rulers, they compassed him, they enclosed him.
4. They Crucify him.
They Crucify him. And this his passion is expressed by an (...), foretelling
what Christ was to sustain in his body, his soul.

1. I am poured out like water: No part of my body has any consistency, The
passion described.
no more than water, that being poured on the ground, runs every way: Or else
my blood is poured out freely, and no more account made of the effusion, than
of water. 2. All my bones, being racked on the Cross, are luxated, and out of
joint. 3. My heart, at the sense of Gods wrath, is dissolved and melted like
wax at the fire: It is melted in the midst of my bowels. He was in an Agony. 4.
My strength, my radical humor, is dried up like a baked pot. 5. My tongue, for
thirst, cleaves to my jaws. Sirio. 6. Thou have brought me to death. 2. To the
dust of death. Dead. Buried. 7. And Crucified also. For he was to dye upon the
Cross. They pierced my hands and my feet. 8. My bones are so disjointed, that
they may be all told. I may tell all my bones. 9. And yet for all this they
show no pity, no compassion at all. For, 1. They look, and stare upon me. With
pleasure they behold my misery, which, (...), is an affection fit for the
Devil. 2. They part my garments among them, He prays as Christ did on the
Cross.


And he falls to Prayer again. Which in effect is the same with that
ejaculation with which Christ gave up the Ghost: Into thy hands, O Lord, I
commend my Spirit. The second part of the second part.


But, be not thou far from me, O Lord, O my strength, have thee to help me.
Deliver my soul from the Sword, my darling, that is, my soul from the power of
the dog. Save me from the Lions mouth,

The third part of the Psalm, is the profession of thanks for the delivery; The
third part. The thanksgiving for deliverance.
and it contains a clear Prophecy of the Resurrection of Christ, that having
conquer^d Death, and the Devil, he was to reign, and gather a Church out of all
Nations, which was to continue for ever. This is amplified 1. By a Public
Profession of this benefit received from God. I will declare thy Name to my
brethren. And again, Showed in the promulgation of the Gospel.
My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation, and I will pay my vows
before them that fear him. In which we have 1. The Propagation, Proclamation,
or Preaching of the Gospel. 1. Narrabo nomen: Brethren. Jacob, the seed of
Israel. The afflicted, the Meek. 2. By the place, In the midst of the
Congregation, In the Church and Gods worship there observed.
in the great Congregation, that is, in the Church, grown great by the
Accession of all Nations. 3. By the Worship they were to exhibit. Praise,
paying of vows. Fear. I will praise thee. My praise shall be of thee. I will
pay my vows, etc.
2. An Exhortation to his brethren, etc. to do this duty, To which he exhorts
Gods people.
For every one is not fit to take Gods name into his mouth. It is, Ye that fear
the Lord, the seed of Jacob, the seed of Israel, do ye praise him, glorify
him, fear him. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him with reverence.
Exhibit external, internal worship. 3. And to persuade to this, he gives two
reasons. 1. Drawn from Gods goodness, his acceptance of the Worship, Because
God will accepts is.
and hearing our prayers, and affording help when we call. For the Lord has
not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid
his face from him, but when he cried to him, he heard him. 2. This is the first
Reason: A second there is at the 26. verse, By the promises made to them.
which is the great good that should happen to those that believe and accept of
the Gospel preached to them. The Meek; i. e. the humble, the brokenhearted,
the penitent, the heavy-laden, those who are oppressed with the burden of their
sins, and astonished at the sense of Gods wrath. Three promises of comfort are
made unto them.




1. They shall be satisfied with the Gospel.
They shall eat and be satisfied: i. e. They shall be fed by the Word of the
Gospel, and the Sacrament, and they shall be satisfied with the glad tidings
thereof.

2. Celebrate the Eucharist.
They shall praise the Lord for this mercy, seeking his favor in his
Ordinances, especially the Eucharist. The Sacrifices of the New Testament, are
Sacrifices of praise.

3. Their conscience quieted.
Their heart shall live for ever. Their conscience being quieted, and pacified,
and freed from the sense of Gods wrath.

And now the Prophet goes on, These promises made to the Gentiles, as well as
the Jews.
and sets forth unto us the extension and amplitude of these benefits, that
they belonged not only to the Jews, but even to the Gentiles, by whose
Conversion the Kingdom of Christ was to be enlarged.

All the ends of the World.

1. Being warned by the preaching of the Gospel, and allured by these promises,
shall remember themselves, Who were to be converted.
consider of their lamentable condition in which they are, and deplore their
former estate, impiety, idolatry, etc. and the mercy of God now manifested to
them, being laid to heart.

2. They casting away their gods, and forsaking their lewd courses, shall turn
unto the Lord, from whom they have been alienated.

3. And embrace a new form of Religion.
And being converted, they shall embrace a new form of Religion under the
Gospel; All the Kingdoms of the Nations shall worship before thee.

Of which the reason is, All power is given to him. For Christ is exalted to be
King.
For the Kingdom, i. e. of the Church, is the Lords, and he is the governor
among the people.

And then he instanceth in two sorts of men that should become subjects of this
Kingdom. In effect all, Rich, and poor.

1. The fat upon the earth: that is, the wealthy, the mighty, Kings, Princes,
To whom the rich should be Subjects.
Great Men, are not excluded from the society of this Kingdom, and
participation of Grace. All they that be fat upon the earth, shall eat and
worship.

2. And the poor, penitents. Ezekiel. 27.30.
They also that go down to the dust: that is, who are poor, neglected, draw out
their life in misery, and sit, as it were, in the dust. Those that are
perpetual Mourners, and have perpetual dust and ashes on their heads. These
shall bow before him.

And, No man has quickened his own soul: Or, None can keep alive his own soul.

This clause is diversely read.

Moller. Et qui animam suam non vivificat. Vulgar. Et anima mea illi vivet.
Jun. Qui animam suam in vita non conservaverit. Musculus. Quorum nemo animam
suam vivificabit. Chald. Et anima impii non vivet. And therefore admits of
several interpretations, which read in the Authors.

3. And to be a perpetual King.
Lastly, He does amplify the greatness of this benefit, by the perpetuity of
Christ's Kingdom. It was not a Feast of one hour, but it was to continue.

1. A seed shall serve him. It shall be counted to the Lord for a generation, a
holy Nation, Whom his seed shall serve.
a royal Priesthood. 2. And when one generation was past, another should come
up to perform this Duty, They shall come, and declare his righteousness to a
people that shall be born. For ever.
Manebit semper Ecclesia. 3. Lastly, He concludes with the cause of all, why we
called, why justified, why sanctified, why saved. Quia ipse fecit. Ipse. God
the Author of all: This is Gods doing.
or if we read, That he has done it. Then it is to be a part of the
Declaration.
A Prayer collected out of the 22. Psalm, to be used by a disconsolate soul in
a spiritual Desertion.
O Heavenly Father, and most Merciful God, thou see that at this time I am a
man of sorrows, and beset with heaviness, thy comforts I now most need, and yet
thou seem to turn thy face from me. My God, whom I have always served, my
God, whom I have always trusted, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so
far from my help? why is it, that thou do not hear the words of my
complaint? O my God,

As water that is poured out upon the ground, and has no consistence: and I am
brought even to the very dust of death.

I looked about to see if any would pity me, a worm and no man, they stare and
look upon me, delighting themselves in my misery. Their words are bitter, their
gestures worse. They thus insult over me, nay blaspheme thee. He trusted in
God,

But O thou God of Israel, thou continuest propitious and benevolous,

Yet, O Lord, I am thy creature, be not far from me, for most grievous
trouble is near, and there is none besides to help me: none to mitigate the
pressnre of my calamities with any comfort. But O thou Father of Mercies,
defer no longer, but haste thee to help me; O Lord my strength, deliver my
soul from the Sword, my soul, I say, which is only dear to me, from the power
of the Dog. Save me from the Lions mouth, from my Adversary the Devil, and
hear me, and free me from the hands of Tyrants.

This if thou shall do for me, then I will appear before thee in the great
Congregation, then I will declare thy Name, thy Power, thy Goodness, to all my
brethren, to those who are bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, to all those
who are partakers of the same Covenant, and of the same spirit with me,

And I will call to my brethren to ioyn with me, O ye of the seed of Jacob,
that fear the Lord; and, O all ye of the seed of Israel, that imitate his faith
and piety, praise the Lord, glorify my and your God; fall low before him,
adore and worship him,

O Lord, thou heardst thy Son when he prayed for himself, hear him, we beseech
thee, My God, my God: Remember how for us he became the reproach of men, forget
not those Bulls, those Lions, those Dogs, that came about him to devour him,
and when they had brought him to the dust of death, O let not this blood be
spilt in vain, but for these sufferings unknown to us, but felt by him, have
pity upon us, and save us.

Since he has given his soul a Sacrifice for sin, Isa. 53.
divide him a portion with the great, and let him divide the spoil with the
strong, because he has poured out his soul to death, and was numbered with the
transgressors, and bare the sins of many, let him see his seed, let him
prolong his days, and let the pleasure of the Lord prosper in his hand: Since
he has borne our iniquities, and made intercession for the transgressors, let
him see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied, and let this thy
righteous Servant justify many.

Let all the ends of the world remember themselves, mourn and deplore their
former estate, lament for their impiety, and forsaking their lewd conversation,
be turned unto the Lord, and let all the kindreds of the Nations, instead of
the creature, worship the Creator. For thine, O Christ, is the Kingdom, and
Power, and Glory, and thou by the meritorious Death and Passion, to be the
governor among the Nations. A seed even of the Gentiles shall serve thee, they
shall be counted to the Lord for a generation. These are the meek upon earth,
these are the poor in spirit, these are the contrite and brokenhearted. To
these thou have sent the glad tidings of the Gospel, for these thou have
prepared a banquet of thine own flesh and blood. Oh give us grace so to eat thy
flesh, and drink thy blood, that we may eat and be satisfied, and being filled,
with joy of heart, we may praise thee, that we seek to thee, and please thee,
and our consciences being quieted, and secured by this repast, we may acquiesce
and live in the persuasion of thy peace and reconciliation for ever.

O let the fat on earth, the greatest, the richest, the mightyest Princes and
Potentates on earth, long after this food, and in testimony of their faith and
Religion, eat, adore, and worship. These, even these must go down to the dust,
for no man can keep alive his own soul. Let these then, together with all other
Mortals, bow their knees at the Name of Jesus, and come and eat this spiritual
meat, that they may live for ever.

Thou, O Jehovah, art our righteousness, our childrens children shall know,
that thou alone have done this for us, that thou have redeemed us, that thou
alone art the Author and Finisher of our justice and salvation, that thou
do justify, thou do sanctify thy people, and wilt save them by the
meritorious Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore for this
we will declare thy Name unto our brethren, we will praise thee, we will
glorify thee, we will fear, adore, and worship thee. Our praise shall be of
thee in the great Congregation, and we will pay our vows before them that fear
thee for ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM. XXIII. The Scope is, to show the Felicity of that man who has God for
his Protector, and is under his Care and Tuition.
FOR this Protection David in this Psalm congratulates, and expresses his
thoughts under two Allegories, the one of a Shepherd, the other of a
Free-hearted man, given to hospitality, and bountifully entertaining his guests.

Two parts then there be of it.

The first sets forth Gods 1. Care of him, in providing him with all
necessaries, in the four first verses. 2. And then his Liberality, in supplying
him abundantly with more than he needed, verse. 5. The second is his confidence
in Gods Grace, David's position or inference, what God would do for him, being
his Shepherd.
and his profession of thankfulness, verse. 6.
He begins the first part with this Position, or Assertion: God is my Shepherd;
and upon it infers, Therefore I shall not want. He will do for me, what a good
Shepherd will do for his sheep.

1. He will feed me in green pastures, verse. 2. The first part.
2. He will there provide for my safety. He makes me there lie down. 3. He will
provide waters of comfort for me. 2. He will feed, provide, etc.
And these waters shall be gentle flowing streams, still waters, not turbulent
and violent. 4. He will have a care to preserve me in health, if sick, he will
restore me. 5. He, ducit, he goes before and leads me, that I mistake not my
way. He leads me in the path of righteousness. Which is his love. For it is for
his Namesake. 6. Nay Reducit, which is my Security. If I err, and go astray,
(as it is possible, for a sheep is a straggling creature) yet I will fear no
evil: for he has a Rod of the Law to chastise me, and a Staff of Evangelical
promises to sustain me, and in both, Thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff
comfort me.
2. Thus as a good Shepherd he supplies me of Necessaries, But as a bountiful
Lord
that I want nothing, but over and above, as a bountiful-minded Lord, he has
furnished me copiously with varieties, which may be for Ornament, and my Honor.

1. He has prepared a Table before me, He provides him abundance.
and that in the presence of my enemies. 2. He has anointed my head with oil.
To refresh my spirits, 3. And my cup runs over with the choicest wine. He
glads my heart. The last Verse, The second part.
1. Sets out David's confidence, that it shall be no worse with him: For this
David expresses
Surely goodn^ss and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. 2. His
confidence.
Then expresses his thankfulness: And I will dwell in the house of the Lord
for ever. In thy house among the faithful I will praise thee for ever.
Thankfulness.

The Prayer collected out of the twenty third Psalm.
O Lord, I am that lost sheep, that strayed into the Wilderness, but thou in
mercy-hast gone after me, laid me on thy own shoulders, and brought me back to
the fold. Thou make me lie down in green Pastures, among the Congregation of
thy Saints, feeding and clothing my body, but refreshing more my soul with the
sweet, and rich, and wholesome Doctrine and promises made unto me in the
Gospel. Thou have also led me from the turbulent streams of a troubled soul, to
the still waters of comfort, confirming and raising my heart by the
consolations of thy Holy Spirit.

I acknowledge mine own condition; that in this valley of tears I am subject to
many dangers, though then I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
uphold me, that I fear no evil, be thou with me in all my tentations, chastise
me when I go astray with the rod of thy Fatherly correction, and when I am
ready to fall sustain me with the staff of thy Gospel-promises, let me be
sensible of thy arm whipping me, and thy hand embracing me, that from both I
may receive comfort.

Those that envy my happiness are many, prepare a Table for me, anoint my head,
and let my Cup run over, even in the presence of my enemies, and let them eat
their own hearts for envy, to see, that with so liberal and plentiful a hand
thou have imparted thy outward blessings to me. But these I weigh little in
comparison of thy Spiritual favors: O Lord, I beseech thee ever supply me
copiously with these. Thy Holy Word is a well-furnish'd Table of all various
dainties, let that be always prepared to my hand, and by meditation and
rumination always ready provided, that I may have whereon to feed my self, and
sufficient to nourish those that need it. There is the oil of thy Holy Spirit,
those Graces that flow from thee the God of Grace, O Lord, anoint my head with
this oil of Grace, and not my head alone, but my heart also, fortify my
understanding with truth, infuse goodness into my will, cheer up my affections
with charity, that cheerfully I may run the way of thy Commandments. Thou have
also prepared a Cup for me, the Cup of blessing filled with the blood of thy
Son, in which runs over a Sea of mercies to mankind, prepare me to receive
this cup, let me be a worthy guest at thy Table, that so some of the
overflowings of this cup, may stream also to me, and rejoice my fainting and
dying soul. This wine can alone make glad the heart of man, ever, ever let me
drink it to my comfort.

To this day I have had experience of thy bounty and preventing Mercy,
dangerous ways I am to pass, till it bring me, and set me safe in a place of
rest and happiness. In the mean time, I shall think my self happy, if I may
dwell in thy House, thy Church, among the company of thy faithful people here,
and with them sing praises unto thee; for that will put me in good hope, when I
shall pass from hence, I shall dwell with thee in that celestial house above,
and with them sing Honor and Glory to thee who sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

PSALM. XXIV. Of Christ's Dominion, and the Church: and his Ascension.
THE Subject of this Psalm is Christ, called, The King of Glory, verse. 7. And it
has two parts.

1. The first that concerns Christ's Lordship, which is in general over the
whole world, verse. 1, 2. But in particular, the Church, from verse. 3. to verse.
7. 2. An Exhortation to all men, to receive Christ for their King.
The first part of this Psalm shows, that God is King of all the world, The
first part. Christ's Dominion.
but in his Kingdom he has two kind of Subjects.

1. Either all men in general, For the earth is the Lords, Over all.
And of it he gives a reason, from the Creation of it. He ought to have the
dominion of it, For he has founded it upon the Seas, and established it upon
the floods.

2. But all are not his Subjects in the same way. There are a people, Over the
Church.
whom he has called to be his Subjects in another manner. A Mountain there is,
which he has sanctified, and chosen above all other Hills, to make the Seat of
his Kingdom, it is the Church, and over them that live in it he is in a more
peculiar manner said to be a Lord, than of the whole earth. And these are more
properly called his Servants and Subjects. And yet among these there is a
difference too. For some only profess to be his Servants, and call him Lord, as
Hypocrites; some other there are, that are his Servants really and truly. And
that this difference be taken notice of, the Prophet asks, Quis? And, Who shall
stand in his holy place? In which some of his Subject. are hypocrites
As if he should say, Not Quisquis. It Is not every one; for Infidels are not so
much as in the Church. Hypocrites, howsoever in the Church, are no true Members
of the Mystical Church, and some which come to the Hill of the Lord, yet stand
not in his Holy place; For many believe only for a season, and few continue
faithful to death.

3. That then it be truly known, Others true Subjects. Their Characters.
who they are over whom he is truly Rex gloriae, The King of glory. The Prophet
gives us their Character, and sets down three distinctive Notes by which they
may be known.

1. Cleanness of hands. He that has clean hands: a cade furto, etc. Clean hands
For the hand is (...). 2. Purity of heart. For external purity is not enough,
except the heart, A pure heart.
the Fountain of our actions, be clean. Hypocrisis est in cor consentiat. 3.
Truth of the tongue, is not guilty of lies and perjuries. A true tongue.
He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto
vanity: nor sworn deceitfully. After that the Prophet had given the Character
by which you may know the man, he then assigns his reward, and ends with an
acclamation. 1. Their reward a blessing.
This is he that shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness,
i. e. be justified, from the God of his Salvation. 2. This is the generation of
them that seek thee: i. e. These are the people of God: Because these are alone
the people of God.
let other boast themselves, and please themselves as they list, yet these are
the godly party, these they that seek thy face, O Jacob, i.e. O God of Jacob.

This part is an Exhortation to all men in the whole world, The second part.
especially Princes, Nobles, He exhorts all to receive Christ.
Magistrates, that they receive, acknowledge, and worship Christ as King.

1. Life up your heads, O ye gates, i. e. O you Princes that sit in the gates,
portae mundi, and the King of glory shall come in.

2. Which they deride,
Who is the King of glory? To which he answers, The Lord, strong and mighty,
the Lord, mighty in Battle. I tell you who he is, To their ruin.
one able to destroy you, and will destroy you if you reject him: For he is far
beyond all the strength and power of men. He is the Lord, mighty in Battle,
Dominus excercituum. And that his Exhortation pierce the deeper, he ingeminates
it with the answer, verse. 9, 10. I know this last part is otherwise
interpreted, and I dislike it not. See Bellarmine.

The Prayer out of Psalm 24. which was composed to be Sung on the Sabbath.
O Omnipotent God the Creator and preserver of the whole Universe, Zion, that
thou will dwell among these, be adored by these, and give a favorable answer
to the petitions that these shall make unto thee.

Of these thou requirest integrity, purity, fidelity. Clean hands, a pure
heart, These are the generation that seek thee, and to these thou have promised
thy blessing,

O Lord, who art the Savior of all those that seek and open to thee, I lift up
my heart to thee, being destrous to approach thy presence in the right place,
where thou may be found, and the right time, whilst thou may be found:
Open my dull ears, and hard heart, that thy Son, my Savior, that King of Glory
may come in and dwell with me. Grant me grace,

And, O Lord, give this Grace unto all Princes, that they shut not the gates,
nor of their Cities, nor hearts, against thy Son, when he would enter, and
bring the glorious light of the Gospel; rather let them set them wide open,
that there may be a free passage for the King of Glory to enter; for then thou,
wilt go forth with their Armies, and subdue before them their enemies.

O thou, who art the King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty, remember thy
dwelling place that now lies waste, and those doors in which we do hope
everlastingly to praise thee: By these we entered to offer unto thee our
supplications before thee, in these houses we were want to praise thee: But now
they are thrown down, desolate, and forsaken: Arise therefore, O Lord, thou and
the Ark of thy strength; build again the walls of Jerusalem, and set up the
gates of Zion, that thy people may enter in, and magnify thy Name, singing
with joyful lips, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

PSALM. XXV. This Psalm is a continued and earnest Prayer of a man pressed with
enemies, danger, and sensible of Gods heavy displeasure for his sin.
AND the several Petitions which he makes, may make the Partition.

1. His first Petition is, that his enemies triumph not over him, ver. 2, 3.

2. His second is for instruction, ver. 4, 5. which he urges, ver. 8, 9, 10,
12, 13, 14.

3. His third for mercy and forgiveness, ver. 6, 7, 11.

4. He inforceth and renews his first Petition, ver. 15, 16, 17, etc. with many
Arguments.

5. He prays for Gods people, the Church, ver. 22.

1. He prefaceth with the profession of his faith and confidence in God, The
first part.
which is the chief wing of all prayer: Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul,
He relies not on, nor seeks not after any humane helps; David relies on God,
and prays.
and upon this living hope he prays.

1. For his hope, that it shame him not, as it does, when a man hopes, That his
hope be not frustrate.
and is frustrated: Let me not be ashamed; make it appear, that I hope not in
thee in vain. 2. Let not my enemies triumph over me, glorying that I am
deserted; O let none that wait on thee, be ashamed; but let them be ashamed,
which transgress; that is, do me wrong maliciously, without any cause given
them by me.
2. Then he petitions for instruction, The second part for instruction.
that he may be so always governed and confirmed by the Word of God, that he
sink not under the Cross, but rely on Gods Promises.

1. Show me thy ways, and teach me thy paths; quicknest; set the Cross
before the Crown: Teach me, show me, that this is thy way. 2. Direct me in thy
Truth, and teach me: Make me remember that thy promises are firm and true; yea,
and Amen to those that trust in thee; this makes me hope still, Thou art the
God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the day.
3. The third for mercy.
He prays for mercy, and a remove of his sin that might obstruct it.

1. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, which have
been ever of old; 2. And remission.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my: ransgressions; This Petition he
repeats, ver. 11. For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity, and upon this
my confession; for it is multa or magna, great.
David here breaks off his prayer, Of which, that he may be the more assured,
he calls to mind Gods goodness.
and to confirm his confidence discourses of the Nature and Person of God;
even in the greatest fervency of our prayers, the greatness of our sins, the
unworthiness of our persons, the anger of God against sin come into our minds,
stagger our hope, and tell us we shall not be heard; no better way than to
confirm us, than to call to mind the nature and the ways of God with his
people, and this course David here takes; he says: 1. That he is good.
Good and upright is the Lord. 1. Good; for he receives sinners gratis. 2.
Upright; constant and true in his promises, therefore instruet, He will grant
me my request, 2. Favorable.
The meek he will guide in judgment; He will not suffer them to be tempted
above their strength, secundnm rigorem juris, 3. All his ways mercy and truth.
In a word; All the ways of the Lord are Mercy and Truth: Mercy, in that he
freely offers remission of sins, the graces of his Spirit, government in this
life; mitigation of our calamities, and at last a discharge from them, and
eternal life: Truth, in that he will perform what he has promised: To those
that keep his Testimonies.
Non est mendax sed verax: But with this caution, that men perform with him;
for it is unto such as keep his Covenant and Testimonies; i. e. in faith and a
good conscience walk before him; the Covenant being this, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed; upon which follows, Walk before me, and be thou
perfect. 4. David repeats his prayer: Upon which he repeats his prayer.
For thy Name sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity, for it is great; Multa and
magna.


And yet David proceeds in the consideration of Gods Nature, his Goodness, his
Truth and Mercy to those that keep his Covenant; And admires the happiness of
him that trusts in God.
and by way of admiration asks, Quis, i. e. Quantus and qualis: O how happy,
how blessed is the man that fears the Lord, worships God, loves his Word, and
casts not away his hope and faith in the day of trouble and tentation,

1. For God shall direct him.
Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. 2. He shall dwell at ease.
not molested, but quiet: His soul shall dwell at ease. 3. Happy in his seed.
A third is, that he shall be happy in his children and posterity: His seed
shall inherit the land. 4. The fourth is, that Redemption of Mankind by the
blood of Christ, and all the effects of it, Remission, Reconciliation, etc.
which is a secret unknown to flesh and blood, shall be revealed and applied to
him: The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Gods Covenant applied
to him.
and he will show them his Covenant.
Being confirmed with these promises, and cheered with these fruits, he, The
fourth part.
1. Testifies his acquiescence and faith in God for deliverance: My eye^ are
ever toward the Lord; he shall pluck my feet out of the Net. In this he
acquiesceth.
2. And then returns to his Prayer again, being in effect the very self-same
that he began with; which he offers in several Clauses. 1. Turn thee unto me.
He renews his former prayer.
2. Have mercy upon me. 3. O bring thou me out of my distresses. 4. Look upon
my affliction and trouble, and forgive me all my sins. 5. Consider mine
enemies. 6. O keep my soul, and deliver me. 7. Let me not be ashamed. 8. Let
integrity and uprightness wait upon me.



Petitioners and men in misery think that they can never say enough; this makes
him so earnest, and so often repeat the same thing; in which longing, there is
yet an incrementum: The sum is, That God would hear, and grant him defense and
deliverance in his dangers, remission of sins, which caused them, and protect,
direct, and govern him in his troubles.

Now that he might prevail in his Suit, as an excellent Orator, And uses many
Arguments that God be propitious to him.
he uses many Arguments to induce God to be propitious to him.

1. His faith and trust in his promises: Min^ eyes are ever toward the Lord.
2. The danger he was now in: His feet were in the Net. 3. He was oppressed and
alone, had none to help him: I am desolate, 4. His inward afflictions and pain
was grievous: The troubles of my heart are enlarged; by which he was
distressed, in pain, in sorrow. 5. And without his enemies, powerful, many,
merciless, cruel, My enemies are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred. 6.
And yet I am an Innocent, and desire to be so, thy servant: Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, for I wait upon thee.
And thus David having through the whole Psalm prayed for himself, He prays
for the Church. The fifth part.
at last in the close, he offers up a short, but earnest Petition for all the
People, and for the whole Church; which proceeded from that (...),

Redeem Israel, O God, out of all their troubles.

The Prayer collected out of the twenty fifth Psalm.
UNTO thee, O Lord, I do lift up not only my eyes and hands, My sin is very
great, more in number than the sand, heavier in weight than the greatest
burden; O pardon my iniquity for thy Name sake. The offenses of my younger
years are over-many, Remember not the sins of my youth, of my unruly and
unbrideled Age; but according to thy mercy think thou upon me, blot out of thy
remembrance my abominations, and remit my crying exorbitances, for thy goodness
sake, O Lord.

O Lord, Thy Goodness and Mercy is showed, Thou art the God of my salvation,
from thy Mercy I look for my Instruction, Show me thy ways. and reach me thy
paths, and lead me in thy Truth: I am a man of a broken and contrite spirit,
guide me in the day of Judgment,

These my sins have procured me many enemies, and thou have justly raised up
these Rebels, to revenge my Rebellions against thee; with these I am so
compassed, But mine eyes are toward thee, O Lord; and except thou pluck my seet
out of the Net, I must needs perish in the snares that they have privily laid
for me: of all humane help, left alone by my friends, and afflicted by my
enemies: my sins are represented to me in the largest manner, my distresses are
instant, my pain grievous, for which I openly confess, I have justly deserved
to suffer what I now feel and complain of.

Make it known, see and confider the multitude of my enemies, who hate me with
cruel hatred, and persecute me without any just cause; for though I have justly
deserved at thy hand those things which I suffer, yet to them I have done no
wrong, neither do they pursue me in revenge of my sin, but merely out of malice
and envy, serving and gratifying their own lusts, not any way intending thy
Glory.

O keep then my soul, which they seek to destroy, and deliver me from their
multitude and injustice; For it will derogate from thy glory, that any that
trust in thee, be frustrated of their expectation; but frustrate their
counsels, and let them be ashamed of their undertakings, who without any just
cause given them,

Redeem Israel, is thy people that thou have chosen; Israel the people that
thou have bought and purchased with thy own blood; many troubles and enemies
they have, for them I pray, and not for my self alone: O Lord, deliver them for
thy Names sake, and for thy Sons sake, out of all their afflictions and
pressures. Amen.

PSALM. XXVI. David's Appeal to God to vindicate his Innocence.
THE parts of the Psalm are, 1. An Appeal of David to God, to be his Judge,
ver. 1, 2. 2. The causes that induced him to it, his integrity especially. 3. A
Petition, ver. 9, 11. 4. His Gratitude, ver. 12.


He begins with his Appeal to God, David appeals to God to be his Judge.
whom he knew to be a just Judge, and therefore desires to be dealt withal, in
forma juris; Judge me O Lord, examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try out my
reins, and my heart.

2. Then he assigns two causes of it; his integrity and his faith.

1. His faith and confidence was such in God, Upon his, 1. Faith.
that he knew that the Judge of all the World would do him right: I have
trusted in the Lord, I change not my Religion, to which I am tempted. Integrity.


2. His integrity; for I have walked in my integrity; for thy loving kindness
is before mine eyes, I follow thy Word, and the Truth therein. The second part.
This he demonstrates,


Next he sets down his integrity, by an injunction of parts, which were two,
How he carried himself to men: 2. How to God.

1. He abstained from all society, confederacy, counsels, By his carriage to
man.
and intimacy with wicked men; nay, he did abominate and hate their ways.

I have not sat; viz. in counsel with vain persons,

2. The other degree of his integrity, was, his piety, which he here
professes; To God.
I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will compass thine Altar, O Lord; To
his worship.
I will worship thee; for that end in the next verse, he would keep his hands
from blood, oppression, innocent, pure; it was, Ut, therefore he would be
innocent.

And then he professes a second act of his piety, his love to Cods house, O
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy House, To his house. The third part.
Therefore he prays.
and the place where thine honor dwells.

Upon which conscientiousness of his integrity, he falls to prayer, That God
would not suffer him to be polluted with the conversation of wicked men, Gather
not my soul with sinners, And describes wicked men with whom he would not
converse.
and their right hand is full of bribes.

But by the way, observe the many Titles he gives here to wicked men.

1. They are vain persons, void and empty of the fear of God, irreligious. 2.
Deep men; occulti, absconditi, versuti, dissemblers, aliud ore, 3. Caetus
Malignorum, Malignants, doing all for their own ends. 4. Impious, Turbones,
(...). 5. Peccatores, sinners, (...), Workers of iniquity. 6. Blood-thirsty
men, cruel and revengeful. 7. Mischievous, ready to execute with their hands
what they plotted in heart. 8. (...), That will do any thing for a bribe.
Now from some such kind David blesses himself, he will have nothing to do
with them: As for me, I will walk in my integrity;

Lastly, The fourth part. His gratitude.
He shows his gratitude: My foot stands right; hitherto I am sure I am in a
good way; I will therefore praise the Lord in the Congregations; not only
privately, but publicly.

The Prayer collected out of the twenty sixth Psalm.
MANY, O Lord, very many are those temptations to allurements, which the World,
the Devil and Mon have laid before me, to withdraw me from the profession of
thy Truth, and a religious course of life; but because I have continued
constant in my integrity, they load me with slanders, and pursue me with
violence, seeking to take away my life, as they have already taken my
inheritance: But Lord, I commit my cause to thee, by whose power I have
hitherto persisted in my uprightness.

Judge, They impute folly, error, and stubborness to me; but my heart tells
me, That I have walked innocently: They lay to my charge things that I knew
not; but thou art the searcher of all hearts; therefore, as gold in thy fire,
the secrets of my reins, and the inmost cogitations of my heart, explore what
they are, and whether they be worthy of that despite and ill usage which I have
received from these men of blood.

Thou know, Lord, that I have gone on in that right way of piety, which thou
have proposed and prescribed in thy Word; nor profit has allured me, nor
threats have affrighted me, nor flattery won upon me to turn to the right hand,
or unto the lest: I have put my trust in thee, thy loving kindness has been
before my eyes, and I have been pleased in the way of Truth: Be merciful
therefore to me,

By the way side, there be too too many tempters and temptations; the most are
destitute of thy fear, having one thing in their heart, another upon their
tongue; But thou know, That I have not sat in counsel with these vain
persons, neither will I go in and converse with these dissemblers; for I have
hated, with a perfect hatred, and with my whole heart have detested their
Covenants and Engagements: I have not, I will not sit with these wicked and
evil doers, lest I should be infected by them, or countenance and confirm them
in mischief, and draw on others by my example.

They, Lord, have demolished and polluted thy dwelling place, but I love the
habitation of thy house; by their irreverence in that place, they dishonor
thee; And when thou shall again open those doors unto me, I will wash it off
with a flood of tears; and being an innocent among thy innocent people, and
about thy Altar I will adore, and with the Quire of those that sing to thy
Name, will I publish with Thanksgiving, and tell abroad all thy wondrous works:
There with Hymns and Psalms composed to that end, I will declare to all men
that are there present, how wonderfully and mercifully thou have wrought for
me, and for thy people, in delivering us from the hands of our blood-thirsty
enemies.

Since then, O Lord, I have always detested and declined the counsels and
confederacies of evildoers; since I have been ever studious of Religion, and
loved the communion of Saints, and involve not my life in that perdition, which
here and hereafter, is due to these men of blood, and oppressors of the
innocent: As for me, I have walked innocently, wronging none, I will yet walk
in my integrity; therefore, good God, destroy me not with these evil doers, be
merciful unto me, and redeem my soul from the evils with which I am
encompassed, and from those evils that hang over their heads.

My foot has hitherto been kept right by thy grace and mercy; Amen.

PSALM. XXVII. To comfort one in Danger and Adversity against Despair.
THERE be four general parts of it. David shows, 1. How free he is in danger
from fear, and the causes ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. He expresses his love to Gods House
and Religion, ver. 4, 5, 6. 3. He prays, ver. 7, etc. 4. He exhorts to depend
on God, ver. 14.


Possible it is, that some Man, Friend or Foe, might ask David, The first part.
David fears not, because God is with him.
what heart he had in his miseries and persecutions all the time of Saul? To
whom David might return this Answer, That he was never disheartened, he never
did despair; and the Reason was, because God was his Light to guide him, his
Rock to save him, his Strength to sustain and uphold him.

The Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, of whom then should I fear?
The Lord is the Strength of my life, of whom then should I be afraid? Of which
he had experience.

And this he amplifies in the next two verses; first by experience, he had
already found this true: When the wicked, secondly, he puts a case, Say that an
Host of men should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear;

The Arguments of his confidence, were Gods goodness, ver. 1. And was therefore
confident.
and his own experience, ver. 2. to which he adds three more, in the 5, 10, 13,
verses.

1. That God would hide him in his Tabernacle, ver. 5. 2. That when his father
and mother forsook him, God took him up, ver. 10. 3. That he should see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, ver. 13.
He expresses his great love and desire to the Tabernacle and House of God:
The second part. His love to Gods house.
One thing I have desired, this one before all other things; and he was
constant in it, That, emphatically, I will seek after, that I may dwell in the
House of the Lord all the days of my life; and that for three ends.

1. To behold the beauty of the Lord; to taste how good and gracious the Lord
is. 2. To enquire in his Temple; there to search the mind of God. 3. To offer
in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy,
And this was another Argument of his security: For in the time of trouble he
shall hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide
me, he shall set me upon a Rock; and now shall mine head be lifted up above all
my enemies round about me.

In the last part he falls to prayer. The third part.
1. He prays.
For Audience, and an Answer: Hear O Lord when I cry with my voyee; have mercy
upon me, 2. The ground of his prayer, obedience.
The ground of his prayer, his obedience to Gods Command: Thou have said, seek
ye my face; Thy face Lord will I seek. 3. Hide not thy face from me, put not
thy servant away in anger; The matter of his prayer in general, that God desert
him not.
Thou have been my help, be not now worse to me than thou have been; therefore
leave me not now; nor forsake me, O God of my salvation; when father and mother
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. 4. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and
lead me in a plain path: In particular, to he taught a way to escape his
enemies;
i. e. Teach me what to do, that I may please thee; and lead me in a plain
path, that I may escape the ambushes and snares of my enemies; deliver me not
over to their will; for they seek my ruin. 1. Who are,
They are perjured men; false witnesses are rise up against me. 2. They breath
out cruelty.
5. Perjured men.
And their cruelty and falsehood is so great, that I had fainted, were it not
for my hope in thee: Cruel men.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living.


At last he concludes with an Exhortation, The fourth part He takes heart, and
persuades others to it.
that all others would take out his example, and in their greatest extremities
be courageous, and put trust in God as he did: Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: Wait I say, Be an expectant; for
he that shall come, will come in his good time.

The Prayer collected out of the twenty seventh Psalm.
O Heavenly Father, whatsoever the World plots, the Devil endeavors, and
wicked men conspire against us, that we are fully persuaded shall come to
naught, For thou, O Lord, art our delight, to direct and comfort us; our
salvation to deliver us; the strength of our life to support us; of whom then
should we be afraid, when we have so powerful a Savior to defend us? Though an
Host of armed men should encamp against us, our heart should not fear, though
War should rise against us, to which the malicious hand of our enemies shall
never be able to reach.

How often have our enemies,

For which great mercy, One thing I have desired of thee, this One before all
other things, deny me not, that in peace and quietness, I may dwell all the
rest of my life, in that place, where the House of my God is; that I may have
experience of the beauty of holiness, and taste of that delight with which thou
do affect thy servants by the manifestation of thy presence; that I may there
inquire and learn my Duty, and make a progress in the knowledge of spiritual
things; compass thy Altar, and offer the Sacrifices of Joy, and sing Psalms of
Praise, and Hymns of Thanks to thee my God.

O my God hear my voice, for I have long cried and called unto thee; deliver me
from mine enemies that pursue me, heart has always thought upon thee, and
been revived with thy command, Seek ye my face, call upon me in the day of
trouble; and therefore with elevated eyes and hands, and with an intent heart,
I have sought thy face, thy presence, thy favor, thy protection, and I will
never cease to seek it, till I shall see thee face to face: And since from my
heart I seek it, O do not turn, Conceive not so great anger and displeasure
against thy servant (who yet have deserved it for his sins) as to cast me away,
and deny me that help which thou have hitherto graciously afforded me: My
father, my mother, my friends, my acquaintance, and will thou also leave me at
this time? This has not been thy custom; for when I have been destitu^e, Thou
have been my help; when I have been exposed, Thou have taken me up: Forsake me
not then now, O God of my salvation; be my Helper, who without thee am nothing;
be my Savior, who except thou save, am like to perish.

Teach me thy Law, and set me in the way in which I am to walk, make it plain
to me, that I mistake it not; lest by the error in thy way, which my enemies
have set for me: O, never deliver me over to their will: Consider, O Lord,
their injustice, who have suborned false witness against me, and such as breath
out cruel words to take away my life: So great is their malice, but that I
believe verily to receive that happiness which thou have promised in this life,
and after to enjoy those good things which thou have engaged to give in Heaven,
which is truly, the Land of the living: For these thy word is past, and
therefore I will wait on thee, this shall make me of good courage, and
strengthen my heart; I will wait, I say, on the Lord, with patience; and though
he defer me, I will not faint; but I will be instant with him in prayer, and
beg his aid, being assured, that at the last he will hear me, for the merits of
Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

PSALM. XXVIII. A Prayer for Help, and a Thanksgiving.
THREE parts there are of this Psalm.

1. A Prayer, from ver. 1. to 6. 2. A Thanksgiving, from ver. 6. to 9. 3. A
Prayer for the Church, ver. 9.
The first part, is a Prayer to God, and he first prays for Audience, ver. 2.
The first part. He prays for Audience.
Hear me: And his prayer is so described, that it sets forth most of the
conditions requisite in one that prays.

1. The object, God: Unto thee O Lord I cry. 2. His faith: To thee I cry, who
art my Rock. The conditions required in a supplicant.
3. His fervor; it was an ardent and vehement prayer, I cry. 4. Humility; it
was a supplication: Hear the voice of my supplication. 5. His outward gesture:
I life up my hands. 6. According to Gods order: Toward thy holy Temple. His
Argument to persuade Audience.

The Argument he uses to persuade Audience, is drawn ab incommodo; Lest if
thou make as though thou hear not, have no hope of life in me, no comfort,
no heart at all; (...). That he prays for, is, that he might not partake with
hypocrites.


2. Then he expresses what he prays for, which is, that either:

First, He might not be corrupted by the fair persuasions of hypocrites.

Secondly, Or that he might not be partaker of their punishments: Draw me not
away with the wicked, and workers of iniquity; upon whom he sets this mark, Who
speak peace with their Neighbors, but mischief in their hearts. Against whom
he imprecates.


3. Against whom he uses this imprecation, which is the second part of his
prayer: Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their endeavors, He does not simply pray that punishment may overtake them,
but that it may be proportionable to their desert; and he prays earnestly for
it, as appears by the often repetition of words importing the same thing; which
that it seem not strange, in the next verse he gives the Reason, that they were
enemies to Piety, and contemners of God; far from repentance, and any hope of
amendment.

Do this unto them, Because they were enemies to piety.
Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands:
And then intimates, that this their punishment was just, and that it should
come from above: Therefore he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

Then there follows an excellent form of giving Thanks, The second part. His
thankfulness.
into which he falls by an admirable Acclamation: Blessed be the Lord; of which
blessing he assigns the Reasons, which excellently expresses the chief parts
of Thanksgiving.

1. He has heard the voice of my supplications. 2. The Reasons of it.
That he would be his Protector: The Lord is my strength and my shield. 3. My
heart trusted in him. 4. That from him he had relief: I am helped. 5. The
testification and annuntiation of his Gratitude: Therefore my heart greatly
rejoices, and in my song will I praise him. He remembers the Indenture, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall praise me; and therefore with heart and tougue he
gives thanks. 6. And that God should be sure to have all the Honor, he repeats
what he said before, The Lord is not my strength, but their strength; i. e. of
all those that are with me, and he is my strength also; the strength of
salvation (for there were a plurality of them) of his Anointed.
He concludes the Psalm with a Prayer, The third part. He commends the Church
to Gods care and tuition.
in which he commends the whole Church to Gods Care and Tuition.

1. Save thy People in the midst of these Tumults and Distractions. 2. Bless
thine-Inheritance, that they may increase in knowledge, piety, wealth. 3. Feed
them, and give them a better Shepherd than Saul. 4. Lift them up for ever:
Make their name famous among the Gentiles, give them dominion over them, that
it may be known they are thy peculiar people.
The Prayer collected out of the twenty eighth Psalm.
VNLD thee, O Lord, with all intention of heart, and fervor of spirit, I cry,
forsake me not, and withdraw not thy help from me; be not deaf, and still
silent to answer my prayers, Suffer me not to be corrupted with the fair
persuasions of hypocrites, to be drawn away and deceived by the flattering lips
of the workers of iniquity; lest I be partaker of their sin and punishment, who
give good words, and speak peace to their Neighbors, when yet they imagine
mischief in their hearts.

I know, Reward them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness
of their endeavors; I know they are malicious sinners, that break thy
Commands, not upon ignorance and infirmity, but presumptuoufly, and with a high
hand: Show thy great works in the Earth, they regard it not; let thy power of
thy hand work wonders, they pass it by, without the least observance;
therefore, O Lord, destroy them with an irreparable ruin, and never permit
them to be raised and built again.

Blessed, and thrice blessed be the Lord, and who I am certain will grant what
I have asked of him: The Lord is my strength to confirm me, my shield to defend
me, in him my heart trusted, my mouth I will open to his honor, my song shall
be of him all the day long, and with a cheerful mind, and a grateful tongue, I
will praise him.

Lor, save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, save them with thy hand;
feed them with thy Word, and lift up their heads above those that hate them,
that it may be known they are thy chosen Israel, the people of thy love.
against the face of their enemy, and send them salvation by the hand of thy
Anointed, and at last bring them to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Another out of the same Psalm.
O Heavenly Father, we humbly beseech thy goodness, when we cry unto thee, to
hear our supplications; for if thou turn away thine ear, and neglect to give us
Audience, in these our pressures and afflictions, the men of thy hand will
prevail against us, and bring down our life unto the pit.

We do acknowledge before thee; that our ways have been perverse, our works
wicked, and the imagination of our hearts only vain, and evil continually; yet,
O Lord, we desire to be holy, render therefore not unto us, not according to
our deserts, but according to thy great mercies: Of thy insinite goodness
reckon us not with the workers of iniquity, suffer us not to be seduced by, and
punished with wicked men, as we have deserved; return unto them, O Lord,
sevenfold into their bosom, but to us thy people be propitious.

Be unto us, O Lord, strength, and a buckler; save us in our dangers, feed us
in our necessities, favor us in our enterprises, and give us success in our
actions. O Lord, we are thine inheritance, the people that thou have adopted to
be thy children and heirs, heap upon us here thy mercies, and hereafter bring
us to an everlasting inheritance in Heaven, by the precious merits of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XXIX. An Exhortation to praise God.
THERE be two parts of this Psalm.

1. The Exhortation it self, ver. 1, 2. 2. The Reasons to persuade, drawn, 1.
From his Power, from ver. 3. to 11. 2. From the Protection of his people, ver.
11.

The Exhortation, which is rare, proceeds from a King, He exhorts Princes to
praise God.
and not from a common man; a Prince, a great Prince; minds Princes and great
men, that there is one greater than they, and that therefore they yield unto
him his due honor and worship.

1. That they withold it not from him, but freely yield it up, and give it;
Anaphora, Give, give, give. 2. That in giving this, they yield him no more than
his due; Give him the honor due unto his Name. 3. What they are to give, Glory
and strength: They must make his name to be glorious, give him such glory as is
fit for his name: 2. Then again, attribute their strength to him. 4. That they
bow before him, and adore him: Incurvate, Junius. 5. To persuade this, he
proposes two Reasons.
That they exhibit this honor in that place they ought, in atrii sancto ejus:
Vulg. In decoro sanctitatis: Jun. In decore splendore, ornatu sanctitatis:
Moller. In the beauty of holiness, his Temple.
And that they may the easilier be persuaded to give the Lord this honor due
unto him, he proposes two Reasons to be considered. 1. His power shown.
His Power, a Power (though they be Filii fortium, high and mighty Potentates,
far beyond theirs, which is seen in his Works of Nature; but passing by many
other, he makes choice of the Thunder, and those impressions that follow it;
this he describes, 1. From the nature of it; for however men of it do conceive
natural causes, In the thunder, which is, Vox Jehovae.
yet religious men will look higher, and when they hear those fearful Murmures
in the Air, will confess with David, it is Vox Jehovae, Vox Jehovae, here
seven times repeated; and this voice has affrighted the proudest, the
mightiest Tyrants. 2. From the place whence this voice is given, the watery
Clouds: The voice of the Lord is above the waters, 3. From the force and power:
They are not vain and empty noises, but strike a terror; Humanas motura
tonitrua mentes: The voice of the Lord is powerful, 4. The effects of it.
From the effects, which he explains by an induction. 1. Upon the strongest
Trees, the Cedars; the Cedars of Lebanon: The voice of the Lord breaks the
Cedars, etc. 2. Lebanus and Sirion; for sometimes the Thunder is accompanied
with an Earthquake, and the Mountains dance, skip as a Calf. 3. Upon the Air,
which is no small wonder; for when nothing is more contrary to fire, The voice
of the Lord divides the flames of fire. 4. In the Creatures of all kinds,
especially the wild; for it makes them fear, and leave their Caves, and the
Woods; yea, makes the Dear for fear abortive: The voice of the Lord shakes the
Wilderness, etc. The voice of the Lord makes the Hindes to calve. 5. In the
mighty Rains that follow upon it: When the Cataracts of Heaven are opened, and
such floods of water follow, that a man may justly fear a second inundation
would drown the World; out of all which he draws this conclusion, The Lord sits
King for ever.

2. His works of grace.
His second Reason, is drawn from his Works of Grace, when he moves the hearts
of his people to acknowledge his voice, and to give him glory in his Temple; in
his Temple does every man speak of his honor: Secondly, by the security he
gives in people, even in that time he utters his voice, and speaks in Thunder;
whereas the wicked then tremble and quake: The Lord will give strength unto his
people; security, and peace of conscience.


The Meditation collected out of the twenty ninth Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, wheresoever we cast our eyes, Thy voice, O Lord, is heard in
the Clouds above, whence thou roarest to us in Thunder, and whence being
resolved into Rain, thou sendest many and mighty waters. In this murmur of the
Air, is of so great strength, that it breaks the Cedars, and splits to pieces
the strongest Daks: Lebanon did tremble and quiver, and leap too and fro at thy
voice. At thy voice it is,

O then all ye, who are mighty upon earth, give unto the Lord, give unto the
Lord glory and strength, acknowledge that you have your power and glory from
him: Give unto the Lord the glory due to his Name, worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness, adore him in his holy Temple, where his service has beauty
in it, and in which every one does speak of his glory. O Lord, For thou, Lord,

A Prayer out of the same Psalm.
O Almighty God, great has been thy mercy unto us, that by the voice of thy
Son, thou have made known unto us the great mysteries of our salvation: O let
this thunder never sound in our ears, but let it strike a terror into our
hearts, that we despise not so great Redemption, and let it raise in our eyes a
shower of penitent tears, that our sins should crucify the Son of God.

O let this thy voice be full of Power and Majesty; powerful, for the
conversion of many people, and so full of Majesty, that all the Potentates and
wife men of the World fall low, and worship thee; make it of that strength,
that they be never able to resist it; and of that efficacy, that hey be willing
to yield to it: As for those tall and proud Cedars, which obstinately and
maliciously refuse to give thee the Honor due to thy Name, break them in
pieces, and let them feel thy hand.

But for those who are moved by this thy voice, divide unto them the flames of
thy spiritual fire, that may illuminate and melt, and purisse their blind,
hard, and polluted cold hearts; distribute and divide unto them the gifts of
thy Spirit, subdue their vices by thy Grace: Let them meet in thy Temple, and
always praise thee in the beauty of holiness: Bless them with peace of
conscience while they are in this valley of tears and trouble, and receive them
at last to an eternal peace in the life to come. Amen.

PSALM. XXX. The occasion of this Psalm, was some grievous sickness or danger
from which David was delivered.
TWO parts there are of it.

1. The Rendition of praise and thanks, ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. An Exhortation to
others to do it by his example, and Gods dealing with him, from ver. 4. to the
last.
He beings with his profession of praise; The first part. He praises God.
I will extol thee O Lord; and adds the causes.

1. For thou have lifted me up; as a man out of a dark deep pit. 2. And adds
the causes.
Thou have not made my Foes to rejoice over me; but turned their mirth to
sadness. 3. Thou have healed me, in body and mind. 4. Brought my soul from the
Grave, etc. Lent me life, when I was dying.
Of all which effects, he conceals not the means by which he procured them: O
Lord my God I cried unto thee,

2. The second part: And exhorts the Church to praise him.
After he had given Thanks, he speaks to the whole Church, and exhorts by his
example, to acknowledge and celebrate the goodness of God, in defending, and
delivering those which are his.

Sing unto the Lord (O ye his Saints) and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness. Lest they have experience of Gods anger as he had.
That God was justly angry with him, but soon appeased.

1. Angry he was; but his anger endures but for a moment; but life, and
continuance of life, There may be heaviness for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. 2. In prosperity I was, and in my prosperity I said, I shall never be
moved; Lord, by thy favor, thou have made my Mountain to stand strong. 3. my
Trouble: Thou did turn away thy face, and I was troubled.
This is the example he sets the Saints, that they be not secure, when the
World goes well with them; lest they have experience of Gods anger, as he had:
Next, he shows how he behaved himself to avert Gods wrath, How he averted Gods
anger.
which also he proposes, as a pattern for them to follow in the like cause.

1. Viz. By prayer.
He betook himself to prayer. 2. 1. He that is ill, calls for the Physician, so
did I; this was the fruit of my chastisement; I cried to thee, O Lord, and unto
the Lord I made my supplication. 2. The Form he used.
And the Form I used, was this; thus pathetically I pleaded with God. 1. What
profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? 2. Shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy Truth? Can a dead man praise thee? or can
thou make good thy promises to the dead? 3. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon
me; O Lord, be thou my Helper.

3. And then shows the effect of his prayer, that it was turned. And the
consequent of it, was, he was relieved.
Thou have turned my mourning into dancing; Thou have put off my sackcloth,
and girded me with gladness. 4. This God did for me, and he did it for this
end, That my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent: O Lord my God,
Now O ye Saints, ye see my case, For which he gives thanks.
you see what course I took, you see the effect, and the end, why God was so
good to me, it was, That I should praise him; and therefore I propose my
example to you to imitate: Betake you to God in your necessities, and having
obtained deliverance by your prayers, remember to sing praises to God.
The Prayer collected out of the thirtieth Psalm.
INTO thy hands, O Lord, I commend my body, my soul, my thoughts, my
affections, my goods; whatsoever is mine, I dedicate to thee, beseeching thee
to dwell with me; for then no uncleanspirits shall have power over me, nor
heinous transgressions shall pollute and profane what thou have bestowed upon
me; sanctiffe to my use, and to thy honor, all thy Creatures.

Thou, Lord, have been a bountiful God unto me, and bestowed upon me many
blessings, which thou have denied to many of thy better servants, but I have
been an ungrateful wretch, and in my prosperity forgot thee my God; I forgot
mine own condition, and was so secure of thy favor, that I began to be proud,
and puffed up upon the conceit of mine own wisdom and strength: I thought thou
had made my hill so strong, that I could not be shaken or overthrown by the
force or practice of any enemy: But now this sottish pride and presumption is
shaked off from me, experience I have, that it is thy favor and goodness
alone, that must keep me safe; for thou did only hide thy face from me, and I
was troubled: Troubled in my body, troubled in my house, troubled in my estate;
I saw my self frustrate in my expectation. Great trouble, Lord, is now upon me,
and thy wrathful displeasure does now for my security and pride go over me: But
now, O Lord, take away thy hand from me, for I am even consumed by thy heavy
hand.

What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? How shall my life
be beneficial to thy honor, or to men, if being taken away by an untimely
death, I be laid up in the Grave, and my body rot in the Earth; Shall the dust
praise thee, or shall it declare thy Truth? Shall a dead man resolved into
ashes, sing praises to thy honor among men? or make boast of thy faithfulness
in performing what thou have promised? It Is for thine honor then to prorogue
my life, and for thine honor sake I entreat, that thou respite me, that thy
servants may see that thou have made good thy Word unto me, and thy enemies may
not have occasion to deride the Truth of thy promises, and blaspheme: For this
reason especially unto thee, O Lord, I cry in my distress,

And when I thus prayed, Thou O Lord, in mercy have heard me: I cried,

For thine anger, in which thou did justly chastise me, though sharp, for a
moment, and in thy favor I have found life; weeping has endured with me for a
night, but joy came to me in the morning.

Therefore my tongue shall sing and praise thee,

And all you, remember that he is a good and merciful God; remember that he is
a holy God, and will visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, to
the third and fourth Generation: Remember that he is a gracious God, and will
not always be chiding, nor keeps his anger for ever. Appear then before him, and
where he is pleased to be present, sing Praises to him. O Lord, we will ^lwayes
send forth thy honor through the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XXXI. For one in anxiety of spirit.
THIS Psalm is composed, and mixed of diverse affections; for David sometimes
prays, sometimes he gives thanks; now he complains, now he hopes; one while he
fears, another while he exults.

This vicissitude of affections is sixfold, and it may very well divide the
Psalm.

1. With great confidence he prays to God, from ver. 1. to 6. 2. He exults for
mercy and help received, ver. 7, 8. 3. He grievously complains of the misery he
was in, from ver. 9. to 14. 4. He prays again, upon the strength of Gods
goodness, from ver. 15. to 18. 5. He admires and exults, and proclaims Gods
goodness, from ver. 19. to 22. 6. Lastly, He exhorts others to love God, and be
courageous, ver. 23, 24.
In the six first verses, He prays. The first part.
he prays to God, and shows his Reasons.

1. Let me never be ashamed. 2. speedily delivered. 3. be his Rock, and House
of defense to save him. 4. Lead me, guide me. 5. That God would pull his feet
out of the Net that they privily laid for him.
In effect his Petition is the same, His Reasons.
viz. to be delivered from his danger; and his Reasons to persuade God to do
this for him, 1. In thee, O Lord, I put my trust. 2. God a Rock; Thou art my
Rock and Fortress. 3. For thy Names sake lead me. 4. Thou art my strength. 5.
Into thy hands I commit my spirit. 6. Do to me, as thou have ever: Thou have
redeemed me heretofore. 7. I do not as other men, trust to vain helps, but on
thee only: I have hated them that regard lying Vanities, but I trust in the
Lord.


And in effect as his Petition was the same, so are his Reasons also: His
confidence in God to be his Deliverer, his Fortress, Rock, Redeemer^, etc.

In which we have an example of a man in misery, that thinks he can never say
enough for himself, and that makes him descant on the same thing, which is no
flat Tautology, but an elegant (...), or Expolition, Then again, we have a
pattern for a pious soul in trouble to imitate, Thou art my Rock, my Fortress,
my Strength: Thou have redeemed me, So he begins, so he concludes this first
part of his prayer.

2. Next he exults and gives thanks for some former deliverance, The second
part.
and by the experience of that, doubts the less in this. Perhaps the Chorus
sang this. He exults and gives thanks, Moller.


1. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy. And his reason follows from his
experience. 2. For thou have considered my trouble. 2. Thou have known, i. e.
seen my soul in adversity. I have seen, Upon his deliverance.
I have seen the afflictions of my people, etc. 3. And have not shut me up into
the hand of the enemy. 4. But have set my feet in a large room.
3. And now he prays again. 2. The third part. He prays again.
And complains of what he suffered within, and without.

1. He prays. Have mercy upon me, O Lord. 2. Then he complains, Complains.
and in his complaint shows the reason of his prayer for mercy. 1. Within, at
home he was in a sad case: For I am in trouble, Totus marcesco. Of the sad case
he was in.
My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing, my strength fails,
because of my iniquity, and my bones are consumed. 2. Without, I have little
comfort either from friends or enemies; 1. I was a reproach among all my
enemies. 2. Then for my friends, they stood afar off. They especially; but
especially among my neighbors, and I became a fear to my acquaintance. They
that see me without, fled from me. 2. And then he aggravates the greatness of
his grief, and scorn, This he aggravates.
and contempt. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind, u muertos y ydos no
son amigos. I am become as a broken vessel. 3. And which is yet more, the
people they mock me. I have beard the slander of the many. 4. And the
Consequent was mischievous. Fear is on every side. 2. While they conspire, or
took counsel together against me. 3. And their counsel was, they devised to
take away my life. What could enemies do more, or friends permit?


And after his Complaint, The fourt^^ part.
he comforts himself with his first and chief reason again. But I have trusted
in thee, O Lord, and said, Thou art my God. He comforts himself in God.
except thou permit them, they are not able to do it. Thou art my God, in thee
I trust. For my time is in thy hand, not in theirs, i. e. My life.

And then he falls to prayer again, which consists of three parts.

1. A Deprecation. 2. A Supplication. 3. And an Imprecation. He prays yet
againn.


1. A Deprecation, for he prays that he come not into their power. He
deprecates.
Deliver me from the hand of my enemies, and from them that persecute me.

2. A Supplication. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: Supplicate^
O Lord.

3. An Imprecation. Let the wicked be ashamed, and be silent in the grave:
leges inter arma, when they are of no force. Imprecates against the wicked.
So let the wicked dye, be silent, and have no power. 2. Let the lying lips be
put to silence: which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against
the righteous.

In which there be so many Arguments to quicken the grant of his Imprecation.

1. The quality of their persons. They are wicked, impious men. Whose qualities
he sets forth.
2. There is no truth in them; they have lying lips. Their words are false. 3.
And their actions worse; they speak grievous things, and that against the
righteous. 4. Then their intention is worst of all, for they do it proudly,
contemptuously, disdainfully, despitefully. It proceeds ex malo habitu.
In the fifth part, he sets out the abundant goodness of the Lord to his
people, The fifth part.
and, He admires Gods goodness to his people.
as it were a little carried beyond himself by a divine rapture or ecstasy, in
a holy admiration he exclaims, O how great is thy goodness, which thou have
laid up, This goodness of God is often laid up and hid, as it was to the
Israelites in Egypt, not seen for many years, but after a long time it was
brought forth and wrought, even before the sons of men.

But then observe, this goodness is laid up for none, nor wrought for none, but
such as fear him. 2. Put their trust in him, expect and believe his promises.

1. The specialties of it.
Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man. 2.
Thou shall keep them secretly in a Pavilion from the strife of tongues.
Upon which consideration in gratitude he breaks out into a Benedictus. 1.
Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness, etc. 2. For
which he blesses God.
And corrects his error and former mistake. I said in my haste, tashly,
imprudently, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Such was his rash judgment.
But he confesses and amends this his folly: And corrects his error.
Nevertheless, thou heardst the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto
thee.


6. The sixth part. He exhorts the Saints to
And so he falls upon the last part, which is an Exhortation to the Saints. 1.
That they love God. 2. That they be of good courage, for it was the same God
still, and he would be as good to others, as he was to him.

1. For that the Lord preserves the faithful. Love God.
2. That he plentifully rewards the proud doer: That was his Mercy, this his
Justice.

2. That they be courageous.
That they be of good courage. For then he shall strengthen your heart, all ye
that hope in the Lord. They despair not, but keep their heart fixed and firm to
the profession of truth; which would be a seal of their hope.

The Prayer collected out of the 31. Psalm.
O Merciful Father, who art wont to take pity on those who are distressed, have
mercy on me a poor wretch,

Yea, though my affliction be so great and urgent, yet among men I found not
any to comfort me. fear is on every side, they take counsel together to take
away my life.

But these were enemies, and I expected no other from them, that which most
deeply pierces my heart, and fled from me; there is not a Neighbor that does
not scorn me, not any of my acquaintance who is not afraid to own me: I am
forgotten as a dead man, of whom, being laid in the grave, than a broken
vessel, of which there is no esteem, because of no use, but is cast to the
Dunghill.

Yet though I am brought to this pitiful condition. I do not despair, in thee,
to be ashamed of my hope and expectation; It is only to thy hands, to thy power
and care, I commend my spirit and life, which they go about to take from me.
This, at other times, They lie in wait for my blood, but my time is in thy
hand, who art the Lord of life and death, thou give, thou take away, O then
shut me not up in the hand of the enemy, set my feet in a large room, and let
me enjoy my liberty.

O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
It passes man's understanding to conceive, and the eye of humane reason sees it
not, which judges of all things by the present success: This thou have
reserved in secret for those which serve thee with a sincere heart, and in thy
good time, thou by great works, which thou will do for those who trust in thee,
wilt manifest it, even before the sons of men.

The pride of man is great, but thou O Lord, wilt hide those thou love in the
secret of thy presence from the pride of man, and wilt keep them secretly, as
in a Pavilion, from the strife of tongues.

And yet I pressed with the consideration of many evils, said rashly in my
have, Surely I am cut off from before thine eyes, thou will never certainly
cast any favorable look toward me. Such was my infirmity, so great my
inconsideration. But thy mercy passed by even then my weakness, and settled my
staggering soul. Notwithstanding my imperfections, thou heardst the voice of my
Supplications, when I cried unto thee.

Hear me then now, O Lord, consider my troubles, speak against the righteous.

Blessed be the Lord, and praised be his name,

O lov^ ye the Lord, all ye his Saints, all ye that serve the Lord in holiness,

O Lord, preserve the faithful, and though the wicked flourish, and pride it in
their success, yet look upon our affliction, and plentifully reward the proud
doer. As for those, who with an honest heart serve thee, give them constancy
and perseverance in thy love, fear, and Truth, and let their hope in thee be
well rooted and confirmed through the Son of thy love, Jesus Christ our only
Lord and Savior. Amen.

PSALM. XXXII. Is Doctrinal; and sets forth the happiness of one whose sins are
remitted.
THE Title of the Psalm is Maschil, and at the eighth verse the reason is
given, I will instruct thee, and teach thee. In this then there is an
instruction given, especially about these three points, which divide the Psalm.

1. The Happy estate of a justified person, verse. 1, 2. 2. The unhappy
condition of that man, who is not assured that he is justified and reconciled
to God, verse. 3, A justified person is happy.
4. and the way prescribed, how to gain that assurance, verse. 5. 3. A Lesson
given for obedience after a man is brought into that state, v. 8, 9.
1. The Prophet first instructs us in what justification consists: It is a free
remission, The first part. How he must be qualified.
a covering of sin, a non-imputation of iniquities. 2. How the man must be
qualified that obtains it. He must have an honest, sincere, and upright heart,
verse. 3. Now such a one he pronounces, A Happy man. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: He must confess his sin, not
excuse or hide it.
Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile: who does not excuse, palliate, extenuate his sin, but
confesses it.

2. The second part.
And this he makes good by his own experience, he hid his sin, he doubled with
God, he confessed not, and he was in an unhappy, and unquiet condition all the
while. This David did, he hid it,


1. When I held my peace, And he was unquiet in his soul.
and kept silence, dissembled my sin. 2. I was wounded with the sting of a
guilty conscience, fears, horrors, troubles of soul, etc. My bones waxed old
through my roaring all the day long. 3. But when he confessed it,
And then he shows you the way he took to recover his happiness, which was a
clear contrary course. He would conceal his sin no longer, from which he had so
much unrest, but he was resolved to open and display it before his God. 1. I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. 2. I said, I
will confess my transgressions to the Lord.

Of which the effects are diverse. He obtained remission.


1. The first upon himself. He recovered his happiness, cons^^ing in Remission:
And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. 2. By his example others seek for
grace.
The second upon the whole Church, upon every good man, that took out and
followed his example. For this, i. e. that thou have been so merciful to me,
shall every one that is godly, pray unto thee for pardon, in a time, when thou
may be found, in the day while grace is offered. 3. Surely in the floods of
great waters, And are secure in extremities.
in an inundation of calamities, the troubles shall not come nigh him, that
depends upon Gods goodness and mercy, and is reconciled unto him by repentance.
And he shows the reason from his own experience, God was his Protector. 1. Thou
art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble. 2. Thou shall compass
me about with Songs of deliverance; deliver me, and make me sing for joy, and
give thanks.

3. And now David sets down the Duty of a justified person, The third part.
David instructs a justified person in his way.
that he be after his pardon obedient to his God, and that not out of
compulsion, but freely and willingly. About which that he be not to seek,
either God from Heaven, or David in his person becomes his Doctor; I will
instruct thee, and teach thee in the way that thou shall go; I will guide thee
with my eye. nutum, or nictum heri. As my eye is always over you, carefully to
instruct, so be you as ready to observe it.

2. Ne sitis. Be not like beasts, like horse and mule, To obey freely.
lest they come near unto thee, ^ing thee, hurt thee, kick thee, kill thee.
Constrained obedience is for a beast; free and voluntary for a man.

3. Besides, to quicken your obedience, I will teach you two reasons. Which he
persuades by two reasons.


1. Ab incommodo. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, their griefs, their
troubles, their punishments many and grievous. That the troubles of the
rebellious are grievous.
2. A commodo. Your obedience shall be rewarded, and that amply: But he that
trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about. It shall be like the
girdle, that he is girded withal. The willing obedience of the good rewarded.
God will be present with him in his troubles, he shall perceive he is in
favor with God, that his sins are covered, and that he is an beir of eternal
life.
Upon which he concludes with this Exhortation, Be glad in the Lord, These he
exhorts to rejoice in God.
As there is great reason; for this Doctrine of the Free Remission of sin, can
alone quiet the Conscience.

The Prayer collected out of the 32. Psalm.
O Merciful Father, Lord of Men and Angels, to whose Will and Command all
Creatures ought to be obedient, I have been through my whole life a rebellious
wretch, and with a high hand sinned against Heaven, and against thee, neither
am I worthy to be called thy Son; I have served thee with a double heart, and
after the commission of many a grievous sin, I have sought for fig leaves to
cover my nakedness, either extenuated, and sought to conceal it from thy eyes.
I have done wickedly, I roar all the day long,

But, O my God, I humbly acknowledge that the state of my soul is sad and
deplorable, and by my own fault I am in an ill condition, I do therefore now
acknowledge my sin unto thee, and my iniquity do I not hide. and in this time I
do confess my transgressions unto thee, forgive, O Lord, the iniquity of my
sin. O let not the sloods of great waters come so near my soul, that they drown
me in despair. Be thou to me a hiding place, till thy anger is overpast,
deliver me,

And for the future. Instruct me and teach me in the way that I am to go, bruit
beast, like the headstrong horse, or the sottish mule, whose mouths must be
held in with bit and bridle, kept in their way by force and violence, rather
out of love give me Grace to do my duty, than out of, fear and compulsion.

If, Amen.

PSALM. XXXIII. Is (...). The Contents are,
1. AN Exhortation to the just to praise God, verse. 1, 2, 3.

2. The Arguments he uses to persuade to it, from verse. 3. to 20.

3. The Confidence of Gods people in his Name. Their joy in him, and petition
to him, verse. 20, 21, 22.

1. David exhorts the righteous to praise God. The first part.
In the three first verses he exhorts to praise God. But whom?

1. The righteous, not all. For praise is comely for the upright. 2. That it be
given with all zeal and affection, with exultation, with singing, voice, with
instruments. Some new Song composed for some new mercy; skilfully expressed. 2.
His reasons. The second part.
To this he persuades upon diverse good grounds. 1. The first in general, fetched
from the truth, the faithfulness, the justice, the goodness of God. 1. For the
Word of the Lord is right. 2. And all his works are done in Truth. 3. He loves
righteousness and judgment. From Gods goodness, etc.
4. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. 2. From his power.
His second Argument is fetched from Gods power in the Creation of all things:
verse. 6, 7, 9. and upon it interserts, Let all the earth fear the Lord, let all
the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. 3. His providence.
His third Argument is fetched from Gods providence in governing the world,
which may easily be discerned by those who will diligently consider his ways
and proceedings both to other people, and to his Church. 1. In defeating his
enemies.
He makes void all stratagems undertaken against his Will, not of single men,
but whole Nations: The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: 2.
In bringing to pass his counsels.
The counsel of the Lord stands for ever: the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.


Upon the consideration of which, he breaks out into this Epiphonema, For which
he accounts his people blessed. He amplifies Gods providence; and illustrates
it,
whom he has chosen for his inheritance.

After which he returns to his discourse of Gods providence, and by an elegant
hypotyposis, amplifies his former Argument. For he sets God before us, as some
great King in his Throne, providing for all the parts of his Empire, examining
all Causes, and doing justice to every one.

1. The Lord looks from heaven, and beholds all the sons of men. 2. That he
sees all.
From the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth. 3. And he is not ^^iosus spectator neither. He sees and considers their
hearts, their works. Considers in what men put their trust.

And he sees in what they put their confidence, in their Armies, in their
strength, in their Horse, not in him; But all in vain. For there is no King
that can be saved by the multitude of an Host: Evacuates their designs.
A mighty man is not delivered by much strength: An horse is a vain thing for
safety, neither shall he deliver any man by his great strength. Multitude,
strength, etc.

2. Hitherto he has given a proof of Gods providence toward all men; But
defends his Church.
but now he descends to a particular proof of it, by his care over his Church,
which he wonderfully guides, defends, protects in all dangers and assaults: And
that notice be taken of it, he begins with an Ecce.

Behold the eye of the Lord, his tender'st care is over them that fear him,
To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. Upon this
Gods people The third part.

The three last verses contain the Acclamation of Gods people, who believe and
place all their hope and trust in God. For being excited, as it were, by the
former Arguments. They do three things.

1. They express and profess their faith and dependence on God, Wait on him.
Our soul waits on God, he is our help, and our shield. 2. They publish upon
what hope they are held up, and how comforted, Publish his name, and rejoice in
it.
For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his Holy Name.
3. Upon this hope, they commend themselves by prayer to God, Commend themselves
to Gods mercy.
Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we hope in thee.
The Prayer collected out of the thirty third Psalm.
O God, thy goodness is so great, thy faithfulness so constant, thy power so
wonderful, thy providence so universal, but thy care so Fatherly toward thy
people, that we were unworthy of the least of thy mercies, should we not
acknowledge them, and return thee due honor and thanks. For there is nothing
in the whole world, which does not witness thee to be a bountiful God,

Thy Word, O Lord, thy Decree, for the Creation and Government of the World, is
right and equal, and all thy works are done in true wisdom, righteousness, and
judgment. Fiat of thy mouth. He spoke and all this was done, he commanded, and
it stood fast. For so great is thy power, that without any labor, without any
delay, without any help, all this was done, and that by thy Will and Word only,
and by thy Word and Will it is that it does so now continue, and remain without
dissolution.

Therefore, O ye righteous, rejoice in the Lord; Praise is not comely in the
mouth of a sinner, And you who have so often sung of his honor, now since he
has renewed his mercies, set forth your joy with a New Song, play skilfully
with a loud voice. So set forth his praise, his power, his wisdom, that all the
earth may fear the Lord, and the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
Since then thou, O Jehovah, art most just, most merciful, blessed is that
Nation, who have chosen and worshipped thee, O Lord, for their God, and happy
is the people, whom thou have chosen for thine inheritance. O make us, Lord,
always of this people, that we may be happy under thy protection: Dwell in the
midst of us, and bless us.

But, O Lord, bring the counsels of wicked men, against this thy people, to
naught, Thou searchest the very hearts and reins, It is not in these vain helps
we put our considence, our hope is in thee alone, on thee we rely, to thee we
trust, from thee we look for help. who rely not upon any merits and creatures,

Upon thee, and we shall have just occasion to triumph, For thy Sons sake we
hope for mercy, and for his sake let it descend upon us. Amen.

PSALM. XXXIV. (...).
THIS Psalm is composed with great art: which must be observed by him who will
rightly Analyze it. The Scope of it is to praise God, and instruct in his fear.
The parts in General are,

1. He praises God himself, and calls upon others by his example, to do so,
from verse. 1. to 8.

2. He sets himself in the place of a Master, instructs and teaches in the
fear of God, from verse. 8. to the last.

1. David praises God. The first part.
He praises God himself, which he professes thus, 1. I will bless the Lord.
2. His praise shall be. 3. He would boast in it. 2. Continually. 3. Expressed
it should be by his mouth, My ^oul shall make her boast in the Lord. 4. And so
long he would continue in it, till others were moved to do the like; The humble
shall hear thereof, and will be glad.


2. Upon which he provokes others to join with him to praise God also, And
incites others to it.
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together: In that God
heard his prayer, and will hear others also.
he proposes his own example of Gods dealing to him, I sought the Lord, and he
heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.

Yea, but perhaps it may be said, This was a singular mercy exhibited to David.
To which he replies in effect, No, a Mercy it is,

They looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.

But it seems this did not satisfy neither. For they rejoin, And by his Angel
deliver them.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, that is, David, but he was in
favor, and saved him out of all his troubles. The second part.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. Be they who they will. He gives them counsel.
And for this cause he persuades them to join with him in the praise of God.

2. And thence he falls to his instructions. Now the Lessons are two.

1. That they make a trial of Gods goodness: To rely on God.
O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in
him. 2. That they become his Servants: O fear the Lord, ye his Saints, To fear
him, for they shall not wanr.
for there is no want to those that fear him. Which he illustrates by a
comparison, The lions lack, etc. But they that seek the Lord, shall not.
These promises, and this blessing, belongs to none but such as fear God. The
Fear of God; and calls his Auditors to be attentive, This fear he teaches.
Come you Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
That fear of the Lord, which, if a man be desirous of life, and to see many
days, And shows the qualities of the man in whom this fear is.


1. Let him be sure to have a Lock upon his tongue: Keep thy tongue from evil,
and thy lips that they speak no guile. 2. Let him bear no affection to
injustice: Decline and depart from evil. 3. Let him be charitable, ready to do
good works: Do good. 4. Let him be a Peacemaker: Seek peace, and ensue it.
Else, he fears not God.
These be the Characters of those that seek the Lord, and fear him, and these
shall want no manner of thing that good is. Nothing that God sees good for them.

Object. Yea, but are not the righteous exposed to obloquies, scorn, injuries?
etc. and do not the wicked flourish in wealth, power, and authority? etc. To
these God is propitious.


Resp. Yes indeed, but they, the godly, are neither unhappy for this, nor the
ungodly happy. For though the world deride them, and tread them underfoot, yet
they are dear to God.

1. For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, 2. But the face of the
Lord is against those that do evil,
And upon this point David makes his (...), Which largely he declares.
and comes over it in the rest of the Psalm.

1. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears him, he hears him ad voluntatem, or
ad salutem; and delivers him, either by taking them from him, or him from them.
2. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be
of a contrite spirit. Consolatur, confirmat, roborat. 3. many are the
afflictions of the righteous. But deserted they are not. But the Lord delivers
him out of them all, because he makes him patient, constant, able, cheerful in
all, Superior to all. 4. He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them is
broken: Perhaps it refers to Christ, whose bones were not broken; or to the
bones of the Saints in their graves, which shall come again together. Capilli
capitis numerantur.
But as for the ungodly, But the wicked shall perish for their malice.
it is not so with them. Occidet impios malicia. The very root of their
perdition is their malice. The first showed to God, the second to good men.

1. Evil shall slay the wicked. 2. And they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.
And then David concludes this Psalm with this excellent (...). Though God
suffers his Servants to come into trouble, yet he delivers them from thence.
For that is the nature of Redemption, The godly delivered.
to free one from misery; for Redeemed one cannot be, who is not under some
hardship. This shall be done, says David. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his
servants,

The Prayer collected out of the thirty fourth Psalm.
MAny, I will praise thy name at all times, and thy honor shall be continually
in my mouth. It shall be the boast of my soul, and the joy of my heart, that
when I sought thee, thou have heard me, and delivered me from those fears with
which I was surprised.

O let this thy mercy showed to me, raise the hearts of thy afflicted people;
let all those who are of a meek and patient spirit under the cross, heat
thereof, Let them magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name
together, being fully persuaded, that that God who sent his Angel and delivered
me, taste and confess that the Lord is good, and that the man is blessed that
trusts in him,

O Lord, Thou have said it, O make thy word good, That many are the troubles of
the righteous, but do thou deliver him out of all.

And that we may be always in thy favor, and under thy care, good God
instruct-us ever in thy fear. O Lord, our tongue from evil, and our lips from
speaking guile. And because it is a hard matter to have peace with all men,
seek peace so much as in us lies, and to pursue it: So shall we have our
desires, and obtain what we love, long life, see many days,

O Lord, let thy face be against those that do evil, if they persist in it,
slay the wicked, and their death be miserable.

But as for those who serve thee with a single heart, Amen.

PSALM. XXXV. Is (...).
THE parts of it are,

1. A prayer for defense against his enemies. In which he prays, first for
protection, verse. 1, 2, 3, 17, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25. Then imprecates evil to fall
on them, verse. 4, 5, 6, 8, and 26.

2. A bitter complaint against the malice of his enemies, which he pours out
into the ears of God, as motives to plead his cause, verse. 7, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 19, 20, 21.

3. A proposal of his trust and confidence in God for help and deliverance, his
joy in it, verse. 9, 10. His thanks for it, verse. 18, 28. and a motive to others
to do the like, verse. 27.

1. The first part. He prays God. to be his Advocate.
In the Courts of men and Princes innocents are often oppressed by false
accusations and calumnies, persecuted, and over-borne by power. He then,

First, Prays to God to be his Advocate, his Patron and Protector.

1. Litiga: Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that serive with me. 2. Fight
against them that fight against me. 3. Say unto my soul. Assure me, I am thy
salvation. He imprecates against his enemies.

Secondly, He falls to an Imprecation against his enemies.

1. Let them be confounded and put to shame, etc. verse. 4. 2. Let them be as
chaff before the wind, etc. verse. 5. 3. Let their way be dark and slippery,
etc. verse. 6. 4. Let destruction come upon him at unawares, verse. 8.
And here he interserts some reasons of his Petition and Imprecation.

1. From the justice of his cause, and their unjustice: The reasons of both.
Without cause they have hid a net, etc. verse. 7. 2. And my soul shall be
joyful in the Lord, verse. 9, 10. 3. From his enemies dealing with him, from
verse. 11. to 17.
And so enters upon his Complaint, The second part. His complaint of his
enemies.
which is the second part of the Psalm, and upon this he stays long. And he
lays to their charge, 1. Perfidiousness and extreme malice, and perjury: False
witnesses did rise up, 2. They rewarded me evil for good: Good he did to them,
he, 3. (...). In my adversity they rejoiced, etc. 4. The abjects gathered
themselves against me, 5. And then prays again to be delivered from them.
And a Conspiracy in all, to verse. 20, 21.


Then he returns to his Prayer again, and expostulates his cause with God,
wondering that he should be so patient: Lord, how long will thou look on?
resoue my soul from their destruction, And to move God the sooner to do it,
verse. 9. engaging himself to be thankful, Vowing thanks
I will give thee thanks in the great Congregation, I will praise thee among
much people.

And yet so he gives not over, He continues his prayer.
but continues his suit even unto the end of the Psalm, sometimes praying,
sometimes imprecating.

1. Let not them which are mine enemies, wrongfully rejoice over me,
Deprecating.
neither let them in scorn wink with their eyes at me, without a cause. And
that God be the readier to hear him, and stay this their joy and triumph, he
subnects this reason; For they speak not peace, Yea, they opened their mouth
wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it.
This is a Truth, This thou have seen, and from them to thee I turn my eyes,
And praying God to protect him.
and thus make again my prayer.

1. Keep not still silence. Neglect not always my cause, or grant them
impunity. 2. Stir up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause,
my God, and my Lord: defend me, and punish their impudence. 3. Judge me
according to thy righteousness: which suffers not the just to be oppressed
always. 4. Let them not rejoice over me. And in me over the Truth, and a just
cause. 5. Let them not say in their hearts, So would we have it; let them not
say, We have swallowed him up. 6. Let them be ashamed, And bring them to shame.
and brought to confusion, that rejoice at my hurt, let them be clothed with
shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves against me.
The conclusion is drawn from the consequent of David's prayer, The third part.
He moves the Church to give thanks.
if heard, then he, and the whole Church, all good men would rejoice with him.

1. To them he first turns his speech, Let them shout for joy that favor my
righteous dealing; yea, let them say continually, The Lord be magnified which
has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. 2. Which he would be ready to
do.
Then he professes for his own particular as he had done before, verse. 9, 10.
and 18. My tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the
day long.
The Prayer collected out of the thirty fifth Psalm.
O Lord, thou see with how many enemies I am beset, Behold, they have
suborned against me false witnesses, Even they who had nothing but sweet words
of peace in their mouths, took their opportunity to open their mouths wide
against me, to insult and boast, Ah, Thus have they rejoiced in my adversity,
and gathered themselves together for my ruin; yea,

Lord, how long will thou look upon this? how long will thou leave me in the
hands of these ungrateful and cruel men? Up, Lord, rescue my soul at last from
destructions, and my darling from these lions.

O thou the Lord of the whole world, Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them
that strive with me. Wrongfully they pursue me, without a cause they hate me,
let them not then exsult at my ruin,

That this happen not, fight thou against them that fight against me,

Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul, let them be turned
back, and brought to confusion, that devise my hurt. And as the lightest chaff
is blown hither and thither by the wind: let destruction come upon them
unawares, and let the net, that they hid privily, catch themselves, into that
very destruction let them fall. Let them be ashamed, and brought to confusion
together, that take pleasure at my hurt, and let them be clothed with shame
and dishonor,

So shall my soul be joyful in thee, I will not be unthankful, nor stupid upon
the sense of thy mercy; my heart shall exult,

As for me,

O Lord, be merciful to thy poor afflicted and persecuted Church, and in thy
good time deliver thy people from the hand of the Oppressor: Amen.

PSALM. XXXVI. (...).
THE end of this Psalm, is to implore God, that out of his goodness, he would
deliver David, and all good men from the pride and malice of the wicked: To
this purpose, 1. He sets down a Character of a wicked man, and his grievous
estate, from ver. 1. to ver. 5. 2. He makes a Narrative in the commendation of
Gods mercy, from ver. 1. to ver. 10. 3. He prays for the continuance of Gods
goodness to his people, petitions against his proud enemy, and exults at his
fall, ver. 10, 11, 12.


1. The first part.
Howsoever other men may judge of wicked men, bless them while they prosper,

The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, A character of a wicked
man.
that there is no fear of God before his eyes: Sic apud me statuo, sic decerno.
This is David's postulatum, and he first sets it down, as the bitter root from
which all the ill fruit following does grow; and so he enters upon an induction
of particulars, and by them describes a wicked man.

1. He flattereth himself in his own eyes: He calls evil good.
His (...), love to himself is so great, that a great sin in his sight is no
sin; vice is virtue; falsehood, truth. 2. He continues in it.
The second, that in this he continues, and will not be persuaded out of it,
until his iniquity be found to be hateful; till God by some heavy judgment,
has past his sentence, and dislike against it. 3. aliud cord, aliud ore; The
words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: He is an hypocrite.
He gives goodly words, but has war in his heart. 4. He is obstinate.
The fourth is, his pertinacy in evil, and his abrenunciation of good: Desinit
adhibere intelligentiam, he has left off to behave himself wisely; or he will
not understand, that he may do good. 5. verse, he bundles up as it were his
sins. 1. He plots evil, and devises mischief upon his bed. He is studious in
wickedness.
2. He sets himself in the way that is not good. 3. He abhors no evil. He
invents wickedness, he sets about it to perfect it; yea, though it be of the
highest strain; he swallows it, and nauseates it not.
This is the description of a wicked man, which some men beholding, begin to
wonder at Gods patience, that he will endure this a buse and affront, and are
apt upon it to question his providence; to whom, that David may return an
answer, he enlarges himself upon Gods mercy and goodness, Gods patience and
mercy.
from which this his longsuffering does proceed: And two streins there are of
it; the first absolute and general, extended to all: 2. The other particular,
The second part.
which is exhibited to the faithful only.

First, In general: God is good to all, which is seen in his bountifulness, To
all, even all creatures.
his fidelity, and his justice, and his preservation of all things.

1. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens: Thou preservest them. 2. Thy
faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds: They water the Earth, 3. Thy
righteousness is like the great Mountains, immovable. 4. Thy judgments are a
great deep; unsearchable, past finding out. 5. Thou Lord preservest man and
beast; in thee, we live, move, and have our being. But particularly to his
people, which he admires.

Secondly, But of his special care and providence, as it stands in relation to
the faithful, he gives another account; it is a precious thing, he sets a price
upon it, and admires it; O how excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord; Of
which the consequent is in the faithful, hope, confidence, Upon which the
faithful,
comfort in distress.

1. Therefore the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings. Trust.
2. The effects of it, Are satisfied.
the plenty of all good things prepared for the faithful. 1. They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House. 2. Thou shall make them
drink of the Rivers of thy pleasure.
3. To which he adds the cause: For in thee is the Fountain of life, and in
thy light we shall see light.
He concludes with a Prayer. 1. For all Gods faithful people. 2. For himself.
The third part. He prays, that this effect may light,


1. He prays that this peculiar and precious mercy might light upon the heads
of all those that serve God in sincerity: O continue thy loving kindness to
them that know thee, On Gods people.
2. He prays for himself, that he may be defended from the pride and violence
of wicked men: Let not the foot of pride come against me, On himself.
and let not the hand of the wicked remove me. 3. Lastly, He closes all with
this exulting Epiphonema, His acclamation upon it.
There are the workers of iniquity fallen: There, when they promised to
themselves peace and security, and said, tush, no harm shall happen to us;
there, They are cast down, and shall not be able to rise.
The Prayer collected out of the thirty sixth Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, a great deep, which no man can search, an abyss which no
humane understanding can find out: Man and Beast have their being, life, motion
from thee; to man and beast thou suppliest wharsoever is necessary for food or
existence; they are sustained by thy goodness, and preserved by thy mercy.

But thy care, O Lord, and providence over thy people, is far more gracious;
Who can, O how excellent is thy loving kindness toward them thou love, and
them that love thee? These thou will protect, as a Hen does her Chickens, under
the shadow of thy wings. These shall enjoy, not only temporary good things,
common to man and beast; they shall be satisfied with the abundance of thy
House; that is, with the beatifical vision, and full fruition of thyself; for
thou art the fountain of that life which is true life indeed,

Till we come thither, we pass through a valley of darkness, and live a life
that may rather be called a death, it is so full of cares, so full of miseries,
so full of sin; howsoever in this, let us have a taste of thy mercies, protect
us under thy wings, let us dwell in thy house, satisfy us with the graces of
thy Spirit, let us drink of the Rivers of thy pleasure, make our life
comfortable, and let us enjoy the light of thy countenance. This will be life
to us, even when we sit in this shadow of death; this will be light to us, even
while we remain in this darkness.

Here we are subject to many temptations, and the ungodly thrust sore at us,
that we might fall: But O never let the foot of pride come and prevail against
us, let not the hand of the wicked remove us: We know, O Lord, that their
malice is so great against thy Truth, and flatter themselves in their own eyes,
till their iniqity be found out, and made apyear to be odious before God and
man; whatsoever they speak, is full of iniquity and fraud; they are not only
ignorant, whosoever shall advise them to do good, and so hardened in their sin,
that they will not set themselves in any good way, nor abhor even the foulest
evil.

Therefore, O Lord, for thy mercy and faithfulness, for thy loving kindness and
righteousness sake, we beseech thee, suffer not our souls to be delivered over
as a prey into their hands; and since they will not desist from their
mischievous and bloody enterprise, let these worker of iniquity fall together;
for peace, let them find war; Amen.

PSALM. XXXVII. (...).
THE intent of this Psalm is, that good men be not overmuch troubled at the
prosperity of wicked men; and what is here delivered, may be reduced to these
two general Heads.

1. He sets down the Duty of a good man, which is to be patient, and put his
confidence in God, when he sees the wicked prosper and flourish. The first
part. That we fret not at wicked men's prosperity.
2. He gives many Reasons to persuade unto it.
1. He begins with an Interdict, and then descends to give forth some Commands.

1. His Interdict is, Fret not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity. Be nor angry, not envious; for they
shall be cut down as the grass, and wither as the green herb: ver. 7, 8. and
the reason, ver. 9, 10, 35, 36, 38. He sets down some Rules to keep from envy.
2. Then he sets down some commands or rules to keep from fretting and anger.
1. The first, is a perpetual rule for our whole life, Trust in the Lord; rely
not on humane helps, riches, friends, etc. trust to God. 2. Do good, increase
not thy state by ill arts and means. 3. Dwell in the land, desert not thy
station; for verily thou shall be fed. 4. And therefore enjoy quietly what thou
have at present. 5. Delight thou in the Lord, be pleased with his way: Ratio;
Dabit petitiones cordis. 6. Commit thy way unto the Lord; labor in an honest
vocation, leave the rest to him; for he shall bring it to pass; 7. Rest and
acquiesce in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; Fret not thy self.

Then he resumes his former Reason mentioned at the second verse, The first
Reason.
and amplifies it by an Antithesis, viz. that bonis been, malis male erit, ver.
9, 10, 11. The second part. Evil doers cut off.
and so it falls out plerumque, but not semper, which is enough for temporal
blessings.

1. Evil doers shall be cut off; but those that wait on the Lord, shall inherit
the Earth. 2. Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea, and thou
shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be: But the meek shall
inherit the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
To this he adds a second Reason, taken from the Providence of God: 1. The
second Reason. Gods Providence. Object. 1. Bad men hate good men.
In protecting the righteous, and confounding their enemies: 2. In blessing the
little they have, in which he seems to remove a double objection: The first,
about the tyranny of the wicked over just men; The second, that they were
commonly in want and poverty.

The first Tentation that much troubles pious souls, is the power, the cruelty,
the implacable hatred of wicked men; The wicked plotteth against the just, To
which David answers: Resp. God shall revenge it.


The Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees that his day, dies ultionis, is
coming. Reply; yea, they kill them.


Yea, But the wicked have drawn out their Sword, and have bent their Bow
(which is beyond plotting and derision) to cast down the poor and needy, Resp.
They killed for it.
and slay such as are of an upright Conversation. David answers:

Be it so, Their Sword shall enter into their own heart,

The other Tentation, is beggary and poverty; (...). Good men poor. Resp. Their
little better, than great Riches.
The ungodly swim in wealth, but the godly are commonly poor, and therefore
exposed to contempt; (...).

To this David answers, A little that the righteous has, is better than the
riches of many wicked; better, because used better; better, because possessed
with content; better, because it has Gods blessing upon it: David proves by
many Reasons. His Reasons for it, his Riches durable.


1. For the arms of the wicked: i. e. Their arm and strength of riches, shall
be broken; but God sustains with his blessing, that little of the righteous. 2.
The Lord knows the days, good or bad, of the upright; he loves them, and their
inheritance shall be for ever, firm, stable. Not so with wicked rich men.
3. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, nor destitute, nor forsaken of
necessaries, and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
But with rich wicked men it is not so; though they abound in wealth, shall
insensibly consume, perish, as the fat of Lambs, that burnt upon the Altar,
vanishes into smoke, Out of his little he has to give.
and passes away.

4. And yet another blessing there is upon the good man's little, that he has
over and above, the wicked, notwithstanding his ample fortune, But the wicked a
borrower, and pays not.
is a borrower, and has this ill quality, that he pays not again; the
righteous shows mercy, and gives. Of which he gives this Reason: For such as
God blesses, shall possess the earth; i. e. They shall have, And thus much
David proves by his own experience; I have been young, and now am old, He is
ever merciful, and lends, The third Reason. God upholds him.
and his seed is blessed.
Another Argument of Gods protection, is, that God upholds him: The steps of a
good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way; and be it that by
infirmity, though he fall, yet he shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand.

In the rest of the Psalm, He repeats his Rule, to fly evil, and do good.
David makes a repetition of all that went before, he ingeminates his chief
rule, his promises, his comforts, his comminations.

And he begins with his Rule, ver. 3. Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell
for evermore: His Reasons. 1. A promise to the godly.
Mortification, Vivification; which he fortifieth with a double Reason, the
same before.

1. A promise to the godly: For the Lord loves righteousness, he forsakes not
his Saints, 2. A commination to the wicked.
A commination to the wicked; but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
These two Reasons he resumes, amplifies, and illustrates.

First, The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever; He
illustrates the first.
and that you may know who he means by his righteous man, he further sets down
his Character; he it is, 1. The character of the righteous.
Whose mouth speaks wisdom; he speaks honorably and reverently of Gods
Justice, and denies not his Providence. 2. Whose mouth talks of judgment; i. e.
that only which is just and right. 3. The Law of God is in his heart; not in
his tongue alone, or his brain. 4. None of his steps shall slide; he keeps on
his right way, and will not be seduced: ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. has his enemies;
for the wicked watches the righteous, And him God protects.
and seeks to slay him.


Well, The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
judged: And therefore do what I have formerly advised, ver. 3, 7. Wait on the
Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land; when the
wicked are cut off, thou shall see it.

Secondly, He illustrates the second; viz his commination.
For they shall be cut off, as I said, ver. 28. This I know by my own
experience, I have seen the wicked in great power, and flourishing like a green
bay Tree; yet he passed by, and lo he was gone; I sought him, but he could not
be found.

And what I have in my time observed, 1. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright; for the end of that man is peace. 2. But the Transgressors shall be
destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be cut off.


Of which, The cause of both, Gods doing.
if you shall enquire the cause, it is easy to give it, and I have said it
before, but I will here say it over again, for it can be never too often
repeated, that it may be the better remembered: But the salvation of the
righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in the time of trouble; and the
Lord shall help them, and deliver them from the wicked, and on the contrary,
the wicked shall be cut off, and perish, because they trust not in him.

The Prayer collected out of the thirty seven Psalm.
O Almighty Lord, since the weakness of thy best children has been such, that
they have been offended at the prosperity, and repined at the successes of
wicked men; yea, this temptation has so far seized upon them, that they have
called in question thy Providence, and been staggered in the way of Truth and
Piety: Enable me thy servant with thy grace, that I be not tempted above my
strength; Lebanon, and spread and flourish like a green bay Tree: Expect they
do, with a drawn Sword in their hand,

Good God, never suffer our faith and confidence to be shaken at these
proceedings of thy Providence, but with an equal and patient mind, let us
resign our selves to thy will, and be content, thou do what seems good in thy
eyes, being fully assured, that all things shall work together for the best to
those that love God.

O Lord, let us rest in thee, and wait patiently for thee; for thou have said
it, That wicked doers shall be cut off, and yet a little while, and his person
shall descend into the grave; his pomp shall vanish, cut down as the grass, and
wither, as the green herb; let his Sword, that he has drawn against the
innocent, enter into his own heart; let the Bow, which he has bent to wound
the guiltless, and wound himself; because he is the enemy of thy people, he is
an enemy to thee, and therefore let him suddenly and wholly vanish away,

But as for the meek, who with a patient soul delight in thee, and cheerfully
undergo those affronts and injuries which the prosperity of the wicked shall
lay upon them, Give them and their posterity a sure possession in the earth,

Let the little they have, be unto them better than the great riches of the
ungodly, which they have heaped together by unjust ways; their seed to beg
their bread; when by some misfortune they shall fall from a high estate, and
have experience of adversity; or else, if through infirmity they fall into sin,
yet Lord, let them not be utterly cast down, but even then put to thy helping
hand, and lift them up, restore them to their former state, and to thy favor.

This that they may the sooner recover, recall them when they go astray, order
their steps in thy Word, and delight in their way; thy Saints, approve not thou
that unjust sentence which wicked men pass upon them.

O ye righteous, then wait on the Lord, and keep his way; good God, give us all
grace to delight in thee, the wicked shall be cut off: Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace: O Lord, let me dye
the death of the righteous, when the Transgressors shall be destroyed,

O Lord, Amen.

PSALM. XXXVIII. Which is the third of the Penitentials; in which he does
implore Gods mercy, being grievously afflicted.
THE parts of it are, two in general.

1. A Deprecation begun in the first verse, and continued in the two last. 2. A
grievous complaint of his sin, disease, misery, Gods anger, his friends, and
his enemies, through the whole Psalm; all which he uses, as Arguments to move
God to pity him, and show him mercy.
In the first verse, The first part. He deprecates Gods anger.
that the fears of his heart proceeding from the sense of Gods anger against
his sin, might be mitigated at least, though rebuked, yet not in wrath; though
corrected, O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

And so he falls instantly upon his complaint, The second part. His complaint
amplified.
which he amplifieth diverse ways.

1. From the prime cause, God: For thine arrows stick fast in me, thy hand
presses me sore, 2. his sin, his iniquities, ver. 4. his foolishness, ver.
From within.
5. 3. The arrows of God that stuck in his flesh, the hand of God with which he
was pressed; That there was no soundness in his flesh, no rest in his bones. 4.
By an induction of particulars, where he declares many effects of his disease.
1. My wounds stink, and are corrupt. 2. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly,
I go mourning all the day long. 3. My loins are filled with a sore disease. 4.
A general disaffection of parts: There is no soundness in my flesh. 5. I am
feeble, and sore smitten. 6. A pain that forced from him an outcry: I have
roared. 7. The disquietness of his heart: I have roared for the disquietness of
my heart. In the midst of which, that he might not be thought to have let go
his hold, his hope, his confidence in his God, he turns his speech to him;
Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee; he
hopes, he prays still. 8. The palpitation and trembling of the heart: My heart
pants. 9. The decay of his strength: My strength fails. 10. The defect of his
sight: As for the light of my eyes,

All these pressures and calamities were upon David from within, From without.
thus he suffered in body and in mind. But what, had he now a^^^omfort from
without? Not any.

1. None from his friends. By friends.
My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar
off. Amici non amici. 2. As for his enemies, they even then added to his
affliction. Enemies.
They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me, In action, How he
carried himself in this extremity.
tongue, and thought, they seek to undo me.
He next descends to show his behavior in these grievous sufferings both from
within and without. He murmured not at them, but was silent and patient, as a
Lamb he opened not his mouth. But I was as a deaf man that heard not, Patient
he was.
Thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs. was
his strength, Isa. 30.15. Which is another chief Argument he uses to mitigate
Gods wrath, and hot displeasure. Of which patience he gives these reasons.

1. His reliance on God for audience and redress. For in thee, O Lord, For he
relied on God.
do I hope: Thou will hear me. 2. For this he petitions: For to God he was not
silent, And prayed.
though deaf and dumb to man; for I said, Hear me. Hear me then, lest otherwise
they should rejoice over me, as accompting me a patient fool: When my foot
slippeth, they magnify themselves against me. 3. That in the greatness of his
grief he was thus patient, Under a bitter Cross.
for I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. I am under a
bitter cross, and I know if I be thy Servant I must be under the cross, 4. And
this cross I know I have deserved also: it is for my iniquity, For I will
declare mine iniquity, Which he had deserved.
I will be sorry for my sin. I suffer justly, and therefore have reason to be
patient.
Only, O Lord, I hope this shall not be imputed to my impatience, He yet
complains of his enemies.
if I complain again of my enemies, and put thee in mind of their prosperity,
that they live quietly, securely, plentifully, that they are strong and
powerful, that they hate me, and are ungrateful persons.

But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong,

And so he concludes with a petition to God, in which he beggs three things. He
concludes with a Petition; for,
1. Gods presence. Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God, be not far from me. 2.
Aid and help. Gods favor.
3. And then that it be speedily afforded: Make haste to help me, Speedy help.



The Prayer collected out of the thirty eighth Psalm.
O Lord, when I consider the multitude of my sins, and grievousness of my
transgressions, I must confess, though I suffer heavy things under thy hand,
for my iniquities, as some great floods of waters, are gone over my head, and
threaten to drown me in despair, and my sins are a heavy burden that load my
memory and conscience, so heavy they lie upon my so^ that I am not able to bear
them, but am ready to sink under them: sharpest arrows of thy wrath stick fast
in me, and thy severe hand sorely whippeth me, and presses stripe after
stripe; there is no part sound, neither is there any rest in my bones, much
less any peace in my soul, for the multitude and greatness of my sin: Through
great folly I have committed sin, and through greater folly I have dissembled
them, that my loins are justly filled with a loathsome disease, that there is no
soundness in my flesh.

I am troubled righteously for the evils I have committed, bowed down greatly,
I go mourning, and that deservedly, all the day long: I am feeble, sorely
afflicted and humbled, I have roared for the disquietness and anxiety of my
heart. My heart, through the greatness of my affliction, the conscience of my
sin, and consideration of thy wrath, pants, beats, and is troubled;

And in the extremity of this my sorrow, my friends and familiars, and
pretended much friendship and love, these now stand aloof off from my sore;
nay, my very kinsmen stand afar off, affording me no comfort, no show of help.

As for my enemies, and utter calumnies against me; mischievous things they
invent, and imagine deceits all the day long; yea, and these my enemies live in
prosperity, they are potent, and able to mischieve me, they are in number many,
to render me evil; O Lord, Thou know that wrongfully, and that without any
just cause at all given by me, they are my adversaries; no reason at all I am
able to think of; no cause I am able to assign, why they should thus hate me,
why they should thus persecute me, except it be that I am constant in defense
of thy Truth, and follow the thing that good is.

Thy hand, Lord, is justly upon me, and I am content to bear thy reproach; I
have spoken once, I will be as a deaf man, that hears not; at their scorns, as
a dumb man, that opens not his mouth, and commit my cause wholly to thee;

I beseech thee therefore, Forsake me not, O Lord my God, be not far from me;
for I seem to be destined and appointed to bear stripes and affliction, answer
for me, O Lord my God; in my prayer I have, and will always say, Lord hear me,
Amen.

PSALM. XXXIX.
THIS Psalm is conceived to be penned upon the same occasion with the former,
in some grievous distress he was, that is certain; whether by Absalom, or
Shimei, or some great sickness, uncertain: However, as he professed before, at
his sufferings and in juries, he was patient and silent. I was as as a deaf
man, that heard not; and as a dumb man, etc. Psalm. 38.13, 14. Yet here he
confesses, that the tentation was so sharp, and the provocation was so great,
that he could not choose but speak, he could hold no longer, but must needs
burst out; yet as there, so here, his complaint and petition is to his God:
There be three parts of the Psalm.

1. A Manifest of his resolution and full purpose of heart for silence, ver. 1.
and the consequence upon it, ver. 2, 3. 2. His Expostulation with God about the
shortness and variable condition of life, ver. 4, 5, 6. 3. His Petition for
remission from sin, ver. 8. from punishment, ver. 10. for a farther respite and
grace, ver. 12, 13.
First, David acquaints us here with his resolution; Dixi, I said, I decreed,
The first part. David's resolution to be silent.
I fully purposed; and it was filent and dumb in the presence of his enemies.

1. I said I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue; and
again, I will keep my mouth, as with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
2. And this resolution for a while he kept; I was dumb with silence, even from
a just defense. But his heart boiled within him; sain he would speak.
3. But I found in this very great difficulty; nay, impossiblity. 1. For all
this while, my sorrow was stirred, it was pain to me to be silent. 2. My heart
was hot within me; I was in flame to utter my mind. 3. And while I was thus
musing, the fire burst out; what was within, And at last he burst out, and
spoke in a querulous manner. The second part.
I saw could not be concealed, no more than fire, for a while raked up in
embers; and at last, I spoke with my tongue.

Secondly, But better it had been, he had been silent still, since in a
querulous manner he begins to expostulate with God; Lord, let me know mine end,
and the measure of my days, what it is: As if he had said, The condition of
man's life.
yet it has many properties to alleviate the comforts of it.

1. It is very brittle and frail: Make me know how frail I am. Frail.
2. It is very short, it may be measured out by a hand-breadth, Short.
which is no long measure, nor a yard that is made of it: Behold, thou have
made my days as a hand-breadth. 3. Nay, which is yet of less reckoning: It Is
as nothing before thee, a nihil. A Nihil.
4. It Is full of vanity: Verily, every man at his best state, in his strength,
Vain.
riches, power, is altogether vanity; his labors promise much, satisfy
little. 5. It Is unstable and uncertain; as a shadow, the image of a shadow;
Uncertain.
Surely every man walks in a vain shadow. 6. It Is full of trouble and
disquiet; Surely they are disquieted in vain. Troublesome
7. His labors are for he knows not whom: He heapeth up riches, Laborious.
and knows not who shall gather them.
Thus David querulously expostulates, but presently recollecting himself, He
checks himself.
he stops and checks, as it were, his immodesty; nor the brevity, nor the
vanity, nor the uncertainty, nor the anxiety of his life shall hereafter much
trouble him, he had a surer Rock than any worldly thing whereon to rely, which
was his God: And now Lord, And shows God to be his stay.
what wait I for? my hope is in thee. Let others toil for riches, admire
dignities, empires, pleasures; let them be proud of these, and complain that
their life is too short to enjoy these:

Thirdly, The third part. He prays.
Then upon this confidence he falls to prayer.

1. Deliver me from all my transgressions. 2. For remission.
For defense against ill tongues: Make me not a reproach to the foolish. 3.
Pardon for his immodest expostulation, upon promise not to do the like: I was
dumb, For defense.
I opened not my mouth; hereafter I will humble my self under thy hand, Pardon
for his impatience.
and be silent; for thou have done it, my affliction is from thee. 4. A remove
of punishment, and pleads for it.
A remove of his punishment: Take away thy plague away from me. 1. And he adds
the cause; either remove thy hand, or I must needs yield and perish: I am even
consumed by the means, or by the blow of thy hand. 2. And this he amplifies by
a similitude of a Moth, and adds a second Reason: When thou with rebukes do
correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty consume away as a Moth; which
is bred in the Garment, and insensibly corrodes, Upon diverse Reasons.
frets, eats it; as does some disease our body, that bred in it, consumes it:
And for confirmation, he repeats his former words, ver. 5. delivering it here
in a (...), Surely every man is vanity, Selah; mark that. 3. To which may be
added a third, The consideration of our present condition in this life; I am a
stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were; therefore parce.

Faith is always struggling with tentations; before, ver. 7. he is confident,
God is his hope; but yet his calamities, his sickness, his enemies, the
brevity, fugacity, troubles of his life, ever and anon come into his memory,
and therefore he prays again for mitigation of these;

1. He prays for Audience: Hear my prayer, O Lord. 2. He inforceth his prayer.
Then that his cry, for such it was, be heard: Give ear unto my cry. 3. For
admission of his tears: Hold not thy peace at my tears; the Reason is, a
stranger, thy grace, thy favor. 4. For some relaxation and ease: O spare me,
that I may recover my strength; which he quickens with this motive; before I go
hence, and be no more seen. Restore me to thy favor in this life, hereafter it
will be too late to expect it. Ne moriar desperans.
The Prayer collected out of the thirty ninth Psalm.
O Lord, when I beheld the flourishing estate and successes of the wicked, and
the life of the godly worn out with sorrow and afflictions, I being not able to
comprehend the secret ways of thy Providence, was resolved to lay my hand upon
my mouth, and acquiesce in thy will and wisdom: Even so Lord it pleased thee,
so thou wisely disposest, and brings to pass all things; and though I were able
to put in a just Apology for this thy doing, yet I said weithin my self,
especially while the wicked is before me; that I say nothing against thee my
God, nothing unworthy my self.

But while I was dumb with silence, while I held my peace, and refrained even
from good words, in that intemperate heat, zeal and indignation at the wickeds
prosperity,

O Lord, make me know, as a hand-breadth; it is a moment, it is as nothing in
comparison of thee and eternity, and will thou not then suffer me to swallow my
spettle? Behold all things that are in the World, are vanity of vanities, and
man among the rest, his labor, his power, his strength, his favor promise
much, and little satisfy, and will thou then contend with such an one, and
persecute him as the dry stubble? O Lord, man is but the shadow of a shadow,
which is the image of a thing,

This, O Lord, needs not, for he is apt to afflict himself; that little time
which thou have given him, which he ought to endeavor that he might enjoy in a
quiet and peaceable manner, is disquieted with the perturbations of the mind;
for he disquiets himself in vain with fear, and joy, and hope, and a covetous
desire especially, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.
The Prodigal, and unthrifty here, dissipates what he had with so much care, and
perhaps sin heaped together, or else Thieves or enemies violently plunder, and
carry them away.

These considerations, O Lord, I must confess pierced my soul, and these
thoughts wounded my heart, and made me a little impatient; till by thy mercy I
recollected my self, and retired my heart from all things below, For now, Lord,
what wait I for? what is my erpectation? what my confidence? what, my wealth,
my power, my command, my strength, my life? No, no, Lord, I renounce my trust
in all or any of these, Thou Lord only, art my hope, my rock, my strong Castle,
my defense, my help, my subsistence.

Thou, O Lord, which savest all those who hope in thy mercy, deliver me from
all my transgressions, and make me not a reproach to foolish men, to whose
hands thou have now justly delivered me for my iniquities;

But yet, O Lord, I beseech thee make an end of beating me, and remove thy
stroke, that sense of thy wrath, those terrors of conscience, and pains of
body under which I groan; for I am even consumed, and am ready to faint by the
blow of thy heavy hand: Thou have made me an example,

Lord, hear my prayer, and give ear to my cry, a man in this World of a short
continuance, the City I seek is above, my way thither through this valley of
tears, in which for a time I must sojourn, a Citizen I am of that City, a
pilgrim, and a stranger here, and the time I am to abide in it, is but a little
while; and deal more remissly and kindly with me, forbear these severe strokes,
that I may a little recover my strength, by an assurance of thy grace and
favor unto me, before I go hence, and be no more seen among men.

Cease good Lord, to smite and afflict me in this grievous manner, give me some
ease and relaxation of my pain; lay no more upon me, than thou will make me
able to bear: O let me recover my strength of faith and hope in thee in this my
pilgrimage; it is not long, but I must depart from hence, and not be seen any
more in this land of the living: Grant therefore good Lord, that I leave not
this World with a conscience oppressed, and affrighted with the grief and
burden of my sin; but that being discharged of that guilt; I may quietly and
peaceably resign my soul into thy hands, being clothed and beautified by the
merits of thy only Son, my Lord and only Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM. XL. Which is (...).
THERE be two main parts of this Psalm.

1. A Thanksgiving, from ver. 1. to 11. 2. A Prayer, from ver. 11. to the end.
Thankfulness consists in the exercise of two virtues, Truth and Justice.

1. Truth causes us to acknowledge the benefit, and from it we have received
it. 2. Justice ties us to be grateful, and to perform some duties, as evidences
of our thankful mind; and both these we meet with in the first part.
David begins with the profession of his thankfulness, The first part. David
waits on God.
and he premits to it his confidence, I waited patiently for the Lord; then
shows the success, or what God did for him.

1. The success of his waiting.
He inclined his ear, and heard my cry. 2. He brought me also out of the
horrible pit, out of the mire and clay. 3. He set my feet upon a Rock; being
drawn from danger, he set me in a safe place. 4. He established my goings, he
confirmed my steps, that I slip and slide no more. 5. He has put a new song
into my mouth, He is thankful.
even a thanksgiving unto our God. The deliverance was not common, and
therefore the praise should not be common, but expressed by a new and exquisite
song.
Of which he conceived the consequent would be, And conceives others by his
example, would wait, and be thankful also. In his thanksgiving, he shows the
blessed man.
that his example would be a common document; many shall see it, my
deliverance, my thanks, and shall fear God, and acknowledge his providence and
protection, and shall put their trust in the Lord.

And so he falls upon his form of thanksgiving, and, First, Pronounces the man
blessed that relies on God, affirmatively. 1. Blessed is the man that makes the
Lord his trust, reposeth his hope in him. He it is that relies on God.
2. respects not the proud; men proud of their wealth, 2, Not on man.
wit, or power, nor such as turn aside to lies, trust on lying vanities,
Admires Gods works.
which will deceive.
Secondly, Then by an exclamation admires Gods mercies and goodness to his
people. 1. Many, O Lord my God, are thy Works. 2. For the strangeness, they are
not vulgar, but miraculous: Thy wonderful Works. 3. For the incomparable wisdom
by which they are done and ordered: Many, O Lord my God, are thy wondrous Works
which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward; they cannot be
reckoned up in order unto thee; if I would declare them, and speak of them,
they are more than can be numbered.



2. And so having in words acknowledged his thankfulness, His real thanks by
obedience:
he descends to speak of the other part of his gratitude, his real thanks, to
which in equity he thought himself bound: viz. To be obedient to Gods voice,
which is the best sacrifice, and indeed far beyond all legal sacrifices; as is
apparent in Christ, to whom these words, and the obedience contained in them,
is principally attributed, and by way of accommodation, belongs to every one of
his Members, who means to be thankful for his Redemption.

1. And first he acquaints us, that the outward worship is to little worship,
Which was, 1. Sincere inward.
if sincerity and true piety inwardly be wanting: Sacrifice and offerings thou
did not desire, burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required. I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice. 2. To this end, Aures perforasti mihi; Thou
have opened, boared, Outward.
and made a window in my ear; made me docible, and thy servant. 3. And I will
be obsequious, a willing and voluntary servant: Then said I, this thy whole Law
requires, Voluntary, such in Christ.
in the Volume of thy Book it is written. 4. He describes his singular
obedience. 1. That he performed it cheerfully, and with complacency: Cheerful.
I delight to do thy Will, O my God. 2. That he did it heartily: Thy Law is
within my heart. Hearty.
The obedience of eyes, hands and feet may be hypocritical and feigned, that
which is done with the heart cannot; that the heart thou requirest, and that
thou shall have; to that purpose I have placed thy Law there. 3. That he did it
charitably, to the benefit of others, Charitable for our good.
he published the Gospel. 1. I have preached righteousness in the great
Congregation. 2. I have not refrained my lips, and that thou know: Feci sine
fuco. In the publication of the Gospel.
3. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart. 4. I have declared thy
faithfulness, and thy salvation. 5. I have not concealed thy loving kindness
and truth from the great Congregation. The commendation of the Gospel:



In which verse, we have the commendation of the Gospel, that it is
righteousness, for it justifies, it sanctifies; that it is Gods truth and
faithfulness, for in it his promises are performed; that it is our salvation,
freeing us from sin, death, To which we must be obedient.
Gods wrath, hell; which must be published and preached in the great
Congregation; and to it obedience must be yielded, to which there be four
things necessary set down in this place.

1. The help of Gods Spirit, Thou have opened my ears. 2. A ready and willing
mind, Then said I, lo I come. 3. A ready performance in the work, I delight to
do thy Will. 4. That a respect be had to Gods Law, Thy Will is within my heart.
And thus having premised his thanks for some deliverance already receive, The
second part. He petitions for favor.
he thought he might be the bolder to petition for continuance of this mercy
and favor for the future; upon which he now enters in these words, Withhold
not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord, His reasons for it.


Of which Petition, he adds a necessary Reason drawn from the greatness of his
evils and sins.

1. For innumerable evils have compassed me; his miseries were many. His sad
condition.
2. My iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up;
they are more in number than the heirs of my head. 3. Therefore my heart
fails me; my agony is great, my vital spirits fail.
And therefore prays again, Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me, And for the
confusion of his enemies.
make haste to help me.

2. The second part of his prayer, is, for the confusion of his wicked enemies;
Let them be ashamed,

3. He prays for all good men.
The third part of his prayer, is, for all good men: Let all those that seek
thee, be joyful and glad in thee; let such as love thy salvation, say
continually, The Lord be praised,

In the Close, And for himself.
he renews his Petition for himself, and to move God the sooner, 1. He puts
himself into the number of the poor aflicted people, he boasts not, I am a just
man, a King, a Prophet: But I am poor and needy. 2. Yet the Lord, I know,
thinks upon me. 3. He casts himself solely on God: Thou art my Help, and my
Deliverer. 4. Therefore make no long tarrying, O my God, delay me not.


The Prayer collected out of the fortieth Psalm.
O Lord, I am poor, and destitute of all humane help, think upon me, Thou art
my Helper and Deliverer in all my troubles, Withhold not thou thy tender
mercies, which thou have hitherto showed, from me, and let thy loving kindness
and truth, in performing thy promises, always preserve me.

For troubles,

Great evils I have formerly suffered under thy hand, I ardently, continually
and patiently expected thee my Lord, and thou did incline thy ear to me,
bring me out of this misery and calamity in which I am plunged, as in some deep
Pit, or in some miry and thick Clay; and being delivered, set me upon a Rock
and safe place, and settle and confirm my goings, that I may walk with a shady
and inoffensive foot.

I know by experience, That the man is blessed that makes the Lord his trust,
and relies not upon his wit, of whom it is written in the Volume of thy Book,

Many, not to me alone, but to all those that trust in thee; and thy thoughts,
which are for good to Mankind, who can number? They cannot be declared, they
cannot be spoken, they cannot be set in order before thee: But of all thy works
of wonder, that is most admirable, that thou should send thy only Son into
the World, fit him with a body, and cloth him with our flesh, bring him down,
and humble him to the state of a servant, that he might do thy Will, redeem
lost man, by making his soul a sacrifice for sin: It Is the wonder of wonders,
that upon the Cross he should shed his blood to save us weak men, and without
strength; ungodly, and without worth; enemies, and without love; for scarcely
for a righteous man will one dye: But in this thou have commended thy love to
us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. O wonderful love, O
unexpressible mercy! We that were ungodly sinners, are justified by his blood;
we, who were sons of wrath, are through him saved from thy wrath; we, who were
enemies, are reconciled unto thee by his death; we, in him, have received that
perfect righteousness and justice; which alone we dare plead before thy
Tribunal; his obedience being a full satisfaction for our disobedience; his
voluntary sacrifice the sole oblation with which thou art well-pleased.

And this mercy and faithfulness thou have declared and published to the sons
of men, and sent thy servants into the World, that they should proclaim these
glad tidings, of which thou have called me, the unworthiest of all thy
servants, to be an Ambassador: which thou freely offerest to all penitent
Believers: This I have declared in the frequentest and fullest Assemblies.

For this I now suffer, and bitter enemies I have, That seek after my soul to
destroy it; O let them be ashamed and confounded together, let them be
forsaken,

Free me, O Lord, from their hands, expecting defense and deliverance from thee
alone, may have just reason continually to say, The Lord be magnified, who is
so merciful and just toward his servants. Amen.

PSALM. XLI.
IN this Psalm, David shows how men should, and how commonly they do carry
themselves toward men in affliction and trouble.

1. They should carry themselves compassionately and kindly, which would make
them happy, and find mercy from God, from ver. 1. to 4. which is the first part
of the Psalm. 2. But they commonly carry themselves unkindly, and afflict the
afflicted, of which David complains, from ver. 4. to 10. which is the second
part. 3. Upon which unkindness he flies to God, and prays for mercy, ver. 11.
shows his hope and confidence in God, ver. 11, 12. and blesses him, ver. 13.
which is the third part.
1. He begins with an excellent (...), or a grave sentence, The first part. He
is blessed,
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy; i. e. any man in trouble,
want, etc. That is of compassionate bowels.
and applies the following particulars to the poor and needy, or to the man
that considers him, Interpreters are doubtful; the particular comforts are six.

1. The Lord will deliver him in time ^f trouble. 2. The Lord will preserve
him, that he faint not in his great troubles. The particulars of his blessing.
3. The Lord will keep him alive, prolong his life and days. 4. He shall be
blessed upon earth, God shall enrich him, and bless his substance. 5. Thou will
not deliver him to the will of his enemies; never to their will, to their full
desire, though sometimes into their hands. 6. The Lord will strengthen him upon
the Bed of languishing, his Bed in his sickness: He shall have comfort in his
grief, and assurance of Gods favor in his sick Bed.
Now before he enters upon the second part, The second part. He petitions for
mercy.
the complaint of the unkindness of men to him; he offers a short ejaculation
to God, begging mercy, health and pardon, which he asks upon confession of his
sins; health he asks first for his soul, that being healed from sin, he doubts
not it would go well with his body.

1. I said, the Lord be merciful to me, merciful to my sin. 2. Heal my soul, in
which there is yet the sense of thy wrath. 3. He complains of others malice.
And the Reason is, because I have sinned against thee.
And the complaint of himself being ended, he complains of others.

1. Of their hatred and malice: My enemies speak evil of me. 2. When shall he
dye, and his name perish? Cruelty.
They would have no memory left behind of me. 3. Perfidiousness.
Their perfidious dealing and dissimulation: They come indeed to visit me, but
it is to fish what they can from me, If he comes to see me, he speaks vanity,
all vain and feigned words; for his heart gathers iniquity to it self,
fraudulently searches my counsels; for presently being gone abroad, he opens
and tells all to my hurt. 4. Conspiracies
Of their plots and conspiracies: All that hate me, whisper together against
me, 5. Joy at his miseries.
Their (...), or exultation at his misery: An evil disease, say they, 6. Of a
perfidious friend.
Of the perfidiousness of some particular friend, perhaps Achitophel: Yea, mine
own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up
his heel against me;
And then he prays, The third part. He prays to God to raise him.
But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up; which prayer he
enforces by these Reasons.

1. That thereby, as a King, he should have power to do justice on Traitors,
That I may requite them. 2. By this I know thou favourest me, etc. 3. As for
me, thou upholdest me in my integrity, and se^t^st me before thy face for ever.
Then he closes the Psalm with a Benedictus, And concludes with a Benedictus.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting.

The Prayer collected out of the forty first Psalm.
O Merciful God,

This very day, is a day of blackness and heaviness, of gloominess and sad
affliction unto thy servants, and Lord, out of a fellow-feeling I lay it to
heart, I pray not for my self alone, but for them also: O Lord, deliver them in
this time of trouble, preserve them, and keep them, that they fall not into
evil, nor faint not under their pressures: enmies is unsatiable; their desire
is to root them out, that they may be no more a people, O never deliver them to
their will, nor leave them in their hands, into which thou have now brought
them, for some reasons best known to thee: When thou shall cast any of these
upon his sick bed, then stand by him, Make thou for him his Bed in all his
sickness; Lord,

Thou Lord, know our enemies, how many they are, My own familiar friends
whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, whom I have fed at my Table, and
sustained with my meat, this man, or this beast rather, has lift up his heel
against me, and kick't at me.

And I among others, oppressed with these evils, do here prostrate my soul
before thee, O Lord, be merciful unto me, raise me up from this calamitous
condition, and make me know by this expression of thy mercy, that thou
favourest me, By this I shall know, That thou will uphold thy servants in their
integrity, Amen. Amen.

Here ends the first Book of the Psalms, as the Jews divide them; and so also
Junius and Tremellius, Moller. and Bellarmine.
PSALM. XLII. (...).
DAVID, whether by Saul or Absolon, Psalm in order, than the speeches of a
passionate man; yet I shall endeavor it, by reducing the whole to these four
heads.

1. The zeal of David to serve God in Gods house, ver. 1, 2, 4, 6. 2. His
complaints, and expressions of grief for his absence, for his affliction, and
his enemies insultation upon that ground, ver. 3, 4, 7, 10. 3. His
expostulation with his soul for his dissidence, ver. 5, 6. And again, with God
for his desertion, ver. 9. 4. His faith and confidence in Gods promises, ver.
5, 8, 11.
More particularly, David's zeal to Gods House and Worship.


1. He begins with an expression of his grief, for his ejection from the
Assembly, and then sets forth his zeal and desire he had to be present with
Gods people, by an elegant similitude of a chased, As the Heart pants after
the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God; my soul is athirst for
God, ver. 1, 2.

2. His sorrow, and the causes.
Then he shows what case he was in in the mean time, in a very heavy condition.

1. My tears have been my meat day and night, ver. 3. 2. The insultation of
enemies.
And the cause was, not only his absence, but this bitter Sarcasm of his
enemies; namely, while they insult, and continually say in scorn unto me, Where
is now thy God?
3. His banishment from Gods presence.
Now that which added to his grief, was that which gave occasion to this
Sarcasm, his Banishment from Gods Sanctuary, and consequently, as they thought,
from his favor and presence: This overwhelmed his soul with sorrow, this
caused a flood of tears.

1. The remembrance of his former happiness.
When I remember these things, my absence, their insultation, I pour o^t my
heart by my self; Effundo; undaque impellitur uno; Tear follows upon tear;
complaint, and that from the heart, upon complaint. 2. And good Reason, when I
lay together my former happiness with my present condition; for the comparison
aggravates my misery: Thus it was with me, but now it is not so. I had gone
with the multitude, I went with them to the House of God, with the voice of joy
and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy Day, ver. 4. I had gone, now I
cannot, I must not go.
2. At which being somewhat dejected.
Hitherto he has expressed his zeal, his sorrow, his complaints, with the
causes of them, these put his soul into a sad condition; to which, by an
Apostrophe,

1. He blames himself for it.
Blaming himself for his weakness and diffidence: Why art thou so vexed; O my
soul? why art thou cast down? and why art thou so disquieted within me? 2. Hnd
revives by faith.
Then presently fortifies himself in Gods promises, assuring himself of the
performance; Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
countenance.
In all which, is lively described unto us the combat and tentation that a
good man undergoes in a spiritual desertion, who finds a great difficulty to
struggle at the same time with despair and hope; who yet at last conquers
through faith, and kisses the promises.

3. His conflict renews.
But as yet David's combat is not over; for he renews his complaint, Lucta
recursat and trahitur ad novas pugnas; O my God, my soul is cast down within
me; of which he assigns two causes. The causes.


1. Jordan, at Hermon; 'twas his grief, that there, and not at Zion, he must
remember it: Therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the
Hermonites from the Hill Mizar. 2. Deep calls upon deep; All thy waves and
billows, all kind of afflictions, are gone over me.
4. His Faith in it.
And yet he despairs not, he casts not away his hope and confidence for all
that, but again closes with his God, and encourages himself in his mercy:
Yet, I know, the Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime: in the
night-season, even in this night of trouble: 1. His song shall be with me. 2.
And my prayer unto the God of my life. Upon which he takes heart.



5. Upon which he grows more bold, courageous, confident, and fuller of life
and spirit, and again expostulates, not now with his soul, as before, but with
his God; I will say unto God, my Rock.

1. Why have thou forgotten me? for so much my carnal part presents to me. 2.
Why go I thus mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy? 3. Why am I
thus wounded with grief? For, as with a Sword in my bones, mine enemies
reproach me, while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? Omnes dolores
leves, preterquam tum carendum quod erat.
6. But in the close, after all his complaints and expostulations, And quiets
his soul.
he quiets his soul (as every good man ought in the like vicissitudes of trial
and combat) by a full assurance, faith, confidence of Gods favor and
protection.

1. Chiding himself for his discontent and diffidence: Why art thou cast down O
my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? 2. Then encourages and revives
his heart upon Gods goodness and faithfulness: Hope thou in God, for I shall
yet give him thanks, who is the help of my countenance, and my God.
PSALM. XLIII.
THIS Psalm is of the same nature with the former, and is, as it were, the
Epitom of it, and it contains two chief things.

1. A Petition, which is double. 1. One in the first verse. 2. The other in the
fourth verse. David's Petition, that God would be his Judge.



2. A comfortable Apostrophe to his own soul, ver. 5.

First, He petitions to God. The first part.


1. That being righteous, he would be his Judge: Judge me, O Lord. 2. That
being merciful, he would plead his Cause: Plead my Cause. 3. That being
Omnipotent, he would deliver him: Deliver me, ver. 1.
Of this he assigns two Reasons.

1. The first, the unmerciful condition of his enemies. The Reasons of it two.
1. They were a factious, bloody, inhumane people: Plead my cause against an
ungodly Nation, an unmerciful people, ver. 1. 2. They were men of deceit and
iniquity: Deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man, ver. 1.
2. The other from the Nature of God, and his relation to him: For thou art the
God of my strength, ver. 2. Thou have promised to defend me; His expostulation
upon it.
and upon it he expostulates. 1. Why have thou cast me off? For so to the eye
of sense it seems to me. 2. Wh^ go I mourning, because of the oppression of the
enemy? ver. 2.

Secondly, The second partt of his Petition, is, The second Petition, for Gods
favor.
that he may be restored to Gods favor, and reduced from banishment to his
Country, ver. 3.

1. O send forth thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me, ver. 3. 2. Let them
guide me; whether? to my dignity and honors? No, I ask not that so much, as to
thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles, where I may enjoy the exercises of
piety, ver. 3.
Thirdly, Which if granted, he vows to be thankful.
that this courtesy should not be cast away upon an ungrateful wretch;
thankful he would be, and make it known how good God had been unto him.

1. Then will I go to the Altar of God, unto the God of my exceeding joy; the
joy and content he would take in this, should not be vulgar. 2. Yea, upon the
Harp will I praise thee, O God my God. His joy should be expressed outwardly,
and Gods Name celebrated with a Psalm, and instruments of Music, ver. 4.
The Petitions being ended, The second part. His faith by which he quiets his
soul.
and he now confident of audience and favor, he thus bespeaks his heavy and
mournful heart, just as in the former Psalm: 1. Chiding. 2. Encouraging himself.

Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God, ver. 5.

The Petition collected out of the forty second Psalm.
O most just God, for our heinous transgressions and profaness, it has seemed
good unto thy Majesty to turn away thy favorable countenance from us, and to
banish us from those comforts which we were wont to enjoy in thy Temple, and in
thy Courts. By the want we are come to know the just value of those enjoyments,
and brought to confess the advantage of those Petitions which in public we
offered with thy Saints and servants, before those suits, which now we singly
make in our retirements: This is it, that in secret setcheth sighs from our
hearts, and tears from our eyes, that we may once more meet in the beauty of
holiness.

Behold, as the chased Heart, ready to perish for heat and thirst, pants after
the waterbrooks, in whom are the Fountains of living water: Oh therefore that
that day would once come, that we might go to thy Sanctuary again, and freely
appear in thy presence.

The insultations of our enemies are many and bitter, they judge us quite
rejected, and cast off by thee; and this is it which breaks my heart, and my
tears have been my meat day and night,

Now when I compare my former estate with my present condition, for I lay to
heart, How I had gone with the multitude; I went with them to the House of God
with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept Holy Day: But now
it is otherwise, I am driven from thy Sanctuary, I am cast out from thy Temple,
and this is it, which makes my soul within me like melting wax; this is it,
which makes my life a burden to me.

O my God, it is a trouble that I must remember thee even from this place of
banishment, even from these desolate places, and land of strangers to which I
am driven; All thy waves and billows of afflictions are gone over me, and are
ready to sink and drown me.

Yet Lord, I despair not of thy mercy and goodness, I know the Lord will
command, and make me sensible of his loving kindness in the daytime, and in
the night-season he will continue his love, so that I shall have just reason to
sing of him, and my prayer shall approach and come unto the God of my life.

Why then art thou cast down, why do thou despair? why art thou so impatient?
O hope, and put thy trust in God, be bold upon the confidence of his presence
and help; for I know the day will come, when he will yet look upon me with a
favorable eye, when I shall yet confess his Name, and praise him for the help
of his countenance.

I will say unto God, O thou my Rock, my stay, my hope, Their reproach is no
less grief unto me, than if I felt a Sword of death in my bones, it wounds me
to the very heart to hear them daily say unto me, Where is thy God? where is
thy Helper, thy Redeemer, thy Deliverer?

But, O my soul, be of good comfort, Why art thou cast down?

The Prayer out of the forty third Psalm.
O God, thou art my strength and comfort, Judge me then, as if thou had cast
me aside? that bitter enemy to me, and to thy Church.

O send out thy Light, and thy Truth: Compassed about we are with a fearful
mist and darkness of errors, and false opinions; dispel these thick Foggs with
the beams of thy Truth: Driven even to the very brink of despair we are by our
present calamities, and yet we remember, that thou have made many comfortable
promises to those that fear thy Name, verify these, O Lord, in us, and to us,
and let these always lead us, and direct us in our way, till they again bring
us to thy holy Hill, and to thy Temple, where thine honor dwells, and where
thou have promised to be present, and to hear the supplications of thy servants.

Bring us again to thy House, O God, Thou,

Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me?

Though the storms and waves of persecutions have gone over us, and the depths
of Tentations gaped very wide to swallow us up quick; yet we are confident,
that with the Tentation, thou will give the issue, and so moderate the whole by
thy grace and mercy, that the solid joy of a good conscience shall never be
taken from us.

O Lord, enable us by the power of thy Spirit, that in these our pressores we
fall not from thee, but expect deliverance from thy hand, for which we will
return thee thanks in the great Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PSALM. XLIV.
IN this Psalm is lively expressed the Sufferings, the Complaints, the
Assurances, the Petitions which are offered to God by good men, who suffer
together with other in the common afflictions that God brings on his people.

The parts are two: The Arguments to persuade his Petitions.
1. A Petition, from ver. 24. to the end. 2. The Arguments by which the
Petition is quickened, from ver. 1. to 24.


First, He begins with the Arguments; of which,

1. The first part.
The first is drawn from Gods goodness, of which he gives in particular; viz.
his Benefits and Miracles done for their Fathers; Arg. From Gods goodness to
his people.
as if he had said, This thou did for them, why art thou so estranged from us?

1. We have heard with our ears, O God, and our Fathers have told us, what
Works thou did in their days, The particulars of which are: 1. How thou
did drive out the Heathen; viz. the Canaanites. 2. How thou plantedst them.
3. How thou did afflict the people, and cast them out, ver. 2.
2. This we acknowledge to be thy work; which he expresses: 1. They got not
the Land in possession by their own Sword, neither was it their own arm that
helped them, ver. 3. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the
praise. 2. (...), Positively; for it was thy right hand, and thy arm, and the
light of thy countenance, a mere gratuito, because thou had a favor unto
them, no other reason can be assigned, but that, ver. 3.
3. Apostrophe, he turns his speech to God, and sings an (...), For which he
sings an (...).
of which the streins are: 1. An open confession, Thou art my King, O God. 2. A
Petition, Send help unto Jacob, ver. 4. 3. A confident persuasion of future
victory; but still with Gods help and assistance, ver. 5, 6, 7. 1. Through thee
will we push down our enemies. 2. Through thee will we tread them under that
rise up against us; all through thee, in thy Name, by thy Power.
4. An abrenunciation of his own power or arm: For I will not trust in my Bow,
5. A reiteration, or a second ascription of the whole victory to God: But thou
have saved us from our enemies, ver. 7. 6. In God we boast all the day long,
The second Argument, the present misery the Church was in.
and praise thy Name for ever, Selah.

Secondly, The second Argument by which he wings his Petition, is drawn from
the condition in which for the present Gods people were in; before he had done
wonders for their deliverance, but now he had delivered them to the will of
their enemies: This would move a man to think that his good will was changed
toward them.

But thou have cast us off, The consequent lamentable.
and put us to shame, and go not forth with our Armies,

Of which the consequences are many and grievous, although we acknowledge that
all is from thee, and comes from thy hand and permission.

1. Thou make us to turn back from the enemy, ver. 10. 2. The second, we
become a prey: They which hate us, spoil for themselves, v. 10. 3. Thou have
given us as sheep appointed for meat, killed cruelly, when, and as they please,
ver. 11. 4. The fourth, we are driven from out Country, and made to dwell
where they will plant us: Thou have scattered us among the Heathen; inter
Gentes, without God in the World. 5. The fifth, we are become slaves, sold and
bought as Beasts, and that for any price, upon any exchange: Thou sellest thy
people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price, ver. 12.
puts them off as worthless things. 6. The sixth, we are made a scorn, a mock,
and to whom? to our enemies; nay, for that might be born; but even to our
friends and neighbors: Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn
and derision to them that are round about us; and this he amplifies: 1. From
the circumstances: 1. That they were a Proverb of reproach: The Aggravation by
an excellent incrementum, or (...).
Thou make us a byword among the Heathen: 2. That in scorn any one that
would, used a scornful gesture toward them: We are become a shaking of the head
among the people. 3. That this insultation is continual: My confusion is daily
before me. 4. It is superlative; shame so great, that he had not what to say to
it: The shame of my face has covered me. 5. It is public, their words and
gestures are not concealed, they speak out what they please; Ashamed I am for
the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth, for the enemy and avenger.

Thirdly, And yet he uses a third Argument, The third Argument, from the
constancy of the Church under the Cross
that the Petition may be the more grateful, and more easily granted; drawn it
is, from the constancy and perseverance of Gods people in the profession of the
Truth, notwithstanding this heavy cross, persecution, and affliction.

All this is come upon us: Thus we are oppressed, devoured, banished, sold,
Yet* we continue to be thy servants still, we retain our faith, hope, service.

1. We have not forgotten thee; not forgotten that thou art our God. 2. We have
not dealt falsely in thy Covenant; we have not bogled and jugled in thy Service,
daubing with any side for our advantage, renouncing our integrity. 3. Our heart
is not turned back; our heart is upright, not turned back to the Idols our
Fathers worshipped. 4. Our steps are not gone out of thy way: Slip we may, but
not revolt; no not though great calamities are come upon us: 1. Broken: 2.
Broken in the place of Dragons; i. e. enemies fierce as Dragons: 3. Their
appeal.
Though covered with the shadow of death.
Now that all this is true, we call thee our God to witness,

If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands to, etc.

Fourthly, But the last Argument is more pressing than the other three; The
fourth Argument, from their profession of truth.
it is not for any wrong we have done those who thus oppress us, that we are
thus persecuted by them; it is for thee, it is because we profess thy Name, and
rise up in defense of thy Truth.

Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long,

The sum then is, since thou have been a good God to our Fathers, since we
suffer so great things under bitter Tyrants, since notwithstanding all our
sufferings, we are constant to thy Truth, since these our sufferings are for
thee, for thy sake, His Petition.
thy truth; therefore awake, arise, help us; for upon these grounds he
commenceth his Petition. The second part.


This is the second part of the Psalm, which begins, ver. 23. and continues to
the end; in which Petition there be these degrees.

1. That God, Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, ver. 23. 2. That he would
arise, and judge their cause, and not seem to neglect them as abjects: Arise,
cast us not off for ever, ver. 23. 3. That he would show them some favor,
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and oppression?
4. Lastly, That he would be their Helper, and actually deliver them: Arise for
our help,
Which Petition, that it might be the sooner and easier granted, he briefly
repeats the second Argument: ver. 25. For our soul is bowed down to the dust,
our belly cleaves to the Earth; brought we are, as low as low may be, even to
the dust, to death, to the grave.

The Prayer collected out of the forty fourth Psalm.
O God the Father of mercy, That thou have gathered thy Church out of all
Nations, that thou have driven out thine own people, the Jews, and planted us
Gentiles in their room: Thou have called us by thy Gospel, redeemed us by thy
Blood, purified us by thy Spirit, and that not for any merit that was in us, or
goodness, or power, For we got not a possession in thy Church, by our own
Sword, neither was it out own arm that could save us; but it was thy right
hand, and thy arm, and the light and favor of thy countenance; no other reason
can be given of this wonderful kindness, but because thou had a favor, and
borest a good will unto us.

But now, O Lord, Thou have cast us off, and put us to shame, Thou have not
gone forth with our Armies: Thou have made us turn our backs upon our enemies,
and they that hate us, spoil us, our habitations, our goods, and thy Temples
at their pleasure; deslined we are, like simple and harmless sheep, to be
slaughtered and devoured by these greedy woldes, scattered and dispersed
whether they please, to those round about us, a scorn, a derision, a proverb;
our misery is their mirth, and at the sight of us,

Thou, these scorns and calamities we suffer for the profession of thy Truth,
and yet we are patient under the Cross; Yet we have not forgotten thee, thy
Worship, thy Service, nor dealt falsely and hypocritically in thy Covenant; our
heart is yet sincere and upright, we have not turned our backs upon thee, No,
not when thou have smitten us in a land of captivity, where we converse with
Dragons in the shape of men, with the face of death. Should any such wickedness
be in our hands, it could not be hid from thee, Thou, Lord, would search it
out; for thou know the secret of the heart.

And now, Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is then in thee: Thou art our
King, Give us power by thee, to push down our enemies, and through thy Name, to
tread them down that rise up against us: We will not trust in our Bow, neither
shall our Sword save us; it is thou alone, put them to shame and confusion that
hate us.

At this time we are in great distress, belly cleaves to the ground: Awake
therefore, O Lord, why sleep thou, Thy mercy will appear to be so wonderful
and signal in our delivery, that we will give thee perpetual and eternal
thanks, celebrate and extol thy loving kindness from Generation to Generation.

PSALM. XLV. An Epithalamium, or spiritual Marriage-Song, composed for the
solemn espousal of Christ and his Church.
THE Type of the Messiah is Solomon; of the Church, especially of the Gentiles,
to be espoused, Pharaoh's daughter.

Three parts there are of the Psalm. 1. A Preface, v. 1, 2. 2. The body of the
Psalm, containing two commendations. 1. Of the Bridegroom, from ver. 3. to 10.
2. Of the Bride, from ver. 10. to 18.
3. The Conclusion promissory and laudatory, ver. ult.


1. In the Preface, the Prophet commends the Subject he is to treat of, The
first part. The Preface.
signifying: 1. That is a good thing; good, as speaking of the Son of God, who
is the chief good. 2. And good for us; good.


2. That the Author of this Psalm, and the Subject of it, is God: He was but
the pen, the instrument to write it, full he was of the Holy Ghost; therefore
his heart was enditing, and his tongue followed the dictate of his heart, and
presently became the instrument of the ready Writer, viz. of the Holy Spirit:
My tongue is the pen of a ready Writer.

And so having insinuated into his Auditory, 1. The second part.
By the commendation of the matter of which he is to treat; viz. that it is
good. 2. That it tends to a good end; viz. to the honor of the King: i. e.
Christ the King of his Church. He falls upon the main business, which has two
particulars.

1. He turns his speech to Christ the King, The excellency of Christ.
and commends him for many eminent and excellent endowments, never was there
such a Spouse.

1. For his beauty: Thou art fairer than the children of men. 2. For his
elocution and speech: Full of grace are thy lips. 3. For his valor and
fortitude: Gird thee with thy Sword upon thy thigh, O most Mighty. 4. For his
happy success and prosperity in his Kingdom: And in thy Majesty ride on
prosperously. 5. For his equal administration of his Kingdom, in Truth,
Meekness, Righteousness: Ride on, because of Truth, Meekness and Righteousness.
6. For his Battles and Conquests: Thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things; thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, 7. For the
stability and eternity of his power: Thy Throne, O God, 8. For his justice and
equity: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter; Thou love
righteousness, and hate iniquity. 9. For the fullness of his gifts and graces,
superlatively beyond all others: Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy Fellows. 10. For his splendor both in his
garments and buildings: All thy garments smell of Myrrh,
There is nothing we can call good, The commendation of the Church.
either internally, or externally, nothing praiseworthy in any Prince, that
may not be found in this King.

2. From the Bridegroom he descends to commend the Bride, which is the
Catholic Church, whom he sets forth: 1. By her Attendance: 1. No mean persons,
but Kings daughters, and honorable women. 2. By her Name, Title and Dignity: A
Queen. 3. By her Place: On the right hand did stand the Queen. 4. By her Attire
and Vesture: She stood in a vesture of gold of Ophir.


And in the very midst of this great Encomium, His counsel to the Church.
he breaks off, and by an Apostrophe, turns his speech to the Church, lest she
forget her self in the height of her honor, giving her this good counsel.

1. O daughter of the most High, audi, hearken, mark what Christ says. 2.
Vide, look about, and consider what is done for thee. 3. Incline thine ear, and
be obedient. 4. Forget thine own people, and thy fathers house, leave all for
Christ; thy old ways, deny thy self. 5. The consequence, Gods favor and good
will. Reasons to persuade to obedience.
The consequence of which will be this: So shall the King have pleasure in thy
beauty, ver. 11. 6. And there is all the reason in the World, that thou hear,
that thou be obedient and conformable to his Will. 1. For first, He is the Lord
thy God, and thou shall worship him. 2. Then again, it will redound to thy
benefit, for thence will accrue unto thee great wealth; Tire shall bring the
purple, and rich gifts: The daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, and
the rich among the people shall entreat thy favor, ver. 12.

The counsel and admonition being ended, The second Encomium of the Church.
he returns again to the Encomium of the Spouse, and commends her: 1. For her
inward virtues and endowments: The Kings daughter; i. e. the Church, is all
glorious within. 2. For her externals; whether doctrine, manners, offices,
which are as it were, her clothing; it is of wrought gold. 3. For her Rites and
Ceremonies: They are as Needle Work, of diverse colors, 4. Her Maids of Honor,
Virgins, holy and sincere souls, men pure in heart, in life and doctrine,
living in every particular Church, these her companions shall follow her. 1.
These from all Nations shall be brought to thee; i. e. the Church. 2. brought
with joy and gladness, and enter into the Kings Palace;
5. For her fruitfulness: Barren she shall not be, for she shall have many
children, The Churches gratitude.
good children, and great; for the Fathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests
in the old Law; Apostles, Evangelists, and their Successors in the New, that
may be made Princes in all Lands; her Officers are not contemptible.


3. The third part
The conclusion, which is gratulatory; for for this honor the Church would, 1.
Erect, as it were, a statue; I will make thy Name to be remembered in all
Generations. 2. Therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.


The Prayer collected out of the forty fifth Psalm.
LET the words of my mouth, and meditations of my heart, be always acceptable
in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer; that my heart may endite a
good matter, and make my tongue a ready instrument of thy Spirit, nimbly and
aptly, and solely to express what thou shall dictate to me of the King of glory.

O thou wonderful God and Man, the Messiah and Savior of the World, but thou
were holy in and from the womb, being freed and purified by the Holy Ghost from
the stain and spots of our original corruption; and when thou wast pleased to
manifest thy self to the World, thy lips were full of grace, thy words drop'^
as the honeycomb, never man spoke like thee, never was there such discourses
of mercy, such calls and offers of love, by which thou did encourage the
weary and heavy-laden to come unto thee, and we miserable sinners to be
reconciled to God; for which, God has blessed thee for ever, and given thee
all power in Heaven and Earth; for which we bless thee for ever on Earth, and
hope to do it in Heaven.

Now since thou art the Lord of power, Gird thy Sword I pray thee, conquer and
subdue thy enemies, whether impious Devils, or devilish men; take from the one,
that dominion which they usurp over thy people, and bring the other readily and
willingly to submit unto thee; this will increase thy glory, this will improve
thy Majesty and Renown; and ride on, that Truth and Meekness, and Righteousness
may flourish in thy Kingdom, which is easy for thee to do, because the right
hand of thy power, and Divine Omnipotence, shall wonderfully teach, and direct
thee in this work, causing thee, to the admiration of all, not to desist, till
thou have obtained an absolute victory, and lead in triumph thy enemies.

Let the words of thy Gospel be sharper than arrows, whose Throne is for ever
and ever,

Cause them to love that which thou love, and hate that which thou hate:
Thou love righteousness, make them then in love with equity; thou wast
anointed with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, yet for thy fellows,
anoint also all those that thou have taken into this fellowship, with a
fragrant portion of this thy holy oil, that they rejoice to do thy will.

Let Kings Daughters, noble and princely souls, Queen, thy Church, whom in
mercy and loving kindness, in judgment and justice, thou have espoused to thee,
stand on thy right hand clothed in a golden Robe of thy Righteousness: O let
the smell of their garments be as a Field that the Lord has blessed; Myrrh,
Cinnamon, and Cassia, compounded by the skilfullest art of the Apothicary.

And thou, O Daughter, so peculiarly beloved and elected by the Messiah,
attend, and give diligent heed what the King shall teach thee, concerning the
true God, and his Service. Our eyes are heavy, and we cannot see; our ears are
deaf, and we cannot hear; Lord, open our eyes that we may see, and say thou
Ephatha to our ears, that we may hearken, and soften our hearts, that we may
consider of the great honor thou have done us. Teach us to leave father and
mother, and house and land for thy sake, to forget our own people, and our
fathers house, and all that is most dear unto us, the bewitching lusts of our
own wills, and the vanities of our former lewd conversation. Enrich our hearts
with thy gifts of Grace, so shall the King have pleasure in our beauty, and we
shall acknowledge him for the Lord our God, adore, fear, reverence, and worship
him.

Keep our hearts, Tire shall come and bow to us, and offer us gifts, the rich
also among the people, shall entreat our favor, and desire they may be united
to our Communion. Adorn us, O Lord, inwardly with thy Graces, the needle work,
and embroydery of Holiness. By all which the Virgin-souls of the people may be
brought unto thee, and accompany us to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.
This may move them to enter into the unity of the Church with joy and gladness,
which is the door of those mansions, which thou have prepared for them in
Heaven, where they shall enjoy thy sight and thy presence for ever.

Raise up, instead of the fathers of our profession the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, Apostclical men; Bishops, Pastors, and lawful Ministers of thy
Word, whom thou may make Princes to feed and guide, to govern and teach thy
Church in all lands.

O Lord, that I will make thy name to be remembered in all Generations. O let
the people praise thee, and sing of thy honor for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

PSALM. XLVI. (...).
THIS Psalm is wholly Gratulatory, sung by the Church for some very great
deliverance after the victory from confederated enemies.

Two especial things to be considered. 1. The confidence the Church has in
God, from verse. 1. to 8. 2. An Exhortation to behold it, and that he is the
Lord of Hosts, the Author of War and Peace, verse. 8, 9, 10.


1. The first part. The Churches confidence.
He begins with a (...) or Maxim, which is the ground of all the confidence
which the people of God can have. God is our Asylum or refuge to fly to, our
strength, on which to rely, a very present help to deliver us in trouble.

Upon which Gods people infer this Conclusion, The inference upon it:
boldness in persecution.
Therefore will we not fear, no not in the greatest calamities and multitude of
enemies. Which he expresses, First, Metaphorically, then in plain proper
terms. Fear we will not, 1. Though the earth be moved, or removed, on which the
Church is seated. 2. Though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea;
i. e. the great and strongest Empires and Kingdoms should be ruined and
overwhelmed. 3. Though the waters roar and be troubled. Church. 4. Though the
Mountains, i. e. Kingdoms shake at the tumor and swelling pride of these
Compiratours. For the waters are people, Revel. 17.


More plainly, for we have the interpretation of these Metaphors, Verse. 6.
Though the heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved: yet will we not be afraid.

Justum and tenacem propositi virum, non civium ardor prava jubentium Non
vultus instantis tyranni Mente quatet solida: Neque Auster Dux inquietus
turbidus Adriae, Nec fulminantis Jovis, manus Si fractus illabatur orbis
Impavidum ferient ruina.

2. And of this he next descends to show the reasons.

1. There is a River, The reasons of this.
the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God, the holy place of the
Tabernacles of the most high. Jerusalem, the type of the Church; and the holy
place of the Tabernacles, the Temple. The little Siloah that ran softly, did
water Jerusalem, and the Gospel-promises that shall flow always in the Church,
shall make glad the hearts of Gods people. 2. God is in the midst of her, to
keep, to defend her, therefore she shall not be moved, that is, utterly
removed, but shall remain for ever. 3. God shall help her, and deliver her:
yea, and that right early in a fit season. He that should come, will come, and
will not tarry. 4. He uttered his voice, and the earth was melted. The hearts,
5. The Lord of hosts is with us. He is Dominus exercituum, verse. 7, 11. 6. The
God of Jacob is our refuge. He is our Asylum, and he will say us, verse. 7, 11.
The second part contains two Exhortations.

1. He calls to all to behold the works of the Lord, Exhortations. The second
part.
and of two he gives instance for to behold. 1. That War is his work. See what
desolations he has made in the earth. 2. That Peace is his work. He makes War
to cease to the end of the earth, etc.
2. Then in the person of God, he exhorts the enemies of the Church to be
quiet, for their endeavors are but in vain, and their rage to no purpose. Be
still, and know that I am God, I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth.
The Prayer out of the forty sixth Psalm. Or an Hymn.
O Blessed Lord God,

So shall we not fear in the greatest storms; No, no not though a multitude of
people conspire and swell with pride, though they compass us about as a flood
of waters:

For thy rich promises will sustain our fainting hearts.

Arise,

Certainly the Lord of hosts, Jacob worshipped, and by whose power and mercy he
was defended from the fury of his brother Esau, will defend us, when we fly to
him.

O come then, he has made Wars to cease in all the World, he has broken the
Bows of the mighty, cut their Spears in sunder, and burnt up their Chariots
with fire from Heaven, giving to his people the blessing of peace.

All then you who are enemies to his Church, The Lord of Hosts is with us, the
God of Jacob is our refuge.

PSALM. XLVII. (...) and Triumphalis.
THE Prophet takes occasion from the bringing up of the Ark, or else by the
settling of it in the Temple by Solomon, to foretell the Ascension of Christ into
heaven, who was the true Ark of the Covenant, and the Propitiatory. Then there
was a Jubilee, and so there must be at the remembrance of this. It contains a
Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, and it has two especial parts.

First, Christ's ascension typified.
An invitation to sing praises to Christ.

Secondly, The reasons that persuade to it.

1. Verse 5. God is gone up with a shout, His invitation to praise God for it.
the Lord with the sound of a Trumpet. 2. Upon which he invites, that we do
that at this feast which was then done, viz. That we clap hands, and sing
praises. That this be done 1. O clap your hands: for clapping of hands is an
outward sign of inward joy, Nahum 3.19. 2. Universally. O clap hands all ye
people. 3. Shout unto God with the voice of melody. 4. Sing praises, sing
praises, sing praises, sing praises, verse. 6. And again, sing praises, verse. 7.
It cannot be done too often. 5. Knowingly and discreetly. Sing ye praises with
understanding: know the reason why you are to praise him.
3. Now these reasons are drawn from his Greatness, and his Goodness. The
reasons to persuade to it.
1. He is Great. He is the Lord the most high. 2. Terrible. 3. A great King
over all the earth. All power, at his Ascension, God great.
given to him in heaven and earth. 2. He is a Good God. 1. In collecting his
Church, by subduing the Nations, Good, and that in four respects.
not by a Sword, but by his Word and Spirit, by which he would subdue their
iniquities, the iniquity of the Jew first, Gentile. For the Law was to come out
of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; To the discipline of that
Religion and Service which we profess, both were to submit, and therefore both
might well be said to be subdued to us, and be brought under our feet. 2. In
honoring and rewarding his Church. He shall choose out an heritage for us, even
the worship of Jacob, whom he loved. 1. His Church was his choice. A chosen
generation: a select people. 2. His heritage, for he will dwell among them: and
provide an inheritance for them, blessings on earth, and an inheritance in
heaven. 3. This is the worship and glory of Jacob, of Jacob after the Spirit,
the Kingdom, Priesthood, and all the promises made unto Jacob and the Fathers,
being theirs. 4. The cause. His love only. He chose,
3. In increasing and amplifying his Church. God is the King now of all the
earth, not of the Jews only. he reigns over the heathen also. He sits upon a
Throne of Holiness, rules by his Holy Word and Spirit, making them Holy, who
were unholy. 2. Yea, and a willing people also. For the Princes of the people
are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham.
4. In protecting his Church, whether by himself, For the shields of the earth
belong unto God. Princes and Prelates are shields of the Church, but God is the
chief. He is greatly exalted.


The Eucharistical Prayer collected out of the forty seventh Psalm.
O Lord God, who have exalted thy Son Jesus Christ with great Triumph into the
Kingdom of heaven, we beseech thee leave us not comfortless, but send to us thy
Holy Spirit to comfort us, and exalt us to the same place whither our Savior
is gone before.

And thou, O blessed Savior, the Lord the most high, terrible, and a great
King over all the earth, receive the petitions of thy humble Servants, present
them at the Throne of Grace, and make intercession for us.

Subdue the people by the power of thy Spirit, thy feet by the sharp edge of
thy Word. Cause those who are yet strangers and aliens from thy worship, to
fall low before thee, and persuade all those who are yet afar off, to come
near, and to embrace thy Gospel, and the truth and equity of thy Law.

The time was, Judah only God was known, and thy Name was great in Israel, it
was the excellency of Jacob, which thou did love, but now thou have merited,
the King of all the earth; since therefore thou have chosen these also for
thine inheritance,

O happy day, Princes of the people shall be gathered together, and be united
to the people of the God of Abraham, being all worshippers of the same God,
professors of one and the same Faith, and partakers of one and the same mercy.
For then should the name of our God, who is truly the shield and defense of his
people, be greatly exalted in the earth.

The praises of our God should then be in our mouths, Psalms, heart and hand,
affections and work being every way agreeable to our Psalmodie.

O Lord, infinite and wonderful are thy ways and works toward the children of
men, but the work of Redemption by the blood of thy dear Son, far exceeds
them all. For this love, for this mercy, O work upon our hearts to sing praises
to thy honor, our tongues to sing praises to thy glory, our lips to shout with
the voice of melody.

O all ye Saints of his, Let hands and tongue, and works and words be ready
pressed to sing praises to the God of Jacob. Amen.

PSALM. XLVIII. (...).
UNder the Type Jerusalem, is set down the happiness of the Church, which is
always protected by Gods favor.

Three parts there are of this Psalm. 1. The excellencies and privileges of
the City of God, from verse. 1. to 4. 2. A Narration of a miraculous deliverance
she obtained, and upon it the Terror that fell on her enemies, from verse. 4.
to 8. 3. An Exhortation to consider it, and praise God, from verse. 8. to 15.


1. The first part.
He begins with a (...), Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised. Great in
himself, The excellencies of the Church.
In the City of our God, in the Mountain of Holiness.

Then he descends to set forth the Excellencies and Ornaments of the Church.

1. It is the City of God. Built, governed by him. He resides there. 2. It is a
Holy Mountain. The Religion in it Holy. The people a Holy people. 3. Beautiful
for Situation. God had put his beauty upon it. 4. The joy of the whole earth is
Mount Zion. The joy of all the Land, of Juda then, and after of the whole
earth: Because the Law was to come out of Zion. 5. The City of the great King;
that is, God. He founded it, and rules in it. 6. God is known in her Palaces.
In her is the knowledge of God, yea, and by an experimental knowledge to be an
Asylum, a sure refuge.
2. And well it is, that it is so; for Jerusalem, i.e. The Church, has many,
The second part. The enemies of the Church.
and great enemies, which, verse. 5. the Prophet begins to describe, and desires
that notice be taken of them, for he points them out with an Ecce, F^r Lo.

1. They are many and powerful. They were Kings, a plurality of them. 2.
Confederate Kings. The Kings were assembled. Many and Mighty. But prevail nor.
Vis unita fortior.
But all the endeavors of these Kings, of these Confederate Kings, came to
nothing.

1. They passed by together. Together they came, and together they vanished. 2.
They saw, they wondered. They saw the strength of this City, and wondered how
it should be so strangely delivered out of their hands. And troubled at it
3. And upon it they were troubled, they trembled and hasted away. Fear took
hold upon them. Which the Prophet illustrates by a double Similitude. 1. By a
travailing woman. Fear and trembling took hold upon them, 2. By the fear of
Mariners at Sea, Euroclydon threatens to tear their sh^p. Their amazement was
such, Gods protection of her.
as when Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an East Wind.

3. Now follows the third part of the Psalm, The third part.
in which are two especial points.

1. A grateful acknowledgement of Gods protection of his Church, Gratitude.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God: Heard we have that
he will protect this City, and we see that he has done it, and persuaded we
are, that he will always do it. God upholds the same for ever. 2. And this
shall never be forgotten by us. We have thought upon thy Name, O Lord, and
loving kindness, in the midst of thy Temple. 3. And so thought of it, as to
praise thee for it. According to thy Name, so is thy praise, O God, to the ends
of the earth. That thou with a powerful hand do help thy people oppressed
with injuries, and do punish their enemies, by which thou do give a
manifest evidence of thy righteousness and justice.
The other point of the third part, is an Exhortation to Gods people.

1. That they exult and rejoice for that which God does for them. To which the
Church is incited.
Let Mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy
judgments, in defending thy Church, 2. That they take especial notice of his
miraculous deliverance of Jerusalem, with all the particulars of it, that
notwithstanding the Army was great that lay against it, yet no harm was done to
any part of it. Walk about Zion, and go round about her, and tell the Towers
thereof. See, mark, consider whether they are not all yet standing entire. 3.
And do it for this, That you may tell it to the generation following: 4. Now
for this there is good reason. For this God, that so protects and defends his
Church, and takes revenge for us, is our God by Covenant and promise for ever
and ever, and he will for ever keep this Covenant with us. He will be our
guide, even unto death, and in death. Leave us he will not, when all the world
leaves us. Therefore exult, rejoice, mark it, and make it known to the
generation to come.
The Prayer collected out of the forty eighth Psalm.
O Lord God of Israel, thou which dwell betwixt the Cherubints, thou art the
God, even thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the earth: and yet amongst these
thou have erected to thy self an everlasting Kingdom, and set thy King upon thy
Holy Hill of Zion, this thou have chosen to be the City of our God, the
Mountain of Holiness. This thou have seated on a fruitful Hill, sure refuge.

Lord, for lo the Kings of Nations are assembled, they passed by together, and
are confederate against thee, they lay their heads together with one consent,
and take counsel how they may lay Jerusalem in the dust.

O Lord, troubled, Break their power, and dissipate their Armies, as ships at
Sea are broken to pieces by some violent and unexpected wind.

O Lord, As we have heard, so let it be seen in the City of our God, make us
experimentally to know, that thou will establish this thy City, So shall we
have just reason to think of thy loving kindness,

O let Mount Zion rejoice, and the daughters of Judah be glad, for the bulwarks
that yet stand fast, and the palaces that flourish, proclaim, that this God is
our God for ever and ever, that he is a great Lord, and greatly to be praised,
and that he will be our guide unto death. Amen.

PSALM. XLIX. (...).
AND the Doctrine it teaches, is, That rich men be not proud of their wealth,
nor poor men dejected and troubled at their mean estate, since all men are
mortal, and it is not the wealth of the one can make them happy, nor the mean
estate of the other can make them unhappy, there being another life, by which
the condition of both is to be judged.

Three parts of the Psalm. 1. An Exordium or Preface, from verse. 1. to 5. 2.
The matter proposed, debated and argued, from verse. 5. to 16. 3. An Advice or
Admonition given, from verse. 16 to 20.


1. The Exordium artificial.
In the Exordium he 1. Calls together his Auditory, viz. All people. All
Nations of the world, men of all conditions, high, low, rich, poor, The first
part.
because what he is to speak of concerns All. 2. Then he calls to them to be
Attentive. Hear, give ear. 3. He labors to make them docile, and Benevolous,
1. My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding: that which I understand, and is fit for others to understand. 2.
Then that to which I will be obedient. I shall teach you no lesson, but that I
teach my self. I will incline my ear. 3. It Is a Parable, it is a dark speech I
am to deliver, and such wise men are delighted to hear. 4. Lastly, That it may
be brought to your ear with more delight, I have set it to the Harp: I will
open my dark saying upon the Heart.



2. And thus having assembled his Auditory, and made them Attentive, The second
part. A debate, who is the happy man. Fig. (...).
Docile, and Benevolous, he propounds his Parable and dark saying, and it is
done with much Art and Rhetorique. For he first seems to prevent an Objection
which might be thus read. David, we see you are troubled much at the prosperity
of the wicked. To which he returns his answer by a quick E^otesis, Wherefore
should I fear in the days of evil? when the wicked prosper, when they, who
insidiantur calcaneo, compass me about to destroy me. Or else: Why should I
unjustly seek after wealth, honor, etc. which would make me fear in the day of
vengeance, and when the wickedness, that is, the punishment which follows all
iniquity at the heels, would overtake me?

There is no reason of this fear to me, to the wealthy, ambitious there is:
They that trust in riches, not happy.
And this he demonstrates two ways, (...) and (...), for he takes away
Happiness from the one, from verse. 6. to 15. and places Happiness in the other,
verse. 15.

1. They that trust in their wealth, are not happy, verse. 6. For wealth will
not deliver in the evil day. 1. 'Twill save no man's life. None of them, these
rich men, The reasons.
can redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him. 2. 'Twill save no
man's soul. For it cost more to redeem asoul, 3. Yea, be it that he be wise, and
a long-lived man. For he sees, that wise men dye, likewise the fool and the
brutish person perish. 4. And which sufficiently shows the vanity of their
riches. 1. They leave them to others, they suppose to their heirs, children,
but it often falls out, that strangers, others they thought not of, enter into
their labors. They leave their riches aliis, alienis, such as they thought
should never enter upon their labors. 5. Farther yet, Their thoughts are vain.
The vain thoughts of rich men.
For 1. Their inward thoughts are, that their houses shall continue for ever,
and their dwelling-places to all generations. 2. To this end, they call heir
lands after their own names. They study not only to be rich, but are
vainglorious also.


But this their study is, Vanity. Secondly, Folly.

1. Vanity it is. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not, for Summis
stare din parcarum lege negatur. A change there will be, and the most glorious
man, will be like the beasts that perish, an eternal Oblivion will be brought
upon his name. The man no more remembered than a beast. 2. Folly. This their way
is but foolishness, a great foolery to place their chief good in riches, and
honors; and yet, Their posterity are guilty of it, as great fools as their
forefathers. For their posterity praise, approve, and applaud their sayings,
follow their way, magnify their thoughts, tread in their steps, and gape after
Riches and Honor.
That then, Considerations fit for rich men.
if it be possible, I may take down these high, vain, and ambitious thoughts,
and remove them from those inordinate studies, and immoderate desires of Wealth
and Honor, I shall propose unto them these considerations touching their
future condition.

1. Like sheep they are laid in the grave. That Is their common condition, for
as sheep they are, but fatted for the slaughter. 2. Death shall feed on them.
The second death, for with Dives, they shall be buried in Hell, and the fire
that cannot be extinguished, shall feed upon their soul and body. 3. In the
morning of the Resurrection the upright shall have dominion over them. The
righteous shall shine like the Sun when it arises in the morning, when they
shall be made Christ's footstool. They shall see the godly placed on the
right hand, and seated on Thrones to judge them, when they shall be set on the
left, to be judged and condemned. And this to their great grief, read the fifth
Chapter of Wisdom. 4. And their beauty shall consume in the grave from their
dwelling, their riches, their power, their glory which accrued from these,
veterascet, shall waste, wax old, as does a garment. For the figure of this
world passes away.
Happy then the Rich of this world, Who the happy man.
and the possessors of great Glory and Honor are not. But now (...), or rather
(...), He set down the Happy man. It Is true, that he, walking in his integrity,
is subject to many crosses, and oppressed with many miseries, but look upon his
end, and you must needs judge him happy. For whereas the wicked shall live in
torment, he shall be freed from eternal death, and gifted with eternal life.

But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave,

1. He shall redeem my, and all good men's souls. 2. Not from the grave, for dye
we must: but from the hand, the power, the dominion of death. Death shall not
reign over them. 3. And the reason is, Because he shall receive me with favor;
adopt me, and make me capable of all the promises made over to me by Covenant.
3. The third part. The advice to good men.
Upon these considerations, viz. The different conditions of good and bad men,
he gives forth his prohibition, and admonishes the good, that they be not
troubled at the prosperity of the wicked. Ne trineas. Be not afraid. Let not
your heart betroubled.

1. That they be not troubled at the prosperity of the wicked.
Not at the great wealth of the rich. Be not thou afraid, when one is made
rich. 2. Not at the glory and honor of the mighty. Nor when the glory of his
house is increased.
And he repeats the former reason. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing
away: His glory shall not descend after him. Their happiness was then but
Momentary.

This he amplifies by a bitter Epitrope. Esto. Be it they flatter themselves,
and are flattered by others.

1. Though while he lived, he blessed his soul. Soul, thou have many goods for
many years. 2. Though men will praise thee, and sound in thy ears, Euge, been,
providest for me, heapest up Riches, and gapest after Honor. Think to be
Semi-deum. 1. A mortal thou art, short-lived as all that went before thee were.
He shall go to the generation of his fathers. And 2. If wicked, be cast into
utter darkness. They shall never see light.
3. Surely any man, how rich soever, how great soever, who understands not thus
much, beasts himself. Epiphonema he concludes the Psalm, which is doubled, that
it may be remembered. Man being in honor, and understands not, is like the
beasts that perish. Even while he lives, he is but like a beast.
The Prayer collected out of the forty ninth Psalm.
O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who have created man through wisdom
according to thy likeness, giving him a capacity to know, and a will to choose
the true way to Happiness: Give me Wisdom that sits by thy Throne, and reject
me not from among thy children, become like a beast that perishes. But grant,
that in what condition soever I am,

Taught us thou have in thy Divine Oracles, that we should not place our
confidence in the vain and fading things of this life. But with shame and
confusion of face confess we must, that we have made the World our God, who
have trusted in their wealth, and boasted in the multitude of their riches. Our
inward thought has been to add house to house, and land to land, persuading
our selves, that our houses shall continue for ever, We labor to be immortal
here on earth, and to that purpose we call the land after our own names. We
bless our selves in our abundance, and say to our souls, Eat, drink, and be
merry: Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years.

This is our vanity, this is our way, our folly, for when we do thus well unto
our selves, they stand by, flatter, and praise us.

O good God, keep under, and subdue these immoderate affections, and teach us
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, let it never slip
out of our memories, that we are mortal, and all the things of the world
momentary, vain, fading. that wise men dye, and the fool and brutish person
perish. Every man is but short-lived, follow the generation of his fathers; and
when he dies, Our wealth in that evil day, will not profit us, our glory will
no way avail us.

What wealth, still live for ever, Make us wise, O Lord, to consider these
things, and always to remember our latter end.

To the house of death we must be brought, but that is not our latter end. Of
an immortal soul we do consist, as well as of a mortal body. And will wealth or
power be able to deliver that, either from the wrath of God, or the torments of
hell?

The wicked shall be turned into Hell, for I verily believe to set God in the
land of the living. Why then should I fear in the days of evil; Surely there
is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.
Men that are in honor, and understand not, are like the beasts that perish:
but the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, he shall receive them,
the wicked, shall never see light, whereas the righteous shall shine like the
Sun. Death, eternal death, whereas the righteous shall enjoy everlasting life.
At the general resurrection those goats shall be set on the left hand, and the
other sheep honored with the right. While they lived they trampled upon, and
oppressed the righteous, but in that morning the upright shall have dominion
over them. They and their beauty shall consume together in the grave, when the
Lord shall exalt his Servants to eternal Glory.

Good God, when thou have blessed us with wealth, and when we abound in honor,
give us understanding hearts, that we think on these things; that our time is
short, our riches vain, our houses frail, our honors fading, that there is a
life after this, in which we must be happy, or miserable, so then let us set
our hearts upon these transitory advantages, that we never forget the desire of
that life to come, so use this World, as if we used it not, making it a passage
to the celestial Canaan. Amen.

PSALM. L. (...).
THE Prophet by a Prosopopeia brings in God prescribing rules for his Worship.
The (...) then, or the main debate in this Psalm, is, How God will be honored
in his Church, which because that none can teach but God himself, therefore he
brings him in speaking to his people.

Two general parts it has. 1. The Majesty and Authority of the person that is
to judge this debate, described, from verse. 1. to 7. 2. The sentence by him
given, from verse. 7. to 23.


The Prophet begins with an Elegant (...), calls an Assize, The first part. The
Majesty and Authority of God the Judge.
summons a Court, presents us with a Judge, produces Witnesses, cites those
who are to answer, and having seated the Judge on the Throne, gives forth his
charge.

1. He presents the Judge in Authority and Majesty, The mighty God, He is Deus
Deorum, other gods there may be so called, so feined, but he is the God
Almighty over them all, verse. 1. 2. The place whence he comes to judge, is his
Church, Out of Zion the perfection of beauty God has shined; To Zion the Law
was given, and out of Zion the Law was to come, according to which Law he would
judge, and therefore it was rightly said, That out of Zion the Lord has
shined. 3. His coming to judgment is like to be terrible. It was so, Sinai,
and it is like to be so, when he shall come to require it. Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
very tempestuous round about, 2 Pet. 3.10. Luke 21.25, 26.
Secondly, Those that are cited here to appear before him, Gather my Saints
together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me with Sacrifice; i. e.
undertaken to worship me as I have appointed. Not as if others were excluded,
and should not come to judgment, but because those they are who know his Will,
with whom God has the contest in this place.

Thirdly, Against these he produces his Witnesses. The heavens, the earth. The
Lord has called the earth from the rising of the Sun, Witness his judgment to
be just; and other it could not be. For God is Judge himself.

Next follows the Charge given by God himself the Judge, to which, The second
part The charge at the Tribunal.
that he might win attention, he thus prefaceth, Hear, O my people, and I will
speak; O Israel, and I will testify against thee. I am God, even thy God.

1. I am God, therefore worship and obedience is due to me from all creatures.
2. I am thy God, thou my people, therefore due from thee especially. 3. I will
speak, judge and determine this Controversy about my Worship. 4. I will
testify against thee, and convince thee for what is amiss.
A double Worship there is. 1. Ceremonial and External. 2. About outward
worship.
Spiritual and Moral, and I will speak, and testify of both.

First, A duty then there was owing in Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law,
which indeed I expect, because I have commanded, but let no man think that I am
satisfied with the outward Act, except they be brought, performed, and offered
with an honest heart.

1. I will not then reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings,
These thou bring, and these I accept, and that thou, according to my
Ordinance, thou have brought, I reprove not. But that thou think, that by
this External service howsoever performed, About inward worship without the
outward, rejected.
I am pleased, and that for these thou deservest a pardon, that is it, which I
reprove.

2. For I without an inward reflection upon that obedience unto my command, and
a sincere, and loving, faithful, penitent heart in the offer of them, will
never think my self honored. I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor
he-goats out of thy folds. And that for two reasons.

1. First I need them not. I am rich and Opulent. For every beast of the
Forest is mine, 2. My perfection is such that I need it not. The gods of the
Heathen may be pleased and fed, as their Hierophantae taught, (...), indore
carnium, with the fumes of their Sacrifices, and complain of starving when they
were detained. But think thou, that I will eat the flesh of bulls, I need no
meat of thy provision.
Upon these terms then, these Sacrifices, though of mine own institution,
please me not. Ex antithesi then I shall acquaint thee with those Sacrifices,
that worship, which will please.

2. Inward worship required, which has two parts.
And here begins the second part of the Charge concerning Moral and Spirit^^
Worship: which is Synecdochically declared by the two parts of prayer,
Thanksgiving and Petition, or Invocation.

1. Thankfulness he expects. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto
the most High. 2. Invocation he looks for. And call upon me in the day of
trouble. Which being done, he makes an Indenture with us. 1. On his part, that
he will deliver us. I will deliver thee. 2. On our part, that we return him the
Glory of our deliverance. And thou shall glorify me.

3. No worship accepted from hypocrites.
And yet here he puts in his exception against some men, viz. Hypocrites and
impious men. For praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner, and a petition
presented by an obstinate, rebellious, profane soul, shall not be heard.

To such he speaks in these following words. To the wicked God says, 1. What
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant
in thy mouth? 2. They contemners of Gods Law.
The reason is, because in words thou professest thou love me, but in deeds
thou denyest him. Thou hate instruction, in thy heart hate that Law, and
have cast my words. behind thee: Written I have to thee the wonderful things of
my Law, and thou have counted them a strange thing.


This I shall now prove and illustrate by a distribution. This proved.


1. When thou saw a thief, then thou consentest with him. In the consent is
the more malice; it shows that it was not rashly done, but on purpose,
deliberation, counsel. 2. Thou have been partaker with the Adulterers. 3. Thou
give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and
speak against thy brother, thou slanderest thine own mothers son. Against
thy brother, not a stranger, and that not casually neither, or in anger, but
studiously, thou satest and speak. 4. No nor of the first. For thou have had
a profane thought even of me, These things have thou done, and I kept silence,
arose not presently to take vengeance on thee: And thou thought, that I was
altogether such a one as thy self. A Patron, an approver of wickedness as thou
thy self art.
But from any such imputation, God no Abetter of wickedness.
here I purge my self before the Heaven and Earth, and the whole World. For I
will not suffer this thy wickedness to go unrevenged. The day shall come, when
I will reprove thee, and set in order before thine eyes, the villainy that thou
have committed, and labored to hide. Confess at that day thou shall, that the
sentence pronounced against thee is most just. Yet He gives warning to the
wicked, threatens, that he may spare.


And yet in judgment God remembers mercy. It becomes a Judge, even when he is
pronouncing sentence, to take unto him the bowels of compassion. And these,
God, who is to be our Judge, here puts on. (...). For he gives a fair warning
to the wicked, that they repent, and perish not.

1. Now, while you have time, consider this, he is a God of pur eyes, and
cannot behold iniquity. Consider this then, I say, lest like as an angry lion,
Promises help to the sincere.
he break out upon you on a sudden, and there be none to deliver. This is a
fair warning to the wicked.

2. Now to those who worship God in sincerity, he makes a quite contrary
promise, of defense, help, salvation. Who offers with an honest heart,
praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his conversation aright, goes
the right way that Gods Word directs, I will show the salvation of God: He
shall be saved, and know that he worships not God in vain.

The Prayer out of the fiftieth Psalm.
O Most Mighty and just God, who have appointed a day in which thou will judge
the world, when all flesh shall appear before thee to render an account of
their ways, whether good or evil, never let that strict account that we must
make, slip out of our memory, but let the sound of that Archangels Trumpet
sound in our ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

God, to whom the secrets of all hearts are open, is then to be the Judge,

How shall then our hearts fail us for fear,

Out of that celestial habitation, and that Zion which is above, His Saints,

O most Merciful and Gracious God,

Keep us, O Lord, with thy mighty hand, that when in words we profess to know
thee in deeds we deny not; consent to the Thief, nor partake with the
Adulterer; far be it from us, to give our mouths to evil, and our tongues to
frame deceit; let us not join with the malicious and factious, and sit and
speak against our brother, never let such obdurate obstinacy seize upon our
hearts, that we hate instruction, or cast thy words behind us: These are sins
inconsistent with grace, and evident Arguments of a reprobate soul; those that
abuse thy patience and long-suffering, commit them;

Against all sinners, keep me therefore O Lord, from these presumptuous sins.

Thou art God, even my God; when thou speak, give me an ear to hear; and
what thou command, give me a will to do: O let me glorify thee, and order
my Conversation aright,

I have grievously sinned, and wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow
my self before my God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with
calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten
thousand Rivers of oil? To what purpose are the multitude of sacrifices, and
the fat of fed Beasts, these thou delightest not in; incense is an abomination
unto thee, the calling of Assemblies, the new Moons, the Sabbaths, all external
worship is hateful, and a trouble unto thee, so long as the persons of those
who observe them are not accepted; so long as the men are Formalists,
Hypocrites, and have their hands full of blood; it is the penitent soul to which
thou will look, the sincere heart which thou will regard.

Cleanse me therefore, O Lord, and wash my heart, give me power to put away the
evil of my doings; let me cease to do evil, and learn to do well, that so my
person being pleasing in thy sight, thou may hear my prayers, and accept my
thanks.

It is now a day of trouble, and as thou have commanded, I call unto thee for
help; as thou have promised; so shall I glorify thy Name,

Remit Lord, and pardon the sins of thy people, put our present sufferings and
extreme afflictions before thy eyes, and return to us, who return to thee with
fasting,

PSALM. LI. One, and a chief of the Penitentials.
THE occasion of this Psalm, was the message that David received from God by
Nathan the Prophet, for the murder of Vriah, and his Adultery in defiling
Bathsheba; this put him into the state of a Penitent, and to petition to God
for mercy, for pardon, for grace, for peace of conscience, for renovation of
his heart.

It in general contains David's prayer. 1. For himself, ver. 1. to 13. 2. And
three vows or promises, ver. 13. to 18. 3. For the Church, from ver. 18. to the
end.


David being in a perplexed estate, conceived he could have no comfort, The
first part.
but in Gods mercy, and therefore he first in general prays for that, Have
mercy on me, not on David the King, thine Anointed, but on me, The general
Petition for mercy.
that am not worthy to be called thy servant, thy son; and the motive he uses
to gain that, is not any plea or merit of his own; but, 1. The kindness of God,
Have mercy on me, according to thy loving kindness. 2. The compassion of God,
According to the multitude of thy compassions.


The general Petition for mercy being offered, next he tenders three particular
Petitions.

1. His first particular Petition, is, for forgiveness of his sins; the fact
was past, The first Petition, for forgiveness.
but the guilt remained, he therefore earnestly petitions, Put away mine
iniquities; and upon this he insists, and in other terms comes over it; for a
soul that is truly sensible of sin, is never at rest, and satisfied with one
deprecation; for sin is a spot, a deep stain: Therefore wash me, thoroughly wash
me from mine iniquities, as if one washing were too little for a double sin,
for two such sins.

To this Petition for mercy, he subjoins a confession of his sin, knowing well,
To this he subjoins a confession.
that this was the readiest way to obtain it; for he that confesses, and
forsakes his sin, shall find mercy; in which we may learn many excellent
conditions requisite in a true Confessionist.

1. He enters into a serious consideration of the nature of sin, he feels the
weight, the burden of it; feels the anguish, and abhors it: I excuse it not.

1. I know my iniquity; I know it now to abhor, to reform it. 2. It is ever
before me; not to please me, but to trouble and grieve me. 3. He aggravates it
with diverse names, iniquity, sin, transgression; it is Pasteanos, rebellion; it
is Greavah, crooked dealing; Chatta, error and wandering.
2. And so he falls upon an open and plain confession, Peccavi, I have sinned;
He aggravates his sins, 1. From the person.


1. Of the person; It is against thee, against thee I say, a good gracious God,
that from a Shepherd have made me a King; a great and terrible God, that art
able, and have threatened to punish; there was neither grace, nor fear in me,
that I durst sin against thee, against thee; the Epizeuxis is emphatical; yea,
against thee only have I sinned: In maxima fortuna minima licentia: So highly
thou have advanced me, that I need to fear none but thee; but this has not
kept me from this sin, in this was unthankfulness. Vriah was my Soldier, I
need not fear him; the People my Subjects, they cannot judge me; it is to thee
I am to answer for breach of thy Law; I esteem therefore my sin to be against
thee only, for I had not known this sin to be a sin, had not thou forbidden
it; nor need not fear any, would not thou punish it. 2. Of the manner; it was
an impudent sin, done in thy sight, The manner.
before thy eyes, thou being by, and looking on, and so done without any
reverence of thy Majesty, as it were in contempt: I have done this evil in thy
sight.
So that I confess that in reproving and threatening me by Nathan, thou art a
just God, and to be justified in thy sayings, and clear in the judgment of any,
who with an impartial eye shall examine my offense, and thy proceeding; for I
have deserved whatsoever thou have threatened, and given thee just cause to
speak and judge as thou have done: Vt is not here causal, but consequential;
for it is not his meaning that he sinned for that end, that God should be
justified; but that this would follow upon it, whenever he was brought to
confess his sin, then God would be justified in his proceeding against him.

3. He proceeds in the Amplification and Exaggeration of his sin, He yet
aggravates his sin. 1. That it proceeded from original sin in him.
and declares from what root this his actual sin sprang, even from his
original: Behold I was born in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me. This very sin that I have committed, gives me occasion to enquire into my
state, and I find, and confess upon a diligent inquisition, that I am
universally corrupted even from my mothers womb, and that I carry about me the
seeds of all sin.

4. From an insincere heart.
Thou requirest truth in the inward parts. The Lord is holy, his eye is pure,
he delights in holiness, truth, and sincerity of the heart; but I am unclean,
fallacious, and therefore miserable, because my disposition and affections are
contrary to his.

5. Committed against conscience.
And that which yet more aggravates his sin, committed it was against his
conscience, against that light of knowledge and wisdom with which God had
endued him; for God, in the hidden part, by a secret and unknown way, by the
motions of his holy Spirit, had taught him wisdom; but he like a Beast, had
suffered that light of knowledge to be suffocated by the fury of his own
affections.

Hitherto has David confessed and aggravated his sin, And lastly, names his
sin.
at the 14th. verse, he names in particular the sin for which he asks pardon,
Blood-guiltiness; Deliver me from Bloodguiltiness, O Lord.

His sin being confessed, He renews his first Petition for remission.
and that not coldly, or for fashion, but aggravated with all the
circumstances, he renews his first Petition for remission, which he does under
a Type then in use, and a Metaphor; the Type is Hyssop, and the Metaphor, Wash
me.

1. To be justified.
Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean; with a bunch of Hyssop dipped in
the blood of the Paschal Lamb, the Israelites sprinkled their doors. This was
again used in besprinkling and cleansing the Leper, and in the sacrifice for
sin; this bunch was, and the blood alterius in enigma, a Type of Christ's blood;
with that it was that David desired to be sprinkled, for then he knew he should
be clean; for the blood of Christ purges from all sin: Justified then he would
be; for it is the blood of Christ that alone justifies.

2. Sanctified.
And sanctified also he would be, and therefore he adds, Wash me, wash me with
thy holy Spirit, who is compared to water, and I shall be whiter than snow,
have a snow-white soul; not as if he should be without sin, while he remained
in this life, but that his sin, being by the power of Gods Spirit weakened,
mortified and subdued, that it reigned not in him, it should never be imputed;
and a sin not imputed, is, as if it never had been committed.

2. The second Petition, That the effects of sin be removed. 1. Remorse of
conscience.
David having ended his first Petition for forgiveness, now proceeds, and
craves another; viz. That the ill effects which sin had brought upon him may be
removed; the first of which, is grief to the soul, terror and disquiet that
arises out of the accusation of an evil conscience, David lay under this; the
sense of his sin had taken from him his inward joy, and his wonted peace, of
this he desires a restitution: Make me to hear of joy and peace, and gladness.

2. An ill state of body.
A second effect it had even upon his body, he was in a pining condition, his
bones were, as it were, broken, through the extremity of the anguish of his
spirit; the moisture of his body was like the drought in Summer, vide Psalm. 32.
ver. 3. and 4. To be restored again to Gods favor, he desires, That even the
bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.

3. Gods anger and displeasure
he that showed him a favorable countenance, now beheld him with an angry
brow; and so he knew it would be, till his sin was remitted and pardoned; and
therefore he begs: 1. Hide thy face from my sins; for if they appear before thy
eyes, I know they will provoke thine anger, and then I am but in an ill case;
for who can abide thine anger? He that turns away his face, considers not,
remembers not, and he that considers not, will not punish. 2. And blot out all
mine iniquities: I know there is a long Catalogue of sins in thy Book writ
against me, good God, Dele, blot, raze out this handwriting that it may not be
read; he that turns away his face from a writing, may yet call for it again,
and read it; but if blotted, it cannot be read: David therefore desires both.


3. Now follows David's third Petition, The third Petition, for grace and
sanctification.
in which he craves the grace of Sanctification; he first sought for remission,
then for reconciliation, and now for renovation, which he asks of God in the
three following verses.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me
not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore unto
me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.
In which we are to consider,

1. The subject upon which the work is to be done, the heart, the spirit; Of
the heart.
for as the heart is that part that first lives in nature, so it first lives in
grace; within this work must begin, or else outward renovation is to no purpose.

2. The work it self, which is: 1. A Creation: By a new Creation.
Sin had brought David's heart in respect of a heavenly being, as it were to
nothing, and from nothing to make it something, must be an act of power, O Lord
create; when thou wentest away, my life went away, Lord come again and create.
2. It is a Renovation: David was fallen, as I may so say, And renovation of a
new spirit.
in senium peccari, into the old age of sin; therefore he desires that God
would, as it were, begin with him again, and make him to renew his youth, as an
Eagle: O Lord, renew a right spirit within me. 3. Reconciliation and
Restitution: And a restitution of a spiritual life.
Therefore he craves that God would no cast him aside, as a dead man, and take
from him his Spirit by which he lived: Cast me not away, take not away, restore
to me the joy of thy salvation. 4. A confirmation in what was good; Uphold,
confirm, establish me.


3. Who was to do this work; not himself, no humane power, but God alone, And a
confirmation in goodness: Which work God alone could do: By changing the
qualities of the heart.
but his power, his Spirit: O God create, O Lord restore, uphold me by thy
Spirit. Renovation is a work that has its beginning, its progress, its
continuance and perseverance from God and his Spirit.

4. The Quality of this, a cleansing, so in the general; for it was not the
substance of the heart which was to be renewed and changed, but the qualities
and disposition only; now what he means by this pure and clean heart, he
declares in the following words, when he begs of God to give him a right
Spirit, a holy Spirit, a free Spirit.

1. A right spirit; for he easily perceived that by his indulgence to this sin,
In giving him, 1. A right spirit.
there was a crooked and perverse spirit that had prevailed over him; he judged
not as he did before of Gods Law, but perversely opposed it; he desires that God
would give him a spirit to judge rightly, as he did before, and firmly to
resolve to keep to that was the right and strait way to happiness: Renew, O
Lord, in me a right Spirit.

2. A holy Spirit: The profane, carnal spirit, is opposed to this, A boly spirit
and to that he hearkened; by this holy Spirit he was wont to be carried, which
opposed all carnality; but such good and sweet motions he perceived to be
departed, and therefore he desires of God a restitution of this holy Spirit,
this sanctifying and renewing Spirit, that might again kindle in him the love
of God, holy motions agreeable to Gods Law, and an obedience to the same: Take
not thy holy Spirit from me.

3. A free Spirit: He found that ever since he fell into his sin, he did his
duty, A free spirit.
and served his God with an ill will, with much reluctance, he took no delight
in the doing of it, as he did before; this therefore he begs, that God would
again give, and restore to him a free Spirit, that freely, cheerfully,
willingly he might run the way of Gods Commandments, and that he would so
uphold him with his Spirit, that he might constantly continue in the same to
his lives end: Uphold me, O Lord, with thy free Spirit.

2. Hitherto the Prophet has presented his three Petitions, The second part of
the Psalm, in which he vows three things.
and upon the confidence of these, he makes his vows, first to teach others;
secondly, to praise God; thirdly, to offer him the best sacrifice, a sacrifice
which should be instead of all sacrifices, which he knew would accept a
contrite heart.

1. Then, that is, after my pardon obtained, and my reconciliation unto thee, I
shall teach; His first vow, to teach others.


2. I will teach thy ways to sinners; not my ways of sinning, but thy methods
of pardoning; viz. That to the stubborn thou will show thy self froward and
stubborn; but to the penitent, such as I am, thou will show mercy.

3. And the effect will be, That sinners shall be converted unto thee: They who
were perverted before, and averted from thee, being encouraged by the mercy I
have found, shall be converted.

2. His second vow to praise God.
His second vow and promise is to praise God: My tongue shall sing aloud of thy
righteousness, But to this he was unapt, so long as he remained in his sin; But
because not fit to do this, he prays.
and therefore he prays for a capacity to do both.

1. For remission.
Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, and then my tongue shall sing. 2. For
assistance.
O Lord open my lips, and then my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
3. His third vow is about a sacrifice, which should be better than any then in
use; not the sacrifice of a beast, but the sacrifice of a heart, a heart
well-conditioned, His Preface to his third vow. Negatively. That God delights
not in sacrifices.
seasoned with contrition and sorrow, such he knew God would accept, and such
he should have.

1. Thou desire no sacrifice: That is, the outward in comparison of the
inward; would the outward please, I would not be behind for that also; I would
give it thee, but I know, Thou delightest not in burnt-offerings without the
heart.

2. Nor in the heart, till contrite.
No nor with the heart neither, till it be broken and contrite; broken for sin,
and contrite for mere love, that it has offended so good a Father; I vow
therefore to bring thee this sacrifice, this is instead of all other, instead
of many sacrifices; The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; His third vow, a
contrite heart The third part, in which he prays for the Church.
a broken and a contrite heart, Thou, O God, wilt not despise.

3. David having finished his prayers and vows for himself, forgets not to
petition for Jerusalem, for Gods Church; and the reason might be, a religious
fear in him, lest for his sin Jerusalem might suffer; such a thing might
happen, for so it did when he numbered the people: Peccant Reges plectuntur
Achivi; His method was to be commended, and his charity.

1. His method; first to be reconciled to God himself, before he prays for
others; for the prayers of a righteous man prevails much, and the Apostle
speaks of intercession. 2. His charity; for we are always bound to remember
the afflictions of Joseph, and to pray for the peace of Jerusalem. He prays
then for her.
1. That God protect his Church.
Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion.

2. That he would have a special favor even to the material buildings: Build
thou the walls of Jerusalem, Even the walls.
for these fall not alone; Religion, and the Service of God fall, when the
Temple and Houses of God fall to ruin: Probatum est.

3. Then Religion would flourish.
For the consequence of Jerusalems prosperity would be this, That Religion
would flourish with it: Then there would be sacrifices, burnt-offerings, and
Holocausts; And which is yet more, we shall offer, And God pleased with it.
and thou shall accept: Then thou shall be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness. We being reconciled unto thee, justified, sanctified, righteous
upon thy account, and in favor, all our sacrifices shall find a gracious
acceptance.

The Prayer collected out of the fifty first Psalm.
O Almighty Lord, and most merciful God, thou have showed compassion to many
penitent sinners since the very beginning of the World, thou never rejectedst
any that sought to thee with a penstent soul; and therefore Lord, since thou
art the same, and no shadow of change in thee, I befeech thee, cloze not that
door of mercy on me that has been opened to receive so many before me, and let
not those Rivers of compassion be dried up to me, that have flowed so
plentifully to others. Have mercy on me, O Lord; on me, I know Lord, thou have
thy debt-book, wherein thou writest the transgressions of them with a pen of
Iron, and point of a Diamond, with whom thou mindest to enter into judgment;
let not me, O Lord, be of that number, let not my debt stand registered in that
Book, but of thy mercy, and not my merit; put it away, and blot it out; for if
my sin stand upon thy account, I am but a dead man; Lord, quicken me; Lord,
forgive me my trespass, and put away the handwriting of thy Ordinance that is
against me.

O Lord, if thou wash me not, I shall have no part with thee; spots I have,
wash me then by thy vower from iniquity, and cleanse me by thy Spirit from my
sin, or else as an Aethiop, I shall never change my spots. O Lord, lest my
uncleanness banish me from my fellowship with thee, wash I beseech thee, not my
feet only, but my hands and my head also: Wash my feet, that is, my unclean
affections; wash my hands, that is, my unclean actions; and wash my head, that
is, my unclean imaginations; cleanse me in all, that the pollution of any do
not cast me from thy presence.

O Lord, I do not hide and conceal the iniquity of my bosom; my sin is ever
before me, do thou therefore cast it behind thy back.

My sin is so secret to the eye of the World, that no eye beholds it, against
thee then, against thee I confess, that I have grievously offended, and done
evil in thy sight; and therefore it is not, O Lord, without cause, that I
suffer these heavy things from thy hands, I have deserved them all, and given
thee just Reason to proceed against me as thou have done; and now I here
acknowledge it before the world, that thou may be justified, and have the
praise of righteousness even in those things which by the hands of men, thou
have brought upon me: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just in thy judgments.

I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, Behold I
was born in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. A Transgressor I
have been from the womb; for that bitter root of sin ingraffed in my nature
has gathered strength, and shot forth new branches; my understanding is
darkened, my will perverted, and my affections bent to evil, so that I am truly
abominable in thy sight, and ashamed of my self, especially being conscious to
those foul and enormous actual sins that grow from this polluted feed.

Behold, Thou love Truth in the inward affections; but woe is me, Miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord, he has shed his blood for me, Purge
me then O Lord, not with hyssop, but with his blood; nor Soap, nor Niter, nor
Fullers Soap can make me clean, but that stream which issued out of his wounds
and side: Purge me then with this blood, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I
shall be whiter than snow; though my sins were as scarlet, yet I shall be
whiter than wool; though they be red like crimson, yet (...) shall be white as
the driven snow.

O Lord, O Lord, let me hear the voice of joy and gladness; send down from
above the Comforter, who alone can speak peace to my soul; and then my body,
which pineth away under this anguish, and my bones, which seem to be broken
through my disconsolate condition, shall again recover their wonted strength,
and my flesh upon me shall rejoice.

If then, Hide, O hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all my misdeeds:
Turn thy angry look from me, and look upon the face of thy Anointed, that so
thy anger, when it reaches me, may as the Sunbeams, passing through some
thick cloud, be refracted and mitigated,

O Lord, by my sin I have grieved thy holy Spirit, and forced thee, who art
properly my heart, and life of my heart, to forsake me; come again, Lord, and
restore life unto me; without thee, I am dead in trespasses and sins; I have
lost my life, Return, O Lord, and come again, and create a new heart within me:
Of my self I have fallen, by thy assistance I must rise, lend me then the
helping hand of thy grace that may lift me up. And being fallen, my heart is
foul, and who is able to bring a clean thing out of an unclean? This is a work
much like the producing the first World out of the Tohu and Bohu; set, O Lord
Almighty, thy power to work again, and create in me a clean heart.

Fallen I am into the old age of sin, begin with me again, and make me young
and lusty as an Eagle: and forsake me not in my old age of iniquity, as a dead
man out of mind; but let thy presence yet be with me, and restore me to the joy
of thy salvation: O take not from me the graces and assistances of thy Spirit,
thy right Spirit, thy holy Spirit, thy free Spirit. A perverse spirit I find in
my self, thy Spirit will rectify it, and teach me to go the right way; an
unclean spirit I am possessed with, thy Spirit will sanctify it, and purge it
from pollution; it is the spirit of bondage to which I am subject, thy Spirit
can set it at liberty, and make it free; impart therefore some, nay, a liberal
portion of this thy Spirit, that may teach me the right way, that may set me in
a holy course, that may keep, preserve, uphold, and confirm me in it, that I
never more fall from thee, but with a free, willing, loving, and an ingenuous
soul, I may constantly keep the strait paths of thy Commandments all the days
of my life; this, this will be an assurance unto me, That I am restored to the
joy of thy salvation.

And being restored my self, I will teach sinners in the way; as my example
has seduced them, so shall my exemplary Repentance again reduce them, I will
show them my tears by which I have recovered thy grace, my sorrow, my
confession, by which I have pacified thy wrath; what they are to do, if they
will recover thy favor, and how ready thou art to forgive, and be reconciled,
if they do it, by which many a poor sinner shall be converted to thee.

And then they with me, shall sing aloud of thy righteousness, That thou art a
righteous God, that punishest the wicked and impenitent; which my sin has shut
up and closed, and my tongue shall sing of thy mercies all the day long; which
being offered upon the Altar of a broken, tender, melting, and contrite heart,
thou have promised to accept.

Would thou be pleased with the firstborn of my body for the sin of my soul,
I would not detain it? Had thou any delight in the fat of Rams, but thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings; but he that offers thee thanks and praise,
he honors thee; but he that brings a heart broken for his sin, he pleases
thee; and to him that presents a soul truly contrite, that he has offended so
kind a Father, thou will look this broken heart I bring to thee, this contrite
spirit I bear sacrifice before thee, O Lord, accept of this offering of me thy
thankful, but weak and miserable (except thou be merciful) servant.

And in the last place, being persuaded that I am reconciled unto thee, Do good
in thy good pleasure to Zion, and build thou the walls of Jerusalem: When thy
servants think upon her stones, it pitieth them to see her in the dust; my
sins, as well as others, have brought upon her this ruin; but Lord, turn from
thy fierce wrath, and once more repair her breaches; let this City flourish
once again, let peace be within her Walls, and plenteousness within her
Palaces, but especially a happy progress in true Religion, and fear of thy Name.

Then shall thou be pleased; not with burnt-offerings and oblations, Hymns and
Psalms, which they who confess thy Name, shall sing melodiously in their hearts
to thee: O my God, I will sing of thy Name, and exalt thy power and mercy for
ever. Amen.

PSALM. LII.
THIS Psalm was composed by occasion of Doegs cruelty in falling upon, and
slaying the Priests of God, 1 Samuel 21, 22. and the Subject is Doegs malice, and
Gods goodness.

Three parts there are in this Psalm. 1. An Invective against Doeg and his
fall, from ver. 1. to 6. 2. The comfort that Gods people should take in it,
ver. 6. 3. The security and flourishing estate of those who trust in God, and
David's thanks for it, ver. 9.


1. David begins with an abrupt Apostrophe to Doeg, The first part.
and figures it by an Erotesis, Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, thou
Mighty man? and answers, The goodness of God endures continually; An invective
against Doeg. 1. His Character.
which was enough to quiet any soul, that was affrighted with his brags and
threats.

And so having put this black character upon him, that he was a malicious
bloody man, and arrived to that height of impudence, that he boasted in
mischief; he descends to particulars, and sets him out in his colors,
especially by the ill use of that part by which he did most mischief, his
tongue.

1. Thy tongue works mischief, like a Rasor, working deceitfully. 1. Which is
an instrument to cut the Beard, but it comes too near the Throat. 2. When this
is done, a deceit there is in it; for the man who came under the edge of the
Rasor, expected no such usage.
2. Thou love evil more than good: His wickedness was habitual, 3. Thou
love lying, rather than to speak righteousness: An enemy he was to the truth,
and by lies and flatteries ready to destroy good men. 4. Which David in the
next verse more plainly expresses, Thou love all devouring words, O thou
false tongue; he was, as it were, all tongue, and wholly false and deceitful.
This is his Character; now David foretells his ruin and total destruction,
which he amplifies from the Author by a Congeries of words: His ruin.
God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the Land of the living:

2. The second part. The comfort Gods people take in it.
Then follows how Gods people should be affected upon Doegs fall.

1. They, The Righteous shall set it, and fear; fear and reverence God more
than before, as taking a just revenge on a wicked man. 2. shall laugh at him,
using this bitter Sarcasm, Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength,
This ruin is justly happened to him, he trusted in his gold more than God; and
by adding one wickedness to another, thought to strengthen himself.
But such a fearful end shall not fall upon David, The third part. The
flourishing estate of the good.
not any good man; when a wicked man shall be unrooted, he shall flourish as an
Olive, that is never destitute of leaves nor fruit; a good and bad man are here
opposed, and their successes.

1. As for me, I am like a green Olive Tree, fruitful and green. 2. An Olive
Tree planted in the House of God, without which the fruits are but sour, and
the leaves bare leaves only. 3. His faith is the cause of it.
An Olive lasts long, two hundred years, and long lived a good man shall be,
for ever and ever; to a good life longaevity is promised here, hereafter
eternity. 4. And the Reason of all this, the good man's faith: I trust in the
mercy of God.
Upon which his Conclusion being full of confidence, Which is accompanied with
praise and hope.
and expectancy follows.

1. I will praise thee for ever because thou have done it. 2. And I will wait
on thy Name, for this is good before thy Saints; this alone is the foundation
of their hope, who commend themselves to thy goodness, and are favored by
thee.
The Prayer collected out of the fifty second Psalm.
O Lord God Almighty, who have separated the Tribe of Levi to come near unto
thee, and have commanded them to teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy
Laws, behold, and look down from Heaven, and consider the disgrace and injury
we suffer for thy Name; Thou have sent us as sheep among wolves, and as wolves
they fall upon us, and devour us; counted we are, as the offscouring of all
things for thy sake, and made a spectacle to Men and Angels.

The tongue of the Mighty devises mischief against us, instead of love, they
return us haired; Their tongue is deceitful, Nay, they boast in this mischief,
as if in destroying of us, they thought they should do God good service.

And now Lord, what is our hope, truly our hope is even in thee: Thy goodness,
O Lord, endures continually; we know whom we have trusted, we know on whom we
rely, so shall God likewise destroy them for ever; he shall take them away, and
pluck them out of their dwelling place,

This the righteous shall live to see done with their eyes, and for it serve
thee their Lord with more fear, and rejoice before thee with the greater
comfort, being delighted not so much with their destruction, as with the
express of thy justice. Laugh they shall, and say, So, so let it happen unto
all those, who make not God their strength, but trust to the abundance of their
riches, and strengthen themselves in their wickedness.

But, O Lord, let the fate of him, Levi, that seeks his God with a clean heart,
and in sincerity serve thee in thy house, be like a green Olive tree, full of
fruit, and full of youth; and for ever and ever be joyful in thy mercy.

Which thing if thou will do for us, then shall we praise thy Name, then will
we wait upon thee, and expect to see thy goodness in the land of the living,
through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior.

PSALM. LIII.
THIS Psalm is the very same with the fourteenth. The Analysis then must be the
same, and the Prayer, and therefore I refer you thither.

PSALM. LIVE. (...)
DAVID, in danger in the Wilderness of Ziph, composed this Psalm.

There be 2 parts of the Psalm. 1. His Prayer for help and salvation, from
verse. 1. to 4. 2. His Confidence, that he should have help, and upon it his
gratitude, to verse. 7.


David preferres his Petition in the two first verses.

1. Save me, plead my cause. Hear my prayer. The first part. David's Petition.
Give ear to the words of my mouth. Earnest he is, and he ingeminates his
desire, and yet he desires not to speed, except his cause be just. Plead thou
my cause. 2. He produces two grounds upon which he petitions. The name, The
ground of it.
the strength of God. 1. He that calls on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.
I call, Save me in thy Name. 2. Thou art a powerful God, able to do it. Save me
in thy strength.

And this his Petition he quickens by the greatness of his danger. The
greatness of his danger.
1. Were strangers: from them he could expect very little favor. 2. They were
violent oppressors, formidable, cruel tyrants, and from such I must expect no
mercy. 3. Nothing can satisfy but my blood. They arise, not for me, but
against me, and seek after my life. 4. They are a sort of impious people. They
have not set God before their eyes.


Well yet, be they Aliens, The second part. In which he expresses his
confidence.
and by their works unworthy of the name of Israelites, formidable and cruel
men, who will show me no mercy; bloody-minded, whom nothing can satisfy, but
my life. Impious and ungodly people, that remember not that God has a
revengeful eye. Yet I will not fear. For behold God openly favors me. 2. And
is against them. Me he favors,

1. God is my helper. As he has promised, so he has done, and will do to me.
2. God is with them also, that stand for me, and uphold my soul. Ecce, Behold
both these.
But he opposes them, that oppose me. Is an enemy to them, who are mine
enemies.

He shall reward evil to such enemies that observe me, Of which being assured
in the Spirit of Prophecy, he imprecates.

Destroy thou them, And imprecates.
cut them off in thy truth. Promised thou have, that it shall go well with the
righteous, but on the ungodly thou will rain snares, fire, and brimstone. Let
God be true. Fiat justitia, pereat mundus. As thou have said, Cut them off.

Now for so great a mercy, Vows to be thankful.
David vows not to be unthankful. For this 1. He would Sacrifice, I will praise
thy Name. 2. I will Sacrifice freely.


For which he gives two reasons.

1. For it is good. The reasons.
6. The (...), occasional, or outwardly impulsive. His deliverance. 1. For he
has delivered me out of all my trouble. 2. And mine eye has seen, to my great
admiration and content, his desire upon my enemies. Delivered I am, they
confounded.

The Prayer collected out of the fifty fourth Psalm.
O Almighty Lord, who heardst the cries of thy people Israel, when they were
oppressed in Egypt, look upon the afflictions of us thy people, who have just
reason to groan under our hard Taskmasters, and heavy burdens. By experience
we find, Hear our prayer, O God, and give eat to the words of our mouth. Now we
stand in need of thy strength, now we have use of thy powerful arm, since our
enemies become strangers to their own blood, and show us no favor, are violent
oppressors, and load us with heavy burdens, are cruel tyrants, from whom we
must expect no mercy, are bloody men, whom nothing can satisfy but our lives:
are a sort of impious people, that have not set thee before their eyes.

O God, be thou our helper, and Savior, and be present with all those that
fight for thee, Judge us, O Lord, in thy strength. Thou which art terrible to
the oppressor, and a refuge to those who are injuriously oppressed, according
to the Truth of thy promises made to thy people. that severe revenge which thou will take upon our and thy enemies:

So will we offer unto thee the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving freely and
cheerfully in the midst of the Congregation,

PSALM. LV. (...).
WHETHER David composed this Psalm upon the hard usage of Saul, or the
rebellion of his son Absolon, is uncertain, sure it is, he was in some great
distress, and upon it he makes his address to his God.

There are in genetal four parts of this Psalm. 1. He prays to God to hear his
prayer, verse. 1, 2. 2. He complains of his trouble, from verse. 3. to 8. 3. He
prays against his enemies, and shows the causes, from verse. 8. to 15. 4. He
takes heart upon assurance of Gods help: and his enemies overthrow, from verse.
15. to the end.


1. He first beggs audience. 1. Give ear, hide not thy self, attend, hear me.
The first part. He prays for audience of his complaint. The second part.
2. My prayer, supplication: that I mourn, complain, make a noise. Affected he
was with the sense of that he prayed for, and therefore earnest he was in it.


2. This in General, but next in particular he mentions the causes of his
complaint and earnestness to God, that he might be hea^d, The causes of it two.
both in regard of his enemies. 2. And the condition that he now was in.

1. The danger he was in was very great; The malice of his enemies.
1. They slandered and calumniated him, and threatened him. Because of the
voice, etc. 2. They vexed, pressed upon him, and oppressed him. Because of the
oppression of the wicked. 3. They plotting his ruin, devol'd and cast iniquity
upon him. Charged him home. 4. They were implacable, angry, and hated him. In
wrath they hate me.
2. Then for his own person, he was in a sad, heavy, doleful condition. His sad
condition.
1. My heart is sore pained within me. His grief was inward. 2. The terrors of
death are fallen upon me. 3. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me. Which
are the outward effects of fear. 4. And an horrible dread within has
overwhelmed me. Amazement followed his fear.

And he illustrates this his condition by the counsel he took with his own
heart: His result upon it to fly.
upon the deliberation, the result was, that he would speedily fly away, fly
into the Wilderness, as if he might be safer among bruit beasts, than such men.

1. And I said. That was his result upon the debate with himself. 2. O that I
had the wings of a Dove. It is a fearful creature, of a swift wing; in fear he
was, and he would fly as fast, as far as the Dove from the Eagle. 3. As far,
even to some remote land, where I should have rest from these wicked men. 4.
And by an (...), he amplifies and explains himself again. 1. That he would fly
far away, Lo, then, would I wander far off, and remain in the Wilderness. 2. I
would hasten my escape, from the windy storm and tempest. Such turbulent and
impetuous creatures his enemies were, that threw down all before them, as a
wind, storm, tempest.

3. The third part. His Imprecation.
To his Prayer he adds an Imprecation.

1. Destroy them, O Lord. Destroy them in their own counsels. 2. Or else,
Divide their tongue. Let them not agree in their counsels.
Of this he gives the reasons in the following words, The reason.
viz. that they were a sort of violent, contentious, ungodly, troublesome,
crafty and fraudulent people.

1. I have seen violence and strife in the City. 2. Day and night they go about
the walls thereof, mischief and sorrow are in the midst of it. 3. Crafty and
fraudulent also. Deceit and guile depart not from their streets. It was then a
City, a Corporation, a Society of evil doers.
And of this he produces an instance, His instance, a friend, that became his
enemy.
which whether it were some bosom friend of David, that stole out of the City
of Keilah and betrayed his counsels to Saul; or else Achitophel, that being
formerly his great Favorite and Counselor, fell to Absolon, it is uncertain,
whoever it was, such a treacherous person there was, and of him he complains,
and well he might, for (...).

This treachery he exaggerates most eloquently by an Incrementum, Which he
Aggravates by circumstances.
and Apostrophe, drawing his aggravation from the Laws of friendship which he
had broke; Had it been an enemy, he could have borne it, but that it was a
friend, was intolerable and also unexcusable. Thus the Climax stands.

1. For it was not my enemy that reproached me: Then I could have borne it. 2.
Neither was it he that hated me: that did magnify himself, that is, arise and
insult against me: Then I would have hid my self from him; Never admitted him
to my bosom. 3. 1. It was Thou. (...). Thou, precipue and per aliis. None but
Thou. 2. A man according to my own rank, mine equal. My guide, or counselor;
my acquaintance, or own familiar friend. 3. We took sweet counsel together; One
to whom I communicated my secrets. 4. And walked in the house of God in
company. Professors we were of the same Religion.

Now all these Circumstances much aggravate and heighten the treachery, that
thou, my equal, my director, my familiar friend, one whom I made the Master of
all my secrets, one who was a great Professor of the same Religion with me,
Upon which he redoubles his Imprecation on the Faction.
that thou should betray me, even breaks my heart; (...), Judas, betrayest
Thou?

Being thus much wronged and moved, as he had just reason, he falls again upon
an imprecation, not only on him, but all that did believe him, even upon the
whole faction. Let death seize upon them, let them go down quick into hell,
have Corah, Dathan, and Abiram's wages. And he adds the reason. They are
signally and incorrigibly wicked. For wickedness is in their dwelings, and
among them.

4. The fourth part.
Hitherto has David prayed, complained, imprecated, but now he shows how he
recovered heart again, being certain of Gods help, and a revenge to be taken on
his enemies.

1. As for me, I will call upon God, fervently, His affiance in God, that 1. He
shall be safe.
and the Lord shall save me. 2. Evening, and morning, and at noonday,
uncessantly will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear. 3. And I pray in
faith, experience I have of his deliverance; He has redeemed my soul in peace
from the battle that was against me. Even in the midst of the battle, I was as
safe, as in a time of peace. Miraculously delivered, as if there had been no
danger. 4. For there were many with me. Many enemies, say some; other, many
Angels. Those refer it to the danger, the other to the protection. Many
enemies round about me, and then it is a wonder I should be delivered. Many
Angels pressed to help me, and then 'twas no wonder that my life was saved.
But as for the ungodly, it is not so with them, That his enemies shall perish.
for this Verse is opposed to the former.

1. God shall hear, viz. Me and my prayers, 2. And shall afflict them, i. e. my
enemies. 3. Even he that abides of old. Selah. Mark that, for he is immutable,
his power and strength is the same, and his care and love to his people.
Therefore he will afflict them.
And besides, there is in them, that which will provoke him to it.

1. Because they have no changes. Obstinate they are, impenitent, The reasons,
For they are,
and change not their ways: Or else they prosper, Impenitent, secure.
and this makes them secure and proud. 2. They fear not God. They ask, Who is
the Lord, They fear not God.
that we should let Israel go? 3. They are truce breakers, violators of Oaths,
Leagues, Covenants, He, that is, Truce breakers.
some chief Commander among them, has put forth his hands, made war, and brued
his hands with blood, against such as are at peace with him. He has broken and
profaned his Covenant. His Oath. 4. He is a gross Hypocrite, his deeds answer
not his words. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, Dissemblers.
but War was in his heart: His words were softer than oil, and yet they are
drawn swords.
In the Epilogue of the Psalm he exhorts good men to rely upon God. He exhorts
good men to rely on God.


Cast thy burden, the cares, troubles, etc. with which thou art loaded, on the
Lord; and he fits it to his present purpose,

1. To the Godly he gives this comfort. 1. He, that is, God, shall sustain
thee; He will uphold thee, and give thee strength under the heaviest burden.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden. 2. He shall never suffer the
righteous to be moved. With the tentation he will give the issue, pressed they
may be, but not oppressed to fall finally.
2. To the Ungodly. 1. Overthrown they shall be, and utterly destroyed. Thou, O
God, The Grave. Tertifies the ungodly.
Hell. 2. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. They
come commonly to some untimely death. As Absolon, Achitophel, Saul, of whom the
Psalm was composed.

He concludes with the use he would make of it. As if he had said, His affiance
in God.
Let these bloody and deceitful men, repose their confidence in their Armies,
in their violence, in the crafty and subtle ways, I will take another course.
But I will trust in thee.

The Prayer collected out of the fifty fifth Psalm.
O Merciful God, to call on thee in trouble, and have promised to hear us.

Of a quiet mind we cannot be, so long as we see and feel, that those that are
enemies to thy Truth, seek our subversion, hence it is, that our heart is sore
pained, that fearfulness and trembling are come upon us: hence it is, that the
fear and sorrows of death has overtaken us,

Happy is the silly and innocent Dove, wings she has, swift wings to fly from
the talents of the bloody hawlk:

But since it is so, that we must live among them, O Lord, bring the counsel of
Achitophel to naught, precipitate and destroy their conspiracies, divide their
tongues, and raise discords among them, that speaking and plotting contrary
things, they may, as at Babel, come to confusion.

Such is their impiety, that they deserve no other, for they are a Nation of
evil doers.

Worthy such men are to suffer under thy hand, let then Death come hastily upon
them, let them go down quick into Hell, as Corah, Dathan and Abiram, with their
rebellions company, for wickedness is in their dwellings, for they are
assembled for no other purpose, but to do mischief.

And one there is among the rest,

But that which makes the mischief unsufferable, and my danger inevitable, that
have spoken ill of me: Thou, that have betrayed me, who wast my intimate and
bosom friend; Thou, who wast my familiar. Thou, to whom I entrusted my
secrets: one, who seemed to be of the same mind with me in all prophans and
divine things.

His words were smoother than butter, and softer than oil, when, as it appears
since, he had war in his heart, and a sword to be drawn to destroy me: For this
is the man, that has now put forth his hand against me, nor Oaths, nor
Covenant, nor Articles of agreement can hold him, he has broken them all.

And his followers and favorites are no better than himself, They have seen no
changes, therefore they fear not God. let them perish by some violent, and
immature death, and never live out half their days.

But as for me, I will, in the midst of these troubles, call upon my God,
Earnestly will I cry, uncessantly at morning, evening, and at noonday will I
pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice.

Experience I have of his merciful hand, even then he has secured me as in a
time of peace. Then he has sent and set an Army of Angels for my guard, so
that there were many with me.

O Lord, thou art immutable, thou abidest of old, thou art the same, I will
therefore cast my burden of cares and sorrows upon thee, that thou will sustain
me, that I shall not sink under it. Thou will not suffer thy righteous servant
to be tossed and tumbled by the persecution of wicked men for ever. Amen.

PSALM. LVI. (...).
DAVID in banishment among the Philistines, and being there in great danger of
his life, prays, complains of his, professes his confidence in God.

The Contents of it are, 1. David's Prayer, verse. 1, 7, 8. 2. The cause, the
fear of his enemies, whom he describes, verse. 1, 2, 5, 6. 3. His Confidence in
Gods Word, verse. 3, 4, 9, 10, 11. 4. His Thankfulness, verse. 4, 10, 12, 13.


1. He begins with a prayer for mercy, little he was like to find from man, The
first part. His prayer. The second part.
from his God he expected it, and therefore he prays, Be merciful to me, O
God. 2. And then presently be subjoins the cause, The cause, his danger from
his enemies.
the danger he was in by his bloody and cruel enemies, whom he begins to
describe, 1. From their unsatiable raven, like a gulf, they would swallow me
up, verse, Man would swallow me, Whom he describes.
2. From the time, Daily they would do it without intermission. 3. From their
number, Many there be that fight against me.

Of these he gives us a farther Description at the fifth and sixth verses.

1. From their uncessantmalice. Every day they wrest my words. 2. From their
secret treachery, craft, vigilance. They gather themselves together, they hide
themselves, their counsels, lying, as it were, in ambush for me. They mark my
steps. Go whither I will, they are at my heels. 3. From their implacable
hatred, nothing could satisfy them, but his blood. They lay wait for my soul.
In the very midst of this Complaint he inserts his courage and confidence. The
third part. His courage 1. In Gods promise.


1. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. 2. I will not fear. He arises
higher. Even when he fears, he will not fear. In God I will praise his Word: In
God have I put my trust, I will not fear, what flesh, for the proudest, the
mightiest enemy I have, is but flesh, and all flesh is grass: I will not then
fear, what flesh can do unto me. 3. verse. 10, 11. 1. In God I will praise his
Word: In the Lord I will praise his Word. 2. In God have I put my trust, I will
not fear what man can do to me.

And this his Confidence he quickens and animates. In Gods justice.


1. First from his assurance, that God would punish and bring down his enemies.
Shall they escape for their iniquity? No, no. In thine anger thou will cast
them down. 2. In Gods mercy in protecting him.
From his assurance of Gods Tutelage, and paternal eye over him in all his
dangers, griefs, complaints, petitions, banishment. Men think, Non vacat
exiguis rebus adesse Jovi, he knew otherwise. 1. Thou tellest, and have upon
account my wanderings. My flights, 2. Thou putt'st my tears into thy bottle.
Preserv'st them as rich Wine. 3. Thou keep'st a Record of them. Are they not in
thy book? 4. Thou putt'st my enemies to flight. When I cry unto thee, then I
know my enemies shall be turned back, for God is with me.

4. The fourth part.
And therefore at last he concludes with thanks, to which he holds himself
bound by Vow. 1. His thankfulness for his deliverance.
Thy vows are upon me. Damnatus sum voti. I owe thee thanks by vow, and I will
pay it. I will render praises unto thee. 2. For thou have delivered my soul
from death. 2. Wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling? 3. And the end is,
That I may walk before God in the light of the living. That I may live awhile,
and walk as before thy eye, as in thy sight, uprightly, sincerely.


The Prayer collected out of the fifty sixth Psalm.
O Lord,

In these extremities we have no security, Truth, and thy people that suffer
for thy Truth: Thou have made to us many precious promises, upon which give us
grace so to rely, that whatsoever sadness, hardship, calamity fall upon us,
that we may trust in thy Word, and praise our God for that gracious Word of
protection, Why should we be afraid what man can do unto us, when thou have
past thy word to be our Guardian.

It is not as the profane of the World imagine, For if we are in banishment and
pursued, Thou tellest every step we take; if our eyes drop down tears, they are
not lost, for thou put them into thy bottle; our sighs and groans are noted
in thy Book.

When therefore now we are Exiles for thy sake, Bottle up our tears, hear our
groans, register our sighs before us, and turn back our enemies: Shall they
escape by their iniquity?

So shall we have just reason to praise our God for his Word; For thy vows are
upon us,

O Lord, deliver our souls from death, and keep our feet from falling, in
sincerity of heart before our God in the light of the living; in this light,
the light of thy countenance give us grace to walk, that we may live with thee
for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

PSALM. LVII. Ne Perdas, (...), aut Deprecatorius.
THIS Psalm was composed by David, when he hid himself from Saul in the Cave, 1 Samuel 24.

The contents of it are: His Petition, ver. 1. The Reasons that persuaded him
to it, from v. 1. to 6. His profession of thanks, ver. 5, 7, 8, etc.


1. His Petition is ardent, the Epizeuxis shows it, The first part. His
Petition for mercy.
and it is for grace and protection: Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful
unto me.

2. And he presently subjoins his Reasons to persuade God to be merciful.

1. From his faith and confidence he had in God alone: The Reasons. The second
part. 1. His affiance in God.
For my soul trusts in thee, and under the shadow of thy wings, as the
Chicken does under the wing of the Hen, shall be my refuge until this Tyranny
be over-past. 2. From the sufficiency and efficiency of God: I will call upon
God. 1. The most High; sufficient then he is, and able to deliver me. 2. That
performs all things for me; and will therefore effect it. Gods sufficiency
and efficiency.


And upon this Argument he insists in the following verse.

He shall send from Heaven, some miraculous way he shall do it; send from
Heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. Selah.
God shall send forth his Mercy and Truth; perform his word, and mercifully save
me.

3. The third Reason of his Petition, was, His great danger.
the extreme danger he was then in by a cruel and merciless enemy.

1. My soul is among Lions; a ravenous, bloody creature. 2. I lie even among
those that are set on fire; their anger and hatred to me is implacable. 3. Even
among the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp Sword: They calumniate me, and wound deeper than these weapons: A Spear
wounds near, an Arrow afar off, a Sword at hand; near or far off, they spare
not to disgrace me, fortiter accusant.
4. And now he draws an Argument more strong than all the rest; for he puts God
in mind of that which he will not part with, Gods honor
his Glory: A glory it would be to him to be merciful, to save and deliver, and
therefore he prays:

Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens, and let thy Glory be above all the
earth; that is, show thy Power, and assert thy Glory, let not the wicked thus
exult, which if thou shall do, thy Glory will be conspicuous above in Heaven,
and below over all the earth.

And then he falls again upon his complaint,

1. He reiterates his danger. But foretells the event.
They have prepared a Net for my steps; insidiantur, as Fowlers. 2. So that my
soul is bowed down; my life is in great danger. 3. They have dug a Pit
before me, intending to take me, as some wild Beast; but praised be God, I
foresee the event; They are fallen into the Pit themselves.
(...).

Neque enim lex justior ulla est, quam necis artificem art perire sua.

Upon the confidence of which David gives thanks, The third part. For it gives
thanks, which consists of.
which also may be a fourth Argument; for no such way to procure a new favor,
as to be thankful; and by his example we may learn how to give thanks, two
especial points our thanksgiving must consist of, and we meet with both of them
here; the first is, Commemoration; the second, Annunciation.

1. A Commemoration.
so had David done, and therefore he mentions his heart; and to make it more
emphatical, he names it again, My heart. 2. An Affection
After he remembers it, he must be affected with it, and resolve upon it; so
does David, My heart is ready, or else, My heart is fixed, confirmed, I am in
it to be thankful, and I cannot be altered. 3. An Annunciation.
It Is not enough that a man carry about with him a thankful heart, he must
anunciare, tell it abroad, and make it known publicly what God has done for
him; With joy.
yea, and do it joyfully too: I will, says David, sing and give praise. 4. By
all means possible
are all little enough; whence by an Apostrophe, David turns to these, Awake my
Glory; i.e. Tongue awake, Lute and Harp, I my self will awake. 5. With fervency.
He must not do it in a sleepy manner, but with contention, and earnestness of
spirit: Awake, awake, I will awake. 6. Opportunely.
He must take the first opportunity to do it, and not hang off, and delay it: I
will awake early. 7. Publicly.
He must do it in such a place, and such an Assembly, as may most redound to
Gods honor: I will praise thee, O God, among the people; I will sing of thee
among the Nations.
Now that all this be done, The Reason.
David, ver. 10. gives a sufficient Reason, that which may move any man to do
it, For thy Mercy is great to the Heavens, and thy Truth to the Clouds.

And then, as is usual in Poesy, he repeats the verse before, in which we meet
with this (...), Be thou exalted Lord, above the Heavens, and thy Glory above
the Earth.

The Prayer collected out of the fifty seventh Psalm.
O Lord, our enemies are many and mighty, their teeth are as spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword, to wound us in our good name;

O Lord be merciful, O God be merciful unto us, send down, we beseech thee,
Declare thy power, O Lord, and come amongst us, and send forth thy Mercy and
Truth for our deliverance; thy Mercy is infinite, thy Word is past, in thy
protection only, shall be my Refuge, till these calamities be over-past.

Continually, and with an ardent soul, most potent; that God that has so often
done me good, and I doubt not but be will perform his word, and make perfect
his salvation.

Do thou, O Lord, declare thy power,

To do this, O Lord, my heart is ready, my heart is fixed, for thy benefits
shall never slip out of my memory, nor thy goodness recede from my heart;
neither will I remember them alone, but they shall be my song in the house of
my pilgrimage; I will compose Hymns to the honor of thy Name, and in my song
praise thee.

I will say to my heart and tongue, which art my glory, Jacob.

Come along with me, There will we praise thee, O Lord, in the Assembly of many
people; there will we chant Hymns to thy honor before many Nations.

For thy mercy is so great, That it reaches to the very Heavens; and thy
faithfulness in keeping thy promises such, That it extends above the Clouds;
for both these mount up to the Heavens above, and pass through the Earth
beneath; both these are so high and wonderful, that they can never be
comprehended by us.

Therefore I pray, and I pray again,

Arise therefore, O good Father, Be thou exalted, and make thy glory
illustrious, convert all Nations to the Truth; break the Nets, fill up the
pits, make the craft and subtilty of Antichrist and his Followers of none
effect, which they use to eclipse the light of thy Gospel; so shall our hearts
be every day more and more confirmed to confess, praise, and celebrate thy
Name, and to exalt it above all things, through Jesus Christ thy only Son, and
out only Savior. Amen.

PSALM. LVIII. (...).
DAVID deprecates the danger that hung over his head from Saul and his counsel.

The parts of the Psalm are three. A sharp Invective or Reprehension of his
Adversaries, ver. 1. An Imprecation or Denunciation of Gods judgments upon
them, from ver. 6. to 9. The Benefits that the reby would redound to the
righteous, ver. 10, 11.


1. The first part. He reprehends his Adversaries.
David begins with an Apostrophe, and figures it with an Erotesis, which makes
his reproof the sharper.

1. O Congregation, O ye counsel of Saul: By which he intimates, that indeed
they did neither. 2. Do you indeed speak righteously? By which he intimates,
that indeed they did neither. 3. Do you judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? By
which he intimates, that indeed they did neither.
2. verse in plain terms he affirms, and lays home to their charge: Yea, in
heart you work wickedness: 2. You weigh the violence of your hands in the
earth; heart and hand are bent to do evil; which the words well considered, do
exaggerate.

1. They were iniquities, a plurality of them. 2. It was their work. 3. Their
hearty work. 4. Their handy work. 5. Weighed out by their scale of justice. 6.
Which indeed under the color of justice was but violence. 7. And it was in
this earth, in Israel, where no such thing was to be done.
3. He aggravates their crime.
This their wickedness he amplifies, both from the Original, and the Progress
of it.

1. 1. From their birth.
The wicked are estranged from the womb: Alienati, from God, and all goodness.
2. They go astray; even from their Cradle they take the wrong way. 3. From
their malice and obstinacy.
As Soon as they be born, speaking lies, inclined from the very Birth to
falsehood.
2. And in this their falsehood, they are malicious and obstinate. 1. The poison
of their tongue is like the poison of a Serpent, innate, adanct, deadly. 2.
They are like the deaf Adder, that stops her ear, which refuses to hear the
voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

2. The second part. He prays against, 1. their ways and plots.
Their wickedness, malice, and obstinacy being so great, now he prays against,
and devotes them to Gods judgments; he prays in general for their ruin,
esteeming them no better than Lions; Saul the old Lion, and his counsel Lions
whelps.

1. To God he turns his speech, and he prays against their means to hurt,
whether near at hand, or afar off. 2. And then against their persons.
O God, break their teeth in their mouth, breakout the great teeth of the
Lions; O Lord,

O God, when they purpose to harm us, eminus, afar off, let it be in vain;

Thus let it fall to their arms and offensive weapons; but as for their
persons, Their persons, that they may be as waters, a Snail, an Abortive, as a
fire of chorns.
1. Let them melt away as waters, great Brooks, that run with a violent force
from the Mountains, and overrun for a little while the Valleys, but quickly
are received in the Channels, and run continually to the Sea, and so swallowed.
2. Let them be as a Snail, that melts in her passage, which yet quickly passes
away, so let them; or else like a Snail, whose shell being taken off, grows
cold, and dies. 3. Let them be as an Abortive, like the untimely fruit of a
woman, that they may not see the Sun. 4. Before your pots can feel the thorns,
ere they can do much mischief, The benefits that thereby would redound to the
Church.
he shall take them away, as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.


3. The benefit that from this judgment upon the wicked should redound to the
Church. The third part.


1. Joyfulness: The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. 2.
Amendment; being warned by their harms, he shall wash his footsteps in their
blood. 3. Confirmation of their faith, and giving glory to God; So that a man
shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous; doubtless there is a God
that judges the Earth.
The Prayer collected out of the fifty eighth Psalm.
O Merciful Lord God, who said to Moses, I have surely seen the affliction of
my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, by reason of their
Taskmasters; for I know their sorrows, and came down to deliver them;
behold, we beseech thee, our sorrows and afflictions, hear our cries, and come
down and deliver us; for of a truth at this time, both Pharaoh and his Host are
gathered against thy people, to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel has
determined before to be done.

A Counsel under pretense of Religion and Piety they have established; in their
heart they work wickedness, and their hands deal with violence.

From the very womb they brought evil into the World with them, to speak lies.
Their nature is corrupt, and full of poison; no Adder more venomous, They are
like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, they refuse to hear the voice of thy
Charmers, charm they never so wisely.

O God, to whom should we make our moan, but to thee? to whom should we appeal
and fly, except to thee; either thou must deliver us, or our condition is
miserable, thou must save us, or we must perish; for our soul is among Lions.

Break thou the teeth of the old Lion, O Lord, in his mouth, O Lord, make all
their instruments of danger to us of no strength, and the means they trust in
to harm us of no efficacy: Let their Arrows they shoot against us be cut to
pieces, and their Bow broken.

As for their persons, let them be as a violent Torrent, out of their houses
and habitations, and make their end like that of a Snail, which being outed of
his shell, as the untimely fruit of a woman, that never sees the Sun: A noise
they have kept, and a blaze they have made, like as the flash of thorns about a
Pot; but thou, O Lord, take them away as with a whirlewins; while they seem
most living and flaming, extinguish them as in thy wrath.

When righteous men shall see the vengeance thou take on them, they will
rej^yce; not so much at their overthrow, as for that thou have exalted thy
justice, to wash our footsteps in the blood of the ungodly; and that we may be
warned by their harms, but rather, to speak righteousness, and to judge
uprightly.

For verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
now judges the earth,

PSALM. LIX. (...).
THE Argument of this Psalm is the same with some of those before; but the
occasion particular, Readiness purpose to kill him in his house; against whose
treachery and cruelty he here complains, and prays.

The Contents of this Psalm are four. 1. His prayer for deliverance, ver. 1, 2.
and against them, ver. 5. 2. He complains of, and expresses his enemies
cruelty and improbity, from ver. 3. to 8. 3. He comforts himself, being
confident of his own preservation, from ver. 8. to 10. 1. And of their
punishment, for which he prays, from ver. 11. to 14. 2. And of their vain
endeavors, for which he insults, ver. 14, 15.
4. He concludes with thanks, ver. 16, 17.


1. He begins with a Petition for deliverance, defense, salvation, and
persuades it from the qualities of his enemies. The first part. His Petition
for defense.


1. Deliver me, defend me, save me from 2. Mine enemies: 1. Them that rise up
against me: 2. From the workers of iniquity: From bloody men. These
considerations made him pray, O my God deliver, etc.
2. He aggravates his enemies cruelty, etc. The second part.
And yet more particularly he expresses their cruelty and treachery, to
aggravate which, he pleads his own innocence in respect of them.

1. Their cruelty was, Lo, they lie in wait for my soul. 2. The Mighty men are
gathered against me. They run and prepare themselves. 3. They return at
Evening: 2. Mad, and set to do it, they make a noise like a Dog, and threaten
boldly: 3. Unwearied, and obstinate in their purpose, They go round about the
City: 4. Impudent, and brag what they will do to me; Behold, they belch out
with their mouth: 5. And their words are bloody, Swords are in their lips;
(...). 4. And the cause of this is, that they are proud and atheistical: Who,
say they, does hear? Secure they think themselves, supposing they may contemn
God and man; neither regard what is done, or what becomes of poor David. 5. In
the midst of which aggravations, he inserts his own innocence: Expresses his
own innocence
They gather themselves together; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O
Lord; they run and prepare themselves without my fault.
And upon this he renews his Petition.

1. Awake to help me, and behold: He renews his Petition.
1. Thou therefore the Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, the Lord God of
Hosts, therefore powerful. 2. The God of Israel, therefore merciful.
2. Awake to visit all the Heathen: i.e. Punish the Heathen, and the Israelites
in this no better. 3. And be not merciful to any wicked Transgressors: i. e.
malicious, obstinate.
To this rage and implacable hatred of his enemies, The third part. Comforts
himself in Gods promises.
he now begins to oppose the comfort he had upon the assurance of Gods
promises; this I know: 1. Thou, O Lord, shall laugh at them; as it were, in
sport destroy them, be their power never so great, yet thou will laugh them to
scorn. 2. Them, and all that are like them; Thou shall have all the Heathen in
derision. 3. I confess that Readiness strength is great, but my Protector greater;
Because of his strength I will wait upon thee, for God is my defense. 4. This I
am assured also, That the God of my mercy, shall prevent me, come in feason to
my help: 2. Expresses his desire about his enemies.
And God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.


And to the 16th. verse, he expresses what his desires were.

1. Negatively: He would not have them slain and eradicated, He would not have
them slain.
and be gives his Reason for it: Slay them not, lest my people forget; for a
dead man is quickly out of mind, and his punishment out of mind, and so few are
the better for it. 2. Positively: The first degree of which, is dispersion,
But, 1. S^attered.
vagrancy and banishment: Scatter them; which, how heavy a judgment it is, let
the Jews be witness. 2. The second degree, is Humiliation: Bring them down, O
Lord, our shield. Humbled.
Bring them from their power, command, honor, to a low degree, which is no
small heartbreaking to a great spirit: Fuimus Troes, is never remembered
without a groan.
And now he assigns the cause why he would have them scattered and brought low,
The causes.
that their blasphemies and lies may never be forgotten,

1. For the sins of their mouths, and the words of their lips, Taken in their
own sna^e.
let them be taken in their pride: The Jews cried Beelzebub, Nolumus hum, and
taken they were. 2. And for cursing and lying, which they speak: They cursed
themselves, his blood be upon us, and upon them it is with a witness. 3. He
goes on in his desires: Consume them, O Lord, emphatically, consume them in
wrath that they may not be; Slay them not: But it is not so, Consumed.
for he speaks not of their life, as if he would have them so consumed, that
they should not remain alive; but he desires only a consumption of their power,
royalty, command; etc. And so these words are a farther explication of his
second desire, Bring them down: He would have them so brought down and consumed
in their strength, dignity, command, wealth, riches, that made them proud, that
they never be able any more to oppose God, hurt his people, trample upon
Religion, and his Church; he would have them live. 4. The final cause to deter
others.
And shows the end why he would have them live and remain still, it is ut
cognoscant, that they might know by their calamities and miseries, That it is
God that rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the Earth; that he does
wonderfully govern and preserve his Church that is scattered over all the
Earth. 5. His insultation over them by a Sarcasm.
And now by a bitter Epitrope or Synchoresis rather, he insults over them;
before at the 6th. verse, he showed their double diligence, threats, malice to
do mischief. 1. They return at Evening: Well, esto, be it so; And at Evening
let them return. 2. They make a noise like a Dog: Well, Let them make a noise
like a Dog. 3. They go round about the City: Well, Let them go round about the
City.

So withal, they know that they shall be but in a miserable, poor, mean
condition.

1. Let them wander up and down for meat: Let them find no settled habitation,
but wander among strange Nations to seek for necessary food. 2. And grudge if
they be not satisfied: Let them be famelici, so hungerbit, that is, nor little
that will satisfy them, let them be always grudging, if they have not
content; so that if they be not satisfied, they will stay all night, be
importunate and unmannerly Beggars, vexed with a (...).
4. The fourth part The Doxology.
The Conclusion is a Doxology, and contains David's thanks, in which he
acknowledges, That God is his defense, his refuge, his strength; of him
therefore he would make his song.

1. But I will sing of thy power. 2. I will sing of thy mercy: 1. Aloud: 2. In
the morning. 3. The Reason he gives: For thou have been my defense and refuge
in the day of my trouble.
Both he repeats again.

1. Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing. 2. The Reason.
The Reason: For God is my defense, and the God of my mercy.
And he joins these two Attributes, strength and mercy very well; for take away
strength from him, and he cannot; remove morcy, and he will not protect; both
must go together in any one that will defend: Power, that he can; mercy, that
he will; otherwise it is but in vain to hope for help from him. David found God
to be both, and for both he extolls him.

The Prayer collected out of the fifty ninth Psalm.
OMy God, deliver me, I beseech thee, from the hands of my enemies; defend me
from the malice of those that rise up against me. Wicked men, these are
corrupters of all Truth and Religion:

Many, many grievous offenses we have committed against thee our God; but it is
not for these crimes they at this time invade us,

Therefore, O just God, who art a witness of our innocence, arise to help us
that seek thee, behold our miseries, and stand up for us, that stand for thee;
and since thou art the Lord of Hosts, who have all Armies at thy Command; and
the God of Israel, whom thy people serve, suffer not thy chosen to be thus
oppressed by wicked men, whose pride exceeds that of the Heathen; Visit them in
anger, O Lord, and be not merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness,
they are an object of vengeance, not of mercy, execute then thy severe wrath
upon them.

Are not their works altogether the symptoms of an obstinate and hard heart?
they walk round the City, observing where they may take their Prey:

But thou, O Lord, sit in Heaven upon thy Throne,

Let them not be visited with the visitation of all men: Slay them not, make
them for their flagitious lies and perjuries, Let them run here and there for
meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.

Consume them, O Lord, consume in thy wrath; bring them down from their Throne,
out them from their power and dignity, let their unjust gotten goods perish,
and their great wealth come to naught, that they may know that it is God that
rules in Jacob, and unto the end of the World.

The sin of their mouth is impudent, the words of their lips blasphemy; their
very preaching is cursing and lies, therefore spare them not, but let them be
taken by the pride of their words, and fall into that snare of destruction in
which they were wont to boast, that they would catch other innocent men.

Make us so happy, O our Eod, sing of thy power, and all shall know that thou
art a strong Tower of defense, and a sure refuge to all that in sincerity of
heart in the day of trouble call upon thee.

Unto thee, O Lord, will I sing, for thou, O God, art my Refuge, Thou alone
have mercy on me, Amen.

PSALM. LX. (...) vel Triumphale.
BEfore David's time, 1 Chronicles. 18.
and in the beginning of his reign, Israel was in a distressed condition. He
composed and quieted all. And made War, and conquered the Moabites, etc. Edom
only was not vanquished. In this Psalm then he gives thanks for his victories.
And prays for assistance for the conquest of Edom.

The parts of it in general are, 1. A commemoration of the former lamentable
distracted condition of the Israelites, verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. The condition of it
under his reign: much better, from verse. 4. to 9. 3. His thankfulness in
ascribing all his victories to God, from verse. 9. to 12.


1. The first part. The former condition of Israel, which he laments.
In the first he shows that God was angry with Israel. 1. Of which he laments
the effects of his anger. 2. And then prays for the aversion.

1. O Lord, thou have, or had cast us off. 2. Thou have scattered us abroad,
thou have been displeased. 3. Thou have made the earth to tremble. 4. Thou have
broken it. 5. Thou have showed thy people heavy things. 6. Thou have given us a
drink, the wine of astonishment. Every syllable of which Congeries will appear
to be most true, to him that shall examine the story of the Israelites before
Saul's reign, under his government, upon his death, and the first entrance of
David to the Kingdom: The stirs he had, and wars with the house of Saul, until
Ishbosheth was taken out of the way.
2. Imputes to Gods anger.
All which wars, civil and external, with the calamities that flowed from them,
verse. 1. Thou have been displeased.

3. And prays to God to turn to them.
And upon it prays, 1. O turn thee to us again. Let us enjoy thy countenance
which was averted. 2. Heal the breaches of the Land. Close the wounds made by
these contentions; and it seems they were not yet all perfectly closed. For he
adds, It shakes.


2. The second part.
But now the condition of it was much better. All being brought under one King.
The present condition of Israel.
2. And he victorious over his foreign enemies.

1. Thou now have given a Banner to them that fear thee. All Israel, all those
that are thy servants are brought to acknowledge and fight under one standard,
David being King.


2. That it may be displayed. Set up, that Israel may know under whom to fight,
and whose part to take.

3. According to Gods promise.
Because of thy Truth. Who by this have made it appear, that it was no fiction,
nor no ambition of mine to set up this standard. But a Truth, that I was by
Samuel by thy special appointment Anointed to be King. And I am now invested
with the Crown, for the performance of thy Truth and Promise.

4. Which was done for the good of Gods people.
it was, that thy beloved may be delivered. That the Godly, and good men, and
those that fear thee, being hitherto oppressed, and in these distractions,
harraz'd, robbed, kept low and under, might be delivered.

5. Which that it may be done, he inserts a short ejaculation for himself and
them. Save with thy right hand, and hear thou me.

And now he begins to commemorate the particulars that God had done by him, and
the several victories he had gotten, as also in what manner he ruled these
people. To all which he prefaceth with this Oracle.

God has spoken in his holiness. David entering on the Kingdom by Gods
promise, exults. Vows to gov^th.
He certainly and truly has promised to save us. And as he is a Holy God, so
certainly it shall be performed. And has he so spoken? Laetabor. I will be
glad and rejoice in it. With much joy and comfort I shall enter upon the
Kingdom being confirmed by his promise, which I will administer in a different
manner: My government shall be paternal to the Israelites, which are his
people. But more severe and sharp to the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Syrians, because they are aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel.

1. I will divide Sichem, and measure out the valley of Succoth. Paternally to
Israel.
I will bring under my power those places of Israel, and as a true Lord of
them, I will divide and measure out what portions I shall think fit to the
inhabitants. 2. Gilead also is mine, and Manassch is mine, Israelites that
followed the house of Saul, are come into my power, and I will divide and
apportion them also. Yet, as being mine, I shall deal mildly with them. 3. Of
Ephraim I shall make reckoning. Ephraim shall be the strength of my head; as
this Tribe had more men than any other, so they were great Soldiers, these
therefore David esteemed as his Lifeguard. 4. Judah is my Lawgiver. His chief
Counsel was of this Tribe, in whom, with himself, was the Legislative power,
according to that old Prophecy of Jacob, The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come.
And thus having showed his Kingdom, and the administration of it, Severity to
strangers.
over the Israelites, he passes to the strangers whom he had conquered, over
whom he would carry a more severe hand, putting them into a slavish subjection,

1. Moab is my Wash-pot. A servant to hold the Basen, and to wash my feet. 2.
Over Edom I will cast my shoe. Trample upon their necks. ^ick them, if I
please, and expose them at my pleasure to scorn. 3. Philistia, triumph thou
because of me. Which is either spoken Ironically; as if he should say, O
Philistines, whom I have subdued, Go, go, triumph, because I have conquered
thee. Or else: Triumph thou, that is, in the Triumph that I shall celebrate for
my conquest, bear, though unwillingly, a part, and sing among the rest, Jo
Paan. Follow the train with happy acclamations, and proclaim me thy King.
Lastly, After the enumeration of his victories, and form of government, The
third part. He gives God the glory of all. And for Edom not yet conquered.
that no man should take this for a vain boast of his own strength, he
thankfully ascribes all the glory to God, both of what he had done, and what he
was yet to do. One people he was yet to conquer, and that could not be done,
except that God, who had hitherto gone our with his Armies, would again
vouchsafe to lead them. (...). And therefore he asks.

1. Who will bring me into the strong City? Who will lead me into Edom? No
question, had Joab, Abishai, etc. or any of his Worthies been by, they would
have striven who should have profer'd his service. Every one would have said,
I Will be the man. 2. But he prevents them all, and returns this answer to
himself, Which must be done by God.
that none but God should do it, and that he was persuaded he would do it, even
that God, who was formerly displeased with them, had cast them off, but was now
reconciled and pacified. Wilt not thou, O God, lead us into the strong City,
which had cast us off? and thou, O God, bring us into Edom, which did not go
forth with our Armies? 3. Give us help from trouble; and he adds his Reason,
For which he prays.
that nothing can be well done without Gods help and assistance; for the
strength, power, prudence, skill of man without God, are to little purpose; for
vain is the help of man.
And he concludes all with this Epiphonema, And is confident in him to do great
acts.
for he it is that shall tread down our enemies: In War these two must be
joined, and indeed in all actions: He, We, God and Man.

1. We must do valiantly; for God helps not remiss and cowardly men, or
negligent. 2. And yet that being done, the work is his, He shall tread down,
the blow and overthrow is not to be attributed to us, but to him.
The Prayer collected out of the sixtieth Psalm.
O Most Mighty God, just in thy ways, and righteous in all thy judgments, we
confess with confusion of face against our selves, that we by our crying sins
have provoked thee to wrath and indignation against us, and that now we justly
feel the effects of this thy displeasure;

But, O God, Thou art a God of mercy, turn unto us, who turn to thee with
fasting,

Let the man of thy right hand once more set up his Standard, and display his
Banner;

Hear the prayers of those that fear thee; for thy Truths sake make good thy
Word to thy Beloved, let the Fugitives return under the Banner of thine
Andinted, and make up the breaches of this Kingdom, and thy Church.

Thou have spoken in thy holiness, that thou will be a God to the righteous,
and to his seed: O perform this promise, and let the seed of thy righteous
servant inherit his Crown and Dignity.

Rejoice I shall, and with me all that fear thee, when we shall see him divide
Sichem, and measure out the Valley of Succoth; let Gilead be his, and Manasseh
his, bring Ephraim under his subjection, and be the strength of his Crown, and
Judah his Lawgiver.

Subdue Moab and Edom unto him; Moab his Slave and Vassel, and let him trample
upon the neck of Edom, that Edom which in the day of Jerusalem cried, Down with
it, down with it to the ground; and thou, O Philistia, which have brought forth
Sampson to make thee sport, and insulted over the captivity of Israel, the Lord
reward thee as thou have dealt with us, and lead thee in Triumph, as thou have
triumphed over Gods people.

It Is true, O Lord, that thou had cast us off, but we trust in thy Promises,
and rely upon thy Word; Thou will bring us into the strong City, and lead us
into Edom: Thou alone, Thou alone art able, Thou must do it for us; All our
strength is but as Tow, and all our ammunition and endeavors is but to sit
still without thee. and do valiantly; and with the assistance and power of thee
our God, we shall tread down our enemies. In thee is our hope, in thy right
hand our help, give us power to do great things to the honor of thy Name, and
to addance the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM. LXI. (...).
IT is probable that this Psalm was composed by David, when he was forced from
Jerusalem by Absolon: As therefore in other calamities, so now he prays, and
vows perpetual service.

Two parts. 1. His prayer, ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. His vow, from ver. 3. to 8.


1. He begins with a prayer, in which he begs, The first part. His prayer for
1. Audience.
1. Audience; Hear my cry, O Lord, attend my prayer, ver. 1. 2. The Reason to
enforce it. 1. He was in banishment, in the farther part of the Land of Judah:
The Reason.
From the farther part of the earth will I cry to thee. 2. He was in great
extremity; when my heart is over whelmed.
3. For defense; Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I: That is, For
defense and protection
to some safe and defensed place, to which my enemies may have no access;
whither without thy help, I cannot ascend. And he adds a Reason also of this
part of his prayer, For thou have been a shelter for me, The Reason.
a strong Tower from the enemy.


2. His faith now presents him as delivered, and therefore he vows. The second
part. He vows.


1. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever: I will return, and adore thee in
thy Temple. 2. I will trust under the Covert of thy wings: He alludes to the
Cherubims, whose wings covered the Ark.
And of this he assigns diverse Reasons also, 1. For thou, O God, have heard my
vows: i. e. my prayers. His Reasons.
2. Thou have given me the heritage of those that fear thy Name; made me King
over thy people, Abraham of the Land of Canaan. 3. Thou will prolong the Kings
life; make me longaevus. 4. And his years, viz. in his posterity, as many
Generations; of which, verse is the (...) He shall abide before God for ever.
His Vote for establishing his Throne.



And now David assuring himself of his Crown, and that his posterity should
inherit it, puts forth an earnest Vote for that which should establish it: O
prepare thy Mercy and Truth which may preserve him: i. e. Me thy King: for
these two virtues, Mercy, i. e. Clemency and Truth, do commend a King, and make
him dear to his Subjects; for in the practice of these, it is not possible that
his Government should be harsh, unjust, or tyrannical.

Which if it please God to bestow on him, then he makes a new vow, So will I
sing praise unto thy Name for ever.

Which, Upon which he renews his vow.
however it seems to be a new vow here, yet it was that he had vowed before,
and engaged to discharge; for in singing praise to Gods Name, he should but pay
what by vow he had often undertook. I will sing praise to thy Name for ever,

The Prayer collected out of the sixty first Psalm.
O Blessed Lord God, when now I am oppressed with bitterness of soul for the
grievous tentations that lie upon me, to thee I fly, upon thee I call; and as
thou art a merciful Father, hear my cry, and attend unto my prayer.

At this time I live in a strange land, Thou have been heretofore, and I beg of
thee to be so still, a shelter for me, and a strong Tower against the enemy.

I have indeed broken thy Law, and polluted the holy society of thy Saints, and
deserved to feel what I now suffer; to be driven from that holy fellowship; but
restore me once more, O Lord, to that society; and then I will abide in thy
Tabernacle for ever, and prize abode all other things, that protection which I
shall find under the shadow of thy wings: Safer I am assured to be under thy
feathers from the improbity of wicked men, than the poor Chicken can be under
the wings of the tender Hen, from the beak and talent of the Vultur.

Lord, to be Supreme over those that fear thy Name.

Prolong the Kings life, and to His days, and lengthen His years from
Generation to Generation; let Him see His seed, and let His seed sit upon His
Throne, till the Heavens pass away with a noise, the Elements melt with fervent
heat, and this Earth; with the works that are therein, be burnt up: O let Him
abide before thee His God for ever; never let Him in His own person fall out of
thy favor, nor his Posterity from the light of thy countenance; establish His
Throne in mercy and truth, and let thy loding-kindness always preserve Him;
His heart is in thy hand, melt it into clemency, affect it with mercy; that He
may be a Father unto thy people, and mourn with those that mourn, and lament
with those that lament; yet affect Him sofar with the love of Truth, that he be
zealous for the Truth of Religion, earnest to promote thy worship in sincerity,
and resolute to administer true judgment unto thy people, let him bring the
wheel upon the wicked, and extend the bowels of compassion to the innocent and
oppressed.

A mercy this is (when we cast our eye upon the present calamities and state of
things) even beyond hope, the help of man is in vain, then let thy power be
manifest; which thing if thou will grant us, Then will I sing praise unto thy
Name for ever; I will return unto thee every day that Thanksgiving which I have
vowed, which is due, and which I doubt not thou will accept through the Name of
Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

PSALM. LXII. (...).
THE intent of this Psalm, is to teach men to trust in God, and not to trust in
wealth, strength, or in the power or promises of man.

The Contents of the Psalm. 1. David's confidence in God, ver. 1, 2. 2. The
mischievous, but vain attempts of his enemies, ver. 3, 4. 3. He encourages
himself and others to the same confidence, from ver. 5. to 9. 4. That no trust
is to be put in men or riches, ver. 9, 10. 5. The grounds of our confidence in
God, ver. 11, 12.


1. In the two first verses, David expresses, The first part. His affiance in
God.
or rather labors to express (as appears by his often repetition of the same
thing in diverse words) his hope, trust and confidence in God.

1. Truly my soul waits upon God, or is silent; i.e. I do acquiesce in him.
2. From him comes my salvation: If I be safe in my greatest troubles, 3. He
only is my Rock, and my Salvation, he is my Defense, so that I shall not
greatly be moved: He is to me, what a Rock or Tower of defense is to such as
fly to them.
2. And upon it he infers, The second part. He upon it insults over his enemies.
that the mischievous attempts of his bitterest adversaries, are but vain; with
them he expostulates, them he checks, and over them he insults.

1. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? i. e. me? he chides their
obstinacy. 2. Ye shall be slain all of you; And shows their mischievous
attempts.
and their ruin he declares by a double similitude; Ye shall be as a bowing
wall, whence when some stones begin to shut out or fall, the rest follow; or,
as a tottering fence, that is easily thrown down.
Next, by the description of their manners, he intimates the cause of their
ruin.

1. They only consult to cast him down from his excellency: Their counsels to
destroy David. 2. They delight in lies; invent tales and lies to destroy me. 3.
Flatterers and Dissemblers they are: They bless with their mouth, but curse
inwardly; no marvail then if destined to the slaughter, if they be as a broken
wall, etc.
3. And lest his heart faint and fail through the multitude of tentations, The
third part. He encourages 1. Himself.
he first encourages himself to be confident still; secondly, then persuades
others to it.

1. He encourages himself, verses for Reasons. My soul, wait thou only upon
God, Others to trust in God.
2. He exhorts others to do the like: Trustin him ye people, which he
amplifies. 1. By assignation of the time, Trust in him at all times; in
prosperity, that he be not secure; in adversity, that ye be not heartless. 2.
And in our saddest occasions he shows and exhorts what is to be done, that we
bring our grievances and complaints to God, and with an honest heart open them:
Pour out your heart; that is, the griefs of your heart before him. 3. The
reason, he our refuge.
Adding this Reason, God is our Refuge for us.

4. The fourth part.
So are not other things, whether men; secondly, wealth especially unjustly
gotten.

1. So not other things.
Not men; there is no credit or trust to be put in them, of what degree soever.
1. Not men.
Surely men of low degree are vanity: 2. And men of high degree are a lie: The
low are notable, the high deceive and frustrate our hopes. 2. Put them into the
balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity; make trial of them, Not
riches. But God is to be trusted for his power and mercy.
that they carry no proportion to what is weighty; they ascend and flurt up,
and away, as an empty Scale.
2. Nor riches and wealth, especially if unjustly heaped together, and
therefore rely not on them: Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in
robbery; if riches increase, set not your heart upon them.
5. The fifth part.
In the Close, he sets down the grounds of his confidence, taken upon Gods
Word, God has spoken; 'twice have I heard the same: i. e. He has often spoken
it.

1. That power belongs to God, and therefore he is to be trusted. 2. That mercy
belongs to God, and therefore also he is to be trusted.
The consequent of both is, Thou renderest to every one according to his works;
bonis vera, malis male; rely upon him.

The Prayer collected out of the sixty second Psalm.
O God, infinite in essence, terrible in judgments, though thou have commanded
us in our trouble to call upon thee, and to trust unto thee; yet such is the
infirmity of flesh and blood, that we find in our distresses too many
discouragements; tempted we are to doubt whether thou can, but more often
solicited to doubt whether thou will come down and deliver us.

But such is thy condescension to the weakness of man, once by thy Word, and
again privately by thy Spirit, that power belongs to thee, that also unto thee
belongs mercy; power, and therefore thou can; mercy, and therefore thou will
relieve us.

Be it then, being fully assured that thou art able, and persuaded that thou
art willing; a Rock to secure us,

Our enemies are many and mighty, But how long, O ye sons of men, will ye
imagine mischief against the innocent? How long will you invent lies, and speak
unto me smooth and fair words with your mouths,

Know you not, That in God is my salvation and my glory? that he is the Rock of
my strength, And therefore I am fully persuaded that all your endeavors are in
vain, ye shall be slain all the sort of you; bowing wall, that suddenly falls
to ruin; and as a tottering hedge, which a small blast throws down; for thou,

O Lord then, so strengthen our faith, that we may trust only in thee; found we
have by experience, That the man of low degree is but vanity, when we have had
occasion to make trial of them, and weigh them in the balance, they have been
found too light; nay, As for riches, they in the day of trouble have taken
themselves wings, and flown away; as they have increased, so also we must
confess, that our love has been increased to them, and our hearts has been
too much set upon them; but even our experience has taught us this also, that
these are but miserable comforters.

Wherefore men and money, and all other worldly helps being set by, at all
times, in prosperity and adversity, in life and in death we will trust to thee;
Amen.

PSALM. LXIII. (...).
DAVID at this time being forced to fly into the Wilderness, complains of his
condition, that he was compelled to be absent from the Assembly of Gods
servants, and expresses his vehement desire to be again joined unto them.

The Contents are. 1. His ardent affection to be present in the Assembly of
Saints, ver. 1. and the Reasons that moved him to it, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2. That being
where he was, yet he forgot not his God, ver. 6, 7, 8. 3. A double Prophecy
what should befall his enemies, ver. 9. and 10. and what to himself, ver. 11.


1. O God, thou art my God: He premiseth this phrase, The first part. Premising
his confidence in God.
as the foundation of his desires, contemplations, meditation, invocation,
consolation.

2. Then he by a Congeries expresses his ardent desire, and fervent affection.

1. Early will my soul seek thee; (...), Thee, not other things. 2. My soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs after thee in a barren, dry, He expresses
his ardent desire to be present where the Ark was.
and thirsty Land, where no water is: No question in this barren and dry Land,
he must want many things; but of that he complains, it is only that he wanted
the presence of God in his Sanctuary.
2. And so he expresses himself in the following verse, Athirst his soul was,
viz. The Ark of the Covenant, which was a Type of Gods power and glory, as he
had formerly done, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.

And the Reason of this he interserts by a Parenthesis (because thy
loving kindness is better than life) A life indeed I live, but it is not vita
vitalis, The Reason.
I have not so much comfort in it, as long as I am absent from thy Sanctuary;
then I should see thy goodness in the use of thy Ordinances, The consequences
three.
and that I account far beyond my life; could I be so happy to be admitted
again thither, then these effects would follow: 1. Praise. 2. Invocation. 3.
And Content.

1. Praise: For my lips shall praise thee, thus will I bless thee, etc. 2.
Invocation and prayer: I will lift up my hands unto thee. 3. Content, great
content and joy arising from these: My mouth shall be satisfied, as with marrow
and fatness, when my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.
2. The second part. But yet in the case he was, he forgets not his duty.
Yea, but does David now being in the Wilderness forget his duty, did he not
praise, and pray to his God? yes verily, and that he next signifies, that no
man doubt of it; but it was not with such content, as in the company of Gods
people.

1. When I remember thee upon my Bed, and meditate on thee in the
night-watches. 2. (Because thou have been my help) therefore under the shadow
of thy wings will I rejoice. 3. My soul follows hard after thee, thy right
hand has upholden me: It Is evident then, that David here wanted not his
comfort; for, 1. He meditates and remembers what God had done for him. 2. He
remembers that he had been his help, and therefore he rejoices in it. 3. He
still adheres to him, and follows hard after him for help still.

3. The third part. He foretells what should fall.
And now being secure of Gods protection, he foretells what would happen to his
enemies: 2. and what to himself.

1. To his enemies ruin: But those that seek after my soul to destroy it, they
shall go (some of them) into the lower parts of the Earth, To his enemies.
2. They shall fall by the Sword, as did Saul, and be a portion for Foxes;
(...). 2. To himself honor and a Crown: But the King; i. e. David, shall
rejoice in God; the Reason is, 1. Every one that swears by him, that is, by
God, viz. that worships and fears him; an Oath being by a Synecedoche, for the
whole worship of God. 2. But on the contrary, the mouth of those that speak
lies, utter blasphemies, curses, perjuries, shall be stopped; shamed he shall
be, and confounded.

The Prayer collected out of the sixty third Psalm.
O God, the God whom I only serve, that God whom I have always found
propitious unto me; therefore even before the morning light, I will awake, and
seek thee; I am at this time banished, and forced to dwell in a dry and thirsty
land, where no water is; yet the want of necessary relief does not so much
afflict me, as the want of thy presence; after thee therefore I thirst, to thee
I sigh, of thee I more attentively meditate, than of any bodily sustenance.

It is the grief of my heart, that I cannot be present to hear thy holy Word,
to offer up my supplications before thee, to behold thy power in thy Sanctuary;
I did contemplate thy glory, and my mouth shall be satisfied, as it were, with
marrow and fatness, even with the chiefest delights, might I be again restored
to those spiritual comforts in thy house.

My life is not so dear unto me, as is thy loving kindness, that kindness which
I was wont to enjoy in thy presence; Thus will I bless thee whilst I live, and
with the invocation of thy Name in prayer I will lift up my hands unto thee, my
mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.

And yet being where I am, in a desolate Wilderness, in a thirsty and dry land,
I will remember thee in my Bed, Morning, and not without great reason; for thou
always have been my help: Thou have protected me, as the Hen does her Chickens
under her feathers; and therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.
My soul, out of the consideration of thy power and goodness, shall cleave unto
thee, and follow hard after thee; and I am persuaded, thy right hand has
upholden me.

This is my hope, this is my confidence. I doubt not therefore, And many of
them, as they have sought to shed my blood, have their own blood let out by the
edge of the Sword, and their bodies being unburied,

O Lord, let the King, seeing the vengeance which thou will take of his
enemies, rejoice in thee, in thy help, in thy salvation: And let all those who
religiously serve thee, and truly fear an Oath, glory in thee, and make their
boast of thee, especially when they shall see, That the mouth of all those that
have spoken lies against thy people, and by perjury oppressed and undone them,
shall be stopped by an immature death, and made an example to others, that they
do no more so wickedly, nor any more calumniate thy people, that serve thee
with an honest and sincere heart. Amen.

PSALM. LXIV. (...).
THE Subject of this Psalm is the same with many that went before; for in this
Psalm:

1. David being in danger by Saul, and his Courtiers, commends his cause to
God, ver. 1, 2.

2. Complains of his enemies, of whose qualities he gives a a very lively
description, from ver. 3. to 7.

3. He foretells their ruin, from ver. 7. and the event, to 10.

1. He prays in general, Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer. The first part.
He prays.


2. Then in special, That his life may be safe: Preserve my life from fear of
the enemy.

3. As also to be hid from their counsels and practices: Hide me from the
secret counsel of the wicked, and from the insurrection of the workers of
iniquity.

Thus in general he speaks of them: 1. That they were a sort of wicked men. 2.
That they were workers of iniquity. 3. That they took secret counsel against
him. 4. That their counsels broke out into act, and therefore he desires to be
hid, as it were, in some secret place, where he might decline the danger, and
their attempts.


2. And so having set a general character of iniquity upon them, The second
part. The qualities of his enemies.
as a Reason to persuade God to hear him, he descends in particular to describe
their villainy.

1. They were great Calumniators, and false Accusers of him; Calumniators.
with this they were nimble to wound his credit and reputation, which he
aggravates by two circumstances. 1. That it was in secret. 2. That it was
against him who was innocent and upright. They whet their tongue like a Sword,
and bend their Bows to shoot their arrows, bitter words.
That they may shoot in the secret at the perfect, Obstinate.
suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.

2. They were obstinate, and confirmed in mischief, no counsel, no persuasion
could call them from it, so obdurate and hardened in it, That they encourage
themselves in an evil matter: 2. They commune, and lay their heads together, of
laying of snares privily; where the Lions Paw will not reach, they take the
Foxes Tail. 3. Atheistical.
They say, Who shall see them? 4. Crafty and indefatigable.
They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search; They invent all
crafty ways to circumvent me. 5. And all this is done subtly, craftily,
heartily, both the inward thought, and the heart of every one of them is deep;
it is no easy thing to find their intent.
3. The third part. Their punishment.
And now he foretells their punishment: 2. And the event.

1. Their punishment was like to be hasty, sharp, deadly, and very just.

1. Speedy.
God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly they shall be wounded. 2. For
they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves, verifying our
Saviors words, Just.
With what measure you mete, with the same it shall be measured: The
consequence.

2. On them. desertion.
The event should be double: 1. In general to all: 2. In particular to the
righteous.

1. Universally, All that see them, should flee away; fear, desert, forsake
them. 2. On all, fear,
And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God, for they shall then
wisely consider it is his doing: Digitus hic Dei.
But the effect that this their punishment shall have on the righteous, will be
other; viz. not only consider it, and fear, and acknowledge his justice; but,
1. The righteous shall be glad in the Lord; rejoice for the revenge God has
taken. On the righteous,
2. Joy in God.
And shall trust in him; that he will always protect, and deliver the
innocent. Confidence.
3. Exultation.
And all the upright in heart shall glory, make their boast of God, and tell it
abroad what their God has, what he will do for them.


The Prayer collected out of the sixty fourth Psalm.
THOU, how they whet their tongues as a Sword, and shoot out their arrows, that
are of a true heart, and suddenly they aim, and hurt us, that have not deserved
it from their hands: They take counsel together, being destitute of any fear of
thee our God, or careless of the law of man; indefatigable they are in their
ways, the inward thought of every one of them, and their heart, are deep and
unsearchable.

But O God, thou art our God, to thee we fly for help, hear our prayers, O
God,

Then shall all those that lay to heart their punishment, be amazed, and lay to
heart, thy power and justice,

But as for the righteous, having had experience of thy goodness in the freeing
of the innocent, he shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in thee his God; and
being secure in thy Providence and Protection, and conscious to the uprightness
of his own soul, he shall glory, and make his boast of thee all day long. Amen.

PSALM. LXV. Is (...).
THIS Psalm is wholly a Psalm of Thanksgiving, and it is the Prophets purpose to
set us a pattern how, and for what we are to praise God, both for spiritual and
temporal blessings, and that first for those, and then for these, and that this
praise is most acceptable to him in his Church, viz. in Zion.

Two general parts of it. 1. He thanks God for his singular benefits to his
Church, from ver. 1. to 6. 2. He thanks him for the common benefits to all
Mankind, from ver. 6. to the end.


1. He sets forth the grace of God to his people, The first part. An Eucharist
to God.
of which he reckons many particulars.

1. That he made choice of Israel to serve, worship, praise him: Praise waits
for thee, O God, in Zion, For his Election of Israel.
and unto thee shall the vow be performed. 2. That he was so propitious to hear
their prayers: Thou that hear prayer, For hearing prayers.
to thee shall all flesh come; all thy afflicted people in their distresses. 3.
To admit men to confession, of which we have here a Form; For admitting them to
confession.
My iniquities prevail against me; not to extenuate our sins before God, but to
aggravate them. 1. For number, iniquities. 2. For quantity, words, or matters
of iniquities. 3. For efficacy, They prevail against me, are too mighty for me
to conquer without thy grace.
4. That he grants us remission and pardon: As for our transgressions, For
remission.
thou shall purge them away. 5. That he elects a peculiar people to himself,
For reconciliation.
to whom also he will after an offense be reconciled, in which lies their
happiness: Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. 6. That he satisfies those that dwell
with an honest heart in his Courts, For his word and Sacraments.
with the goodness of his House, even of his holy Temple; viz. by the comforts
of his Word, and grace of his Sacraments. 7. That he protects, defends, and
governs his people: For his protection and governance.
By terrible things in righteousness, will thou answer us; i. e. our prayers, O
God of our salvation. 1. Thou answerest us, when we cry and implore thy help.
2. By terrible things, as in Egypt by signs and wonders. 3. And the motive to
it, is, thy justice, He concludes with an Elogy of God and his Providence.
that there be a just revenge taken upon thy enemies, and a just retribution to
thy people.

All which he concludes with a double Elogy of God.

1. Showing what he is peculiarly to his people, O God of our salvation. 2. In
special.
What he is to all: The confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are afar off upon the Sea; for he sustains all, be they where they will;
in him they live, The second part.
and move, and have their being.
2. And so he descends from his peculiar Providence, viz. that care and love,
and the benefits which from thence flows to his Church, In general.
to speak of his general Providence,

1. Ordering Kings.
He by his strength sets fast the Mountains, being girded with power; which
literally is true, but tropologically, Kingdoms, Empires. 2. He stilleth the
noise of the Seas, the noise of their waves, for to that he sets bounds; People.
and the tumult of the people. He stills Devils, Tyrants, Armies, Seditions; so
that they that dwell in the uttermost parts, are afraid at thy tokens, viz.
either the strange signs thou show in Heaven above, or the Earth beneath; or
else the vengeance thou bring on tumultuous, 3. All in Heaven.
Thou make the outgoings of the Morning and Evening to rejoice; orderest the
course of the Sun, Moon, Stars. 4. Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it,
thou greatly enrichest it with the River of God, On earth,
which is full of water, etc. usque ad ver. 11. In which the Prophet amplifies
this mercy of God, viz. That the rain, that the Rivers which water the Earth
are from Gods store, Fertility.
his blessing; the riches it yields, 5. etc. ver. That they, even the little
Hills shall rejoice, they shall laugh and sing: Redebit ager, i. e. florebit.
His meaning is, that men may plow, sow, dig, dung, etc. but it is God that
gives the increase.
A Thanksgiving collected out of the sixth fifth Psalm.
O Heavenly Father, the great, the good God, so many and so great are thy
mercies and benefits toward the children of men, that honor and praise, and
glory is thy due, from all into whose Nostrils thou have breathed the breath of
life; Zion then, the Mansion that thou have made choice to dwell in, we will
sound thy praises; in Jerusalem, the City of the great King, will we perform
our vows.

Such is thy gracious goodness, thy Name be praised.

This is an act of thy mere mercy, for our iniquities prevail against us; many
they are, even a plurality of them; great they are, sins of a scarlet dye, of a
crimson color, and they prevail against us, far exceeding our strength to
master; if either the multitude, or quantity, or prevalence were able to
condemn, our condition were miserable, our case desperate: But we know, O Lord,
that thou art a merciful God, and that thou have ordained a Laver for us of thy
dear Sons blood, and we believe, That the blood of Jesus Christ shall purge us
from all our sins; as for our transgressions, we know thou will purge them away.

This is an inestimable favor, but thy goodness stayed not here; Thou have
elected us before the foundation of the World; so again, after our submission,
Thou will again be reconciled unto us, and cause us to approach unto thee: O
the blessed estate of that soul whom thou have chosen, for he shall dwell in
thy Courts, and be satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy
Temple.

O satisfy our thirsty souls with the pleasures of this house, seed us with
the bread of thy heavenly Word, refresh and strengthen our souls with thy holy
Sacraments, so shall our dying hearts rejoice, and our mouth shall be filled
with thy praise; for thy loving kindness is better than life it self, our lips
shall praise thee.

O God of our salvation, Thou that art the hope of all the ends of the Earth,
for thy people, and showed mighty signs and wonders for their deliverance; in
righteousness thou have proceeded against their Oppressors, and answered their
Petitions when they cried unto thee; Thou art the same God still, hear us, and
answer us also, and do wonders for us on Earth, and signs in the Heavens above,
that so the outgoings of the Morning, they that dwell where the Sun arises;
and the outgoings of the Evening, that dwell where the Sun sets, may rejoice
and sing, beholding the great deliverance which thou have given to thy people.

Unworthy we are of the least of thy mercies, but yet thy goodness has
overflowed unto us; Thou have opened thy hand, Thou by thy strength have set
fast the Mountains, Thou have stilled the noise of the Seas, and set bounds to
its pround waves, that they return not again to cover the Earth; Thou have
quieted, Thou have appointed the Moon for certain seasons, and the Sun knows
his going down: have visited the Earth, when it was parched and burnt, and dry;
and by the Bottles of thy Clouds, have watered it, and greatly enriched it by
thy Rivers, causing that dry Element to be a kind nursing mother to all kind of
fruits and herbs for the sustenance of man and beasts: The Corn that stands in
the Valleys, is thy Corn; the water that descends into the furrows thereof, for
so thou have prepared it, so thou have provided for it, that it bring forth
meat for the use and service of men. The seed fastens upon the root, shoots
into the blade, knits in the ear; but this spring is from thee, it is thy
blessing that it fills, it swells, it ripens for the Sickle: The crown and
glory of the year is thy goodness; That every part of the year yields its
fruits in dus season, is from the continuance in that path which thou have
ordained for every creature to walk in.

Thy drops descend upon the Pastures of the desert places, That men shall laugh
and sing.

Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy
ways, Thou King of Saints; thy wisdom is infinite, thy mercies are glorious,
and we are not worthy to appear before that presence, at which the Angels cover
their faces; yet since thou, O Lord, art worthy to receive glory and honor,
and power, because thou have made, preserved, redeemed us; we unworthy
wretches, do in all humility and obedience offer thee all possible laud,
praise, and honor; O my God, I will give thanks to thee for ever. Amen.

PSALM. LXVI. (...).
THE occasion of this Psalm, was some great deliverance which God showed to his
people, for which, David invites the Church to give thanks, and proposes
himself for an example of Gratitude.

The parts are. 1. An Invitation. 1. To praise God, from ver. 1. to 5. 2. To
consider his works, from ver. 5. to 8.
2. A Repetition of the Invitation, ver. 8. for the benefit and deliverance
lately received, from ver. 9. to 12. 3. A Protestation and Vow for his own
particular to serve God, ver. 13, 14, 15. 4. A Declaration of Gods goodness to
himself, from ver. 16. to 20. 5. His Doxology, ver. 20.


1. An invitation to praise God. The first part.
He invites all men to praise God, and to do it affectionately and heartily. 1.
Make a joyful song unto God, all ye Lands. 2. Sing forth the honor of his
Name. 3. Make his praise glorious. 4. Say unto God, where he prescribes a Form
to be used in Thanksgiving, How, terrible art thou in thy works; viz. in
redeeming and delivering thy people with a strong and powerful hand. To
consider his works. The effect.



Of which consideration he shows a double effect, one upon Gods enemies: 2. The
other upon his people. 1. On enemies a feigned obedience.
Upon his enemies, a feigned obedience, a service done indeed perforce, as the
conquered do the Conquerors, done with lying lips, and an unwilling mind:
Through the greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit themselves, On his
people willing service.
or yield feigned obedience unto thee. 2. Upon his people, who willingly should
magnify him for his terrible works: All the earth shall worship thee, and
shall sing unto thee, they shall sing to thy Name: Selah.


2. He calls again to consider them, especially in
At the fifth verse begins the other part of his Invitation, in which he
exhorts men to consider Gods ways, as if the cause of their ingratitude were,
as it is indeed, their inconsideration; this idle carelessness he would have
shaken off, Come and see the Works of God; not ite, but venite, Come and
consider with me.

2. delivering his people.
Then not his works at large, but his terrible Works, his Wonders, his strange
doings in the deliverance of his people; of which he gives two instances. 1. At
the red Sea.
The division of the red Sea; when Pharaoh pursued the Israelites, he turned
the Sea into dry land. 2. Jordan, Josh. 3. that Israel might pass through, They
went through the flood on foot, At Jordan.



Which he closes with this Acclamation, There did we rejoice in him; those
miracles done for our Fathers, concerned us their children, we, even we, are
the better for them; and therefore in their loins we did, and we will ever
rejoice for it.

But being not satisfied with these instances, as being particular, The (...)
instance of his providence, more general. In which appears,
and concerning one people only, he calls us to come and see, and consider Gods
Power, Providence, Justice over the world. His Power in ruling, his Providence
in beholding the Nations: his Justice in punishing the rebellious.

1. He rules by his power for ever. The Kingdom is his, and for ever his, and
he will administer it to the comfort of his people, His power.
2. His eyes behold the Nations. It Is true, His inspection.
that by a peculiar care he beholds the Jews, but yet so, that he neglects not
other Nations, for by his providence their Cities stand, their policies are
upheld, they are provided of necessary food and raiment. 3. Let not the
Rebellious exalt themselves. His justice.
They shall not prosper as they desire: Nor their endeavors succeed to their
minds. His justice will overtake them.
2. And now again he renews his Invitation to praise God, O bless our God ye
people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard, verse. 8. The second part.
He again invites to praise God.
He exact no obscure, secret, or vulgar praise, but public, manifest, such as
when the Noble deeds of some excellent man is set forth in Verse.

And that he move them to this the more willingly, he makes mention of a
peculiar mercy, then well known to them, though now hid to us. Of which, And
that for some special Mercy. Till which came, their condition lamentable.
he recounts in what condition they then were, and the reason of it, That it
was for their trial and probation, yet very sharp. 1. To deaths door they were
brought, but unexpectedly saved, and gifted with life. Thou uphold'st our soul
in life. 2. At the dangers we were like to fall away. But thou sufferedst not
our feet to slip. We murmured not, but were patient under thy ^and. But God in
thi^
3. For we knew, that our afflictions came from thee. Thou did it. 4. And we
knew also for what end we suffered, it was for our probation, Upheld them 2.
Was the Author.
not destruction. For thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us. 5.
Although that the trial was very sharp, The end, to try and prove them.
which he illustrates by five Similitudes. 1. From silver. Tried us as silver
is tried, which is purged and refined in the fire. Which trial was sharp.
2. From a Net. Enclosed we were, imprisoned; 3. From a burden. In prison we
were laden with fetters. Trouble upon our loins. 4. From bondage and slavery.
Thou have caused men to ride over our heads. That is, men did contumeliously
and cruelly insult over us, and set their feet upon our necks. 5. From fire and
water. Merciless elements, all kind of calamities we have undergone. The fiery
trial: But the issue was good.
and the waters have come to our soul.



But thou, O God, with the temptation have given the issue. Thou have brought
us out into a wealthy place. 1. Thou have proved, and thou have brought. 2.
Thou laidst the trouble, and thou tookest it off; yea, and have made us an
ample recompense, for thou have brought us to a moist, pleasant, a mean,
fertile, rich place, a happy condition, a flourishing condition of things, so
that thou have made us to forget all our trouble. And for this Mercy it is
especially, that David exhorts the people to praise God. Which if they should
be so wretched as not to do, yet he would not; and so he descends to his own
particular, and sets them a fair example to follow. 3. The third part. For this
he gives thanks.
and here he pays it. 1. I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings. Empty
he would not appear before his God, but with his gift in his hand, as was
commanded in the Law. 2. I will pay thee my vows. His offerings were not so
much a gift, as a debt, due upon vow. Vowed with his lips, and spoken by his
mouth, when he was in trouble. 3. I will offer unto thee burnt Sacrifices of
marrow or fatlings, with the incense of Rams, I will offer Bullocks with
Goats.
4. The fourth part. And also because God had been good to him.
And that he do it, there was good reason, for God had been very good to him;
which, in the next verses, he declares: and calls to others to come and hear
that too. 1. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my soul. To those that fear God, he calls to come, for they were
most likely to regard it. 2. I cried unto him with my mouth, verse. 17, 19. 3.
For if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. God hears not
sinners.
5. The fifth part. A Doxology.
Lastly, He closes the Psalm with a Doxology, blessing God, that out of mercy,
not of any merit, he would hear and grant his requests. Blessed be God, which
has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.


The Thanksgiving and Prayer out of the sixty sixth Psalm.
O All ye that dwell in the earth, set a Psalm to the honor of his name,
obscure not his glory, darken not his honor, so that not only they which love
and serve thee with an honest heart, shall submit unto thee, but even those
whom thou have conquered by thy power,

But O the stupidity of men! O the dullness of our wits! God does terrible
things, but they are not regarded; his works are wonderful, but they are not
considered. Who was it that turned the red Sea into dry land? was it not thee,
O Lord? Who made Jordan to stand on a heap, till thy people went through the
flood on foot? was it not thy power? Even we, we that were not then born, will
rejoice for it, being assured, that thou which did these wonders for them,
wilt do even mighty things for us also, in them we were delivered, we were
saved. In him, I say, did they rejoice, and in him will we rejoice, since it is
the same God that rules by his power for ever, the same God whose eyes of
providence beholds all Nations, conserving Crowns, disposing Scepters, and
upholding Cities and civil Societies; in a word, the same God that brings down
the rebellious, though they exalt themselves, and set their nests above the
clouds.

O God of our salvation, thou have of late showed thy people heavy things;

And yet, O Lord, we were not consumed, thou, thou have not suffered our feet
to slip. And to endear and crown this thy mercy the more unto us, after all
this trial and trouble, where for sorrow we shall have joy, for discomfort
refreshment, for barrenness fertility, O bless our God ye people, and make the
voice of his praise to be heard.

This thy goodness, O Lord, shall never be written in sand,

And indeed I should be very ungrateful, should I offer less, for, In my great
distress and sorrow of heart I cried aloud to him for help with my mouth, and
as I cried, my tongue exalted and extolled him,

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has not turned away my prayer; not
that I am worthy to be heard, not that I can bring any thing of worth, that may
incline his ear. It is his sole mercy, his love, his goodness, that I can
plead, and out of his mercy he has heard, and I am assured that he will hear
those petitions, which I offer unto him in the name of Jesus Christ his Son, my
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

PSALM. LXVII. (...).
THIS Psalm contains a Prayer of Israel, first for the flourishing estate of
their own Church and people, and then that the Mercy and Blessing of God might
be so extended to them, that the Kingdom of Christ might be enlarged; and all
Nations come in and bless and praise God with them, with joyful hearts, and
exultation of spirit.

The parts are, 1. A general Prayer, verse. 1. and the reason, verse. 2. 2. A
double vow, verse. 3, 4. with the reason. The vow repeated, verse. 5. 3. The
effects which were to follow, verse. 6, 7.


1. The first part A prayer for 1. Mercy.
He first desires of God, that he would so carry himself to his Church and
people, that it might appear, that he has a care of them, that he loves them.
1. God be merciful to us, favor us, for his Mercy is the fountain of all our
good. 2. A blessing.
Then, Bless us. Give whatsoever is good. Temporal, spiritual blessings. 3. The
blessing of favor and grace.
Cause his face to shine upon us. Clear up his countenance to us. Every man
desires a blessing, the good man this blessing, That this blessing be extended
to all people.
the blessing of the right hand. Let him openly show that he favors us.


And for this he gives his reason, viz. That the light may be communicative,
and the benefit pass over to others, The second part.
even unto all men, all Nations. 1. In which he votes praise to God, and
desires that all may join with him.
That thy Way, thy Will, thy Word, thy Works, may be known on earth. 2. Thy
saving health, not in Jury alone, but among all Nations. He desires that all
men may come to the knowledge of the Truth, and take notice of those ways,
which he takes for the salvation of his people.


2. And upon it he Votes honor to God, for one will easily and naturally flow
from the other,

Let the people praise thee, O God: Let all the people praise thee. This verse
is Emphatical.

1. Te. Thee. Not other strange gods. 2. Celebrent omnes. All the people. Not
mutter thy praises, but make them illustrious. 3. And do it he artily.
And do it often. Repeat them again and again, as he does this verse, verse. 5.
4. O let the Nations rejoice, and sing for joy.
And of this also he gives his reason, The reason.
the Acts that flow from Gods special providence, his governing, his
moderating, his directing his people. 1. Gods equity in judging.
His equity in judging. Thou shall judge the people righteously. 2. His wisdom
in ordering.
His wisdom in governing. Thou shall govern, lead, and direct the Nations, and
that on earth, that they know the way to eternal happiness. Via gratia, via
gloriae.


3. The third part. The Consequences.
The effects of his blessing and our praise, are expressed in the two last
verses. 1. Then shall the earth yield her increase. Which literally, is an
ample Harvest. Spiritually, An increase.
the inhabitants of the earth shall increase in knowledge, thanks, etc. 2. And
God shall bless this increase, for without his blessing, A blessing of that
increase.
the increase will be to little purpose. God, even our God shall bless. Which
he ingeminates, that it be not forgotten. God shall bless. 3. The last effect
is, Gods worship.
that God shall be worshipped and honored all the world over. And all the ends
of the earth shall fear him.


The Prayer collected out of the sixty seventh Psalm.
O God, great in power, but infinite in mercy, acknowledge we do, that thou art
the Father of all gifts, and the Fountain of all goodness,

And this mercy we ask not for our selves alone, but for all Nations. Jury
alone, but all the world over thy ways shall be made known, when there shall
be but one fold and one shepherd, and thy saving health made evident, and
received by all Nations!

Bring to pass, O God, that many may come from the East and West, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. Gentiles with the Jews,
and the Jews with the Gentiles, shall with one heart and one voice sing hymns
to thy name. O then let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee.

Thou art a just God, in equity judge for us; thou art a wise God, Zion to thy
name.

Again and again I beg of thee, O Lord, that all men may come to the knowledge
of thy truth, and confess thy name. O let the people praise thee, Let them cast
away their strange gods; and fall low before thy footstool, and adore thee
alone the Maker of all things, the Redeemer of all men, for then the Lord will
hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, Israel.

Out of thy mercy, O God, bestow upon us the light of thy countenance, and
grateful hearts, that so all other things may be administered unto us, bless our
fields with increase, and our houses with abundance, Amen.

PSALM. LXVIII. (...).
DIverse conjectures there are of the occasion of the composure of this Psalm;
But the most probable is, that it was composed by David, when he brought up the
Ark of God, which was the Type of the Church, and Symbol of Gods presence to
Jerusalem. This, after it was sent home by the Philistines, rested first in the
obscure Lodge of Aminadab, then for a while it stayed with Obed-Edom, near
sixty years in both places. It was David's care to provide a fit room for it in
the head of the Tribes, even in his own City. And to express his joy, and
honor the Solemnity, David led the way, dancing with all his might in a linen
Ephod, and all the house of Israel followed with shouts and instruments of
Music in a Triumphant manner. Now that the Quire might not want how to express
their joyful affections, the sweet Singer of Israel scored this Antheme, and
began the Verse himself, as was commanded at the remove of the Ark, Numb. 10.35.

The Psalm has six parts. 1. The Entrance or Exordium, from verse. 1. to 4. 2.
An Invitation to praise God, verse. 4. 3. The Confirmation of it by diverse
Arguments, from verse. 4. to 24. 4. A lively description of the Triumph or Pomp
in the Arks deportation, from verse. 24. to 28. 5. A Petition, which has three
parts, from verse. 28. to 31. 6. An exhortation to all Nations to praise God,
from verse. 31. to the end.


1. A prayer or Acclamation, that God arise.
Let God arise, is either a Prayer, or an Acclamation. A Prayer that he would,
or an Acclamation that he does show his power and presence, of which the
consequence would be double.

1. Let his enemies be scattered. The consequence.
Let those that hate him, fly before him. 2. Which he illustrates by a twofold
comparison. 1. To his enemies destruction.
As smoke, when it is at the highest, is driven away, so drive them away. 2. As
wax easily melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God.
2. To good men joy.
Toward good men his servants, which is quite contrary to the other, Let the
righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let them exceedingly
rejoice. Philistines, the glory was departed from Israel, and there was nothing
but sadness and sorrow. Phinehees Wife named her child Ichabod. But with the
return of the Ark, the glory returned, and there was nothing but joy and
gladness.
2. The second part.
And so by an Apostrophe he turns his speech to all good men, and exhorts them
to praise God. 1. He exhorts to praise God.
Sing unto God. Let it be done with your voice, aloud, publicly. 2. Psallite.
Sing praises to his Name. Let it be done with instruments of Music. 3. Extol
him, or sternite viam ejus: as in a triumph, and was in use when our Savior
rode into Jerusalem, when they cut down branches, and strewn their garments in
the way.


3. And so David enters upon his Confirmation, producing his reasons, The
reasons. The third part.
1. Drawn from his Majesty. He rides upon the heavens, i.e. Gods Majesty.
rules in heaven. 2. From his Essence. By his name, Jah, the contract of
Jehovah, His Essence.
I am. He gives Essence to all things; therefore; Rejoice before him. 3. From
his general providence and goodness toward his Church. 1. He is the Father of
the fatherless. Loves, cares for, His special providence.
provides an inheritance for them. 2. A Judge of the Widows. He cares for his
people, when deserred, To his Church in general.
a Husband to her he is, even then; Even our God is such in his Holy
Habitation; That God, whose presence is represented by this Ark. 3. God sets
the solitary in Families. He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a
joyful Mother of Children: As also the barren woman, the children, the Gentile
Church, that had no Husband, to bring forth children to God. 4. He brings forth
those which are bound with chains. As Joseph, Jeremy, Daniel, Peter, Paul. 5.
On the contrary. But the rebellious dwell in a dry land. Perish for want and
hunger.
4. From his special providence toward his people Israel, To Israel in special.
to which he makes his way by an Elegant Apostrophe, O God, when thou wentest
out before thy people; and amplifies it by many particulars. As, 1. Gods going
before them, and marching along with them, Egypt, in the Wilderness: all which
time there were manifest signs of his presence. For the earth shook, the
heavens also dropped at the presence of God, even as Sinai also was moved at the
presence of God, the God of Israel. 2. Gods provision for them after he gave
them the possessionof the Land. He fed, sustained them there, counted them his
inheritance, and gave them rain and fruitful seasons. Thou, O God, did send a
plentiful rain, 3. The Victories he gave them over their enemies, expressed,
verse. 12. To which he prefaces, by intimation of the (...) as was then usually
sung by the women and damsels of those times, verse. 11. The Lord gave the
Word, i. e. either the Word of War, or else the matter and occasion to these
songs, and then great was the company of the damsels that published it. As
Miriam, Deborah, etc. 2. And in their songs, they sung, Kings with their Armies
did fly apace, and they that tarried at home divided the spoil. So great was
the prey. 4. The deliverance he sends from troubles, Though ye have lien among
the pots, i.e. cast aside as some useless, old, or broken crok, been (...), the
offscouring of all things, yet ye shall be as the wings of a Dove covered with
silver, and her feathers with yellowgold, i. e. shining and glorious. The
allusion, I guess, is from some standard, whose portraiture and device was a
Dove so overlaid. The Babylonian Ensign was a Dove. Scaliger. Etsi jacueritis,
splendebitis. And this he farther declares by another similitude. When the
Almighty scattered Kings in it, or for her, i.e. his Church, it was white, i.
e. glistering, glorious, to be seen a far off, as was the snow upon the top of
Salmon, with which it was for the most part covered.
5. From Gods especial presence among them; which that he might make the more
evident, Zion, to which the Ark at this time was to be brought, comparing it
with other Hills, especially with Basan. That is a Hill of God, a high,
plentiful, fertile Hill. As if he had said, So much I grant, to them, to other
Hills. But Why leap you so, why are you so proud? why do you insult? why do you
boast of your vines, your fruits, your pastures, your cattle? Zion has the
pre-eminence of you all in two respects.

1. For Gods continual inhabitation, and more than ordinary presence in it.
This is Gods Hill, in which it pleases him to dwell, yea the Lord will dwell
in it for ever. 2. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of
Angels, and these are for the defense of Zion, his Church, for God is among
them as in Sinai, in the holy place. In glory and Majesty there in Sinai; and
in glory and Majesty here in Zion.




And yet he has not done with his Arguments to persuade us to praise God; Two
Arguments more to praise God. 1. The Arks ascension, which was a Type of our
Saviors.
Two there are yet behind. 1. His strange and wonderful works. 2. And the
performance of his promises. Now among his great works, there was none so
glorious as was the Ascension of our Savior, of which the Arks ascension to
Jerusalem at this time, was a type, and therefore he instanceth in that. 1.
Before which it may well be thought, that David and the people used these words
of Acclamation, Ascendisti in altum, Thou have ascended up on high, Thou, O
God, whose presence is shadowed out by the Ark, have ascended from an obscure
house, to a Kingly Palace, Zion. 2. Thou have led captivity captive; those that
led us captives, being captives themselves, and now led in Triumph. 3. Thou
have received gifts for men, i. e. spoils, and gifts from the Kings that be
conquered, or who now became homagers unto him, and redeemed their peace. 4.
Yea, for the rebellious also, formerly so, but now Tributaries. 5. That the
Lord God might dwell among them. Might have a certain place to dwell in, and
the Ark not carried from place to place as before.


This is the literal sense, but the Mystical is other, and must be referred to
our Saviors Ascension, the Apostle being our Author for it, Ephesians. 4. 1.
Ascendisti in altum. When the cloud carried him from earth to heaven. 2. Then
he led captivity, i. e. Those which captived us, captive, viz. Death, the
Devil, Sin, the power of Hell, the curse of the Law. 3. He received, and gave
gifts to men. 1. The Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Doctors, and Teachers,
were those gifts. 2. (...). Graces, Gists of the Spirit. 4. Yea, for the
rebellious also. Paul a persecutor called. Austin a Manachaean, etc. 5. That he
might dwell among them; for to that end St. Paul says, these gifts were given,
to the work of the Ministry, to the edification of the Church, to the building
up the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. Of Christ's ascension, two effects.



The two effects then of this Ascension were, One toward his enemies, the other
for his friends. When thou ascendest up on high. 1. To his enemies.
Thou ledst captivity captive. That was the consequent on his enemies. 2. Thou
receivedst, and gave gifts: That Is for his friends; To his friends.
for which he sings a Benedictus, Blessed be God; for he comes over both these
again, but by an Epanodos, speaking of the last first. 1. The gifts to his
friends: Blessed be God, which loadeth us with benefits, He that is our God, is
the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord, belong the issues from death; he
knows many ways to deliver, even in ipsa morte, when there is no hope. 2. The
conquest of his enemies, for such he counts obstinate, impenitent, God shall
wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on
still in his wickedness.



2. His last Argument, is, The salvation of his people.
Gods performance of his promise to his to save them, as if he had said,
Although you should be in so great straits as you were in the Wilderness, when
you fought with Og King of Basan, or at the red Sea, yet I will fetch you out,
and deliver you, as I did them; his word is past for it, The Lord said, 1. I
will bring again from Basan; from dangers as great as that was. 2. I will bring
my people again from the depth of the Sea, 3. And for thy enemies, they shall
be destroyed by a great effusion of blood; That thy foot may be dipped in the
blood of thy enemies, The pomp at the ascent of the Ark. The fourth part
and the tongue of thy Dogs in the same: Thou shall waste, and be glutted with
their blood.


4. And now he descends by an elegant (...), to set before our eyes the pomp
and show which was used in the Ascent and deduction of the Ark, and the
proceeding of it. 1. The people were all present to see the pomp: They have
seen thy goings, 2. The manner used in the pomp: The Singers go before, amongst
them were the Damsels playing with Timbrels. 3. In the pomp they were not
silent; and that they be not, he exhorts them, Bless ye the Lord in the
Congregations, ye that are of the Fountain of Israel, i. e. Jacobs posterity.
4. And he gives in the Catalogue of the Tribes that were present, all, but
these especially. 1. There is little Benjamin, Jacobs youngest son, or now the
least, with their Ruler, the chief Prince of their Tribe. 2. The Princes of
Judah, and their Counsel. 3. The Princes of Zebulun, and Princes of Napthali,
the farthest Tribes, therefore the nearest. To the pomp he annexeth a prayer.

5. And in the midst of the pomp, he interserts a prayer, which has three
Votes, before which he prefixeth this ingenuous acknowledgment, that all the
power and strength of the Kingdom of Israel was from God; Thy God has
commanded thy strength; and then he prays, 1. For the confirmation,
establishment, continuance of this strength: For confirmation of the Kingdom.
Strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought in us; and let this be
evidenced by the Kings and Tributaries that shall bring gifts: Because of thy
Temple at Jerusalem, shall Kings bring presents to thee. 2. For the conquest
and subduing of the enemy, For conquest of the enemies.
until they become Tributaries, and do their Homage: Rebuke the company of
Spear-men, the multitude of the Bulls and Calves of the people, i. e. Kings,
For increase of the Kingdom.
till every one submit himself with pieces of silver; scatter thou the people
that delight in War. 3. For the increase of Christ's Kingdom, of which David's
was but a Type by the access of the Gentiles: Princes shall come out of Egypt,
These by a Synecdoche put for all Nations.



5. The fifth part. He renews his invitation to praise God.
This excellent Psalm draws now toward a Conclusion, and it is a resumption of
that he principally intended, viz. that God be blessed, honored, praised; to
which he first exhorts, and then shows new Reasons for it.

1. He exhorts all Nations to perform this Duty; before the Jews, but now all
universally: Sing unto God ye Kingdoms of the Earth, O sing praises to the
Lord. Selah. And that all Nations do it. His Reasons.


2. His Reasons to persuade it. 1. 1. The Majesty of God.
By his works: To him that rides upon the Heaven of Heavens which were of old.
2. His protection.
His power, in his Thunder, in his Word: He does send forth his voice, and that
a mighty voice.
2. Ascribe ye the power to God, his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the Cloud. 3. His goodness to his Church.
His communication of himself to his Church in particular. 1. O Lord thou art
terrible out of thy holy places. 2. The God of Israel is he that gives strength
and power to his people. 3. Blessed be God, with that Epiphonema he concludes.



The Prayer collected out of the sixty eight Psalm.
O God, in Majesty terrible, in thy protection of thy people most merciful;
since thy power is so great, thy presence so powerful, that at the blasting of
the breath of thy Nostrils, thy enemies vanish as a vapor when it is raised to
the highest, and those that hate thee, haste from thy presence; Why art thou
absent from us? why sleep thou in this needful time of trouble?

O Lord, awake, and arise for us, and scatter our, nay, thy enemies; they hate
not us, drive them away as smoke; as wax consumes and melts before the fire, so
shall the righteous have just occasion to rejoice,

O God, Thou art infinite in thy Essence, wonderful in thy works, most merciful
in thy ways to the sons of men: when we crawle upon this Dunghill of Earth;
Thou art Jehovah, and have a being in thy self; a time there was when we were
not, and the time will come when we shall not be; and what we are at present,
we have from thee; O let us live then, and we will praise thee; Turn away thy
wrath from us, and we will rejoice before thee, and sing praises to thy Name.

As Orphans we are in this World, be thou our Father; as Widows, be thou our
Husband; destitute we are, without any humane help, left alone, and solitary,
for our rebellions against thee, bound we are with Chains, and brought into a
dry Land; hear the groans and sighs we send up unto thee, and out of thy holy
habitation make it appear, that thou art present with us; look upon the humble,
consider thy dispersed and distracted people, have pity on the Widows and
Orphans, and let us dwell once more together in peace, unity, and plenty.

O God, O Lord, thy power is yet the same, and thy goodness immutable, go out
before us a sinful Nation, and yet thy people, as thou did rain down Manna
for them, so also we beg of thee to send us necessaries from above; and let
this our Land, that has been long afflicted with many evils, enjoy a quiet
peace, and her inhabitants the fruits of peace; confirm us Lord in that
inheritance which thou have given us, and of thy goodness, not for our merits,
prepare and provide meat and raiment for thy people that has been long
oppressed by Tyrants.

We have heard with our ears, O God, and our Fathers have told us, what thou
have done in their time of old; This puts us in hope, that we, even we that
have been for a long time cast aside, as the offscouring of all things, and
black and inglorious by many pressures, shall yet be called for again, and set
in our inheritances; our Dove-like and innocent faces shine as silver, and
glister as gold; as shall our innocence, when thou by these afflictions have
purged away out dross, and melted away our tin.

Such a mercy we cannot expect for our own sakes, for we are a sinful people;
but Lord remember Zion, and be gracious to Jerusalem; Shall then the other
Hills insult over it? shall the Kings of the Nations, Thy Chariots, O God, Now
Lord show thy self in glory, ascend on High, get the victory, and triumph over
the enemies of thy-Church, lead them Captives that have captived us, and make
them bring and offer thee gifts, that have robbed thy Temples; That thou Lord
may dwell among them, and be acknowledged and worshipped by them.

Bring thy people, O Lord, out of their troubles, Og the King of Bashan; or thy
people Israel from the hands of Pharaoh, that pursued them to the depths of the
red Sea: Wound the head of thy enemies, wisely they wrought against us, but
thou art our God, the God of our Salvation; to thee belongs, and thou have
showed, for where the help of man has failed, Thou have reached forth thy
hand, and delivered us from the jaw of the Lion, and the paw of the Boar:
Blessed then be the Lord, which daily loads us with benefits, even the God of
our salvation.

Make thy Word perfect, O our God, restrain the fury of those whose rage and
anger against us is no less than that, of enraged Bulls, still the tumults of
the people, for thy Temples sake at Jerusalem, be propitious unto us, and
strengthen that O God, which thou have wrought in us: Bring down our enemies,
till they submit every one, and humbly bring pieces of silver, until Princes
come out of Egypt, and strangers stretch forth their hands,

O how glorious will be thy praise, how excellent thy Name, with one heart, and
one voice, shall sing praises to thee.

Thou ridest upon the Heavens which were of old,

O God, Thou art wonderful and terrible out of thy holy place, when thou
communicatest thy presence to thy servants; Thou art the God of Israel, that
gives strength and power unto thy people. Blessed therefore be our God. Amen.

PSALM. LXIX. (...).
IN this Psalm, David shows to what extreme straits he was brought by malicious
enemies; and yet he is but the Type, for the bitter passion of our Savior are
by these not obscurely set out to us.

The parts are: 1. David's prayer, and the Reasons he uses for help, from ver.
1. to 23. 2. An imprecation against his enemies, from ver. 23. to 31. 3. His
profession of thanks, from ver. 30. to the end.


1. The first part. His prayer, and the occasion and reason.
He petitions, Save me, O God, ver. 1. and then adjoyns his Reasons, which are
many.

1. The present condition in which he was in, expressed by diverse Metaphors,
comparing his enemies to waters, His present danger.
deep waters, deep mire, great floods. 1. Save me, for the waters are come in
unto my soul. 2. I sink in the deep mire, where there is no standing. 3. I am
come into the deep waters, where the floods overflow me; no more hope for me to
escape without thy help, than for a man of life, who is compassed with the
waves of the Sea.


Yea, and that which adds to my grief, I call to thee, and thou seem not to
hear. 1. I am weary of my crying. 2. My throat is dry. 3. My eyes fail while I
wait upon my God; nothing is wanting on my part, and yet I have no answer, and
yet I will wait still, for thou art my God.


2. From his enemies.
Farther yet; when I consider my enemies, I have reason to cry, Save me; for
they are malicious: 2. Many: 3. Mighty: 4. Injurious. 1. Malicious: They hate
me without a cause. 2. They are more than the hairs of my head. 3. Mighty and
injurious: They that would destroy me, being my enemies wrongfully, are mighty;
Then ^restored that I took not away.


3. From his innocence.
From his innocence, touching which he appeals to God; O God, Thou know how
guilty I am of that which they impute to me for foolishness, viz. I am not
guilty, Before thee I confess that I am a sinner, but not guilty of any folly
done to them; for that which they call folly, viz. thy Service, is my greatest
wisdom.

4. From the hurt may come by it.
Lest if he suffer thus, and be not saved, others then by it will be
discouraged, fall away, and judge it a vain thing to depend and rely upon thee;
and therefore he prays, Let not them who wait upon thee, O Lord God of Hosts,
be ashamed for my cause; let not them who seek thee, be confounded through me,
O God of Israel.

5. That he suffers for Gods sake.
And the fifth Reason he gives, which may be most persuasive that God hear and
save, viz. that what we suffer is not for his own, but for Gods sake: Because
for thy sake have I suffered reproach, An (...).
an Alien to my mothers children. And upon this cause he stays, usque, ver.
13. and shows how he was affected toward God, that he might make it appear, For
it was for,
that for this cause it was he suffered: 2. And then how for it they were
affected to him. 1. His zeal.
He was zealous for his God: The zeal of thy house has eaten me up; and for
this he suffered: The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen on
me. 2. A penitent.
He was religious, a Penitent, fasted, usque ad castigationem animae; I wept,
and chastned my soul with fasting; but when I did this, that also was turned to
my reproof. 3. He humbled himself even to wear Sackloth; I made Sackloth my
garment; but he could not so please neither, I became a Proverb to them, to
them of all sorts. 1. To the high, and such as were in Authority: Those that
sit in the Gate speak against me. 2. To the low, common and ordinary people:
And I was the song of the Drunkards.



2. This I suffer for thy sake, and therefore he now renews again his Petition,
He renews his Petition.
and enforces it near upon the same Arguments; and first he prays earnestly,
hoping that he has chosen for this a fit season: But as for me, my prayer is
unto thee in an acceptable time. 1. Hear me, ver. 13. Deliver me, let me not
sink, let me be delivered, Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the
deep swallow me, etc. Hear me, O Lord, turn unto me; Hide not thy face from thy
servant; Hear me speedily; Draw nigh to my soul, and redeem it; 2. Thus earnest
he was in his prayer, and his Arguments to persuade Audience: are, 1. Gods
goodness, mercy, truth: In the multitude of thy mercy hear me, 2. I am in very
great troubles and dangers: In the mire, and like to sink; 3. I am thy servant,
it is for my service to thee I suffer; therefore hide not thy face, etc. 4. Do
it, do it, because of my enemies; as if he had said, Though I be not worthy for
whom thou should do this, yet mine enemies are such, that they deserve no
favor, they deserve not that I be left in their hands. 1. They are scorners,
and that thou know: Thou have known my reproach, my shame, and my dishonor;
my Adversaries are all before thee; in thy sight they do it. 2. And this their
base usage touches me near, and puts me into an agony; Reproach has broken my
heart, I am full of heaviness. 3. My friends stand afar off, fly, and forsake
me: And I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters,
but I found none. 4. Lastly, they were inhumane: They gave me Gall to eat; and
in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink: Jews.



2. His prayer being ended, The second part. An imprecation.
he fitly subjoins a heavy imprecation by way of a Prophecy. 1. And first he
prays, That as they gave him Gall and Vinegar in his thirst, that they might
find the like at their Table: Let their Table be made a snare to them, and that
for their welfare a Trap: A heavy judgment, The degrees are eight.
when that which God ordains for our necessity, delight, content, health,
prosperity, should be our hurt, discontent, sickness, death. 2. That they be
struck blind; and he means not so much in body, as in mind; a grievous
judgment, Let their eyes be darkened that they see not. 3. That they be
infeebled in their bodies and counsels, Make their loins continually to shake;
i. e. let them be unfit for War and action; or, as Saint Paul renders it, Ever
bow down their backs, let them be in perpetual slavery, and carry burdens. 4.
That they suffer speedily, greatly, and continually. 1. Greatly; for he prays,
effunde, pour out, and that is commonly out of a full Vessel, 2. Speedily;
Pour out thy indignation on them; for (...). Basil. 3. Perpetually; Let thy
wrathful anger take hold of them; for (...).
5. Let their habitation be desolate, and none dwell in their Tents: And here
the Prophet interserts a Reason, which was their (...), or which is worse,
their adding affliction to affliction; so far from commiseration, For they
persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to grieve those whom thou
have wounded. 6. Add iniquity to iniquity; withdraw thy grace, that they sin
freely. 7. That they dye in the state of impenitency, Let them not come into
thy righteousness. 8. That they finally perish, Let them be blotted out of the
Book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.


3. The third part. He sings praise
Hitherto we have heard David's complaints and prayers; but now out of the sense
of divine protection, he breaks out into praises. 1. As for me, I am poor and
sorrowful; Let thy salvation set me on high. And assures himself of Gods
acceptance. The effects shall be,
2. Then with full voice he sings praise: I will praise the Name of God with a
Song, and will magnify it with Thanksgiving. 3. And of this praise he
promises himself acceptance: This also shall please the Lord better than an
Ox or Bullock, that has Horns and Hoofs.


And the effect of this his praise for his deliverance, Joy to the afflicted.
will be double: First, upon the godly poor afflicted people; and secondly,
upon the whole World* 1. The humble and meek shall see this, and be glad; and
your heart shall live that seek God; their sad heart shall revive. 2. For the
Lord hears the poor, and despises not his Prisoners: David and Christ he
heard, and this gives assurance that he will hear suos vincta, those that
suffer for him.


Then secondly, Thanksgiving in all men.
the effect it shall have upon the whole World, is a general Thanksgiving. 1.
Let the Heaven and the Earth praise him, the Seas, and every thing that moves
therein. 2. And the Reason he gives for it, is worth noting, which is, his
goodness to his Church and people. 1. For Gods goodness to his Church.
In saving them from their enemies: He will save Zion. 2. In confirming his
Kingdom among them: He will build the Cities of Judah. 3. In giving them
security and peace; That men may dwell there, and have it in possession. 4. The
seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his Name shall
dwell therein: Not Hypocrites, but they who love him sincerely, and worship him
in Spirit and Truth.



The Prayer collected out of the sixty ninth Psalm.
O Blessed Lord God, who art more ready to grant, than we to ask, let this be
the time when my prayer shall be accepted by thee; O God, Hear me, O Lord,

The waters are come even unto my soul, Now in the midst of these extremities,
and hoarse through my daily complaining; Draw nigh then unto my soul, and
redeem it, and let me have an experience of the truth of thy salvation.

My enemies, O Lord, are many and mighty, and malicious; Mighty they are also,
O Lord, Thou know my foolishness, but to them I have done no harm; and yet
such is their malice, that they seek to destroy me wrongfully, and without any
cause of mine seek to take away my life.

To thee, O Lord, all things are manifest, Thou have known my reproach, and
which is yet more grievous, in this my distress, I looked for some to take pity
on me, but I found none; and for comsorters, but I found none; for not only my
enemies afflicted me, but even my friends ran from me, I am become, as it were,
a stranger unto my Friends and Brethren, and an Alien to those who are of my
own blood, my mothers children, and most familiar friends stand staring upon my
trouble, deny me, and afford me no comfort.

And all this is done unto me without any fault or offense of mine, For thy
sake shame has covered my face; for the zeal of thy House has eaten me up: I
have been very zealous for the Lord God of Hosts, they have thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the edge of the Sword; very studious I have
been, and fervent to maintain thy Religion in its purity, which others have
cast down; and in it, but the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are
fallen upon me.

Because thy Name was dishonored, I wept, and whereas I ought for this to have
been more dear unto them, I became a scorn; even my humiliation and acts of
repentance, were turned to my reproach: I testified also my sadness, by my
Sackloth; and for this, The Judges, the chief of the City, they which sit in
the Gates, speak against me, condemning me, and detracting from me; and as for
the common, ordinary sort of people, the Drunkards, In a word, They gave me
Gall to eat, and Vinegar to drink; so inhumane they were, that whereas in my
greatest sufferings and extremities they ought to have refreshed and relieved
me, they increased my sorrows, and under a color of refreshment, added
affliction to the afflicted.

Now in the midst of these grievances, that which most grieves my heart, is,
the scandal of the Cross; afraid I am, lest that any of thy people looking upon
those things which I suffer, should esteem me stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted; and thereby take an occasion to renounce the Truth of Religion, and
fall from thee: I beseech thee therefore O Lord God of Hosts, Let not them that
wait on thee,

O Lord, to remove this scandal, there is no readier way, than to bring them
down, to humble them, and to pour the vials of thy wrath upon them. Let then
their Table be made a snare unto them, Gall and bitterness they have offered to
me, let their dainties be bitterness in their mouths, and gall to their
palates: A snare they have laid for my feet, and let that, in which they hope
to be prosperous and happy, be an occasion of falling; the very eating of the
Paschal Lamb their ruin, and thy Word, the food of their souls, an occasion of
error.

In hearing, let them hear, and not understand; and in seeing, let them see,
not a stone left upon a stone, and their land without an inhabitant; let them
proceed from one wickedness to another, and add sin to sin, till their iniquity
come to the full; yet, And it is but just that all this happen unto them,
because when common humanity, and thy Word also requires, That we weep with him
that weeps, and lament with him that laments, they have helped on the
affliction; for they persecute Him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the
grief of those whom thou have wounded.

O Lord, I am wounded, I suffer justly under thy hand, but to them I have done
no harm; at this time I am poor and sorrowful, destitute of all humane help,
and affected with extreme heaviness, Arise then for me, and let thy salvation
set me up on High.

Deliver me, O Lord, from these troubles, and so shall I praise thy Name with a
Song; I know, will better please thee, than the fat of fed Beasts, or the
incense of Rams: Besides, all those that are of a dejected spirit, humbled and
brought low at the sight of my afflictions, will consider this, see they will,
which was even dead before, will then revive and live.

O Lord, Amen. Amen.

PSALM. LXX. (...).
THIS Psalm is the same with the five last verses of the fortieth Psalm.

The Contents of this Psalm are. 1. The Prayer of David for himself, that he
may be freed from his enemies, ver. 1. which he repeats, ver. 5. 2. For the
speedy destruction of the wicked, ver. 2, 3. 3. For the prosperity of the
godly, ver. 4. 4. The Arguments he urges to move God to grant his prayer. 1.
His miserable condition, I am poor and needy. 2. Gods office, Thou art my
Helper and Redeemer, therefore make no long tarrying; O my God.



The Psalm needs no farther Analysis, because it is fully Analyzed before in
the end of the fortieth Psalm.

The Prayer out of the seventieth Psalm.
O Lord, we therefore daily implore thy mercy, because we are daily beset with
danger; Enemies we have, without, within us, from whose malice and cruelty we
can find no safety, Thou alone art our Help and Deliverer, make then no long
tarrying, O my God; rather make haste to deliver us,

Many there are that seek after my soul, let them be ashamed and confounded;
many there are that desire my hurt, let them be turned backward, and put to
confusion; suddenly let them be turned back, and put to flight,

On the contrary, let all those who seek thee, who are zealous of glory, and
call upon thy Name, rejoice and be glad in thee; and when they shall see thy
salvation, that thy great deliverance of me from an imminent and unexpected
danger, be in love with thy salvation, and say always, The merciful and just God
be continually praised, who has sent his Angel, and so miraculously delivered
his servants; delay not therefore, O Lord, but send us help through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

PSALM. LXXI. (...).
BEcause David composed this Psalm in his old age, as is evident by the 4, 5,
8. verses, conceived it is, that the enemies he here prays to be delivered
from, was Absolon and his Conspirators.

The parts in general, are two. 1. A Prayer, that God would help and deliver
him, to persuade which, he uses many Arguments, from ver. 1. to 22. 2. His Vow
of Thanksgiving, from ver. 22. to the end.


1. The first part. David's Prayer.
In the first verse he proposes his Petition in general words, Let me never be
put to confusion, In thee I put my trust. verse. 2. Deliver me,

2. His Arguments to persuade it.
And then urges many Arguments, that he might draw God to hear and deliver him.

1. Deliver me in thy righteousness, i. e. as thou art a just God. 2. Thou have
given Commandment to save me; therefore save me. Vt verax. 3. Thou art a Rock
and Fortress. Able then to deliver. 4. David. Thou art my Rock, my Fortress, my
God, my hope. An interest I have in thee. Therefore deliver. 5. wicked,
unrighteous, cruel men. 6. From the confidence he had in God. Which he
amplifies from the time. 1. Thou art my trust even from my youth. 2. And
recalling, as it were, his words. Nay, long before. By thee I have been holden
up from the womb. Thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels.
7. From his thankful heart. My praise shall be continually of thee. 8. I am as
a wonder unto many. 9. But thou art my strong refuge, and therefore from him
prays and expects deliverance, that thereby he might sing his praises with the
fuller voice. Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all
the day.
3. He renews his prayer.
And then he returns to his prayer again.

Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. Describes his enemies.
that God hear him. These are very impetuous, and intolerable.

1. For mine enemies speak against me. Linguam ad jurgia solvunt. 2. They
labor to take away my life. They watch, they lay wait for my soul. 3. They
study mischief. They take counsel together. It is a plot, a conspiracy. 4. God
has forsaken him, persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliver
him.
4. Prays against them.
This puts David to his prayers again. O my God, be not far from me, make
haste to help me, O my God. And he prays, 1. Let them be confounded and
consumed, that are adversaries to my soul, 2. Professes
Then makes a profession of his hope and thankfulness. 1. His hope.
But I will hope continually. 2. I will yet praise thee more and more. In which
he ascribes all the honor to God. My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness
and thy salvation all the day, His thankfulness.
for I know not the numbers thereof.



Secondly, He re-inforceth his prayer by his experience of Gods goodness to him.


1. O God, thou have taught me from my youth. Both by thy Word, and Spirit. 2.
And hitherto I have served thee, I have declared thy wondrous works. 3.
Therefore let thy grace uphold me still, forsake me not now, when I am old, and
gray headed. And the end why he thus prays, is, 4. Until I have showed thy
power to this generation, and thy strength to every one which is yet for to
come. Let not thy power receive dishonor by my ruin.
Thirdly, And yet again he returns to praise God: He again praises God for his
goodness.
and he begins with an (...).

1. Thy righteousness, O Lord, is very high, who have done great things:
Wonderful, O Lord, is thy power in defense of thy Servants, for thou savest
them in another way, and by a higher hand, than we can wish or think. 2. And
this is evident in me. I am the example of it. For, 1. Thou have showed me, 1.
Troubles. 2. Great and sore troubles. Of which he is an example.
2. Yet thou shall quicken me again. 3. And shall bring me up from the depths
of the earth. 4. Thou shall increase my greatness. 5. And comfort me on every
side. It Is an elegant Incrementum.

2. And thus by faith having encouraged and comforted himself in God, The
second part. His Doxology.
he cheerfully returns his Doxology, professing to do it by all means he could.

1. With instruments of Music. I will also praise thee with the Psaliery, even
thy Truth, O my God, unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou holy One of
Israel. 2. With his lips and soul. My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing to
thee, and my soul, which thou have redeemed. Hypocrites praise God with the
lips only, but David joins the soul to the lips. 3. With his tongue. My tongue
shall also talk of thy righteousness all day long. And he concludes with this
reason.
For they are confounded, for they are brought to shame, that seek my hurt.

The Prayer collected out of the seventy first Psalm.
O Lord God Almighty, many are the enemies, they speak against me, they lay
wait for my soul, of whose favor he was want to boast, and by whose hand he
has hitherto been sale that God has now forsaken him, and left him in your
hands, persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliver him.

But in thee, O Lord, is my trust, be not far from me, O my God,

O Lord, for thy sake I am become as a prodigious thing unto many, but thou,
Lord, art my strong helper, under whose wing I shall be safe, and overcome come
those difficulties, Thou, Lord, art he alone in whom from my youth to this day,
I have put my hope. By thee I have been upholden from the womb; and ever since,
by thy miraculous preservation of me, have given me just occasion to praise
thee.

So shall I praise thee more and more, thy faithfulness in keeping promises,
thy justice in punishing wicked men, and thy mercy to me, in sending salvation
at all times.

Great and wonderful things, O Lord, who is like unto thee? If I would declare
them, and speak of them, they are more than I am able to express. Yet what I
can do, I will do, I will show thy strength to this generation, Though I am a
man of a short time, and no way eloquent, yet, I will go in the strength of the
Lord God, and I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.

O God, Many experiences I have had of thy power and justice, for thou have
showed me great and sore troubles, thou have brought me within the sight of
death and the grave, and yet have recovered me again from the depths of the
earth. From so great a death thou have delivered me, and I am persuaded, that
thou will yet deliver me, nay, that thou will yet add this over and above to
thy goodness,

Thought I am by thy Word, assured by thy Spirit, that thou will not be wanting
in thy promise, neither then will I be wanting in my thanks. As thou will be
merciful, I will set forth thy praises with the Psaltery, I will sound out thy
truth in performing thy promises, with instruments of Music. To thee will I
sing upon the Harp, O my God, O thou that art holy, and make Israel to be a
holy people.

Neither will I resound thy honor in a dull and a heavy manner,

And after the Anthymne is ended, And all that fear thee, shall say, Blessed be
God, who has confounded and brought to shame all those who study the hurt of
his people, and the subversion of his Church.

PSALM. LXXII. (...).
DAVID being near his death, makes his prayer for his son Solomon, that he may
be a just, peaceable, and great King, and his Subjects happy under his
Government. But this is but the shell of the Psalm, for the kernel is Christ,
and his Kingdom, under whom righteousness, peace, and felicity shall flourish,
and unto whom all Nations shall do homage for ever and ever.

The parts of the Psalm are, 1. The Petition, verse. 1. 2. The general express
of the Qualities of this Kingdom, verse. 2, 3, 4. 3. The particular unfolding of
these in the effects, from verse. 4. to 18. 4. The Doxology, from verse. 18. to
20.


1. The first part. He prays for Solomon.
David being taught by experience how hard a matter it is to govern a Kingdom
well, prays to God for assistance to his son Solomon, to whom, being to dye,
he was to leave his Crown and Scepter.

1. Give the King thy judgments, O Lord; This granted the effects will be,
2. And thy righteousness to the Kings son: That he may not decline to the
right or left hand, but judge ex aquo and bono. Administer thy justice. Judge
for God. The second part.

2. For then this will follow.

1. Justice will flourish in his Kingdom. Justice.
He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. 2.
And peace also, and prosperity. The Mountains, i. e. Peace.
The chief Magistrates, and the little hills, the lesser officers, shall bring
peace to the people. 2. But by righteousness. For justice upholds the world.
Opus justitiae pax.
3. And now he proceeds to unfold himself upon the two former generals; The
third part. The effects of justice.
first of justice, then of peace. 1. Of justice he assigns two effects.

1. The defense of good men. He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall
save the children of the needy. 2. The revenge of the ill. He shall break in
pieces the oppressor. Of peace.

The Consequents of peace are, 1. Fear and reverence, and the service of God.
They shall fear thee, 2. Plenty and abundance. He shall come down as the rain
upon mowen grass, that causes it to shoot again, and as showers that water the
earth. 3. Prosperity of good men. In his time shall the righteous flourish,


4. Now he shows the amplitude and greatness of this Kingdom, The Amplitude of
Solomon's, or rather of Christ's Kingdom.
which will not be so true of Solomon, as of Christ and his Kingdom.

1. His Kingdom will be very large. He shall have dominion from Sea to Sea, and
from the river to the ends of the earth. 2. His Subjects many; some of which
shall willingly, They that dwell in the Wilderness, 2. His enemies shall lick
the dust. Croutch at his feet, low to the earth. 3. Homage shall be done to him
by Asian, Europaan, Arabian Princes. 1. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the
Isles, shall bring presents: The Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts. 2.
Nay, all Kings shall fall down before him,

5. He sets down diverse excellent qualities of this King.

1. He should be (...), ready to good, The qualities of the King.
a gracious Lord to the meanest Subject. For he shall deliver the needy when he
cries, the poor also, and him that has no helper. 2. He should be (...), far
from loading his Subjects with exactions, He shall spare the poor, and shall
save the soul of the needy. 3. For he shall redeem their soul from deceit and
violence. 4. Far from shedding innocent blood. And precious shall their blood
be in his sight.
6. The gratitude of his Subjects.
And as he shall be kind and loving to his Subjects, so shall his Subjects show
great love and affection to him.

1. He shall live. 2. They shall offer him presents. And to him shall be given
of the gold of Arabia. 3. They shall pray for him. Prayer also shall be made
for him continually. 4. The motive to their gratitude.
They shall speak well of him. Daily shall he be praised.
7. And that which in all likelihood might move them to it, was, that besides
the equity and justice, love and kindness he showed to all, they found that
under him they were in a happy condition, they enjoyed a very great plenty and
abundance of all things. The plenty they enjoyed under him.


1. For the earth brought forth corn in abundance, not so much as the
Mountains, There shall be a handful of corn in the earth upon the top, the
highest part of the Mountains. The fruit even there shall shake, stand so
thick, that the ears brush one against another, as the trees in Lebanon. 2. And
the Kingdom shall abound in people. They of the City shall flourish as grass
upon the earth; Which is thick set, and green.
In a word, Which moved them to love his Memory.
this King shall be so dear unto his people, that they shall love his name
living, and honor his memory when he is dead, and continue it to all
posterities.

1. His name shall endure for ever. His name shall be continued, as long as the
Sun. 2. Men shall be blessed in him. God bless thee, as he did Solomon. 3. All
Nations shall call him blessed: acknowledge his happiness, and wish a blessing
to themselves after Solomon's example.
3. The third part. The Doxology.
In the close of the Psalm, according to his manner, he gives thanks. For
taking into his consideration the happiness that was to accrue unto his people
under such a King, even when he was laid up in his grave. He breaks forth, 1.
Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, which only does wondrous things;
for indeed such a King is a wonder, and it is the grace and Spirit of God that
must make him so. 2. And again. Blessed be his glorious Name for ever. 3. Judea
alone, but all the world over. And let the whole earth be filled with his
glory. Amen. Amen.


The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse, are ended. Of which 1. Some, and most
judge that this was the last Prayer David made. 2. Jumus, that it was so the
last, that it is absolutely the last, and those that follow, were composed by
some other. And adds, Haec est mea sententia. But Bellarmine runs as wide
another way, affirming, that all the Psalms were composed by David.


The Prayer collected out of the seventy second Psalm.
O Merciful God, Solomon, whom thou have set to be King over thy people, an
understanding heart, grant that the equity of thy Law may always be before his
face; commit unto this son of our King, thy power of judicature, and let him
always bear in his mind that he is in thy place, and judges for thee, whose
sentence is righteous, and execution just. For so long as he shall be guided by
thy righteousness, he will rule thy elect people with equity, and thy poor,

Grant, that all those who are Magistrates under him, be they Mountains, in a
higher, or a lower order, may receive from above, and from his example peace
and justice, and administer both so unto thy people, that all unjustice boing
removed, thy people may lead a peaceable and quiet life, under this King, in
all godliness and honesty.

Then shall prosperity and plenty again dwell in our Land, For him we make our
prayer, that he may live, and they of the City under him, flourish like grass
upon the earth.

But this King and Kingdom is nothing in comparison of that of thy dear Son our
Lord and Savior, for the advance then, and prosperity of that, we offer up our
prayers unto thee. O let thy Kingdom come.

He, we are assured, shall judge the poor of thy people, he shall save the
children of the needy from the violence of their oppressor, and shall break in
pieces the slanderer and accuser of thy people, that impious and accursed
Tyrant the Devil.

When he was pleased to descend to this great work, Gideons fleece of wool,
without noise, without any alteration in the fleece: so thy Son, the man from
heaven, by a new and unheard of manner, descended into the Virgins womb,
neither corrupting her Virginity by his ingress, nor violating her modesty by
his egress. This was the first step it pleased him to take to his Crown, and in
this insensibly he descends still, that he may reign in the hearts of his
people.

O let then those sweet dews and drops of grace flow into our dry, earthy
hearts, that they may mollify and make them fruitful, that whereas before we
brought forth the fruits of the flesh, we may now abound in the fruits of the
Spirit.

Before his coming, injustice and iniquity prevailed in the world, there were
as many Religions as Nations, for men walked in, their own ways, O Lord,
therefore raise up thy power, and come amongst us, that all injustice being put
to flight, righteousness may flourish; and iniquity chased away, holiness may
take place, and war, and contention, and strife, and hatred, being banished
from among men, there may be abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures.

It is the honor of thy Kingdom, that it is established in equity and peace;
Oh that it might be increased and enlarged! to see thy dominion extended from
Sea to Sea, and from the river to the end of the earth, that as all power is
given unto thee in heaven and earth, so all knees might bow unto thy name, and
every tongue confess, that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Let the people that dwell in the Wilderness, bow before thee, and those, Let
the Kings of Tarshish, and those that remain in the Islands, bring thee
presents, and let the deceived Princes of Arabia and Saba in a reverent and
humble manner, offer thee honorable gifts. O let all Kings fall down before
thee, and all Nations become thy voluntary Servants. Neither shall it ever
repent any man of this his profession, thou will deliver the needy when he
cries, thou will spare the poor, thou will save and redeem their souls from
deceit and violence.

O Lord, we are thy people, poor and needy, destitute of all true goodness,
weak and oppressed by the cruel power and impetuous tyranny of the enemy of
mankind the devil,

O thou Savior of the world, redeem thy people from deceit and violence. The
deceits and baits of sin are many, with which we are too often taken, the
allurements of the world more, with which we are bewitched, the violences and
assaults of the Prince that rules in the air, most powerful, to whom we too too
often yield our selves captive. O thou Redeemer of mankind, redeem our souls
we beseech thee from this tyranny and base slavery. Let not sin reign in our
mortal bodies, that we obey it in the lusts thereof. But as thou have shed thy
blood to redeem us from this vassalage, so let us be no longer flaves to sin
and Satan, but deliver us from this bondage, free us from this tyranny, and as
we have fornierly serded our lusts, so hereafter let us serve thee in
righteousness and holiness all the days of our life.

Then shall we hope for prosperity in our ways, Lebanon; our Cities shall be
full of people, and our people flourish as the grass, which clothes and covers
the ground with a pleasing greenness.

O blessed Savior, and of thy Kingdom let there be no end. To thee, and to the
advancement of thy service and honor, let men bring of the gold of Arabia,
never let them think any thing too rich, too good for thee. Let thy Temples be
had in honor, and thou alone honored in thy Temples. There let men bow with
reverence. There let prayer and intercessions be made continually to thee. And
there let men offer the Sacrifice of praise and thanks. And thou, O King of
Saints, who sits at the right hand of thy Father, receive the hymns which are
presented in thy name, hear, and hearken to, and hearken to, and grant those
petitions which thy people shall offer for the prosperity of thy Kingdom, and
the good successes of thy Gospel.

O let thy name be praised, Abraham, in thee let all the Nations of the earth
be blessed with spiritual and everlasting blessings. Him, O everlasting Father,
thou have blessed and glorified, and in him and for him bless and glorify us.

Blessed be the Lord God, for he alone by his own power has done these
wonderful things for us; He is our King, and he saves, and he delivers; and he
redeems, and he spares his people, pardoning our offenses, and passing by our
iniquities;

Let his name be praised, and had in perpetual remembrance, and let the Majesty
of his power, the greatness of his mercy, and the mercy of his righteousness be
glorious for ever and ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his Glory.
Amen. Amen.

The end of the second book of the Psalms, according to the Hebrews.
PSALM. LXXIII. (...).
THE Prophet shows the grief that good men sustain at the prosperity of the
wicked, and at the pressures of the godly, and how bitter a tentation this is;
but at last consulting the Will of God, he finds, and acknowledges, that the
felicity of wicked men ends in infelicity, and the crosses of the godly are the
way to happiness, with which consideration he quiets his troubled soul.

Let then the Question be, Who is the happy man, whether the godly or ungodly?
he that serves God with a pure heart; or he that serves his belly and lusts?
And the parts of the Psalm will be in general, Are these: 1. The Arguments
produced for the happiness of the wicked, from ver. 1. to 10. 2. The impression
these Arguments make too often in a carnal mind, ver. 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
3. The Rejection of those impressions and doubts, 15, 16, 17. 4. The Refutation
of those former Arguments, that for those the wicked were not to be accounted
happy, ver. 18, 19, 20. 5. The Prophets censure and condemnation of himself for
his former judgment, ver. 21, 22. 6. His full resolution of the doubt after the
full examination of the Reasons on both sides, that it is happiness only to
cleave to God, and therefore the wicked, however they flo^^^h, are unhappy,
from ver. 23. to the end.


The Prophet, before he falls to debate the question, The first part. A Paradox.
premiseth this Paradox or Problem, Truly, or, But God is loving or good to
Israel: 2. And that he be not mistaken in it, he warily limits it, viz. that be
means not all Israel, But those who are of a clean heart: Israelites indeed,
That God is good to Israel. viz. the sincere-hearted.
as was Nathanael.

And this he premiseth for a Truth, though at first sight a strange on, praeter
opinionem vulgi, as are all Paradoxes; and it seems before he durst pronounce
it, he had a long debate with himself, and strugled with flesh and blood, heard
all that could be said to the contrary (much of which he after expresses) and
yet he is bold to utter, and resolute to stick to this conclusion, Truly God is
good to Israel: David tempted to think otherwise, which wrought much upon him.
Much debate there was, as I said, betwixt him and his soul, before he came to
resolve; and the temptations to the contrary, as it seems, were very strong; so
much he confesses in the two following verses.

1. But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well ^^gh slipped:
Israel. 2. Ready to breed in him envy, emulation, vexation, For I was envious
at the foolish. The Argument, was their present prosperity

Now the main Argument was, The peace, the prosperity, the successes of wicked
persons: I well nigh slipped, I grew envious, A sharp tentation, as appears, not
only in this place, but Jarem. 12.1, 2. Job 21.7, etc. The second part. This
amplified,


Now this prosperity of the wicked is amplified by a long Narration, and showed
in many particulars to the tenth verse, and that two ways: Negatively. 2.
Affirmatively.

1. Negatively. Negatively.


1. There are no bands in their death, but their strength is firm; the sense
diverse. 1. Either not vexed with sharp diseases, so that they have (...), an
easy death. 2. Or their death not hastened by misfortunes, adversities,
calamities. 3. Or else by their riches they extricate themselves from the bonds
of all Laws, by which otherwise they ought to dye; and therefore their strength
is firm; for by the power of their purse, there is nothing which they cannot do.
2. They are in no trouble like other men, neither are they plagued like other
men. In troubles they are, and plagued they may be, but not like other men. 1.
Encumbrances of wife, children, household affairs, victuals, etc. lie on other
men. 2. Famine, war, pestilence invade others; but they living in prosperity,
have means to avoid the first, and find means to escape the extremities of the
last.

Then affirmatively he shows what follows upon their prosperity, Affirmatively.
and to the life sets out unto us their manners: Vermis divitiarum superbia;
Therefore, 1. Pride compasses them about, as with a chain: As their Chains of
Gold compass their necks, He expresses their manners.
so pride surrounds their hearts; or, they are catenati, as slaves in chains,
so are they bondslaves of pride. 2. Inwardly.
And guilty they are of that, which commonly accompanies pride, viz. Violence,
Tyranny, Oppression; Violence covers them as a Garment: They are involved,
and wrapped up in it, and hope to keep themselves warm by it. 3. Outwardly.
Pride and fierceness are their internal qualities, and now the Prophet shows
how they are manifested outwardly, in their gesture, apparel, gate, speech. 1.
Their eyes swell with fatness. 2. Then in their words, They pass the thoughts
of the heart; on this he stays. 1. For they are corrupt, and speak wickedly
concerning oppression: (...), They impudently boast of their Theft and Rapine.
2. They speak loftily, They speak with Authority, think of others words nothing
to theirs. 2. For they set their months against the Heavens. 3. Their tongue
walks through the Earth; They intermeddle, and labor to have an oar in all
Kingdoms, no Law of God or man holds them.




This impression the prosperity of the wicked may sometimes make even upon a
considerate and good man; This their prosperity produces a dangerous effect on
the vulgar.
but upon the common man, and sottish multitude, the tentation produces a far
more dangerous effect; in them it brings forth, 1. Faction, and part taking in
mischief; therefore his people are turned hither; i. e. Faction.
because they have money to feed them, they behold them successful, therefore
his people, Waters of a full cup are wrung out to them. 2. Atheism.
Atheism and Blasphemy, Hesitation of Gods Providence, nay, a plain denial of
it. 1. They say, how does God know? as if they had said, They are fools which
think God takes care of things below, and what every one does in this World. 2.
Nay, how can he, he is in excelso, on high, and how can he know what is done
here? What, is there knowledge in the most High?
3. Extreme folly.
Extreme folly; for they collect, That God cares not for things below, because
these men are ungodly, and yet they prosper in the World, and increase in
riches. 1. In this yet they are wise, that they can discern betwixt piety and
impiety. 2. In this also, that they think it just, Vt bonis been, ut malis
male, a Deo fiat. 3. In this lies their folly, that they know not, that eternal
happiness is reserved as a portion, an inheritance for the just; and that the
happiness which the Earth can afford, is a common commodity, allotted to men in
general, nay, to beasts also.



Hitherto the Prophet has disputed the Thesis, as far as it makes against him,
and may seem to speak for the felicity of a wicked man, together with the
impressions their prosperity makes at first on some good men, and generally on
the vulgar and the multitude.

1. But now he descends to speak of the other part, and to prove, The third
part. The carnal conclusion made out of the premises.
that notwithstanding all that had or could be said, yet the good and godly
person is the sole happy man: To which, before he comes directly, he repeats
again his tentation to think otherwise, confesses his weakness, and how far it
wrought upon him; if this be so, then all my study of Religion is in vain: 2.
All my sufferings are to no purpose, it is all folly, it is all vanity.

1. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.
2. For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning.
2. Then next he shows by a Dilemma, He resolves the question. But not by
reason that too weak to do it; His Arguments are.
the way he took how to find out the resolution of this question; and two ways
he proposed, first, that of Reason, and he condemns it by a double Argument;
the first drawn, ab absurdo: The second, ab impossibili.

1. If I say, I will speak thus; Thus, as ver. 13, 14. That I have cleansed my
heart in vain, that no man can be happy under the Cross, Behold, I should
offend against the Generation of thy children; Ab absurdo.
and were innocent; it is absurd then to affirm this. 2. If I examine this again
in the balance of Reason, Ab impossibili.
That good men should be under the Cross, and yet happy, it seemed to me
impossible to be true, let Reason be Judge, and the quite contrary will appear,
viz. that those who have power, authority, wealth, health, are the happy men;
Prophet adds, When I thought to know this, viz. by the strength of Reason and
Discourse, it was too painful, too hard and difficult for me. 3. Irresolved
then he was, and so shall any other about this point, Being then irresolved
from Reason. He consults with God, and finds their end miserable.
there he shall find a remedy; in his Book, and the School of Christ, what
shall quiet the passions and tumults of his soul, there it is to be learned,
and not from flesh and blood; this he confesses, I understood nothing in this
point, until I wont into the Sanctuary of God, for then I understood the end
of these men: By the end of life a man is to judge of any man's happiness; for
ante obitum nemo, etc. To their end then we are to look, and by that to judge;
What is their end then? that Gods Book here teaches. 1. Be it that they are
set on high, Surely, Thou O God, Thou raisest them thither, but then, Their
felicity unstable.
Thou set them in slippery places; They can have no certain stay and
standing for their feet. 2. Under them is a great Gulf and Precipice, They cast
down.
and God not only humbles them, for that sometimes befalls good men; But these
thou casts down to destruction, prosternis ut intereant. 3. Their ruin is not
vulgar and common, nor delayed long, but sudden, and unlooked for, which the
Prophet intimates by his Exclamation, How are they consumed, and brought to
desolation, Unexpectedly, suddenly.
as in a Moment? 4. Add to this, That their destruction is terrible, and full
of amazement, Their ruin fearful.
both to others that behold it, and to themselves, being troubled with the
affrights of a guilty conscience, and the fear of the wickedness that pursues
them: They are utterly consumed with terrors, as Judas, Saul, Cain, Nero,
Julian, etc.

So that all their happiness in this World was but a vain, like a dream, Their
happiness then is vain.
which similitude is explained, Isa. 29.7, 8. As a dream when one awaketh, so,
O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise, and make contemptible their
image, totam (...), all their pomp and great show.

4. The fourth part. Upon it he confesses his weakness that tempted.
And now the Prophet begins ingeniously to acknowledge his weakness and
infirmity in the debating this question betwixt him and his own Reason; he
takes all the fault to himself, and clears God.

1. He confesses that he was transported with indignation, animosity, and
fretfulness at it; By animosity
Thus my heart was, is not now, grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. 2. By
ignorance
He confesses his folly, ignorance, brutishness about it; So foolish was I,
and ignorant, in this point I knew no more than a bruit beast. 3. And shows the
difference of good and bad men under the Cross.
He comforts himself in Gods goodness and presence, showing, that though he be
in trouble, and under the Cross (which is the lot of the godly) yet there is a
great deal of difference betwixt their troubles, and those of the wicked; for,
1. They are not neglected and deserted; Nevertheless, I am continually with
thee. 2. Thou have holden me by my right hand; As a Father thou leadest me by
the hand. 3. Thou directest me with thy counsel; by thy Word and Spirit. 4. And
after receive me to Glory; Here I may be vilified, but one day glorified; yea,
and if thou see it good, raised to honor, glory, and promotion in this life.

5. The fifth part. His resolution upon it.
And now being as it were, ravished with the contemplation of Gods Providence,
and certainty of his good will toward him, in an ardent affection he breaks
forth, expressing how resolute he is, say flesh and blood what it will, in all
his troubles to stick and cleave fast to his God.

1. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? What God beside, what Angel or Saint to be
my hope? 2. And there is none upon earth I desire besides thee; They are
miserable comforts and comforters, I nauseate all in Heaven or Earth in
comparison of thee. 3. so that my flesh and my heart fails. 4. And the
conclusions he draws thence. The sixth part.
But through confidence and hope in thee, I quickly revive and recover: God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
6. Now two conclusions I have learned from this tentation and debate.

1. That they that are far from thee, shall perish; Thou have destroyed all
that go a whoring from thee. 2. That it is good for me to draw near to God; I
have put my trust in the Lord God, Thy works in governing and defending thy
Church in this life, and rewarding thy servants with glory.
The Prayer collected out of the seventy third Psalm.
O Lord God of Israel, who sits above the Cherubims, and yet casts thy eyes
down to behold all things that are in the Earth, wisely dispensing, and
secretly governing, and by thy Providence and secret counsel disposing of the
Affairs of this World; in all humility I present my self before thy Throne,
entreating thee to forget, and to forgive the disorderly passions of my soul,
and the secret whispers of my heart, by which I have been tempted to doubt of
thy Wisdom and Providence.

When I have seen the prosperity of wicked men, That they should be freed from
the troubles of famine, cold, weariness, For they set their mouth against
Heaven, endeavoring to aunul or change the Laws of God and man, these are the
ungodly, and these prosper in the World, these are they that increase in
riches.

Yea, and this prosperity of their's (I confess it to my own shame) prevailed
so far upon me, that I forgot my self, had well nigh slip't from the study of
virtue, and practice of piety, I was even ready to say, Verily then have I
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.

Especially when I saw how the whole World ran after them, how the multitude
clove to them, applauded their ways, blessed their happiness, yea, or care of
these worldly businesses in the most High?

Thus my heart was grieved and disquieted, The felicity, wealth, and
flourishing estate of wicked men, made so deep impression upon my soul, that I
was tempted with thoughts of falling to them, and to tread those steps they had
chalked to my happiness:

Being in this perplexity of soul, and agony of spirit, I cast about which way
to come to a resolution. I consulted my own heart, but found no comfort, my own
reason was too dark, and flesh and blood too weak to give me satisfaction, why
the wicked should flourish, be rich and mighty, and the good man plagued all
the day long, and chastned every morning; Again, I said, if I speak thus, that
the good man is miserable, and the ungodly happy, who have been studious of
piety,

Being thus tossed with these waves of discomfort, until I went into the
Sanctuary of God, entered thy School, and addicted my self wholly to learn thy
will, and thy ways; as a dream, that the temporal things in which they
gloried, their sole reward, for the bad use of which they were like to lose
Heaven,

O my God, make this thy Word good, thou have ser them in slippery places, so
let them find no steadfast standing, let them slip and fall, and suddenly cast
them down to destruction; bring them to desolation in a moment, and let their
consumption be full of amazement, even as a dream when one awaketh, show of
great happiness be unto them at their latter end, if the remembrance thereof
serve for any thing, let it be to vex them, that it is past and gone, and must
be exchanged for a never dying torment; For lo, they that depart far from thee,
from thy Law, from their Duty, shall perish; and thou will destroy all those,
who leaving thee, the Fountain of living water, have dug to themselves
broken pits that will hold no water, who run a whoring after the creature, and
forsake thee their Creator, to whom they ought only to adhere, and be conjoined
in a firm bond of love.

While then other men feed themselves with the shadow of these pleasing
dainties, That I may be continually with thee; persevere and continue thy
servant, notwithstanding all tentations to the contrary; and as a good Father,
so uphold me by my right hand, that I fall not from thee; guide me by thy
counsel, thy Spirit, thy Word, and afterward receive me to glory; To which of
the Saints should I turn? and what one of the Angels should I invocate? And
when I turn my eyes down upon the Earth, That they are all vanity, and vexation
of spirit.

I must confess my own infirmity, I do acknowledge my own weakness; when I
beheld the prosperity of the wicked, my flesh and my heart failed: Thy goodness
it is, that God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever; with thee
I am content, in thee satisfied, worldly prosperity, wealth, preferment,
honor, power, are a very poor inheritance in comparison of thee.

I have learned out of the Oracles of thy Word, I have been instructed in thy
School, by faith and love for me to draw near to God, and to commit my self
wholly to thy dispose; I will therefore put my whole trust in the Lord God; and
therefore having had an assurance of thy mercies, I will declare thy wonderful
works, and sing forth thy praises in the Gates of the daughter of Zion, and in
the City of Jerusalem, for ever and ever.

PSALM. LXXIV. (...).
THIS Psalm was composed by the Prophet upon some grievous desolation which he
either saw, or foresaw to fall upon the Temple and Houses of God in the land
of Judaea, whether by Nebuchodonozer, Antiochus, Epiphanes, or some other, is
uncertain.

Two parts. 1. His Complaint, from ver. 1. to 10. 2. His Prayer, from ver. 10.
to 23.


1. Both the Complaint and Petition are first summarily comprised in the three
first verses, The first part. His complaint aggravated by a gradation.
and afterward amplified through the whole Psalm.

The Exordium is full of passion, for he expostulates with God about this
calamity, and aggravates it, O God, why have thou cast us off, etc?

1. From the Author of it, it is thou, Thou, O God, that do it. 2. Thou have
cast us off. 3. From the time, duration, or continuance, for ever. 4. From the
cause, Anger, smoking anger; Thine anger smokes. 5. From the object, The sheep
of thy pasture.
As if he had said, when thou art a good and faithful God toward thine, can
thou so far forget thy Promise and Covenant to thy people, as, to cast them
off, for ever to cast them off, and in anger, in smoking anger, thus to proceed
against the sheep of thy pasture? Why, why Lord should it be thus? Vis Deo
grata est, quae precibus adhibetur.

2. And presently to his Complaint he subjoins his Petition. To this he joins
his Petition.


Remember thy Congregation, etc. where every word is almost an Argument.

1. Thy Congregation. A chosen people. 2. Whom thou have purchased by a mighty
hand from Pharaoh. 3. Of old, thy people a long time since, ever since thy
Covenant with Abraham. 4. The rod of thine inheritance, dwelling in that Land
which thou gave them to inherit. 5. Whom thou have redeemed from their
enemies, the Canaanites, etc. 6. And honored thee in Mount Zion in thy Temple,
where thou have dwelt. Remember thou, O Lord, this people, and all these
engagements, and cast us not off for ever. And the qualities of the enemies.

3. Or if these Arguments move thee not, then look upon thine own dishonor.
Lift up thy f^et, i. e. Set up thy self, and march against thy enemies, and the
perpetual desolations which they have brought upon us. Lift up thy feet -- even
to all that the enemy has done wickedly in thy Sanctuary.

1. As Lions and Beasts of prey. They roar in the midst of the Congregations.
Their Sacrilege especially.
2. As Conquerors. They set up their Ensigns for signs of Victory. 3. As
profane persons, what our forefathers built with much cost, art, 4. And yet
their fury stays not here. They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary, they have
defiled it by casting down the dewlling place of thy name to the ground. 5.
Nay, their malice stayed not here neither. Their impiety was such, that after
they had destroyed thy Temple, they encouraged one another to do more mischief,
They said in their hearts: Let us destroy them, without exception, all
together. They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land.
4. And that which yet imbitters his Complaint, he professes, Gods desertion
of his people.
that it was not with them now as heretofore; Thou, Lord, now do seem to cast
us off indeed; in our calamities heretofore we could enquire of thee, and thou
did answer us, either by some sign and miracle, or by Urim, and Thummim, or
by some Prophet. But now, 1. We see not our signs, i. e. Miraculous
deliverances. 2. 2. There is no more any Prophe, as Isaiah, etc. who might
promise us deliverance. He prays again that God would look on the enemies
blasphemy.
3. Neither is there among us any that knows how long? as did Jeremy the
seventy years Captivity.


5. He proceeds in his Complaint, and presses God to hear it, from the
contumely and blasphemy that these wicked wretches used toward God,

O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blasphem: And
remember his mercy, and what he had done for his people in special.
thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck
it out of thy bosom.

6. But that now he return, and with favor and mercy look upon the present
calamities of his people,

1. The special favor and good will he had long ago showed them. For God is my
King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth. Of which he gives
instances. 1. Their miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, and destroying of
Pharaoh, the Princes and Nobles of Egypt in the waters of the red Sea. Thou
brakest the heads of Liviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat for the
people inhabiting the Wilderness. Basil says, that the Ethiopians, upon
Pharaohs overthrow in the red Sea, invaded and possessed Egypt, so that he and
his Land was given, as it were, for meat to the inhabitants of the desert. 2.
Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood, Numb. 20.11. 3. Their wonderful
passage through Jordan dry-foot. Thou dryedst up mighty waters. And for all by
his general providence.

2. Gods general providence in his Mercy to all men. The instances are 1. The
day is thine, and the night also is thine. 2. His Order for the two great
Luminaries. Thou have prepared the light and the Sun. 3. His Order for Sea and
Land. Thou have set all the borders of the earth. 4. His Order for the year.
Thou have made Summer and Winter.

Both in thy special and general providence, He renews his prayer, and
enforces it. The second part.
thy Mercy and Power, are sufficiently declared, and upon these the Prophets
affections being heightened, he falls to an evident Petition.

1. That God would remember his own glory, and take revenge of his reproachful
enemies. Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. 2. 1. O deliver not the soul of thy
Turtle Dove unto the multitude of their enemies. 2. Forget not the Congregation
of the poor for ever.
3. Abraham, that they should inherit the Land, which now they could not do in
quiet. For all the earth was full of darkness, i. e. impiety, and cruel
habitations. Plunderers every where.
And he goes on in his Prayer, and uses two Arguments more.

1. O let not the oppressed return ashamed. 2. Let the poor and needy praise
thy Name.
In the close of the Psalm, he more openly expresses the affection of his
heart for God, and presses him for help, because the cause is his, the enemies
his, the blasphemy against him, and redounds to the dishonor of his name, and
that it daily increases.

1. Arise, O Lord, plead thine own cause. 2. Remember how the foolish people
reproach thee daily. 3. Forget not the voice of thine enemies. 4. The tumult of
those that rise against thee, increases continually.
The Prayer to be collected out of the seventy fourth Psalm, is needless, it
being so powerful, methodical, and easy a Prayer of it self. I shall only then
Paraphrase upon it.
AND why, O God, do thou carry thy self toward us at this time, cast us off,
rejected us from thy care and favor wholly and for ever? O good God, why does
the severity of thy indignation smoke against those whom thou have chosen to
feed, care for, Remember Mount Zion, that is now destroyed by the enemy, and
that place wherein thou have dwelt.

Therefore, that thy mercy may be answerable to thy former love, and lift up
thy feet to the perpetual desolation, and eternal destruction of every enemy,
that has done wickedly in the Sanctuary.

Thy adversaries being become conquerors, have cried with a loud voice, and
roared as Lions in the midst of the Congregations, they have profaned thy
Solemn Feasts, they have thrown down thy Altars, and slain thy Priests with the
edge of the sword, and they have set up their banners in thy Temples, as
manifest signs of their victories, without any reverence had to thy holy place,
without any acknowledgement or honor exhibited to thy name, by whose
permission for our profaneness they thus triumph over us, and these
confecrated places.

When they entered into these holy Oratories, they have cast fire into thy
Sanctuary, they have profaned the Tabernacle consecrated to thy name, drawing
it down to the ground, despoyling it of all glory, and the sincere worship of
thy name being taken away, Come, say they, let us destroy them all together,
Thus have they made all thy Solemn Festivals to cease, and thy whole worship to
be annihilated.

As for thy Prophets, they are few left, and those that are, disgraced,

O Lord, how long will thou suffer the adversary to reproach? Will thou be of
that long-suffering and patience, that the profane shall blaspheme thy holy
Name, and by his blasphemies provoke thee to anger for ever? Why, as a lazy man
is wont toda, do thou keep thy right hand in thy bosom:

It cannot be ascribed to thy want of power, that thou art thus patient. For
thou art the same God now as of old.

Mavelous and terrible were thy works, Israel. Thou did divide the Sea by
thy strength, and made the waters to stand on a heap, Pharaoh, and all his
host in the red Sea. Thou did cleave the Rock, and turn'dst the flint-stone
into a springing Well, that thence the thirst of thy people might be satisfied
as from a fountain. And on the contrary, thou have dried up the swiftest
current, and mest violent stream, that thy people might pass dry-foot through
it.

Neither is thy power declared only in these extraordinary miracles, The
vicissitudes of all things is a manifest of thy power, and the change of all
times and seasons is thy Ordinance wisely disposed for the commodity of man.

When then, remember this, that the enemy has reproached, in effect imputed
weakness and impotence to thee, said in his heart, What God shall deliver them
out of my hand? O Lord, remember that the foolish people in profaning thy
Temples, and trampling thy Prophets, have blasphemed thy name, being regardless
of thy Omnipotence, and secure upon thy patience.

We beseech thee suffer no longer the souls of those innocent,

Have respect,

Forget not the voice of the insulting enemy. The tumultuous and proud attempts
of those which rise up and hate thee, continually increases more and more. And
thou, to whose eyes all things are naked, and into whose ears all oppressions
enter, art not ignorant of it.

Arise therefore,

O let not the oppressed,

PSALM. LXXV. (...).
IT is most likely that David composed this Psalm upon his Inauguration or
entrance upon the Kingdom, and he sets out unto us in it an example of a good
King.

The parts of the Psalm are, 1. His Doxology, verse. 1. repeated, verse. 9. 2.
His profession to perform his Kingly office, verse. 2, 3, and 10. 3. His rebuke
and remove of mistakes in foolish men. 1. Partly for their pride, when they
rise to great places, verse. 4, 5. 2. Partly, that they know not whence their
preferment comes, verse. 6, 7. 3. And that they judge not rightly of
afflictions, verse. 8.



1. David begins with thanksgiving: and he ingeminates it, The Doxology. The
first part.
that it be often done.

1. Unto thee do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks. 2. His reason for
it is. For that thy Name is near, thou, thy help is at hand; for God is near to
those that call on him. For Gods help, and his exaltation to the Kingdom.
3. Of which he had experience, who beyond all hope and expectation was now
exalted to the Kingdom. Which he calls here Mirabilia Dei, This thy wondrous
works declare.
2. And next he shows which way he would show his thankful heart to God for his
preferment, which was in doing the Office of a good King. The second part. For
which he promises,
When I shall receive the Congregation, or when I shall take a set time, when
the people shall come to me for judgment, upon every season and opportunity
given.

1. I will Judge uprightly. Which is the first part of the Kingly Office. 2. I
will restore, and set right what is out of order. To judge justly.
Which is the second part of a Kings duty. 1. Now, till I came to the Crown,
the earth, To rectify disorders.
and all the inhabitants are dissolved. Saul's reign there was a dissolution in
Manners, Justice, Religion. 2. But I bear up the pillars of it. Religion and
Justice are the pillars that support a Kingdom, and David was resolved to
support them.

3. From this profession of his duty, he falls upon a Rebuke of foolish men;
The third part. 3. To robuke bad men.
Which is also the third part of the Kingly Office, it being for a Superior to
reprehend in the Inferior what is amiss. And he labors to rectify in them
three mistakes.

1. The first was their Pride, which caused them to do foolish, unjust, For
their pride.
imous Acts. 1. I said to the fools, (so David calls Saul's ambitious, arrogant
Courtiers) Deal not foolishly, i. e. impiously, unjustly. 2. And to the wicked,
Lift not up your horn. Vaunt not of your wealth, power, etc. 3. Lift not up
your horn on high. Be not over-proud of your place. 4. Speak not with a stiff
neck. Be not Rebellious, and Contumacious.
2. The second was, that they thought their honor came from Saul, For
ignorance, that they knew not the true fountain of honor.
their wit, their good parts, and not from God, which was indeed the cause of
their pride; To remove this, David tells them who is the fountain of Honor. 1.
Negatively, Not any man in the whole world, no Prince in the East, none in the
West, none in the North, none in the South: Negatively. Not man.
or else the wind blows no man to any high place. David himself. 2. Positively,
God is the Judge. He humbles, he exalts. Saul, and sets up another, Positively,
God.
me David upon the Throne.
3. For their mistake in imputing afflictions to a wrong cause. Whereas they
are from God.
The third mistake was about the calamities and afflictions that befall men in
this life; Impute them they usually do to wrong causes, whereas these, even
these come from God. Is there evil in the City, and has not God done it?
To prove this, the Prophet uses an Elegant comparison, or Hypotyposis, for he
likens God to a Master of a Feast, who invites and entertains all kind of men
at his Table, and that has a Cup of mixed wine in his hand, by which he
understands the miseries that befall men in this life, and God reaching to
every one good and bad, some portion of this Cup, to all some, but to all not
equally, nor yet of the same wine. David says. 1. Who dispenses them diversely.
For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup. The Cup at his dispose. 2. And the
wine is red. It Is high colored, faeculent, or troubled wine, i. e.
afflictions. 3. It is full of mixture. Not all sour, nor all sweet; The
strength of it is allayed, and tempered by God, that it intoxicate not the
head, nor produce a feavour, there are some waters of comfort mixed with it. 4.
And he, viz. God pours out of the same, some of this mixed wine, even to his
dearest children. For you must drink of the Cup that Christ drank. 5. But for
the dregs thereof, the lees that settles in the bottom of this Cup, all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them. Because they drink
last, there is nothing left for them but the dregs of Gods wrath, in which
there is none of the mixed sweet wine.


He concludes the Psalm with a double repetition. He concludes.
First, Of his thanks. Secondly, Then of a second protestation of his duty. 1.
But I will declare for ever: I will sing praises to the God of Jacob. With
thanks.
2. His Duty as King he would do, in both kinds. 1. De bellabo superbos. All
the horns also of the wicked will I cut off. With a manifest of his Duty.
2. Parcam subjectis bonis and favebo. But the horns, i. e. power, dignity,
honor of the righteous shall be exalted.



An intercession out of the seventy fifth Psalm for the King, those that are in
authority, and for the Church under affliction.
O Almighty God, that promotion comes nor from the East,

Establish, we beseech thee, in the Throne of this Kingdom, thy faithful
Servant, our bread Sovereign. Let the dew of thy abundant blessings fall upon
his head, give him the success of David, the wisdom of Solomon, and the zeal of
Josiah. Take pleasure in him, O Lord, and restore him to his just right and
people, and make him a most mighty Protector of thy heritage, a most religious
Defender of thy Sacred Truth, and a gracious Governor to all his Subjects.

When he shall receive the Congregation,

At this time the foundations of the earth are out of course, the earth, and
all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved. The seats of justice are corrupt,
all Laws are silenced, an indulgence is given to theft and rapine, Religion is
trod under foot, and men in their manners are dissolute, being guided by their
own counsels, and swayed by their own affections. How is the faithful City
become an Harlot? It was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
Murderers. Our Princes are become rebellious, and companions of Thieves, every
one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherless,
neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.

Set up then thy Servant upon the Throne, that he may restore our Judges as at
first, and our Counselors as at the beginning. Religion and Justice are the
Pillars of the Land, they are now ready to fall, or rather fallen, O let him
bear up these Pillars, repair the breaches of this distracted Church and
Kingdom, and confirm both, Laws and Justice being heard to speak, and a right
order for thy worship and service being re-establishes. So shall this our Land
be called again, The City of righteousness, the holy and faithful City.

Give him, O Lord, courage in the execution of his Office,

And now having presented unto thee our supplications for our King, we are bold
also to offer unto thy Majesty our humble petitions for that part of thy Church
which thou have committed to his care, this for many years thou have fed with
the bread of tears, and entertained with the water of affliction. But it is our
comfort, that the Cup is in thy hand.

So shall we have just r^^son to declare the equity of thy justice, for that
thou art near, and thy name is ready to help all that call upon thee, of which
the exaltation of our King, and the deliverance of thy people, will be a
miraculous declaration.

Thy Church shall for ever remember thy just judgments, and sing forth with
full voice thy praises, when they shall see the horns of the wicked broken, and
those preserved and secured, who have wholly addicted themselves to the study
of justice and piety, as we are taught and commanded by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

PSALM. LXXVI. (...) vel Triumphalis.
THE Glory and Power of God is in this Psalm amply set forth in his defense of
Jerusalem and Zion, which were types of his Church; and it has

Three parts. 1. The Prerogative of Judah and Israel, verse. 1, 2. 2. A
Narration of Gods Majesty in his Church, from verse. 3. to 11. 3. An Exhortation
to worship and serve God, verse. 11, 12.


1. The Jews Prerogative. The first part.
In the two first verses is set forth the Jews Prerogative above other Nations.

1. In Judah is God known. 2. That his Name was great in Israel. Great for his
manifold deliverance. 3. 2 Gods zeal for his Church.
At Salem is his Tabernacle, his Temple, his seat of worship. His presence
singular. 4. His dwelling in Zion. I will dwell in the midst of them, and I
will be their God.
2. The second part.
Next he declares Gods power and Majesty, and vindicating his people, and
destroying their enemies. There, i. e. at Jerusalem, before Zion, as in the
days of Senacherib. Judah. There brake he the arrows of the bow, By which he
showed himself 1. Glorious.
the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah. By which he became
Glorious. 2. And Terrible, verse. 7.

1. Glorious. Thou art more Glorious and Excellent, viz. among good men, than
the Mountains of prey. Than the Kingdoms gotten by violence, murder, and
robbery.
And this his glory was made manifest in these particulars.

1. The stout-hearted are spoiled. 2. They have slept their sleep. Either dead.
Or overtaken with so deep a slumber, that like men surpised by a deep sleep,
and suddenly awaked, they were amazed, and knew not which way to turn
themselves. Their hands were feeble, 3. Which he explains in the words
following, And none of the men of might have found their hands. (...). Pind. 4.
The cause of this consternation. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the
Chariot and Horse are cast into a dead sleep.
Thus God became Glorious and Excellent among good men. Terrible.


2. Terrible also to wicked men. So Terrible, that 1. Thou, even thou art to be
feared, for who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? None, be he never
so proud. 2. Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven. It was so in
the destruction of Senacherib. The earth feared, and was still. Men saw it,
were amazed at it, and put to silence.

And this work of God in overthrowing his enemies, The effects of it.
and saving his Church, he farther amplifies, When God arose to judgment, to
save all the meek of the earth.

The consequent was this.

1. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; Praise from the wicked.
The fierceness and rage of man against thy Church, shall at last turn to thy
praise; confess they shall, being conquered by thy hand, that thou art mightier
than they; Pharaoh, This is the finger of God; so Julian. (...). 1. The
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain; And victory.
Though they body and rally again, yet thou shall overcome and conquer their
fury.
3. In the Close, he exhorts all Gods people to vow him honor, The third part.
For which,
and to perform their vow.

1. Vow and pay unto the Lord your G^d; let all that are round about him, All
to vow praises.
2. And he adds his Reason in an Epiphonema. 1. He shall cut off the spirits of
Princes; Take away from Tyrants their courage and prudence. 2. He is terrible
to the Kings of the earth, They shall know he is God.

A Psalm of Thanksgiving after some great Victory, collected out of the seventy
sixth Hsalm.
O Omnipotent God, and most merciful Father, it has pleased thy unspeakable
goodness beyond any merit or desert of our's, Israel. Declared thou have to all
Nations, that Salem, the City of peace, is that place where thou will set up
thy Tabernacle, and Mount Sion thy Church,

Our ingratitude no question was very great, and our provocations many, our
lives not answering to the light of thy Word which thou made shine unto us;
and because we rebelled against thee, therefore this great Army of rebellious
men is justly risen up against us, who threatened to unroot thy people, and
utterly to lay waste thy Zion: But thou, O Lord, passing by our transgressions,
have put a hook into the nose of our enemies, and a bridle into their lips,
defended miraculously thou have thy City Jerusalem for thy own sake, and for
thy servant David's sake, our blessed Savior.

There have thou broken the strength of the Bow, and not suffered him to shoot
an arrow there; in our land thou have made void their Shield, dulled the edge
of the Sword, scattered their Army: and by thy power dissolved and brought to
nothing all their warlike preparation and ammunition.

When we are compassed, as it were, with a darksom cloud of fear, are spoiled,
they are consumed, and have slept their sleep; out of which when they awaked,
they have been amazed, that in their hands, but at thy rebuke, O God of Jacob;
by thy command, by the severity of thy judgment, both the Chariot, and those
who trusted in it, both the Horse and his Rider are fallen.

O Lord, Thou, even thou, art terrible; Thou, even thou alone art to be feared,
Who is there, though never so potent, though defenced with the strongest Army,
that is able to resist thee, that may stand in thy sight when thou art angry?
At this time thou have fought from Heaven for us, and their knees smote
together, quiet they were, and silent, not daring to mutter against thee, or
against thy people.

O Lord, the fierceness, the rage, the pride of man shall turn to thy praise;
even thy enemies,

And now, O all ye which are Israelites indeed, and perptually stand in his
presence, To him I say, vow, and perform your vows, who for your sake, has cut
off the animosities, and made it appear, That he will be a terrible God to all
the Kings of the earth; to whom be praise, to whom be glory now and for ever.
Amen.

PSALM. LXXVII. (...).
In this Psalm, the Prophet shows the bitter agony which a troubled spirit
undergoes upon the sense of Gods desertion, and the comfort again it receives
upon the consideration of Gods great and gracious works.

Two parts of this Psalm. 1. He sets forth the strife betwixt the flesh and the
Spirit, and how the flesh tempts to despair, and calls into question the
goodness and favor of God, from ver. 1. to 10. 2. Next he shows the victory of
the spirit over the flesh, being raised, encouraged, and confirmed by the
Nature, Promises, and Works of God, from the 10th. verse, to the end of the
Psalm; an excellent Psalm this is, and of great use in all spiritual desertions.


1. The first part.
I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me; ver. 1, 2.

Here David shows the course he took to find ease in his extreme trouble of
soul; David betakes him to God in affliction, and prays very earnestly.
he blasphemed not, he despaired not, nor filled the Air with empty
complaints; but he betook himself to his God, opened to him his grief, and of
him he desired help and comfort. 1. He prayed. 2. He prayed often. 3. He prayed
earnestly. 4. With a troubled foul.

1. His prayer was, a cry, 'twas earnest. 2. Despairs not.
With his voice, with his voice he cried, it was often. 3. To God he cried, I
sought the Lord. 4. And it was in his agony; he no question had done it before
in his prosperity, which is the best way, for then he is near; but yet now he
does it again, even in the day of his trouble, and yet he despairs not to be
heard then; and he gave ear to me. The Psalm is not then an expression of a
despairing soul, but of one that has a conflict with tentation.
And now to the 10th. verse, he expresses two things: First, What were the
affrights of his troubled soul: Secondly, What did aggravate and increase this
his trouble.

1. His complaint is bitter, and he sets down the particulars that troubled
him, which were these.

1. The particulars that troubled him.
His sore ran in the night, and ceased not; whether he means his sore of body
or mind, is indifferent, both troubled him, yea, and in the night, when he
should take his rest, then he found no intermission; and this his hand, as some
reads it, runs and extends it self in prayer; even in this night, when no man
saw it, and so his complaint was in secret, and far from hypocrisy, which
loves witnesses. 2. My soul refused to be comforted: All the comforts which
were offered me were to no purpose, my soul respuebat, as a sick stomach
delicious meats; with Rachel, with Jacob, he would not be comforted, all
friends were miserable comforters, as they were to Job; he was ready to say,
There is no hope. 3. I remembered God, and was troubled: A heavy affliction,
David's case, his memory presented to him all Gods favors to himself and
others, and yet he was troubled still; I complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed, Selah. He was, as it were, in a swoon. 4. Thou hold my eyes
waking, my sleep is gone from me; 5. I am so troubled, that I cannot speak;
Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent: At the first verse, when he cried with
his voice, he felt some ease; but in the extremity of his trouble, he was
amazed, he had not a word to speak.
2. Hitherto of his agony, and trouble in body, soul, spirit; next, That which
increased his grief, viz. The memory of Gods goodness to him before.
he shows what did aggravate and increase his grief, which were, the happiness
which Gods people, and he himself enjoyed before, the memory of which did
increase his grief.

1. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times; how
merciful thou have been to our forefathers in pardoning them, That he could
joy in, and praise God.
2. In particular, I call to remembrance my song in the night; I remember with
how much comfort and joy of heart, even in the night-season, I was wont to sing
unto thee, and praise thee. 3. But now I commune with mine own heart, Now not
so.
and my spirit makes diligent search; I have a long dispute with my own heart,
and make a diligent search betwixt me and my own soul, why it should be thus
with me? why I should be thus afflicted? why my God should upon the point cast
me off?
3. And now by an elegant Hypotyposis in the three following verses, The debate
betwixt hope and despair in him.
he sets down what those disputes and disquisitions were he had with his own
heart, when he strugled with the wrath of God, and his own heart tempting to
despair of Gods goodness and performance of his Promises to his people; he said
within himself: 1. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable
no more? 2. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for
evermore? 3. Has God forgotten to be gracious?


2. Now follows the second part of the Psalm, The second part. How he recovers.
in which David shows how he did recover out of this tentation; and first, he
confesses that it arose not from any change in God, or alteration of his
good will, but from his own weakness; and secondly, He checks his foul for
weakness of faith.
shows the way how he would secure himself from the like trouble for the
future.

1. He begins with a correction of himself, And I said, it is my own weakness
of faith that puts me to all this trouble, Takes heart upon the memory of
which if it were stronger, I know I should hope better; the Nature, the
Promises, the Works of God being sufficient to confirm me. 2. That therefore I
relapse not: 1. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High;
Gods ways.
I will remember the power of Gods right hand, which is able to turn the most
desperate and darksom nights of trouble, into the pleasant and joyful days of
content, according to our Saviors words, Your sorrow shall be turned to joy.
2. I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of
old, His works.
viz. That God calls not his people to the pleasures of this World, but to
dangerous conflicts with Satan, sin, etc. And yet his presence is such, that he
does defend them, yea, and miraculously save them; This is the work of God,
these are his wonders of old, which I will remember. 3. Upon which he would
meditate and discourse. On these he stays.
and speak of them; I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy
doings.

Upon which works of God he makes a stand, and insists to the end of the Psalm;
first in general, and then by name, in Israel.

1. At the 13th. verse, he turns his speech to God. 1. Thy way, O God, is in
the Sanctuary; that is, in secret, and hid from the World; Considering Gods
ways to his people in general.
he that will understand the way of God to his people, must by faith enter into
his Temple, and enquire of his Word, as it is, Psalm. 73.17. it is too hard for
him else to know; else he shall never perceive why God brings them into the
case that David here was. 2. To which he adds a Doxology, Who is so great a God
as our God? which he confirms in the following verse, Thou art the God that
do wonders, Thou have declared thy strength among the people; Israel, may see
it, and acknowledge it, if not blind.
2. To Israel in particular.
But in particular, Thou have declared thy strength in defense of Israel. Thou
have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
And he amplifies this story of their deliverance from Egypt,

1. In the red Sea; The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; not only
the Egyptians, but the senseless Element felt thy power, they were afraid,
Exodus 14. 2. The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound, thine
arrows also went abroad; the voice of thy Thunder was in the Heavens, Exodus
14.24, 25. 3. In the earth, The earth trembled and shook; and all this was
done, that Israel might have a passage through it; Thy way is in the Sea, and
thy passage in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known.
And the final cause of this miracle was, The final cause of it.
that he might show his severity toward his enemies, Moses and Aaron, ordained
a King and a Priest; by them, Thou leddest thy people like sheep, by the hands
of Moses and Aaron.

The Prayer collected out of the seventy seventh Psalm.
WITH all ardency of spirit, earnestness of soul, and contention of voice,

In the night-season, when others devoid of care, take their rest and sleep, my
sore ran, and ceased not; I found no rest in my bones, by reason of my sin;
yea, so great was the grief of my soul, That I refused comfort; I remembered my
God, whom I had so often, and so foully offended, and I was troubled at it; my
sin, my grievous sin lies heavy upon my soul, it makes me to complain; and the
conscience of it so far depresseth my spirit, That I am even overwhelmed with
fear and sorrow.

By the dread I have of thy anger, my eyes are held waking, and I pass the long
night, in which others are refreshed with sleep, without any rest; I revolved
in my mind the times that were past, and the years of former Generations, And
in the night-season, a season most fit for meditation, I called to remembrance
my song, my song in which with a joyful heart I was wont to praise thee, and
yet so I received not comfort: I communed with my own heart, I searched out, as
with a Lanthorn, my soul; I called to mind thy clemency to thy children, thy
Truth in thy Word, thy Justice in thy Promises, the causes of all calamities,
and these my sorrows, and yet so I could not be comforted.

Ah merciful Lord, and loving Father, Will thou cast me off for ever? and will thou no more be favorable to me? Thou art patient and long-suffering, and is
thy mercy now gone for ever? that I shall never more have any sense or feeling
of them?

Of a truth, Lord, for my wicked life. I have deserved the fiercest of thy
wrath, and all the judgments which thou have threatened against rebellious
sinners; but, O Lord, Thou art able of a Saul to make a Paul, of a Publican a
Disciple, of Zachaeus a Penitent, of Mary Magdalen a Convert; these changes are
in the hand of the most High: Turn then me, O Lord, and turn unto me, and so I
shall be refreshed; pardon my sin, and change my heart, and so I shall be
assured, that thy mercy is not clean gone.

For after this long debate betwixt me and my own soul, upon the serious
thoughts of thy mercy, I came to this resolve, that my diffidence proceeded
from my own pusillanimity; for I said, all this trouble is from my own
infirmity: I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High; I will
remember how gracious he has been to other sinners, how strangely he has
converted them, how mercifully he has forgiven them, and this change has put
me in good hope of an old man, to become a new man, of a vessel of wrath, a
vessel of mercy; and that though in anger for a time he has seemed to desert
me, yet out of mere compassion he will return, and be gracious to me.

I will remember the works of the Lord, I will call to mind, That thou do not
call thy people to partake of the pleasures of this World, but to desperate
conflicts with sin, death, Satan and Hell; that there is not any of thy
servants of old, but have born this burden and heat of the day, and shall I
then look to escape? shall I hope to be exempted? A secret there is, why thou
dealest thus with thy servants, and known it cannot be, till we go into thy
Sanctuary, there we may learn, That thou chastnest every child that thou
receivest; there we shall find, That the reason of all thy proceedings are full
of equity and holiness, and that there is nothing we can justly reprehend, or
complain of.

Which of the gods of the Nations is in power to be compared unto thee? which
in mercy is like thee? O show therefore thy self to be the self-same God, and
in this my weakness and infirmity support me.

It is not for nothing, Israel is left upon Record, the Redemption of the sons
of Jacob and Joseph, are expressions of thy power and mercy: law thee, then the
waters felt thy presence, and as if they had been stricken with fear by thy
hand, they fled, and the depths of the Ocean being troubled, forgetting to flow
on the right and left hand, stood up in heaps, as if they had been congealed to
Mountains of ice; but after thy people were passed through, at thy command they
relented, and with an hasty and hideons reflux, overwhelmed Pharaoh and his
Chariots by their violence.

Then the clouds poured out water, which astonished his warlike Horses, thy
hail in manner of arrows were shot from Heaven, in the voice of Thunder, and
thy lightning flashed in their faces; from which their fear was so great, that
they thought the immovable Orb of the earth did shake and tremble under their
feet. and after the parted streams came together again, thy footsteps are not
known, no evidence there was thou had been there; Moses thy Prince, and Aaron
thy Priest, were then thy Ministers,

This thy miraculous redemption is written for our instruction; I do remember,
O Lord, what thou have done, freed a distressed people, delivered a broken
hearted Nation, saved from death those who did despair of life; Lord, I am
distressed, send from Heaven and relieve me; I am brokenhearted, O Lord, come
and heal me; I am even at the point to dye, save and quicken me: As thou have
set me up for a mark of thy justice, so make me also a monument of thy
compassion; let me obtain mercy, that in me, first, Christ Jesus might show
forth all long-suffering for a pattern to them, which should hereafter believe
on him to everlasting life. Despair I will not, for I serve a good Lord; hope
for pardon I will, for I trust in a merciful God. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save
sinners; of these I am the chief, the chiefest object then, O Lord, for thy
mercy; thy goodness can be no where so conspicuous, as in saving me: Lord then
have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me; Lord have mercy upon me, hear my
voice, give ear to my cry, in the day of my trouble I have sought to thee; let
me find thee, so shall my heart rejoice, my flesh rest in hope, and my tongue
be encouraged to sing, Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only
wise God, be Honor and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM. LXXVIII. (...).
THE Prophet considering that it is Gods Command, that his works be not
forgotten, but that the Fathers deliver his former doings to posterity, that
they might be to them for comfort and instruction, deter them from obstinacy in
sin, and persuade them to the fear of God, he does in this Psalm give in a
prolix Catalogue of Gods dealing with his people, even from their coming out of
Egypt, to the days of David.

The parts of the Psalm are these. 1. A Preface, in which he exhorts to learn
and declare the way of God, from ver. 1. to 9. 2. A continued Narrative of Gods
administration among his people, and their stubbornness, disobedience, and
contumacy, together with the revenge that God took upon them, from ver. 9. to
67. 3. His mercy yet, that he did not wholly cast them off, but after the
rejection of Ephraim, made choice of Judah, Zion, David, from ver. 67. to 72.


1. In the Exordium he labors to gain attention, Give ear, O my people, The
Exordium, in which he labors for attention.
to my Law, incline your ears to the words of my mouth; and in this, and the
following verses, uses many arguments to gain attention; as, 1. It is Gods Law
which he is to deliver, his Doctrine, The first part.
the words of his mouth, taught, delivered from Heaven, Prophet. To Gods Law,
from the 1. Excellency of it.
2. It is worth hearing, for it is a Parable, a dark, but wise saying, and it
of old; I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old; it
has dignity, wisdom, antiquity to commend it. 3. Yea, and certainty of
Tradition also; Which we have heard and known,


And now he acquaints them with the end, The end to be shown, not hid.
which is another Argument for attention.

1. It was not to hide them, or conceal them from their children. 2. But to
show them to the Generations to come; of which, That God might be 1. Praised,
and
the ultimatus finis, was, 1. That God be praised for his benefits, Praised,
and
showing the praises of the Lord. 2. That his power be celebrated in his
miracles; And his strength, His power magnified.
and wonderful works that he has done.

But the intermedius finis, was the good of his people, for it was, His people
edified.
that they might, 1. Know God: 2. Hope in God: 3. And obey God, not being
rebellious: For he, that is, God, established a Testimony in Jacob, It was not
a Law which our Fathers invented, but taught from above: Now the Duty of the
Fathers, was, to communicate this Law to their posterity; Which he commanded
our Fathers, that they should make known to their children.

And the Duties of the children follow, which are the three ends before.

1. That they know God, and his Law and Works: In knowledge.
That the Generation to come might know them, and the children that were yet
unborn; and their Duty is again, To declare them to their children. Faith.
2. That they might trust, and set their hope in God, 3. Obedience, and
That they might be an obedient people, and keep his Commandments, which they
could not be, if they were like their forefathers; for they were a stubborn
and rebellious Generation, Not rebellious, as their fathers of which he gives
diverse instances. The second part.
and whose spirit cleaved not steadfastly to God.
2. And now the Prophet begins his Narration, and proves by examples that they
were a stubborn and rebellious Generation, of which his, 1. First example is of
the Tribe of Ephraim, who being armed, and carrying Bows, turned back in the
day of Battle; which Moller refers to the children of Ephraim invading the land
of Canaan before Moses time, In Ephraim.
and were overthrown, 1 Chronicles. 17.21. and were slain, because they did it
without command; Ephraim by a Synecdoche, is put for all Israel, who were
disobedient and cowardly, as Soldiers in War, that turn their back on the
enemy, Bellarmine. 2. Ephraimites kept not the Covenant of God, and refused to
walk in his Law; Jeroboam being of that Tribe, who set up the Calves in Dan and
Bethel. 3. And they forgot his works in Egypt, he means, and the wonders that
he had showed them. A larger Narration:



By which occasion the Prophet enlarges his discourse, and shows, 1. Gods
goodness: 2. Isreal's obstinacy: 3. Their punishment.

1. Of Gods goodness.
Gods goodness appeared, in those wonders he did for them in their eduction
from Egypt; Mavelous did he in the sight of their Fathers in the land of
Egypt, The story is extant in Exodus, from chap. In many particulars.
7. to 12. 2. It appeared upon their departure from thence, when in the red Sea
he wrought a double miracle. 1. He divided the red Sea, and caused them to pass
through, Exodus 14. 2. He made the waters to stand on an heap; contrary to the
nature of water, which is fluid.
3. 1. In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, by which they were
shadowed from the scorching Sun. 2. And all the night by a light of fire, that
they should be terrified, and wander in the dark.
4. 1. He clave the Rocks in the Wilderness, for it was done in Rephidim, Exodus
17. and in the desert of Zin, Numb. 20. 2. That the water flowed in such
plenty, He gave them drink out of the great depths. 3. He brought streams also
out of the Rock, and caused waters to run down like Rivers.

2. Isreal's contumacy.
This is David's evidence of Gods goodness, care, love, provision for Israel;
but now the Prophet begins to relate their untowardness, ingratitude,
infidelity, impatience.

1. for they sinned; and that which; 1. Amplifies their sin, is, First, That it
was yet more, more and more pertinaciously against him. 2. and provoked the
most High in the Wilderness.
2. Incredulous they were, and they showed it two ways. 1. By tempting God,
that is, by correcting his Ordinance; for whereas he had provided Manna for
their daily food, they in their heart asked meat for their lusts. 2. By calling
in question his power, impudently, and with open voice: Yea, they spoke against
God, they said,
3. And they were foolishly impatient, 1. Their folly by their Concession.
Behold he smote the Rock, and the waters gushed out, and the streams flowed
withal. 2. Their impatience by their nonsense question, But can he give bread
also? can he pr^^^de flesh for his people? Sots, that confess he can do one,
and not the other:

3. And upon the heels of their sin the punishment treads. The punishment.
Ab ira Dei pracedit.

1. Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth. 2. So a fire was kindled
against Jacob, and anger also came against Israel, Numb. 11. 3. And the cause
was, their incredulity. Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in
his salvation. Would be provided for their own way, and not trust to that way
he provided for them, and meant to sustain them. He provided Manna.

And of this the Prophet gives in for instance the Manna. That being the food
which God provided them: Which the Prophet commends diverse ways.

1. From the place it came. He commanded the clouds from above, 2. From the
abundance of it. He rained down Manna for them for to ^^t. 3. From the
excellency of it. He gave them of the corn of heaven. Man did eat Angels food.
4. From the sweet taste it had, and the satisfaction it might give. For he fed
them to the full. All which amplifies their incredulity, for this food was sent
them from heaven, and in this abundance, able to give content, yet they
believed not.
4. Gods indulgence in giving Quails.
And now the Prophet proceeds to give another instance of Gods indulgence unto
them; of his indulgence, I say; for it cannot be well called a mercy, because
it came a Deo irato non propitio. Weary they were of their Manna, and they
longed for flesh, Numb. 11. To this their desire, God yielded, and sent them
Quails, but it was in wrath, which the Prophet intimates in this place from the
26. verse, to the 31. In which is set down implicitly their sin, viz. Lusting
for Flesh, and that also, when they had it, and eat till it came out of their
nostrils, they were not satisfied with it. 2. Gods justice, and their
punishment.

This indulgence of God the Prophet amplifies in diverse respects. His
indulgence amplified.


1. From the Author; that it was God that brought them, 2. That he brought them
by a wind that brings no Quails. The North wind does that, nor the East, nor
South. He caused an East wind to blow in the heaven, and by his power he
brought in the South wind. 3. From the plenty of them. He rained flesh upon
them as thick as dust, 4. From the facility of this food, and easiness to be
had, For he let it fall in the midst of the Camp, even round about their
habitation. 5. From the content they took in it. So they did eat, and were well
filled,
But now follows Gods justice in their punishment, Gods justice in their
punishment.
which has its degrees also.

1. They were not estranged from their lust. Though they had flesh enough, yet
they lusted still, their appetite was still sharp set, they labored (...). Quo
plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. 2. 3. That it came from an angry God.
The wrath of God ascendit, or came upon them. 4. It slew them. The wrath
ascended to that height, Vsque ad occisionem. 5. And it fell upon the best, the
chiefest, the choicest, the most Warlike men. He slew the fattest of them,
those that were fatted with the Quails, and smote down the chosen men in
Israel.
5. Their sin notwithstanding.
A man would have thought that such an exemplary punishment should have
affrighted them, and easily have brought them to their duty. But it had a quite
contrary effect. For they first persisted to be contumaciously wicked. 2. And
added dissimulation to their contumacy.

1. Contumacy.
Contumacious, stubborn, and incurably wicked they were; This blow wrought not
upon them. 1. For all this, for all this punishment, they sinned yet more,
added sin to sin. 2. Incredulity.
And remained incredulous. They believed not for his wondrous works.

Therefore the wrath of God pursued them still, though with a slower pace, to
give that time of repentance.

1. Therefore their days did he cons^^^e in vanity. Hope they had, at their
coming from Egypt, Gods wrath for these.
to enter into Canaan, but their hope proved vain, God causing their carcasses
to fall in the Wilderness. 2. And their years in trouble. For in their forty
years continuance in the desert, infected they were with many wants, dangers,
stung with fiery Serpents, set on by the Amalekites.
Now when they saw, Which wrought in them Attrition.
that Gods wrath thus pursued them, true it is, that it wrought for the
present, some remorse in them, they acknowledged, and sought to God for a
little while. Attrite they were.

1. When he slew them, then they sought him. 2. They returned. 3. And enquired
early after God. 2. And they remembered, that God was their Rock. 2. And the
high God was their Redeemer.
Attrite, But not true Contrition. For they, in this remorse, were guilty,
I say, they were, but not contrite. For all this their seeking, returning,
enquiring, was but a formality. And therefore the Prophet, as before he laid
Obstinacy and Contumacy to their charge; so in the following verses, he
impeacheth them of Hypocrisy, and Inconstancy, which is the Note of a
dissembler.

1. Of Hypocrisy.
Of Hypocrisy. Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth, when
they called him their Rock, as it is before, The high God their Redeemer. 2.
For they had no sincerity in them. Their heart was not right with him.
2. Of Inconstancy.
Of Inconstancy. Neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. They quickly
forgot, that as God was obliged by Covenant to them, so again they were obliged
to him.
And here the Prophet, And yet God was merciful to them.
before he goes farther on, with the Narration of their impiety, inserts two
verses to extol the goodness of God even toward such Rebels.

1. The fountain of which was his mercy. But he being full of compassion. 2.
The act of this his mercy. He forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not.
3. The moderation of his anger, and continuance of his mercy. Though he were
provoked often, yet many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up
all his wrath. 4. That which was outwardly the motive to it, The consideration
of their frail condition. 1. For be remembered, that they were but flesh, Genesis
6. full of vanity, weakness. 2. A wind that passes away, and comes not again.
A mortal creature, that dies and revives not. He continues the story of their
Rebellions.


And after the intimation of Gods goodness, he returns back again to his story
of their disobedience, and, as if he were astonished at it, he begins his
Complaint with an Exclamation, in which there is a Climax. 1. How often? Numb.
14.22. 2. How often have they provoked him, by murmuring, by repining at his
doings? 3. And that in the desert, where I showed my protection of them.

More particularly. They 1. Returned, i. e. Rursus ad ingenium redeunt. Egypt.
2. Tempted God, vide Exodus 16. and Cap. 32. Numb. 11. and Cap. 14. and 16. and
17. Cap. 3. And limited the Holy One of Israel. That if he would not do as they
would have him, he should be an impotent and weak God, sup. verse. 19, 20. 4.
And they lastly forgot all he had done for them in Egypt. Nihil citius feuescit
quam gratia.


6. Now upon this their deliverance from Egypt, because it was the greatest of
Gods works, he upbraids them for their forgetfulness, Insists on their
forgetfulness.
that he might the more upbraid their ingratitude and impiety. On this he
dwells long, and first he delivers it in general terms. 2. And after insists
upon the particulars.

1. They remembered not his hand, i. e. Pharaoh. 2. How he wrought his signs in
Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.
The particulars of which signs and wonders now follow. Of the plagues of Egypt.
1. The first plague. He turned their rivers into blood, and the ^^oods, 2. the
fourth plague. he sent diverse sorts of flies among them. 3. the second plague.
and frogs that destroyed them. 4. The eighth plague, He gave also their
increase to the Caterpillar, and their labor to the locust. 5. The seventh
plague. He destroyed their vines with hail, In them God showed his Severity.



In all these plagues, and those that follow, God showed his severity to the
Egyptians. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, indignation,
and trouble. 2. He sent evil Angels among them. 3. He made a way to his anger,
he spared not their soul from death.

6. The first plague. But gave their life over to the Pestilence. 7. The last
plague. And smote all the firstborn in Egypt. The chief of their strength in
the Tabernacles of Ham, i. e. Egypt. Mizraim, that peopled it, was the son of
Cham.
Hitherto the Prophet has recited the signs and wonders God did in Egypt for
his people, how he destroyed their enemies with a mighty hand, that being
warned by their examples, they took heed, that they provoked him not to wrath,
which they did, because they remembered them not.

7. But Mercy to his people.
Now he enters a new way, and recites the Mercies of God to them, of which he
began to speak at the eleventh and fourteenth verses above. Of which the
particulars are, 1. How he brought his people through the red Sea. And made his
own people go forth as sheep. 2. He guided them as a flock. 3. For he led them
on safely, so that they feared not, i. e. that need not fear, since the Sea had
overwhelmed their enemies. 4. He brought them into the Land of Canaan. 2. To
the borders of his Sanctuary. 3. Even to Mount Zion. 4. The Mountain which he
purchased with his right hand. They indeed fought for it, but he gave them
victory. 5. He cast out the heathen before them. And made the Tribes of Israel
to dwell in their Tents. 6. And divided them an inheritance by lot. Nor
judgments, nor mercies did awe them. They still were stubborn and unthankful.
And made the Tribes of Israel to dwell in their Tents.


8. But nor his mercies, nor his judgments could keep in obedience this
stiff-necked, gainsaying people. Ungrateful they were for all this. After they
were brought into the Land, and settled in their inheritance, the same they
were, which they were before. For, 1. Yet they tempted and provoked God. 2.
They were disobedient. For they kept not his Testimonies. 3. They turned back,
and dealt unfaithfully as their forefathers. They brake the Covenant betwixt
God and them, sinning by the example of their forefathers; (...). 4. They were
inconstant in their resolutions; starting aside like a deceitful bow, that
slips the nock when the Archer intends to shoot with it. 5. And to make up the
measure of their impiety, at last they became impudent Idolators. For they
provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with
their graven Images.


9. Gods wrath for this, grows more hot against his people.
Upon this, as before, the wrath of God overtakes them, but now in a hotter
manner than before. Idolatry is one of the crying sins which God hears. That
which a man hears not, troubles him not, now this sin especially God hears, and
it troubled him.

1. The Ark taken.
When God heard this, he was wroth. 2. And greatly abhorred Israel. 2. He
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, and the Tent he placed among them, 3. And he
delivered his strentgh, i.e. the Ark into captivity, and his glory into the
enemies hand. 4. He gave his people up also to the sword, and was wroth with
his inheritance. 5. The Priests, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain with the
sword: and their widows made no lamentation. Being either taken, and led away
captive: Phinehas wife. 6. The sire consumed, i.e. the wrath of God, their
young men, and their maidens were not given to marriage: for defect of young
men, and therefore not praised in Epithalamiis.
Thus the wrath of God overtook the Israelites. But next he shows, The
Philistines that took it, escaped not.
that the enemies, even the Philistines that took the Ark, and set it in the
house of Dagon, escaped not his hand. This ignominy redounded to himself, and
he revenged it.

1. Then at the taking of the Ark, the Lord, awaked, as one out of sleep, and
like a mighty man that shou^s by reason of wine: for vina addunt animos. 2. And
he smote his enemies, i. e. the Philistines in the hinder parts, with Emerauds;
or else made them fly, and fall with their backs to their enemies, which is
dishonorable for a Soldier. 3. Yea, and he put them to a perpetual reproach,
vide 1 Samuel 5, 6. Chapters.
3. But how now did he deal with Israel? The third part. The mercy of God in
bringing back the Ark, and placing it.
Not as he had done before neiher. For after the Philistines had suffered
sharply for their impiety, he caused them honorably to send the Ark home again
after seven months, 1 Samuel 6. A sign this was, that his fierce anger was
abated, yet not so far, but that some Monument should remain of his wrath
against their Idolatry. And therefore he would not suffer the Ark to be brought
to Silo, which was situate in the Tribe of Ephraim. So says the Psalmist.

1. Moreover, he refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, Not in Silo.
and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, lest it should be abused either to
Idolatry, Elies sons. 2. But he chose the Tribe of Judah, the hill of Zion
which he loved. But in Judah.
For it was carried to Betshemes a City of Jud^h, Aaron. From thence to
Kiriath-jearim, thence to Gibea, being translated to the house of Aminadah. And
after it had rested a while in the house of Obed-Edom, it was brought by David
to Jerusalem, and settled in the hill of Zion, which caused the Prophet to say,
And at last in Zion.
The hill of Zion which he loved.
And he does amplify this Narration of Gods love to the Ark, This mercy he
amplifies,
and consequently the Church, of which the Ark was but a type.

1. From the splendor of the situation of Mount Zion. From the place.
And he built his Sanctuary like high places. Strong and beautiful, The
Mountain Zion shall be raised above the tops of the hills, Isa. 2. 2. From the
stability and fixed position of it. For there is no moving, From the stability
of Zion.
or removing the Church. It is like the earth, which he has established for
ever. 3. In choice of a King to be a Nursing Father to his Church. He chose
David also his servant. He chose freely, In choice of David to be their King.
and not for any merit and worth that was in him, for he was of a low degree, a
poor shepherd. He took him from the sheep-folds, when he was following the yews
great with young. 4. The end, To feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. To feed them, and govern them.

The Elogy given to David, with which he concludes. David did his duty. So, 1.
He fed them according to the integrity of his heart. 1. He fed them: In
integrity: And David did his duty.
Sincerely he performed his duty to God and man. No dissembler. 2. And guided
them by the Skilfulnesse of his Hands. In him there was Prudence, and all the
actions of his hands were guided by it.


The Prayer collected out of the seventy eighth Psalm.
WOnderful, O Lord, are thy ways, infinite thy mercies, admirable thy patience
and long-suffering toward the children of men: Jacob, and appointed a Law in
Israel; that we might not forget our duty, thou have left thy Commandments upon
Record; that we should not be a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their hearts aright, and start from our duties as a
broken bow, thou have acquainted us with thy proceedings with thine own people
in Egypt, in the Wilderness; and in that Land, which thou have divided to them
for an inheritance.

We have heard with our ears, Egypt were illustrious, in the red Sea wonderful,
in the Wilderness prodigious, in Canaan full of power. The plagues of Egypt,
thy path in the waters, the cloud by day, the pillar by night, the Manna, the
Quails, the water out of the Rock, show thy power, severity, and mercy. All
which should breed in us fear and reverence.

But like those rebellious Israelites, we have not kept thy Covenant, nor walked
in thy Law, Israel. We have not remembered thy hand, nor the day, when thou
deliverest us from the hand of the enemy.

Of a truth, Lord, when thy hand has been heavy upon us by the pestilence,
that God was our Rock, Novertheless we did but flatter thee with our mouths,
and lied unto thee with our tongues, for thy heavy hand was no sooner removed,
but our obedience was at an end. We have again rempted and provoked the most
High God, we have not kept thy Testimonies, but turned back, and dealt
unfaithfully with our fathers.

Thine own people were not more contumacious, Israel not more stubborn,
forgetful, wilful, than we have been. If they dissembled with thee, we have
done the like; if they provoked, grieved, tempted thee, we have done the like.
Israel was not right with him, nor steadfast in his Covenant: But he being full
of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea, many a time
he turned his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath, For he remembered,
that they were but flesh; a wind that passes away, and comes not again.

Remember, O Lord, the mould of which we are made, consider that we are but
weak and vain flesh, strive not always with us; remember that the breath in
our nostrils, is but a wind that passes away, and comes not again, then turn
away thine anger, and stir not up all thy wrath. Out of thy mere compassion
pardon and forgive our iniquity, and destroy not the work of thine own hands.

Raise us by the power of thy Spirit, and confirm us in thy truth, that there
never may be in us hereafter a heart of unbelief; Never let us depart from the
living God, or harden our hearts from thy fear. The natural branches are broken
off, and we, who were slips of the wild Olive, are graffed in, of which we have
not so much reason to boast, as to tremble, who have refused the Tribe of
Joseph, and cast aside the Tribe of Ephraim for their ingratitude, rebellion,
impiety, and disobedience, should upon the same ground reject us also. We
will not boast against the natural branches, but come before thee with fear and
hope; with fear, lest what happened to them, may befall us; and yet with hope,
that the same mercy which followed them, may yet follow us.

In the hottest of thy anger, thou yet made choice of the Tribe of Judah,
thou made choice of to be their Prince, and brought him to feed Jacob thy
people, and Israel thine inheritance. Let this thy love, Judah be dear in thy
eyes, take pleasure and do good to Zion, build thy Sanctuary on high, and make
it conspicuous and beautiful in the eyes of her very enemies, never let the
gates of hell prevail against it. Call thy servant David from his low condition
to guide thy people, and rule thy inheritance. And let the power of thy Spirit,
be so effectual in him, that he may feed thy people according to the integrity
of his heart, and guide them prudently with all his might: So shall we, who are
the sheep of thy pasture, give thee thanks for ever and ever.

PSALM. LXXIX. (...).
THIS Psalm was composed, when the Church was oppressed, as some conceive by
Antiochus; certain it is, it was in a very distressed condition. And it has

These parts, Viz. 1. A Complaint for the desolation of Jerusalem, from verse.
1. to 5. 2. A Deprecation of Gods anger, verse. 5. 3. A twofold Petition. 1.
Against the enemies of the Church, verse. 6, 7, 10, 11, 12. 2. For the Church,
verse. 8, 9.
4. A Doxology, verse. 13.


1. The Complaint is very bitter, and rises by many degrees. The first part.
The Complaint bitter, and amplified by a (...).


1. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance. The Antithesis is
elegant: The heathen, those Wolves, impure beasts, are come into thy Land, thy
peculiar. 2. Thy Holy Temple have they defiled. 3. They have laid Jerusalem on
heaps. Funditus deleverunt. 4. Their cruelty they have exercised upon the Dead.
The dead bodies of thy Servants have they given to be meat to the fowls of the
air, the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the Land. 5. A second part of
their cruelty, was, that they made no more reckoning to let out the lifeblood
of a man, than of so much water. Their blood have they shed like water round
about Jerusalem. 6. They wanted a grave. And there was none to bury them. 7. We
are become a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are
round about us.
2. The second part.
The misery being fully deciphered in this pathetical Complaint, next the
Psalmist acknowledges the cause of their calamity, and expostulates with God.
The cause, Gods anger.


1. The cause was, Gods anger and jealousy. 2. How long, O Lord, About which
he expostulates with God.
will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? i.e.
Cessairasci.
3. The third part. And prays,
And now he begins his Prayer, which is twofold. First, Against the enemy.

1. Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
Kingdoms that have not called on thy name. For vengeance to fall on the enemy,
for their cruelty.
Not upon us, but on them. 2. And he adds the reason, and it is a reason of
weight, in which he respects not himself, but Gods people. For they have
devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.
The other part of his Prayer, For the Church.
is for pardon and help for the Church.

1. verse. 5. that God was angry, and anger arises from sin. First then he begs
remission. Remission.
1. O remember not against us our former iniquities. 2. Let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us. Ratio. For we are brought very low.
2. Help.
And then he prays for help. Help us, O God, of our Salvation: using the most
powerful Argument, Help us for the glory of thy name. 3. Which both he
conjoins. His Arguments to prevail with God.
Then joins both together. Deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy Names
sake.
And now he adds to his first reason, viz. Gods glory; two more, why he desires
sudden help, which are, The Blasphemy of the heathen. 2. The Misery of his
people at this time. That if not delivered, the enemy would Blaspheme.


1. If they were not delivered, the enemy was like to blaspheme, and say; Now
wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? Therefore, Let him be
known among the heathen in our sight, by the revenge of the blood of thy
Servants which is shed. 2. That their condition was miserable.
Our case is miserable, we are an object of pity. Let then the sighing of the
prisoners come before thee according to the greatness of thy power; preserve
thou those that are appointed to dye. 3. And, thirdly, render unto our
neighbors sevenfold into their bosoms, largely; even the reproach with which
they have reproached thee, O Lord.
4. The fourth part.
The Vote or Obligation to be thankful for the deliverance.

1. So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever. The Doxology for their deliverance.
2. We will show forth thy praise to all generations We thy people, thy sheep,
will do it. For praise is not comely nor acceptable out of the mouth of a
sinner.
The Prayer collected out of the seventy ninth Psalm.
O Merciful God, and loving Father, thou have chosen us from among all people
to be thine inheritance, and have omitted nothing either for our instruction,
or future happiness; Thou have written unto us the wonderful things of thy Law,
thou have opened to us the Mysteries of thy Gospel, thou have washed us with
water, and fed us with the flesh and blood of thy Son. But with shame and
confusion of face we confess before thee, that we have walked unworthy of so
great mercies; and unthankful wretches as we are, have been disobedient to thy
holy Will.

For this thy wrath and jealousy is justly kindled against us, and it has
brought in a cruel and barbarous enemy upon us. and they have laid upon heaps
Jerusalem, those houses which were dedicated and consecrated to thy honor.
Neither has their fury only extended to these material buildings, but they
have showed their rage against the dead bodies of thy Saints, sometimes the
Temples of the Holy Ghost. These they have not suffered to be brought with
honor to the grave, and to be gathered to their fathers in peace, but have
given them to be meat to the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the Land.
While they lived, they made no more account of their blood, than of so much
water, that being spilt upon the ground, cannot be gathered up again, and
therefore, without any commiseration, they have poured it but round about
Jerusalem.

Which affliction falling thus heavy upon us, and suffered by us, when our
Neighbors, that are enemies to thy truth, behold, they deride and mock us, to
them we are become a Proverb of reproach, a scorn and a derision to them that
are round about us, not without the ignominy of thy Name, in which they boast
that we have bellev'd in vain.

But, O Lord, how long? how long will thou be angry with us? for ever? O let
thy wrath cease from the sheep of thy pasture! And if thou will be angry still,
that have devoured Jacob thy servant, these have laid waste his dwelling place.
Let them not escape thy fury, and force them to drink up the dregs of that Cup,
which is in thy hand, and wring put the lees of it.

We beseech thee therefore for thy mercies sake, and at the intercession of thy
beloved Son our Lord, that thou would not remember our former iniquities,
which we and our fathers have committed against thee, but that passing by our
demerits, thy tender mercies would speedily prevent us, before we are utterly
consumed. Help us therefore now, O God of our salvation, to thee we fly, to
thee we cry, help us, and deliver us, and that not for our selves (for we have
justly deserved thy wrath) but for the glory of thy name. For it will much
redound to the honor of thy name, that such sinners, such men, so low, so
disconsolate and helpless, should be saved. Come therefore, O Lord, and deliver
us, and purge away our sins for thy Names sake.

If we now perish under our enemies hands, they will not insult only over us,
but thee; ask they will in scorn and derision, Where now is their God? He is
either so impotent, that he cannot, or so cruel, that he will not deliver those
whom he calls his people, out of our hands. Be therefore, O Lord, known among
the heathen in our sight, by the revenge thou take for the blood of thy
servants which is shed. O let the sighs and groans of those who are led
Captive, and now in prison, come before thee, and by the greatness of thy
power, preserve us, the remainder and sons of those who have been slain, from
death; And to our malicious Neighbors, who have adjoined themselves to our
enemies, and glory at our calamity, render sevenfold unto them; as they have
reproached us, so let them be a reproach.

So we, that thou have honored to be thy people, and chosen to be the sheep of
thy pasture,

PSALM. LXXX. (...).
THE occasion of this Psalm, is the same with the former, viz. An oppression of
Israel, and devastation, as is most likely by the Assyrians.

The parts are, 1. A Prayer, verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. A complaint by way of
expostulation, from verse. 3. to 8. 3. In the twelve last verses, to move God to
commiseration, He 1. First reckons up Gods love to Israel, under the Allegory
of a vine, from verse. 8. to 12. 2. Deplores the waste made upon it, verse. 12,
13. 3. Prays that God would return, look upon, and restore the vine, from
verse. 13. to 18. 4. Makes a vow of perpetual service, verse. 18.



1. The first part. His Petition.
In the beginning of this Psalm, the Prophet offers up his Petition for
audience, for help, for favor, for repentance, and remission of sin.

1. Give ear. For if God will not hear, it is to no end to pray. For audience.
2. Stir up thy strength, and come and save us, shine forth, For assistance.
show us a favorable countenance. 3. Turn us again, and cause thy face (which
seems to us cloudy, For grace to amend.
angry now) to shine, and we shall be saved. Vere faelices.
And the Argument he uses to persuade this, His Argument to persuade it, Gods
love to his Church.
is from the person of God, and his former administration; 1. He showed himself
a shepherd. 2. He was glorious in Israel.

1. O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep. Free us from
these Wolves. 2. Thou that fitt'st between the Cherubims, have taken up thy
seat among us, and showed thy glorious presence by the Ark that the Cherubims
cover. Shine forth, and show thou have not left us. 2. Show thy self before
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, i.e. before all Israel.
2. The second part.
To his Prayer, as ardent Petitioners use, he adjoins his Complaint. Of which
the particulars are these.

1. His complaint. 1. For Godsanger.
He complains that God was angry, and shows his anger in this, that a prayer
would not be heard. O Lord, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of
thy people? Call on me in trouble, and I will hear thee, yet will not hear. No
marvel if he began the Psalm with, Give ear, O Lord. 2. For the misery the
Church was in.
that they eat nor drank without tears, no pleasane meat came in their mouths.
Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in
great measure. 3. He complains of the ill usage they found from all, By the ill
usage of their oppressors.
1. Thou make us a strife, i.e. an occasion of strife to our Neighbors, for
they contend about us, striving who shall reign and domineer over us. 2. And
our enemies laugh among themselves. Make a mock, and scorn of us.

After which complaint, the Prophet ingeminates his principal Petition. Upon
which he redoubles his prays.


1. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts. Make us penitents, Converts, new men.
2. And cause thy face to shine. Clear up thy countenance, 3. And then we know
the effect. We shall be saved, q.d. Vivemus, regnabimus, faelices erimus, nullo
bono destituti.
3. And that he might the sooner move God to commiseration, The third part. And
puts God in mind, what he had done for his people.
under the Metaphor of a Vine, 1. First he puts God in mind, what he had done
for his people Israel. 1. He brought this Vine out of Egypt. A choice Vine
then, translated thence. 2. Thou castest out the heathen. Purgest, as it were,
Under the Metaphor of a Vine.
the ground for it. 3. Thou plantest it. A plant it was of thy own, and men
love their own plants. 4. Thou preparest room before it. Removedst all
impediments, 5. And did cause it to take root. Else the planting, the making
room had been in vain. 6. And it filled the Land. The Vine, that is, the people
grew and multiplied. Which is amplified in the two following verses, in which
the Amplitude and Glory of the Kingdom is declared. 1. The hills were covered
with the shadow of it, 2. She sent out her boughs to the Sea, i.e. Euphrates.

2. The Prophet deplores the waste now made upon the Vine, And he deplores the
waste made upon it.
and that by God. For he faith, 1. Why have thou broken down her hedges? The
fence being broken down, the Vine cannot be safe. 2. And upon the remove of the
Hedge, there followed a Triple mischief. 1. All those that pass by the way, do
pluck her. 2. The Boar out of the wood does waste it. Some homebred enemy in
power, enters and spoils it. 3. The wild beasts of the field devour it.
Tyrants from abroad.
3. He prays to God to have compassion, Prays that God would have compassion
on the Vine.
and look upon his Vine again. 1. Return, we beseech thee, O Lord God of
hoasts. Thou art the Lord of Armies, return then and fight for us. 2. Look down
from heaven. Thence protect us. For earth cannot help us. 3. Behold, and visit
this Vine. Take it once again into thy care. For he that will not visit his
Vine, is not like to have any care of it.
4. And on the Vineyard.
He prays for the whole Land, the Vineyard. And visit the Vineyard that thy
right hand has planted, thy power. And the branch, i. e. people, that thou
made strong (by thy promise and Covenant, that it should grow into an ample
and great Kingdom) for thy self, i. e. for thy glory, for thy service. To bring
forth grapes for thee. And now once more he interserts and repeats his
complaint. 1. It is burnt with fire. 2. It is cut down, Igne, and ferro
grassantur hosts. He repeats the complaint.
2. They, i. e. the boughs, branches, shoots of the Vine, perish at the rebuke
of thy countenance. It is not the enemies swords, but thy rebuke of us for our
sins, that has brought upon us this devastation.

5. And again prays.
He prays again almost in the same words of the 15. verse, Let thy hand be
upon the man of thy right hand, In the interpretation of this verse,
Interpreters agree not. For by the son of man, 1. Some understand Christ, who
is often called the son of man, and is the man on Gods right hand. 2. The Jews,
Zerobabel, or some other chief Leader. Which Jansenius says, is the more
probable opinion. 3. Others, the Jewish Nation, and the whole body of that
people, whom God is pleased to call His Son. Israel is my firstborn, who was
the man of his righthand, because grown strong by his power. To this opinion
Musculus and Moller incline.





According to the first interpretation, which is Basils, the sense is this. Let
thy hand and power be showed by the man of thy right hand, thy Son, and for his
sake spare thy Vineyard, and let not the enemy utterly waste it. 2. According
to the second, he prays that God would send them some strong and mighty
Savior or Deliverer. 3. According to the third, he prays, that God would show
his power and might, and not suffer his people, whom he had taken unto him in
the place of a Son, and to the glory of his name, joined to himself by the
right hand of his power and strength of Covenant, now (to the ignominy of his
name) to perish by the cruelty of wicked men.

4. The fourth part.
The last part of the Psalm, contains a promise of Gratitude. That they would
revolt and rebel no more, but constantly adhere to God, and renounce their
Idols. A vow of Gratitude.


1. So will not we go back from thee. We will no more be backsliders. 2.
Quicken us. Revive us from this death, this calamity. Or, Quicken us by thy
Spirit and Grace. 3. And we will call upon thy name. We will serve thee, and
not any strange god.
And so he concludes the Psalm, with that verse twice before set down and
explained, verse. 3. verse. 7. now repeated.



The Prayer collected out of the eightieth Psalm.
O Almighty and Merciful God,

For those iniquities and grievous sins we have committed against thee,

O Lord, in this needful time of trouble, we have, as thou have commanded, but
thou seem not to hear, nor yet to answer our Petitions, than which there
cannot be a greater sign of thy displeasure. O Lord God of hoasts, that
command all the Armies of heaven and earth, vow down thine ear and hear us,
look down from heaven and consider our afflictions. O Merciful and Almighty
God, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? They know no
other way to paci ^^ee, no other way to recover thy favor. If thou reject our
supplications, we are undone for ever.

Heavy are the things, which we now suffer; so heavy,

But, O Lord God, thou which have the power over all Armies, now at length
convert us unto thee, by thy grace draw us from our evil ways, and receive us
to thy favor, which for some years thou have withheld, which if in mercy thou
shall vouchsafe, then we shall be saved.

Thou, Lord, In a word, thou have chosen, planted, senced, rooted, husbanded,
propagased, extended this Vine, Kings became her Nursing fathers, and Queens
her Nursing mothers.

O then, why have thou broken down the Hedges, with which she was formerly
secured? Why have thou withdrawn thy protection, under which she was so safe?
To that pass, being destitute of thy savor, we are brought, that all that pass
by, every one that lists, now enters into thy Vineyard, and without any
prohibition, pluck off the grapes. The Boar out of the Wood does unroot it,
the wild beasts out of the field, crop, devour, and trample upon it,

O thou Lord of hoasts, look down from heaven thy dwelling place, and send us
help from thence, for vain is the help of man; behold, and visit yet once more
this thy Vine with a pleasing countenance. That Vine, which not with another,
thy Son, thy firstborn, a weak and unable people to help it self, and
subsisting only by thy strength, that power, with which, to the honor of thy
name, at the rebuke of thy countenance, which angry look, if it please thee to
turn upon our enemies, they also shall easily perish. One angry and frowning
look of thy face will do it, O let them feel this rebuke and perish.

Show thy power and might,

Upon which favor and help, we will worship thee alone, and call upon thy name
for ever.

Turn us then again, Grant us this mercy, good Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake,
thy only Son our Savior. Amen.

PSALM. LXXXI. (...).
IN this Psalm the Prophet exhorts the people to praise God in his Festivals,
for the benefits he conferred on them, and exprobates their disobedience, and
shows the events that fell upon it.

The parts are, 1. An exhortation to celebrate in their Festivals, Gods name,
from verse. 1. to 4. 2. The reasons he uses to persuade unto it, viz. the
benefits of God conferred upon Israel, from verse. 4. to verse. 12. 3. An
exprobation of Isreal's ingratitude, and the consequent, verse. 12, 13. 4. The
expression of Gods love, and call to amendment, which if they hearken to, he
tells them what will follow, from verse. 14. to the end.


1. The first part. He exhorts to rejoice.
He first exhorts to rejoice and exult. But not in any worldly manner, as may
easily be collected out of the circumstances.

1. The Object, God. To God, our strength, to the God of Jacob. 2. That this
joy be expressed by voice, and instruments of Music. In God.
Sing aloud, make a joyful noise, take a Psalm, bring hither the Timbrel, At
his Festivals.
Signify your joy always. 3. Especially, that it be in a fit season. In the
New Moon, in the time appointed, on our Solemn Feast Day. For then they were to
rejoice before the Lord.
2. And now he expresses the reasons why this was to be done.

1. Gods command. For this was a Statute for Israel, The second part.
and a Law of the God of Jacob; this he ordained in Joseph for a testimony. The
reason. 1. Gods command.
2. The antiquity of it. Ordained presently upon the time, when he, that is,
God went out through the Land of Egypt. An old Ordinance.
Which benefit he amplifies by this circumstance, that they were delivered from
people of a strange language, which is no small benefit, the intelligence of
any tongue, being the bond of all society.
And now more particularly he recounts Gods favors to them. For which they had
reason to rejoice.

1. That he delivered them from a base servitude. Their deliverance from a base
servitude.
I removed his shoulders from the burden, and his hands, that is, the
Israelites, were delivered from the pots. 2. And he did this for them, when
they were in affliction, Done upon their cry.
and cried to him. Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee. The
courtesy was seasonable. 3. He did by signs and wonders in Egypt, In a
miraculous manner.
show that he had a care of them. Thou calledst upon me in trouble secretly,
and I answered in the secret of thunder; by an open sign I showed my presence
with thee, and my care in secret for thee.
And here he interserts one particular of Isreal's ingratitude, Though God
foresaw their disobedience.
when they tempted God, and murmured for want of water, which God let them
want, for a trial of their obedience. I proved thee also at the waters of
Meribah. Selah. Numb. 20.

And after he proceeds, and reckons up a new, and the greatest benefit, viz.
That he gave them the Law.
the same Preface which is extant, Deuteronomy. 5.1. before Moses gave the Law. Hear,
O my people, and I will testify unto thee. O Israel, if thou will hearken to
me. Then there shall no strange god be in thee: Neither shall thou worship any
other gods. Which is the second Commandment. To which he persuades obedience,
for three reasons.


To persuade to which, he adds three reasons. The two first in the front of the
Decalogue.

1. I am the Lord thy God. A God, thy God, whom else should thou worship? 2.
Which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Redeemed, delivered thee from
bondage. 3. Open thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it. Have no other gods, but
me, and I will largely and abundantly supply thy wants. This is his promise.
Ask and have, seek and find, but seek first the Kingdom of God, and its
righteousness. The third part. He compla^ns of Isreal's disobedience.

3. To this he adds the just complaint of God, for Isreal's disobedience. But,
notwithstanding all the evidences of my might, and Arguments of my love, they
were a rebellious, and stubborn people, which God lays to their charge, verse.
11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would none of me. They
broke my Covenant, and wilfully set me aside for strange gods.

And this their Rebellion drew on them a heavy, Therefore punished grievously,
for God left them to themselves.
the severest punishment.

1. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust. I let them alone in their
obstinacy. 2. And they walked in their own counsels. They might do what they
would, I regarded it not. A heavy judgment for a man to be left to himself.
Compare with this verse, 2 These. 2.12. which expounds it.
4. The fourth part.
And yet behold the love of God to a wilful, rebellious, and obstinate people,
he wishes that it had been otherwise, and by his wish, affectionately moves
them to repentance. Gods love yer, in calling them to repentance.


O that my people had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways. The
reward of which, would be,


And tells them what should ensue upon it. Three very great benefits, and most
desired.

1. A depression of their enemies.
A depression of their enemies. I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord, should have
been found liars, i. e. submitted and humbled themselves, 2. Their peace long
and lasting.
The second benefit is, That their time should have continued for ever, i.e.
Their peace, their tranquillity, their health, their quiet habitation should
have been very long, and not interrupted with War, Sedition, Tumults. 3. wheat,
Abundance of all things, to satisfaction.
and honey. 1. I should have fed them also (not with bran mixed with flower, as
poor folks use, and is usual in time of famine) with the finest of the wheat.
2. And with honey out of the Rock (in which in Judaea, Bees commonly lived)
would I have satisfied thee. It Is a blessing to say, I have enough.

The Prayer collected out of the eighty first Psalm.
INsinite, Thou art our strength, thou art the God of Jacob, we will therefore
sing aloud, and make a joyful noise unto thee; and because our breath is too
short and low to resound thy praises, for this was made a Statute for Israel,
and a Law of the God of Jacob.

Thou were merciful to thy people Israel, when in trouble they called upon
thee, Sinai, and proclaimed thy Law in their ears with the sound of a Trumpet,
when they heard a voice never heard before. Thou easest his shoulder from the
burden of carrying earth, tiles, bricks, and straw, and his hands were
delivered from making the pots.

Thou have been to us no less merciful than to them, when in our afflictions
and troubles we have called upon thee, thou have come down and delivered us,
thou have freed us from our Egyptian darkness of ignorance, thou have loused
us from the slavery of the devil, and from the drudgery and service of sin
which laid a heavy burden upon our consciences, and instead of thy Law
proclaimed with so much terror in Mount Sinai, thou have spoken to us from
heaven by thy only begotten Son, and sounded in our ears the glad-tidings of
the Gospel.

And now, Lord, what do thou require at our hands for all these favors?
even the self-same that thou requiredst of Israel. For thus thou then spakest
to them, and thus thou speak to us. Hear, O my people,

And woe be so us miserable wretches, our ears have been dull of hearing, and we
have not hearkened to thy command; though we have not set up strange gods, yet
we have worshipped our own imaginations, and adored our own inventions. We have
forgotten, that thou brought us out of our more than Egyptian darkness of
ignorance and sin, and filled our mouths with all good things. In a word, we
have not hearkened to thy voice, we have set thee by for the vanities of our own
hearts, and would none of thee. In justice therefore thou have given us up to
our hearts lusts, and because we would not receive the love of the truth, that
we might be saved, for this cause has God sent us a strong delusion, that we
should be lieve a lie, and take pleasure in unrighteousness.

But, O Lord, though Israel has transgressed, yet let not Judah sin; in Sodom
thou had a Lot, in Ur of the Chaldees an Abraham, in the Land of Uz a Job,
though the four hundred Prophets have followed Baal, yet there is one Micajah
left, nay, these will hearken unto thee, these will walk in thy ways. Lord
here their prayers, hearken unto their groans for the remnant that are left.
And thou who would have spared that sinful City at the request of Abraham,
could ten righteous men have been found in it, return in mercy to the thousands
of Israel, which day and night cry unto thee to spare thy people.

O Lord, for their fakes, rather for thine own sake, But let the time of those,
who in sincerity of heart, in truth, and in spirit worship thee, endure for
ever, let their peace be secure, their tranquillity long, their prosperity
perpetual, their habitation quiet, and their health confirmed.

When they shall open their mouths wide in prayer, fulfill their requests,
whatsoever they shall ask in thy name, according to thy promise, give it.
Because they first seek the glory and prosperity of thy Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, let all other things be added unto them. Supply them
with the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth; when other Prodigals feed
upon husks, then feed them with the finest of the wheat. Let the Rocks yield
them honey, the Mountains Brass and Iron, let their pastures de clothed with
flocks, that they take a Psalm; and bring forth the Tabret, the merry Harp with
the Lute, Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

PSALM. LXXXII. (...).
THAT the Prophet might admonish and check the Judges of the earth about their
duty, he sets God in the midst of them, commanding that they do justice, and
^hreatning revenge for their injustice, assuring them, that he will rise one
day, and judge them.

Three parts of the Psalm. 1. The Prophets Proclamation, verse. 1 2. Gods
contestation with the Judges of the earth, from verse. 2. to 8. 3. The Prophets
prayer, that God would rise to judge, v. 8.


1. The first part. Gods pre^ence proclaimed in the Court.
The Prophet, as a Crier in a Court, proclaims first a very profitable
Doctrine, and lays a solid foundation for all justice: viz. That all Judges
remember, that as at an Assize the Judge sits in the midst of the Justices, so
God is present and President, God stands in the Congregation of the mighty,
he judges among the gods.

2. And this being laid for a foundation, he falls, in the person of God, to
contest with the Judges: The second part. His contestation with inferior
Judges. 1. He reproves them,
First reproving them, verse. 2. Then exhorting them to their duty, verse. 3, 4.
Lastly, proposes the event upon the neglect of justice, both to the Common
Wealth, verse. 5. and to themselves, verse. 6, 7.

1. He reproves them in the second verse, and that very sharply, as they
deserved. 1. For their judgment, that it was unjust. Ye judge unjustly. 2.
Vsque quo. For injustice.
How long? 3. Obstinacy in it.
Their partiality. (...). Ye accept the persont of the wicked.
2. Partiality.
He exhorts them to do their duty, which is double. 1. He exhorts to do their
duty.
Defend the poor and fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy. Do
right to every man. 2. Deliver the poor and needy. Rid them out of the hand of
the wicked. Be a shield to them,
3. Where this is not done, all is out of order. The Judges the cause of it,
either,
He acquaints us with the events which will follow where justice is not done.
In that Common Wealth, All the foundations of the earth are out of course. And
the Judges are the causes of it. In whom there are three foul defects. 1. The
first is, Ignorantia juris. They know not. 2. Neither will they understand.
Through ignorance. 2. Wilfulness. 3 Perverseness.
3. Their perverse resolution to go on their own way, without any respect had
to the Laws of God or man: They walk on still in darkness, and then it was no
wonder, that all the foundations of the earth should be out of course.

2. Their punishment, Death, yea though gods.
The other event was death and judgment, which was to fall upon their persons,
verse. 7. Which that they might take down the better, he brings it in with an
honorable Preface, that they might know he had an high esteem of their place
and persons,

I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the most high. Your
Ordination is from Heaven, your Power from God, your Office is his Creature.

But withal he would have them know, that they were but mortal gods, But mortal
gods.


1. Ye shall dye like men, ye shall dye as those that are no gods, that are de
plebe. 2. Ye shall fall as one of the Princes, as those whose death is
inglorious, their memories infamous and hateful, and after death you shall not
be happy, ye shall fall as Lucifer did. Mortal you are become, as Adam by your
sin, and you shall be deprived of immortality.
3. The last part is a prayer, The third part. He prays that God would be
Judge.
that since by injustice all the foundations of the earth be out of course, he
desires that God would take the matter to his own cognizance.

1. Arise, O Lord; He says not, You that are oppressed, 2. That he would sit
upon the Bench, and judge the earth. 3. He would amplify and enlarge his
Kingdom. For thou shall inherit all Nations.
The Prayer collected out of the eighty second Psalm.
O Almighty Lord, who art the fountain of all honor and power, and be thou the
Judge among our gods, that they judge thy people with equity, and thy
inheritance with righteousness. So the poor and fatherless shall be delended,
the poor and needy shall be delivered, and rid out of the violent hand of the
wicked man.

But, O God, such has been our ingratitude, that that power which was ordained
for our good and peace, is now become our greatest mischief, they judge
unjustly, they accept the persons of the wicked, they pronounce an unjust
sentence, and out of the scale of justice they weight unto us gall and
wormwood. All the foundations of our Land are out of course. For those who are
stepped into the Tribunals of justice, either are so ignorant, they do not know,
or so perverse, that they will not know and understand what is right. So
blinded they are either by honor, money, or malice, that they will not grow
wiser by thy admonitions, but walk on still in the darkness of their own heart.

Leave not, O Lord, thy people in the power of them who are blind and cannot,
or malicious, and will not understand their duty, but go about, for their own
ends, to overthrow the two Pillars of the Land, gods, and sons of the most
High, but have forgotten and dishonored thee, that raised them, and
discredited those places to which they are raised, bring them down, O Lord, and
make them know they are but men, that they shall dye as the meanest man, and be
brought to judgment. And that it they continue in their unjust and violent
ways,

Since then, O Lord, thou have set over us such tyrannical Lords, from whom we
can expect no justice, Arise thou in thy power, and judge the earth. Thou art
not now a God of the Jews only, but the Gentiles also; even we, that were not a
people, are become thy people, and thine inheritance, and therefore it belongs
to thee to exalt the Kingdom of thy Son. Come, O sweet Jesus, come quickly: And
as at thy first coming, thou did redeem thy people from that unjust
Oppressor, the Devil; and did establish thy Church to be governed by just
Laws, the execution of which thou have put into the hand of the Magistrate; so,
O Lord, come again, and by thy second coming, deliver us from the injustice and
violence of our Oppressors. And thou, who do render to every man according to
his works, call these tyrants to an account for the maladministration of thy
Laws. Render them, O Lord, sevenfold into their bosoms: So we thy people, and
sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever.

PSALM. LXXXIII. (...).
TO resolve this Psalm, there is no difficulty. For it branches it self into

These parts: 1. A short Ejaculation or Prayer, verse. 1. 2. A Complaint of the
enemies of Gods Church, which is the reason of his Prayer, from verse. 2. to 11.
3. A fearful Imprecation against them, from verse. 11. to the end.


1. The first part. An ardent Ejaculation.
The Prophet out of a holy impatience at the patience and long-suffering of
God, calls ardently and earnestly upon him, as appears by the ingemination of
the words, that he would be no longer patient at the affronts and insultations
of the Churches enemies. The cause was his own, not to be endured then longer.

Keep not thou silence,

2. The second part. His complaint of enemies.
And next he begins to Complain, which was the reason of his Petition. These
were enemies, 1. To the people of God. 2. To God himself, verse. 5. And then he
tells us, who they were, from verse. 6. to 9.

1. Their Characters.
1. They were Soldiers. They make a tumult. Their warlike fierceness is
signified by it. 2. They were arrogant and proud. They that hate thee, life up
their head. And will thou then be silent? 3. They are subtle men. They have
taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones,
those whom thou hidest under the shadow of thy wings. Thy pecul^^r, Exodus 19.5.
4. Their intent.
Their counsel broke out into action, and they encouraged one another in
mischief, Come, say they, let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
2. Which Confederacy and Conspiracy was not only against the people of God,
For they have consulted together with one consent, nemine dissentiente, The
Conspirators.
and are confederate against thee. 3. He gives us in a Catalogue of these
Conspirators. All the world against God and his Church. The Tabernacles of
Edom, and the Ismaelites: of Moab, and the Hagarens. Gebal, and Ammon, and
Amalek, the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire. Ashur also is joined with
them, they have helped the children of Lor. Selah.
3. And having discovered the men and their attempts, The third part. He prays
to God to take revenge on them.
he prays to God for revenge, which consisted in four particulars. 1. Their
fall and ruin. 2. Their persecution. 3. Their terror. 4. And their disgrace.
Which he illustrates by diverse similitudes. 1. Of a wheel, that easily runs
down a hill. 2. Of stubble driven away by the wind. 3. As wood burnt up by the
fire. 4. Of a flame that consumes the Mountains. 5. Of a tempest that throws
down all things before it.

1. Their ruin and fall, he would have it total, and exemplary. That their
ruin be total.
Do unto them as unto the Medianites, as to Sisera; as to Jabin at the brook of
Kison. Which perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth. Make them
and their Princes like Oreb and Zeb; yea, all their Princes as Zeba, and as
Zalmunna. Who have said, 2. And this their ruin he would have sudden and
violent, Sudden and violent.
as appears by the similitudes. 1. Precipitate them, whirl them down. O my God,
make them like a wheel: or unquiet in mind. 2. Remove them, as light things are
blown away by the wind. Make them as stubble before the wind. Terrible and
shameful.
3. Burn them as speedily, as the fire burns the wood: Or, as the flame sets
furs on fire on the Mountains.
3. Persecute them with thy tempest. 4. Make them afraid with thy storm. 5.
Fill their faces with shame.
These three parts of their punishment.

1. Flight. 2. Fear. Terror. 3. Shame, and Ignominy. The ends of his prayer,

And that the Prophet might not seem uncharitable in this bitter imprecation,
he now shows the ends why he thus prayed. These were two.

1. The first, That they might seek after God, in effect be converted. That
converted.
Do this to them, that they may seek thy name, O Lord. Or confounded.
Or as others conceive. Seek thy name merely out of a servile fear of Gods
vengeance, and contain their fury, not daring any further to attempt any thing
against the Church. Which the next verse confirms. Let them be confounded and
troubled for ever; yea, brought to utter destruction; or at least, so
enfeebled, that they may be said to perish. 2. The second, That thereby Gods
glory may be the more exalted, And Gods name glorified.
viz. That men may know, that thou whose name is Jehovah, art the most High
over all the earth, i. e. not Lord of the Jews only, but the Gentiles also. Vt
cognoscatur. Junius. That thy Eternity, Majesty, Power, may be acknowledged by
all men.
The Prayer collected out of the eighty third Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, Come, yea, their consultations and confederacies, They have
consulted together with one consent, and are confederate against thee; yea, so
far they have prevailed, that they have taken to themselves, and their own use,
all the houses of God in possession.

Wherefore, since thy enemies lift up their heads against thee, awake, Isreal's
safety, Edom, and the Ismaelites, against Moab and the Hagarens; against the
Ammonites and Amalekites, against the Philistines, and them of Tire, with all
their assistants: stir up thy strength, and come amongst us. Do unto these
enemies of thy Truth, Medianites, deliver them, and all their host, into the
hand of Gideon. Go out before them, as thou did before Barak, who overthrew
Sisera at the brook of Kison, and astonished the heart of Jabin King of Canaan,
when his whole Army perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth. Set
every man's sword against his fellow, as when thou fought'st for Israel against
Oreb and Zeeb. They have killed our brethren, even the sons of our mother, save
them not then alive, but tear their flesh with briars and thorns of the
Wilderness, as it happened to those who took part with Zeba and Zalmunna.

O my God, giddy in their counsels as a wheel; that is, always turning,
restless in their consciences as a wheel; that is,

Bring it so to pass, good God, that they may not only be frustrated of their
hopes, and ashamed of their counsels, and of their rebellion undertaken against
thy Truth and People: but that these proud, arrogant, and insolent men, who
gloried in their strength, and thought themselves invincible, become
contemptible, and despicable, their faces being so full of shame, that they
dare not look a good man in the face,

So shall other m^n take warning by their boldness, even for very fear they
shall seek thy Name, they shall come bending and bowing to thee to appease thy
anger. that thou alone, That thou art the only God, whom, all Superstitions,
and all false worship being rejected, they ought only to honor, only to serve,
only to obey in thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. LXXXIV. (...).
WHEN David composed this Psalm, he was enforced to be absent from the house of
God, and the holy Assembly of Gods people. In this Psalm then

The Prophet does, 1. Set forth his love to Gods house, and his desire to be
present, verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. Account those happy, who might continue in that
Assembly, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. 3. He prays to God for his restitution thither,
and sets down the causes, verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. 4. Yet he accounts himself happy,
because he trusts in God, verse. 12.


1. He begins with a pathetical Exclamation, as ravished with the beauty, The
first part. By a (...), he expresses his love to Gods house.
the excellency, the comforts which he once enjoyed in Gods house, which he
calls Gods Tabernacle.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts?

Which form is usual, when we conceive more than we can express: As, Quam bonus
Deus? O death, how bitter is thy remembrance? So that, How amiable? is as if he
had said, More amiable than I know which way to tell you.

2. And his desire to be present in it.
Then next in plainer terms he expresses his ardent affections to be present in
the house of God, to the Ministry and Service there done.

1. My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord. 2. My heart,
and my flesh, soul, and body, cries out for the living God.
The Ark of God, which was the sign of his presence, was so dear to him, that
he longs, faints, cries, heart, hands, eyes, tongue, all earnestly desire to be
present with it.

3. He laments his absence, He laments his absence from it.
(whether now forced to it by being present with his Armies abroad, or driven
away by Absolon) so that he accounts his case more miserable in this respect,
than some Birds, Sparrows and Swallows, that might build about the Temple.

Yea, the Sparrow has found her a house, thy house, by a Synecdoche. They may
nestle there, build there, sing there, be present there, but I may not, that is
my grief. They then upon the point, more happy than I.

O Lord God of hosts, my King, and my God. By which words he would move God to
pity.

1. O Lord God of hosts. That I acknowledge thee, now I am in Arms. 2. My King.
I a King over thy people, but thou a King over me. 3. My God, whom I serve, The
second part. For he accounts those only happy, that might be where the Ark was.
therefore I desire to be in the place of thy service, and where thou do most
gloriously administer thy Kingdom, i. e. in thy house.
2. In the second place, he pronounces them happy, who had free liberty
perpetually to live in that Assembly which is called the Church, whether they
did reside there, or were but in their way and journey thither.

1. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, viz. The Priests and Levites. And
that in four particulars.
1. Blessed they are, for thou in thy House, as the good Master of the Family,
There Gods dispensations to be expected.
do there dispense unto them all thy administrations, viz. all thy goods, thy
righteousness, the gifts of the Spirit, an inheritance of eternal life, etc. 2.
Dwellers there.
That dwell, continue, remain, not that come and look into it, and go out
presently from it. They must be Citizens, dwellers in it, not Tenants at will,
and Passengers, habitandi locum habeant, non divertendi non commorand^. 3. A
third part of their happiness consists in this, that they will do their duty.
They will be still praising thee. Which is a true Note of Gods Servants. There
perform their Duties of piety.
They will offer to God Invocation, Thanksgiving, Confession, they will vow to
propagate his Truth, and other duties of love and piety. 4. Blessed is the man,
There they look for an answer to their prayers.
whose strength is in thee. Who rely not so much in their external
performances in the Temple, as unto thy promises which thou have made to those
who worship thee sincerely in thy Temple.
2. And they also are happy, who though they cannot be present, yet desire it.
This is the happiness those enjoy that dwell in Gods house, and they are happy
also, who in their hearts are there, and have a desire, and are in their
journey, yea though in their way they encounter many difficulties. So says our
Prophet, 1. Blessed are they, in whose heart are the ways of them, that is,
who not in hypocrisy dwell there, or that trust in their external
performances, 2. Who passing through the Vale of Baca, make it a Well, the rain
also fill the Pools. And still ascending on going thither.
1. They pass. The Israelites in great numbers did ascend daily to Gods house.
2. They might, or often did pass through the Vale of Baca, or Bochim, the Vale
of Mulberries, a dry Land, and then they wanted water: or through Bochim, the
Valley of sorrow, and then they had tears to drink, and the rain filled the
Pools of their eyes. For many are the afflictions of the righteous: and yet for
all this, go on. 3. They pass from strength to strength, from Castle to Castle,
from Town to Town, from one degree of virtue to another, Till every one of them
in Zion appears before God. Nor length of the journey, nor weariness, nor
roughness of the way, nor difficulties, nor dangers in it, can discourage them,
on they go, till they come to Gods house in Zion. And are therefore, Blessed.


3. The third part. He begs protection.
To his desire to be present in this Assembly, he adds a Prayer, O Lord God of
hosts hear my prayer, give ear, O God of Jacob. Behold, O God our shield, of me
whom thou have anointed to be King. And that he may come again to Gods house.
He desires that the God of Armies would protect, defend, give Victory, be a
Buckler to him and his Army, and reduce them again, that they may do him
service in his house. And he gives his reason, For one day in thy house, is
better than a thousand, viz. out of it: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my God, For it is far more pleasant, more profitable; better it is.
Which he illustrates by an opposition of time, place, persons.

1. One day in Gods house, Reckoning of that day, better than a thousand.
to a thousand out of it. Abroad luxury, pleasure, vanity, ostentation, death.
In Gods house the contrary, therefore out-doors here is beter. I had rather be
a doorkeeper here, than, etc. 2. Gods house, to the tents of wicked doers. To
be a doorkeeper there, than a dweller elsewhere.
Abroad luxury, pleasure, vanity, ostentation, death. In Gods house the
contrary, therefore out-doors here is beter. I had rather be a doorkeeper
here, than, etc. 3. A doorkeeper, a Corite, to the Noblest dwellers. Abroad
luxury, pleasure, vanity, ostentation, death. In Gods house the contrary,
therefore out-doors here is beter. I had rather be a doorkeeper here, than,
etc.
And in the next verse he gives us a more solid reason for this his choice, His
reasons for it.


1. The first taken from the properties of God. For the Lord is a Sun, God the
Lord Protector.
and a Shield. 1. A Sun, he dispels darkness, illuminates, comforts, heats,
gives life, increase. 2. A Shield he is, (...). The Lord Protector of his
people.
2. The second from his Bounty, he gives the best gifts, Grace, A bountiful God.
and Glory. 1. Grace, for freely he adopts us for his Sons, and makes us heirs
of eternal life. 2. Glory in this life, for he raises to dignities here: and
glory in heaven.
3. From his Al-sufficiency, or rather Efficiency. All-sufficient.
For no good thing will he withold.
But that every man do not serve himself of these reasons, as supposing that
all these things belong to him, that God will be a Sun, a Shield to him, give
grace and glory, or withold no good thing from him: But efficient only to the
sincere.
No good thing he will withold from them that walk uprightly. Hypocrites
then, and back-sliders, may challenge none of these blessings.

1. They must walk. Go on constantly, and continue in their way. 2. They must
walk uprightly, in sincerity of heart, and not dissemble with God, if they mean
to have a portion of the good things he gives.
4. The close of the Psalm, is an Acclamation, O Lord God, The last part.
blessed is the man that trusts in thee. In which he tacitly answers an
Objection. An Acclamation, that the man is blessed who trusts in God.
which are exiled from thence. Yes, says David, blessed they may be, and are,
though they want that happiness. For all are blessed, who with a firm faith
rely and trust in God, though being detained by prisons, tyrants, exile, and
Schismatiques, they enjoy not the outward communion of the Church, because by a
true and solid confession of the Truth, they are still joined to the true
society of Saints.

The Prayer collected out of the eighty fourth Psalm.
O Almighty God, whose Throne is in the highest heavens,

O how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord God of hoasts? my heart cannot
conceive, my tongue cannot express the content I have formerly taken to be
present in these Assemblies. And therefore now being exiled from thence, to
appear before the face of the living God. My present condition presents to my
memory my own unhappiness, which is in this respect, below the Sparrow and
Swallow, they can make their approaches to the walls of thy Temple, they there
can build their nests, they there can hatch and lay their young, but I am not
so happy: Thou art the Lord of hosts, who now do protect me in battle, thou
art my King, I a King over thy people, and thou a King over me. Thou art my
God, whom I have always served, and yet at this time I am not admitted to the
place of thy service, where I may publicly acknowledge thee to be all these.

O happy men, for there, as a good Master of the Family, thou dispensest to
them the bread of eternal life. Thou suppliest unto them matter of praise, and
they again are as ready to praise thee, in which constists the chief pleasure
and selicity of man. So often as they meet there, they will invocate thy name,
offer thanksgiving, confess their sins, and give glory to God, vow they will to
propagate thy Truth, and in reverence and fear, do all acts of piety and
devotion.

These are happiest, but those are also happy, that have a destre and a liberty
to ascend thither. till we appear before God in Zion, and find that Majesty and
mercy, which we so earnestly long for, and seek. For whatsoever happiness we
are capable of in this life, we know it is to be obtained in the pious
Assemblies of thy Saints.

O Lord God of hosts, Thou who art our Shield and Protector, behold me with a
serene countenance, and when I shall lift up my eyes unto thee, and for his
sake look upon me and thy people with mercy, and bring us back again to thy
house. Grant that the love of thy house, may be to us, that which thou
desire, that we may think the time of one day spent in it, better than
thousands in doing our own pleasure;

O Lord, be unto me a Shield and a Sun. A Sun to illuminate us: A Shield to
protect us. Dispell our darkness, comfort and warm our hearts with thy light,
increase us with thy sweetest influence, and defend us by thy power. Give us
grace, and adopt us for thy Sons, and at last bestow upon us eternal glory.
Thou have promised to deny no good thing to those who walk before thee in
simplicity and integrity. Enable us then, O God, to walk in thy ways with a
pure and an honest heart. For then we may be comforted with this hope and
assurance,

PSALM. LXXXV. (...).
MYstically this whole Psalm is a Prophecy concerning the redemption of
Mankind from the Tyranny of sin and Satan, by the coming of Christ, prefigured
by the deliverance of the Jews, either from Egypt, or rather from Babylon,
after which they fell again into grievous troubles under Antiochus.

Three parts of the Psalm. 1. An Acknowledgment of Gods formet mercies, ver. 1,
2, 3. 2. A Petition upon that ground, that he would still do the like, 4, 5, 6,
7. 3. A profession of obedience, and an advice to continue in it, ver. 8. that
men may be partakers of the promises, both spiritual, 9, 10, 11. and temporal,
ver. 12. which shall be performed to those who keep in the ways of God, ver.
13.


1. In the three first verses, A Commemoration of Gods mercies.
the Prophet makes a Commemoration of Gods mercies to his people; of which the
Fountain, is, his good will and favor; Lord, Thou bast been favorable; of
which the effects were, temporal and spiritual. The first part.


1. Temporal: Thou have been favorable to thy Land, Temporal.
freed them from the Babylonian yoke. 2. Spiritual; which consisted in two
things. 1. Justification: Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people,
Spiritual.
and covered all their sins. 2. Reconciliation; Thou have taken away all thy
wrath, and have turned thy self from the fierconess of thy anger.

2. And now upon the experience of these former mercies, The second part. Upon
this favor, he prays.
the Prophet commends a new Petition, the sum whereof is briefly this, Thou
have been favorable to us before, and therefore we hope that thou will be so
now; this is the consequent of the former antecedent, and upon it in confidence
he prays.

Turn us then, O God, our Savior, etc. to the 8th. verse; That God would
assure those mercies.
what was acknowledged before in the Commemoration of the benefits.

1. Thou have turned away the captivity; Restore us then, turn us then, or
return to us, O God our Savior. 2. Thou have been reconciled, be again
reconciled to us: Thou have taken away all thy wrath, etc. ver. 3. Now cause
thine anger toward us to cease; Will thou be displeased at us for ever? Will thou draw out thine anger to all Generations? This is contrary to thy nature,
who art slow to anger. 3. Thou have brought us back, and so revived our hearts,
ver. 1. And will thou not revive us again, by delivering us from our present
calamities, that thy people may rejoice in thee? 4. Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people, etc. ver. 2. Show us then thy mercy, O Lord, and grant
us thy salvation. Save us in mercy, first from sins, the cause of our
sufferings, and then from the punishment,
3. And that the Church might prevail in her Petition, she now promises
obedience, and to wait upon God; I will hear what the Lord God will speak: The
third part.
As if she had said, For which he waits.
why do I expostulate thus with my God? why do I thus complain, I will attend
to his Word, and hear what he will say; for he is a trusty Counselor in all
our afflictions, Being assured that God will turn all to the best.


1. For he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints: Though he
begins to his people in the cup of his Cross, yet he keeps the best wine till
the last, And speak peace to his people.
2. If they hear, I say; for he speaks upon a condition, that they be not
Backsliders, the Prophet puts in a Caveat for that; But let them not turn again
to folly.
And this the Prophet confirms in the next verse by a vehement asseveration.

1. Surely his salvation; i. e. freedom from all dangers, is nigh them that
fear him. 2. And the end is, That glory may dwell in our land; i.e. That our
Land may be in a happy condition, enjoying peace, and the fruits of peace,
plenty, laws, liberty, and quietness; for glory here is opposed to devastation.
And this the Prophet amplifies by an enumeration of the consequences of peace:
The consequences of peace.
Inter arma silent leges, silent virtutes; Cruelty the opposite to mercy,
falsehood and error which is opposed to Truth; Injustice the opposite to
righteousness bears all the sway; but when God shall speak peace to his people,
all will be contrary.

1. Mercy and Truth are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each
other: A combination of mercy, truth, justice: peace.
These virtues shall be in great honor, viz. Mercy and Truth, Righteousness
and the study of peace and concord. Justice and peace kiss; for there is such a
league betwixt these two, that where peace is made without justice, it is not
like long to continue; and Mercy and Truth must meet, for it is no mercy to
spare error and falsehood. 2. Truth shall flourish out of the Earth; i. e.
Because men shall be lovers and observers of Truth in their bargains,
contracts, leagues, words and promises, they shall make the earth flourishing,
and the land where peace dwells happy. 3. And righteousness has looked down
from Heaven: For as the rain that descends from Heaven does make the earth
fruitful, so the justice that comes from Heaven, Gods justice is that which
will make a people happy; for this will teach to love thy Neighbor as thy
self: Quod tibi hoc alteri; which the statutes of Omri will not do. 4. Tim.
4.8. 1. They shall enjoy spiritual blessings: For the Lord shall give that
which is good. 2. And temporal; And our Land shall yield her increase.

4. The last part. Our duties for this blessing.
In the last verse, for these mercies, he sets down our Duty. 1. Righteousness
shall go before him, i.e. God: His Saints shall walk before him in holiness and
righteousness. 2. And shall set us in the way of his steps; that is, shall
teach us to walk constantly and happily in the ways of his Commandments all
the days of our life, Luke 1.72.


How this Psalm is aptly applied to Christ and his Kingdom, both by all Ancient
and Modern Expositors, I leave it to be searched in the Authors themselves,
because the Application would be tedious, and is not so consonant to my intent.

The Prayer collected out of the eighty fifth Psalm.
O Blessed Lord God, we have been beset with many troubles, Thou have forgiven
the iniquity of thy people; infinite are our transgressions, and yet Thou have
covered all our sins; Though we have been slaves of the flesh, and Captives of
the Devil, yet Thou-hast taken away thy wrath,

These experiences we have had of thy love, these pawns and pledges of thy
mercy; therefore, O merciful God, we are bold to approach thy Throne, and beg
of thee with an humble heart, that thou, who art the God of our salvation, and
would also be turned unto us, and cause thine anger, which we have justly
kindled against us, to cease. What, have thou changed thy self, as I may so
say, into another nature; so that thou who have proclaimed thy self to be
patient and long-suffering, passing by sins, and forgiving transgressions; will thou be angry with us for ever? Return, return, O Lord, receive us again to thy
favor, revive us again by the favor of thy countenance, and grant us thy
salvation.

Make us, who have been heretofore contumacious and rebellious against thee, to
hearken to what our Lord God will speak; for then we are assured,

Put into us the bowels of thy mercy, and make us studious of Truth,

Godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to come; That thou,
Lord, may give us what is good, and our land may yield her increase. Thou
have delivered us from the hands of our enemies, O stir up our minds to be
thankful unto thee,

PSALM. LXXXVI. (...).
DAVID in this Psalm being in trouble, prays unto God for continuance in
grace, and in an innocent life; and complaining of the insolence of his
Persecutors, prays for protection, and some token of Gods goodness. This Psalm
then is a continued Petition, and according to the various Arguments he uses
to persuade it, it may be divided into

These four parts. 1. The first, is a Petition for safety, drawn from his own
person, the Petitioner, from ver. 1. to 5. 2. The second, a quickening of the
same Petition, from the Person and Nature of God, from ver. 5. to 14. 3. The
third, taken from the quality of his Adversaries, ver. 14. 4. A conjunction of
all these three: The first, ver. 15. The second, ver. 16. The third, ver. 17.


1. His Petition. The first part. The reasons from himself.
His prayer is varied by many forms; Bow down thine ear, hear me, preserve my
soul, be merciful unto me, rejoice the soul of thy servant, etc. and each form
has a reason annexed.

1. Bow down thy ear, hear me; Ratio: For I am poor and needy; i. e. destitute
of other help. 2. Preserve my soul; Ratio: For I am holy: i.e. pious and
studious of holiness, ready to serve thee. 3. O thou my God, save thy servant;
Ratio: That trusts in thee, relies on thy help, and for that exposed to
dangers. 4. Be merciful unto me, O Lord; Ratio: For I cry unto thee daily. I
cry and call without intermission. 5. Rejoice the soul of thy servant; comfort
me with thy presence, and sense of thy favor; Ratio: For unto thee, O Lord, I
life up my soul; i. e. with great desire I long after thee.
And all these Reasons persuade to Audience, from the person of the Supplicant,
who because he was in distress, and yet studious to please his God, did rely
upon God, and daily cry, and earnestly desire the sense of his favor,
therefore he did lift up his soul to him. The second part. A continuance in his
Petition from the nature of God.


2. And yet he continues his Petition, from the consideration of the Nature and
Person of God to whom he prays; Hear me, and turn away thy wrath.

1. For thou, O Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to
all that call upon thee; 2. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee;
Ratio: For thou will answer me; it runs thus, Thou art merciful to them that
call upon thee, ver. 5. I call, None like to him in his works.
therefore thou will answer. 3. There is none among the gods like unto thee, O
Lord, neither are there any of their works like thy works:
And this the Prophet amplifies in the two next verses; as if he had said, the
event does show, That there is none like thee, no works like thy works; for, 1.
All Nations, which now worship Idols, shell come; i. e. be converted, and
worship thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name. 2. For thou do great and
wondrous things (of which, the conversion of the Gentiles is one) Thou art God
alone.


And upon this Reason, Therefore he begs to be governed by his Word and Spirit.
that none is like God, none comparable to him in his works: 1. He falls to
prayer again, and first begs of God that he may be governed by his Word and
Spirit, for then he would be an obedient servant: Teach me thy way, For which
he professes to be thankful.
2. And secondly, professes he would be a thankful servant; I will praise
thee, For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from
the lowest Hell; i. e. from the greatest troubles. And upon both these, his
obedience and thankfulness, he pleads to be heard.


3. And yet he presses another Argument, viz. The third part. He presses his
prayer from the nature of his enemies,
The person and quality of his Adversaries; it is but Reason that God hear him,
for he was beset with enemies; and these were, proud men: 2. Potent men: 3.
Ungodly men.

1. Proud they were; The proud have risen up against me. 2. Potent they were,
and many of them: The Assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul. 3.
Ungodly men, Atheists, Scorners: They have not set thee before them.
4 And now he has recourse again to his former Arguments, The fourth part. He
amplifies his former Argument.
but amplifies them.

1. First, drawn from the Nature of God, ver. 5. But thou, O Lord, art a God
full of compassion, and gracious, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy and
truth. 2. The second, from his own condition, ver. 1, 2. O turn unto me, and
have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant, i.e. one born within
thy Covenant, and of a poor humble mother. 3. The third, from the quality of
his Adversaries, that they which were Atheists, might see Gods hand in his
deliverance, and confounded by it.
Show me a token for good; i.e. That they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed, because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

The Prayer collected out of the eighty sixth Psalm.
O Lord, great in Power, infinite in Majesty, so great is our misery and
poverty, and so destitute we are of help, Bow down thine ear to our prayers,
and condescend to our requests: Be merciful unto us, O Lord, who every day call
and cry to thee: Rejoice the grieved and sad souls of thy servants, who
renouncing all worldly helps,

Give ear, O Lord, to our prayer, and attend to the voice of our supplications;
if not for our sake, if not out of the consideration of our present miseries,
yet for thine own; be to us now, what thou have always been, and always wilt
be: Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, This, Lord, is the day of our
trouble, a day of darkness and gloominess, and in this we call upon thee; Lord,
hear us, and according to thy wonted mercy, receive our Petitions.

O good God, be propitious, for if thou will, thou can relieve us, among men,
some would, but cannot; some can, but will not help: come and bow, and worship
before thee, and magnify and glorify thy Name; for thou do great and
wondrous things,

O God, at this time, because we have been ungrateful to thee for what thou
have done, and all they imagine, is to take away our lives, and thy worship,
not without a great and high contempt of thy Name: Turn thee then unto us,

O Lord, teach us the way in which we are to go, and we will walk in thy Truth;
unite our hearts close unto thee, to fear thy Name; show some token of thy
favor at last to us, that they which hate us, may see it, and be afraid; let
them see it openly, That thou, Lord, have helped us, and comforted us.

So shall we praise thee,

PSALM. LXXXVII. (...).
THIS Psalm is short, but sweet; for it contains many excellent privileges of
the Church of God, of which every one must be a Member that hopes for
salvation; whosoever was the Author, it was his purpose to excite men to be in
love with the Assemblies of Gods Saints; and to that purpose the dignity and
amplitude of the Church is set forth in this Psalm; and the notes of her beauty
and perfection may well serve for the Analysis.

1. The Church commended. 1. For the foundation, laid on a holy Mountain.
First, the Church is here commended for her foundation, the Author of it is
God, it is his foundation, and it is surely laid, not in the sand, but upon a
Mountain, and no common Mountain neither, but a consecrated place; laid it is
in the holy Mountains. His foundation is in the holy Mountain: No question the
Prophet alludes to the hill of Zion, From Gods love to her.
For the Law was to come out of Zion. 2. From the predictions that went of her.
far beyond that of any other Assembly: The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more
than all the dwellings of Jacob. 3. Now besides the commendation it has from
the builder, which was God, and his free love to it, From the increase of it,
by the access of the Gentiles.
Isaiah, Haggai, Saint John, who not. Glorious things are sprken of thee, Thou
City of God. Selah. 4. And one of those glorious things foretold by the
Prophets, was the great increase and amplitude of the Church, Gentiles; even
those Nations which were the greatest enemies to Gods people, should become
friends and Citizens of this City; even the Egyptians, Babylonians, Tyrians,
Aethiopians, in effect all the Gentiles, of what language, Country soever. 1.
I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me, i. e. among my
friends and family; Behold Phylistia and Tire with Aethiopia; some of all
Nations are come into my family; there is one Fold, one Shepherd. 2. This man
was born there; this man, whom you now see a Citizen of Zion, was an Alien, he
was born there, in Egypt, Babylon, etc.
5. But now having renounced his Country, and his fathers house, Zion. Vir and
Vir, From her continuance for ever.
(...). This and that man was born, regenerate, and become a new man in her;
Here he received his adoption, and the earnest of the Spirit. 6. Farther yet,
the felicity of this City shall in this far exceed all other, From her free
Denizons, whose names are
that whereas they fall to decay, and perish, this shall our-last all time. The
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. For the most highest shall confirm
and est ablish her. Eni^ll'd.
7. A seventh Prerogative of the Church, is, That God agit Censum, Jew and
Gentile, bond, nor free, all are one in Christ Jesus. The Lord shall count,
when he writes up the people, That this man, this cast-off Gentile, was burn
there. Be as free a Denizon, and have all the privileges and prerogatives of
this City, as the natural Jew. 8. Another Prerogative of these Citizens, is,
And they shall enjoy a perpetual Solemnity.
That they shall enjoy a perpetual Solemnity, grief and sorrow shall cease, and
with Songs and instruments of Music they shall sound forth Gods praises. As
well the siagers, as players on instruments, shall be there. 9. Lastly, He
concludes the Psalm with an excellent Epiphonema, viz. For that in her all good
is to be found.
All my springs are in thee. Here are the fountains of living water. Here are
to be found the hidden treasures of all knowledge. Here the waters, that will
refresh a thirsty soul, and a fainting spirit. Here all comforts, all content.
The waters that are muddy and troubled in other streams, in this are as clear
as Cristal. It Is Virgo aqua.
A Prayer collected out of the eighty seventh Psalm, for the Catholic Church.
O Lord Iesas Christ, that by thy Almighty power made all creatures, both
visible and invisible: that by thy wisdom have disposed all things in a comely
order, and now do govern them: that by thy unspeakable goodness yet do
preserve, protect, and promote all actions and successes: who by thy mercy
do restore what is decayed, renew what is fallen, and raisest the dead:
Vouchsafe to cast thy eye upon, and view with a pleasing countenance, thy
well-beloved Spouse thy Church, which thou have purchased with thy blood, and
betrothed to thy self in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving kindness, and in mercies. Look upon her with that amiable and merciful
face, wherewith thou pacifiest all things in heaven and earth.

This is that new City, that new Jerusalem, which thou have founded upon the
Mountains of holiness; Thy holy Apostles and Prophets were at thy command, the
chief Laborers in the building of it, and all men since as living stones, are
built upon their Doctrine. Zion, and make choice of it for thy peculiar
habitation, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

Thou see, Lord, with what winds, with what storms this thy holy City is
assaulted, there be who are ready and bent to raze it oven to the foundations.
Have mercy therefore upon the inhabitants of this City, O Lord; and thou who
have promised to protect these Walls, give the glory to thine own name. And
suffer not those thy enemies, who have not known thee, or do envy thy glory,
Down with it, down with it to the ground, yet do thou who art the most High,
establish and confirm it, and never suffer the gates of Hell to prevail against
it.

Many Glorious things are spoken of thee, The Gates are of pearls, the streets
of gold, the light in it beyond that of the Sun, so that the glory of it was
far to exceed the old Temple. Rahab and Babylon enter by them, and those, who
were born in Philistia, and Tire with Ethiopia, be regenerated and born again
in her of water, and of the Holy Ghost.

When thou shall enrole and write up the names of thy Citizens in the book of
life, Israel, was born in thy house. And declare it to the whole world at the
day of judgment, that his portion shall be with thy natural children.

In the mean time establish unity and concord betwixt all Nations,

In Zion are the Springs of living water. In Zion are to be found the hid
treasures of all knowledge. In Zion alone are the clear fountains of all
content, all joy. Lord, evermore refresh our thirsty souls with this water,
enrich out souls with this treasure. Affect us with some degree of this joy
while we remain in this City below, and give us full draughts of it when we
shall be translated into that heavenly Jerusalem, which is above, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
THIS present Psalm expresses to the life the sad case of an afflicted, and a
troubled soul, complaining to God upon the vehemence of the disease, and sense
of death, that he could feel no comfort.

Four parts of this Psalm. 1. A Petition, verse. 1, 2. 2. The cause of this
Petition, the misery he was in, which he describes, from verse. 3. to 9. 3. The
effect which this his miserable condition wrought upon him, which was, 1. A
special Prayer, verse. 9, 13. 2. An expostulation with God for deliverance,
verse. 10, 11, 12.
4. A grievous Complaint, from verse. 14. to 18.


1. The first part. His Petition grounded on four Arguments.
The Prophet offers his Petition, but before he commenceth it, he premiseth
four Arguments that may persuade the admittance of it.

1. His confidence and reliance on God. O Lord God of my salvation. 2. His
earnestness to speed. I have cried. 3. His assiduity in it. Day and night. 4.
Yea, and that sincerely. Before thee.
And then he tenders his request for audience. Let my prayer come before thee,

2. And then next he sets forth the pitiful condition he was in, The second
part.
that thereby he might move God to take compassion, which he amplifies diverse
ways. The sad condition he was in.


1. From the weight and variety of his troubles, many they were, and pressed
him to death. For my soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh to the
grave. 2. From the danger of death in which he was, 1. That he was Moribundus,
no hope of life in him, even by the estimate of all men. I am counted with them
that go down to the pit; I am as a man that has no strength. 2. That he was
plane mortuus, but as a dead man. Free among the dead. Freed from all the
business of this life, as far separate from them, as a dead man. 3. Yea, dead
and buried. Like the slain, that lie in the grave: whom thou remembrest no
more, i.e. to care for in this life, and they are cut off from thy hand, i.e.
thy providence, thy custody, as touching matters of this life.
3. And yet he farther amplifies his sad condition by two Similitudes. Which he
amplifies by two Similitudes.
1. Of a man in some deep, dark Dungeon. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit,
in darkness, in the deeps: As was Jeremiah, Cap. 37. 2. Of a man in a Wrack at
Sea, that is compassed with the waves, Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou
have afflicted me with all thy waves. Vndaque impellitur unda. The recourse of
his troubles was perpetual, one no sooner gone, but another succeeded.
2. And to add to this his sorrow, his friends, And over and above, his friends
afforded him no comfort: Which he amplifies by an Auxesis.
(whose visits in extremity use to alleviate the grief of a troubled soul) even
these proved perfidious, and came not at him; He had no comfort from them.
Which was Gods doing too, the more was his grief. The auxesis is here very
elegant. 1. Thou have put away my acquaintance far from me. Thou. 2. Thou have
made me an abomination to them. No less, an abomination. 3. I am shut up, I
cannot come forth. As a man in prison, I cannot come at them, and they will not
come to me.

3. The effect of which grievous affliction, was threefold. 1. The third part.
The effects this wrought on him.
An internal grief and wasting of the body. 2. An ardent affection in prayer.
And 3. An expostulation with his God.

1. My eye mourns by reason of affliction. An evidence it is, A wasting of the
body.
that my eye droops and fails. For when the animal and vital spirits suffer a
decay, the eye will quickly, by her dimness, deadness, and dullness, discover
it. 2. It produced an ardent affection, a continuance, A fervency in prayer.
and assiduity in prayer, which is here made evident by the adjuncts. 1. His
voice. I have called daily upon thee. It was, 1. Clamor. 2. Assiduns. 2. By the
extension of his hands. I have stretched out my hands to thee. Men use to do so
when they expect help, when they look to receive, whence we usually say, Lend
me thy hand.

3. His expostulation with God.
The third effect was, an expostulation with his God, in which he presses God
to spare his life, from the inconvenience that might thereby happen, viz. that
thereby he should be disenabled to praise God, and celebrate his name, as he
was bound, and did desire to do, among the living. An Argument used before,
Psalm. 6. and 30. This Argument, though it savours too much of humane frailty,
(...).
yet he thought thereby to move God, who above all things, is jealous of his
own glory, which he conceived in his death, would suffer loss, and therefore he
asks,

1. Will thou show wonders among the dead? That is, My desire is, that which
ought to be of every pious man, to set forth thy honor, which cannot be done,
if I now go to the grave, except by some miracle I should be raised from thence.

2. For, Shall the dead arise again, and praise thee? It Is the living, the
living that shall set forth thy power, thy goodness, thy fidelity in keeping
thy promises, to the sons of men. The dead, as dead, cannot do this, and the
dead return not from the grave to do it, except by miracle.

3. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in
destruction? Such is the grave, a place of Oblivion, for Abraham is ignorant of
us. The goodness and faithfulness of God, which he makes known to his Church in
this life, are not known, nor can be declared by the dead, the living see them,
the living have experience of them, and therefore he desires his life may be
spared for that end, lest if he dye now, that faculty, ability should be taken
from him. He should be able no longer to resound the praise of God, which is
the true end, that any man ought to desire life.

4. The fourth part.
And so he returns to his Complaint, and repeats again what he had said before,
and almost in the same words. And gives three instances.

1. He repeats his complaint.
He gives an instance in his prayer. But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, He
prayed, he cried, That God seemed not to hear him.
earnestly, early, not drowsily, not sleepily, for he did prevent God. He
prayed, and would continue in prayer, and yet all was in vain. 2. He asks why
it should be so.
Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? Even the
best of Gods Servants, have been brought to that strait, that they have not had
a sense of Gods favor: But conceived themselves neglected, deserted by him,
and discountenanced. 3. verse. 4, That he is afflicted, which he aggravates
(...).
5, 6, 7. I am afflicted, and ready to dye. Which he does here exaggerate. 1.
From the time and continuance of it; It was a very long grief, for he had borne
it even from his youth up. 2. From the cause. It proceeded not from some
outward and humane cause, that might have been borne and helped. But it was an
affliction sent by God, Thy terrors have I suffered. It came from a sense of
Gods wrath. 3. From an uncomfortable effect. It wrought in his soul, amazement,
unrest, a perpetual trouble, astonishment. Thy terrors have I suffered with a
troubled mind: I am distracted with them. And he amplifies this wrath by the
former Similees, And amplifies by the former Simile of Waves.
verse. 7. Of Waves, and water.

1. Thy fierce wrath goes over me: as waves over a man's head at Sea. Thy
terrors have cut me off, cut off my life as a Weavers Thrum. 2. They came round
about me like water. 2. Daily like water. 3. They compassed me about, Simul,
together, as if they conspired my ruin, there were many of them, All thy
waves, verse. 7.
4. His third instance, which is the same, verse. 8. And by the perfidiousness
of his friends.
The perfidiousness and desertion of his friends. (...). A loving friend is
some comfort in distress, but this he found not. Lover and friend have thou put
far from me. And mine acquaintance into darkness. They appear no more to me, to
give me any counsel, help, or comfort, than if they were hid in perpetual
darkness. Tempora cum fiunt nubila, solus ero^.
(...).


The Prayer collected out of the eighty eighth Psalm.
O Merciful God, the sole Author of my salvation, day and night have I cried
before thee,

For my soul is so filled and overwhelmed with troubles, and my life draws
nigh to the grave. I am accounted in all men's judgment, for a dead man, my
strength is so little, or none at all,

O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me, make haste to help me, O Lord; O
spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be no
more seen. For will thou show wonders to the dead? and shall any raise the
dead, that they should sound forth thy praises among the living?

Experience I have, to them I am become an abomination, they stand all afar
off, and their faces are, as it were, wrapped up in darkness, and will thou also,
O my God, hide thy face from me? yea, I have been so amazed and astonished with
them, that I have been even distracted, and ready to despair. In me there has
appeared manifest signs of thy displeasure, for thou have laid me in the lowest
pit, and imprisoned me in darkness, so thy fierce wrath goes over me, it lies
hard upon me, and I am afflicted with all thy storms,

My eye mourns, Lord, then hear my err, that I daily present unto thee; Turn
from thy fierce anger, and show me again the light of thy countenance. Deliver
me from these thy terrors, from the grave, from this death, and I will magnify
thy name and mercy among the living. O Lord, give a gracious answer to these my
sighs and prayers, stand not far off for ever; Forsake me not in my distress,
but make haste to help. For thou alone art the God of my salvation, if thou
leave me, I must perish. Wherefore, good Father, succor me, and pardon my sin,
which has brought this thy just indignation upon me, for the merits of thy
dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ my Lord. And thou, O sweet Savior, which thy
self have suffered, and wast for my sake tempted, be a merciful and faithful
High Priest to me in things pertaining to God, make reconciliation for my sins,
and succor me that am tempted. Amen.

PSALM. LXXXIX.
IN this Psalm the Prophet praises God, and sets forth his goodness and
faithfulness, particularly, that he made an everlasting Covenant with David and
his seed. In which the stability and perpetuity of Christ's Kingdom, of which
the Kingdom of David was but a Type, is excellently described and foretold.

The parts of this Psalm, are these. 1. The Sum, Pith, and Argument of the
whole Psalm, viz. the Loving Kindness and truth of God, verse. 1, 2. 2. The
particular instance of Gods goodness and truth in making a Covenant with David,
verse. 3, 4. 3. A Doxology, containing the praise of God for his wonders,
faithfulness, power, providence, justice, judgment, mercy, truth, from verse.
5. to 15. 4. The Happy estate of Gods people, from verse. 15. to 19. 5. A
special example of Gods goodness toward his Church, exemplified in David, but
truly verified in Christ, from verse. 19. to 28. 6. How David's posterity should
be dealt with upon their disobedience, from verse. 28. to 38. 7. A Complaint, or
Expostulation upon the contrary events, where he does deplore the torn estate
of the Judaical Kingdom, from verse. 38. to 47. 8. A Petition for mercy and
restoration, from verse. 47. to 51. 9. An Epiphonematical conclusion, verse. 52.
blessing God for the hope he has in his favor and help in all estates.


1. The Breviary of the Psalm is set down in the first verse, and amplified by
the reason in the second. The first part. The Sum of the Psalm, Gods Mercies.
Thus he begins.

1. I will sing. Chant, set forth in a Song. The fittest way to express our joy
for any thing: so best inculcated, so best remembered, so best delivered to
others to remember. 2. Of which David will sing.
Of the mercies, plurally, for they are many. And his Song should be of all. 3.
For ever. Intentionally, though not actually: for as a wicked man, could he
live always, would always sin: so a good man, could he live always, would
always sing the mercies of the Lord. 2. Or if ever be joined to Mercies, it is
his everlasting Mercies. 4. With my mouth I will make known thy faithfulness
from generation to generation. With my mouth, while I have a being, I will make
known; and when I have no being, I will commit them to writing, Ut sciat haec
aetas, posteritasque legate.
His reason for it, is, because Gods mercy is everlasting, Because his mercy is
everlasting.
and therefore fit to be the subject of an everlasting Song.

1. For I have said. Set down this for a certain position, 2. Mercy shall be
built up for ever. It Is not exhausted in one age, but as a house built on a
strong foundation, it shall stand firm, and be perceived age after age. 3. Thy
faithfulness shall thou establish in the very heavens. As is thy mercy, so is
thy faithfulness, perpetual, as the heavens, in which is found no change.
2. And for the proof of Gods goodness and truth, The second part. The
instance, the Covenant.
he produces an instance in his Covenant made with David: Where, by a
Prosopopeia, he brings in God speaking.

1. I have made a Covenant with my chosen. It was not Merit then, 2. I have
sworn. Faelices nos, quorum causa Deus jurat. To David my servant. And the
Covenant and Oath is extant, 2 Samuel 7.11. 3. And the tenor of the Covenant,
is, Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy Throne to all
generations. Thy seed, signally, which is true of Christ only, who was of the
seed of David, to whom the Lord gave the Throne of his father David, Luke 1.32,
33.
who was to reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end. The words then are not to be understood of David's temporal
Kingdom, but of the seed of David; that is, Christ's spiritual Kingdom, for that
was to be established for ever.
3. And now what the Prophet undertook in the first verse, he performs; The
third part. Of this all good men will sing.
for at the fifth verse his Doxology begins. The person is only changed; and
that to advantage. For there he spoke of himself, I will sing. Here he says it
shall be done by others, The heavens shall praise.

1. Some, by the heavens, understand the Church, and the Preachers in the
Church. Heavens, Angels.


2. Others, the Angels, and blessed spirits in heaven. Both are true, and of
both it may be well affirmed. O Lord, the heavens shall praise thy wondrous
works. Thy faithfulness also in the Congregation of Saints.

2. The Subject of the Heavens, and the Angels, and Saints praise, are, The
Subject of their Song.
1. Gods wondrous works, and his Truth. In general, viz. his making a Covenant
with David, in taking an Oath to perform it, His Works, his Truth.
and his faithfulness in keeping it. For it is a wonder, that so great a
Majesty should so far condescend.


And now he sings praise to this Majesty, setting forth the power of it, His
Majesty, to whom none to be compared,
and that in three respects.

1. By way of comparison, in the 6, 7, 8, verses, viz. That there is nor Angel
in heaven, nor Monarch in earth his Peer. For who in the heaven can be
compared to thee, O Lord? Celestial Spirits, can be likened to the Lord? Which
is so true, that the very Angels fear and reverence his Majesty, and ought to
do it. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of his Saints, and to be had
in reverence of all them that are about him. And because this should be always
fixed in our memory, he comes over it again, verse. 8. O Lord God of hosts, who
is strong like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee?
2. No such Agent or Governor.
By his Agency in governing the world, as for example, First, The Sea. 1. Thou
rulest the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof arise, Rahab, i. e. the
Egyptian Pharaoh in pieces, as one that is slain. Thou have scattered thine
enemies with a strong arm, in the Red Sea. 2. The heavens are thine, the earth
also is thine.
3. No Creator, but he alone.
By his Creation of all things. As for the world and fullness thereof, Tabor and
Hermon, i. e. East and West shall rejoice in thy name. And then he concludes
this part of the Majesty and Power of God, with this Epiphonema.
2. The Subject of their praise, is also his Attributes.
The other part of the praise, which both the Prophet and the Angels sing to
Gods honor, is taken from his Attributes summed up in the 14. verse. Justice
and judgment are the habitation of his throne, mercy and truth shall go before
his face. He presents God as a great King sitting in his Throne; Basis of which
is Justice and Judgment. 2. The Attendants, Mercy and Truth. 1. Justice, which
defends his Subjects, and does every one right. 2. Judgment, which restrains
Rebels, and keeps off injuries. 3. Mercy, which shows compassion, pardons,
supports the weak. 4. Truth, that performs whatsoever he promises.

4. The fourth part.
And in regard that God is powerful, just, merciful, faithful, he takes an
occasion to set out the happy condition of Gods people,

Blessed are the people, In which rejoicing, his people are happy diverse ways.
that know the joyful Sound: do know that God is present with them, and his
Kingly Majesty is at hand to protect them. The phrase is taken from Moses. For
the Law was given by sound of Trumpet. The calling of the Feasts, by sound of
Trumpet. At that sound they removed. At that sound they assembled. Balaam said,
Clangor Regis, The sound of a King is among them. Happy then are the people,
that know the joyful sound, God present, their King speaking, ruling,
defending, pardoning them.

That they are Happy, the effects do evince: which are, 1. They shall walk in
the light of thy countenance, i. e. Though beset with troubles, yet they shall
walk confidently, being assured of Gods favor. 2. In thy name shall they
rejoice all the day long. Their joy is firm. 3. In thy righteousness shall they
be exalted. They shall get a name, strength. In their Union and Communion with
God they shall be happy.


Confident then, joyful, and strong they are in all temptations, which yet they
have not from themselves. All is from God, For Thou art the glory of their
strength, and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted.
For the Lord is our defense, Israel is our King.


5. The Doxology being now ended, The fifth part. The Prophet enlarges himself
on the Covenant made with David.
and the happiness of Gods people expressed and proved, the Prophet now
enlarges himself upon the Covenant formerly mentioned, verse. 4, and 5.
exemplified in David, but truly verified in Christ. Which he continues to the
30: verse.

1. Then, i. e. when David was chosen to be King, and invested with the Regal
Robe. 2. Thou spakest in Vision to thy Holy One. To Samuel for his anointing.
And said. 3. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one
chosen out of the people. That is, David in Type, Christ in the Antitype. So
explained, I have found David my servant, with my holy Oil have I anointed
him.
To which there follows the promises made to him.

The particulars of it.
1. For his establishment and confirmation in the Throne. With whom my hand
shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him. 2. For protection
against his enemies. The enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of
wickedness afflict him. 3. A Conquest over his enemies. And will beat down his
foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. 4. viz. The Faithfulness
and Mercy of God. In Mercy he said it, and it should so come to pass. But my
Faithfulness and Mercy shall be with him. And now he goes on. 5. His Horn shall
be exalted. He shall have, as it were,
And this his exaltation appears, 1. In the dilatation of his Empire. I will
set his hand also in the Sea, and his right hand in the rivers, i. e.
Euphrates, 2 Samuel 8. 2. In the Honor done him, to call God, Father, his God,
his Rock. He shall call me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my
salvation. 3. Then that God asserts and fixes this Prerogative upon him, Also I
will make him my firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth. 4. In the
perpetuity of his Kingdom, verse. 25. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore,
and my Covenant shall stand fast with him. 5. In the promise made to his seed.
His seed also will I make to endure for ev er, and his Throne as the days of
heaven.


6. And next the Prophet puts a Case, and answers it. The sixth part. Object.
But what if David's seed prove rebellious?
But what if David's seed transgress Gods Covenant, break his Laws, violate his
Statutes, become rebels, and disobedient, will God then keep Covenant with
them? shall his seed endure for ever? and his Throne as the days of heaven? To
this doubt God answers, from verse. 30. to 38. showing us how David's seed, if
they transgress, shall be dealt with.

1. If his children forsake my Law. That is, my whole doctrine of Worship,
Religion, Faith, etc. 2. And walk not in my judgments, i. e. in those Laws,
which set out rewards and punishments. 3. If they break my Statutes. Those
Statutes I have set down for my service, the Rites, Ceremonies, New Moons,
Sabbaths, Sacrifice, Circumcision, Pasch, etc. 4. And keep not my Commandments,
i. e. The Decalogue, and Moral Law. In a word, if they become vicious in their
Morals, and profane, and Rebels in my Worship, and Religion.
This then shall happen unto them, Resp. They shall smart for it.
escape they shall not, but shall soundly smart for it, they shall feel, 1.
Virgam. 2. And Verbera. The Rod, the Whip. Then 1. I will visit, i. e. punish
their transgression with the Rod. 2. And their iniquity with stripes. Which was
often done. By the Babylon: Antiochus, etc.


And yet in judgment I will remember mercy. But in judgment God will remember
mercy.
I will remember my Covenant, my Promise, my Word, my Oath, and will make that
good, totally I will not cast off David's seed, which I mean not after the
flesh, for that is long since cast off, but after the Spirit. Christ which was
of the seed of David, and those which are his seed, viz. the Church, shall
enjoy the benefit of my Covenant and Oath for ever.

Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him,
My Covenant will I not break,
And that there be no doubt of this, For the Covenant is immutable.
he brings in God repeating his Oath and Covenant.

1. Once have I sworn by my holiness; that is, by my self, who am Holy. 2. His
Covenant. That I will not lie unto David. For His seed shall endure for ever,
It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven.

As the Sun and Moon are not obnoxious to mutations, no more is this Covenant;
they must endure to the end of the world, and so must this Covenant. They are
faithful Witnesses in heaven, and so we are to seek for the performance of this
Covenant in heaven, not in earth, the Covenant being about a heavenly Kingdom,
not an earthly. It being evident, that the Kingdom of David on earth, has
failed many ages since. But that of Christ shall never fail.

7. The seventh part. And that God did punish David's seed for their rebellion,
is evident. So that he was tempted to charge God for breach of promise.
Now that David's Kingdom did fail, or at least was brought to a low ebb, is the
complaint in the following words, which flesh and blood considering, gave a
wrong judgment upon it, as if God did nothing less than perform his Oath and
Covenant. This is it which the Prophet lays to Gods charge.

But thou have cast off, and abhorred, thou have been wroth with thy anointed:
Both King and people are cast aside. Than which nothing seems more contrary to
thy Covenant. Thou have made void the Covenant of thy servant, thou have
profaned his Crown.
Of which there be many lamentable consequences.

1. His Crown is cast to the ground. The glory of his Kingdom trampled upon. 2.
The instances in which they suffered.
His hedges broken down, his strong holds brought to ruin. 3. All that pass by
the way, spoil him. Exposed he is to all Rapine and Plunder. 4. He is a
reproach to his neighbors. Exposed to all contumely and disgrace. 5. Thou,
have set up the right hand of his enemies, and made all his adversaries to
rejoice. Thou seem to take part with the enemy against him, and make him
exult and rejoice in oppressing him. 6. Thou have also turned the edge of his
sword, blunted his sword, that was wont to slay, and have not made him to stand
in the battle, but to fly, and turn his back. 7. Thou have made his glory: The
glory, dignity, authority of his Kingdom, to cease, and cast his Crown to the
ground. 8. The days of his youth thou have shortened, Thou have covered him
with shame, made his opulent, glorious Kingdom, ignominious; which was true in
diverse of David's posterity, especially Jehoiakim.
These were the sad complaints, which the Prophet poures out, as despairing, so
far as sense and reason could direct him of the performance of what God had
promised. But he recovers, and prays. The eighth part.


But he quickly recovers, and recalls his thoughts, and that he may move God to
help, he falls to prayer, which is very pathetical.

8. He considers the nature of God, as kind, loving, merciful, slow to anger,
and asks, 1. Usque quo? How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self, for ever? 2.
Shall thy wrath burn like fire? An element that has no mercy. Pathetically
moves God to pity.



Then he uses other Arguments pathetically expressed to move God to pity.

1. Drawn from the brevity of man's life. Remember how short my time is. Upon
diverse Arguments.
2. From the end that man was created, not in vain, but to be an object of Gods
goodness and favor, which if he enjoins not, he shall seem to be born to no
purpose, therefore he asks, Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? 3. From
the weakness and disability of man. His life is short: What man is he that
lives, and shall not see death? Yea, though he live long, yet he is a mortal
creature. Shall he deliver his soul from the grave? 4. From the Covenant, of
which he puts God in mind. Lord, David in thy Truth? 5. From the ignominy,
scorns, sarcasms by enemies cast upon them, 1. Remember, Lord, the reproach of
thy servant. 2. And how I do bear in my bosom, not spoken afar off, but in my
hearing, and to my face, as if poured and emptyed into my bosom, the rebukes,
not of this, or that man, but many people.
6. And lastly, That these reproaches, in effect, fall upon God. For they, who
reproach Gods Servants, are his enemies. Remember the reproaches 1. Wherewith
thine enemies have reproached, O Lord. 2. Wherewith they have reproached the
footsteps of thine anointed, i. e. Either whatsoever he says or does,
Quocunque se vertat. 2. Or else by footsteps, is to be understood the latter
end of David's Kingdom, which was indeed subject to reproach. 3. But the Chaldee
Paraphrast, by footsteps, understands the coming of the Messiah in the flesh,
which because it was long promised, and men saw not performed, they derided,
mocked at, and reproached as vain.

9. The close of this long Psalm is a Benedictus, by which the Prophet, The
last part. The Doxology.
after his Combat with Flesh and Blood, about the performance of the Covenant,
does compose his troubled soul, and acquiesce in God, blessing him for
whatsoever falls out, no otherwise than Job did, breaking forth into this
Epiphonema.

1. Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Blessed be his Name, who does, and orders
all things for the best to his people, although in the midst of calamities and
troubles, he seems to desert them. 2. And that we may know that he did this
from his heart, he seals it with a double Amen. Amen, Amen. So I wish, so be
it.
The Prayer collected out of the eighty ninth Psalm.
O God, So shall we sing of thy mercies for ever, and with our mouths will we
make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

Out of mercy thou have been moved to make a Covenant with thy elect, that thou
set thy Son upon the Throne of his father David, and thou have established with
an Oath his seed,

Of this his seed, this Kingdom, in which we live, is a principal part, and our
King a principal member. Thou have seemed to make void the Covenant which thou
have made with thy Servant: Thou have prostituted his Diadem, that thou-hast
made his glory to cease, These Tyrants boast, these sons of Belial exult, that
thou have shortened the days of his youth, and covered him with dishonor.

How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self? shall thy wrath burn like fire for
ever? We doubt not of thy power, in thy mercy we hope, Merciful God then, Thou
have overthrown that proud King of Egypt, Pharaoh, and destroyed many other
thine enemies with a strong arm.

Show then thy strength in our weakness, prevail no longer against us, that
they execute not their whole fury and hatred upon us.

To thee, we, who are men but of a short time, call to for life. To thee, shall
we draw out our short days in perpetual miseries?

Thou art our Father, we are elected to be thy Sons, Remember, Lord, Remember,
that this reproach is cast upon thy name, Remember, Lord,

Confess we do to our own shame, that we have forsaken thy Law, but this is it
we beg of thee, If the irreversible decree be not past, which we hope is not,
against this our Church, yet let it stand for ever, as the Sun and Moon those
faithful Witnesses in heaven with the Catholic, and never let the gates of
hell prevail against it.

We know and believe, that thou art a merciful God, long-suffering, and of
great goodness, and therefore in all things we suffer, Job, The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken, Blessed be Jehovah. Amen, Amen.

The end of the third book of the Psalms according to the Hebrews.
The fourth book of the Psalms follow.
PSALM. XC. (...).
THE inscription makes Moses to be the Author of this Psalm, and because here
is mention made in it of the Mortality of man, the fragility of his nature, and
the brevity and misery of his life, which proceeded from the wrath of God,
moved to cut off his life, and punish him while he lives, for his iniquity,
conceived it is, that Moses composed it upon some notable disobedience and
rebellion of Israel, while they were in the Wilderness, for which God brought
upon them an exemplary vengeance, whether that of Corah, Dathan, or Abiram, or
the plague that consumed them for making the golden Calf, or as the common
opinion is, for their murmuring upon the return, and report of the Spies, Numb.
14. For which God sent a plague among them: or else when God smote the people
with a very great plague at Kibroth Hattaavah, Numb. 11. Which of these it was,
is uncertain. One of these is supposed to be the occasion of the composition,
and that which moved God to indignation, which Moses deprecates in the end, and
prays to God to return, and show favor to his people.

There be four parts of this Psalm. 1. An ingenious acknowledgment of Gods
protection of them, ver. 1, 2. 2. A lively Narration of the mortality of man,
his fragility and brevity of his life, together with the misery of it, from
ver. 2. to 7. 3. The causes, man's rebellion, and Gods anger for it, from ver.
7. to 12. 4. A Petition, which is double; 1. That God would instruct man to
know his fragility; 2. That he would return, and restore him to his favor,
from ver. 12. to 17.


1. The first part. An acknowledgment of Gods protection to his people.
In the beginning Moses the man of God freely acknowledges what God had
always been unto his people.

2. What he is in himself, and his own nature.

1. To his people he had been always a refuge, as it were, a dwelling place,
though they had been Pilgrims and Sojourners in a strange land for many years,
Lord, Thou have been our dwelling place, a secure place to rest in, in all
Generations, Deutr. 33. from 1. to 6. 2. And in himself from everlasting.
But in himself he was from everlasting; other creatures had a beginning, and
their Creation and Ornaments from him, he the eternal being: Before the
Mountains were brought forth, Not like man.
even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God: Not like man then, whose
mutability, fragility, mortality, brevity, he next describes.
2. The second part. Who is from dust, and to dust must return.
Thou turnest man to destruction; though framed according to thy own image, yet
he is but an earthen vessel, and rid gis mortalem eo usque ut sit contritus; to
that pass thou bring him, till he be broken to pieces, broken as a potters
vessel: To him thou say, Return ye children of men of Adam, return; for dust
thou art, The mortality of man may not be then attributed to diseases, Man is
then mortal, and his life short as a day.
chance, fortune, etc. but to Gods Decree, pronounced to man upon his
disobedience.

First then, let the sons of Adam remember, that they are mortal; next, that
their life is but very short; suppose a man should live the longest life, and
somewhat longer than the oldest Patriarch, a thousand years, yet let it be
compared with eternity, A thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday
when it is past: Like a
But as of a day, which is short, of a day that is past and forgotten; which
the Prophet farther illustrates by elegant similitudes.

1. Watch.
And as a watch in the night: A time of three hours continuance, which is but
the eighth part of a natural day, and so far less than he said before; the
flower of our youth, our constant age, and our old age may well be the three
hours of this watch, and wise they are that observe their stations in either
of them. 2. A flood.
Thou carriest them away, as with a flood; as a sudden inundation of waters our
life passes, 3. A sleep, or dream.
They are as a sleep, or rather a dream; all our happiness a dream of felicity;
in our dreams, many pleasant, many fearful things are presented; so in life, or
we pass half our time in sleep, drowsily it is certain; there be some men that
are filthy dreamers; our life, (...), Pindar. 4. Grass.
Or we are like grass: Quasi herba solstitialis paulisper fui, repent exortus
sum, and withers: The herb has its morning and evening, The causes of it.
and its midday, and so has our life; naturally it fades, or violently it is
cut off.
3. After he had spoken of, and explained our mortality, the brevity, The third
part. 1. Gods anger.
the misery of our life, he next descends to examine the causes of it, which
are two: 1. Gods anger; 2. And that which brought it upon us, our own
iniquities.

1. Gods anger: We consume away by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we
troubled: The cause then of death and diseases, is not the decay of the radical
moisture, or defect of natural heat, but that which brought these defects upon
us, Gods wrath. 2. Our own sin: For this anger of God was not raised without a
just cause; Our sin that caused it.
a just Judge he is, and he proceeds not to punishment, but upon due
examination and trial, and to that end he takes an account, not only of our
open sins, but even of our secret faults, such as are not known to our selves,
or such as we labor to conceal from others. 1. Thou have set our iniquities
before thee. 2. And our secret sins in the light of thy countenance: No
hypocrisy, He repeats again the effects.
no contempt can escape thy eye, all to thee is revealed, and clear as the
light.
3. And then he repeats the effect, together with the cause: Therefore all our
days, viz. the forty years in the Wilderness, are passed away in thy wrath. 2.
We spend our days, as a tale that is told; Et fabusa fies, the tale ended,
vanishes, and is no more thought of, and (...). 4. And as for our age it is of
no great length: The days of our years are threescore years and ten: To that
time some men may be said to live, because the faculties of their souls are
tolerably vigorous, and their bodies proportionably able to execute the offices
of life: 2. Our life encumbred with,
But say now it so happen, which happens not to many, That by reason of
strength, some excellent natural constitution, a man arrive to fourscore years;
yet our life is encumbered with these three inconveniences; labor, sorrow,
brevity. 1. It Is laborious, nay, labor it self; one is desirous to be rich,
Labor.
another wise, this man potent, that man prudent, or at least to seem so, and
this will not be without labor, all is affliction of spirit. 2. Sorrow; for
(...). Sorrow.
3. Short: For it is soon cut off, and we fly away: Avolat umbra. Brevity.


Thus much by experience there is no man but knows to be true, every man feels
that his life is laborious, sorrowful, short, and upon the wing; but such is
the security of man, that this is not well thought, nor the nature of our life,
nor the cause, viz. Gods anger for sin is not laid to heart; This yet not
considered.
and of this the Prophet in the next verse sadly complains, Who knows the power
of thy anger? Thy anger is great for sin, the power of it fearful and terrible;
Thou can, aniles fabulae. 2. Even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath: But
be it that this stupidity possess men, yet this is certain, that thy wrath is
great, and it shall be executed according to thy fear, And therefore
in such proportion as men have stood in fear of thee; they that have in a
reverential fear stood in awe of thee shall escape it; they that have contemned
and slighted thy wrath, shall feel it to the uttermost. The fourth part. He
prays that God would move our hearts to consider it.


4. Upon all the former considerations, Moses converts his words to a prayer,
in which he implores Gods mercy, that he would turn the stupidity of men into
wisdom: 2. Our calamity into felicity: 3. His wrath into compassion; and, 4.
Our sorrow into joy; for the first he begins thus: 1. So teach us to number our
days; to cast up the labor, the sorrow, 2. That we may apply our hearts to
wisdom; be no more stupid and secure, but wise; wise to avoid thy anger, wise
to set a true estimate on this life, and wise in time to provide for another.
3. So teach us; for God must teach it, or it will not be learned, this wisdom
comes from above.


Secondly, Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants. Then he deprecates Gods anger: And


Thirdly, He begs restitution to Gods favor, and what will follow upon it,
peace of conscience.

1. Begs restitution to Gods favor for himself and Gods people.
O satisfy us with thy mercy; we hunger for it, as men do for meat. 2. Early
let it be done, quickly, before our sorrows grow too high, and overwhelm us. 3.
With thy mercy, not with wealth, delights, etc. 4. And with a perpetual joy of
heart; That we may be glad, and rejoice all our days. 5. And let our joy bear
proportion to our sorrows; Make us glad according to the days thou have
afflicted us, and the years we have seen evil. 6. This is the work he calls
Gods work, for as to punish is his strange work, Isa. 28. so to have pity and
mercy, is his own proper work, and this he desires, that it should be made
manifest: Let thy work appear to thy servants, and thy glory to their children.
Fourthly,

1. And success in their labors
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; for no action of our's is
beautiful, except the beauty of God be stamped upon it, done by his Direction,
his Rule, his Word, and to his Glory. 2. Establish thou the work of our hands
upon us, How many things required to make our labors successful.
yea, the work of our hands establish thou it: There must be opus, our work;
for God blesses not the idle: 2. And opus manuum, a laborious work: 3. Gods
direction, his Word the Rule: 4. A good end in it, for that is his beauty upon
it: 5. So it will be established, confirmed, ratified: 6. And lastly, know that
there is no blessing to be expected without prayer; and therefore he prays,
Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, etc.
The Prayer out of the ninety Psalm.
O Lord,

Man, of all thy creatures here below, is most glorious; but his glory thou
turnest to shame: Thou made him little lower than the Angels, to crown him
with glory and worship; Thou turnest him to destruction: Thou have said it, and
by the power of this Decree, from dust he was taken, and to dust must he
return. Say his days were a thousand years, to which yet no man has attained,
yet were they as nothing, Thou carriest us away as with a flood, a violent
torrent, whose streams quickly arise, and quickly fall; all our happiness is
but as a sleep, or as a dream in sleep, we dream our selves to be happy men,
but when we awake, we find nothing. In the morning of our age, we are like
grass, by thy light and heat of thy favor, is it were the Sa^^^dme, we come
up, and grow, and increase to a perfect stature;

This is our condition, this our misery; a consumption we have brought upon our
selves, and it proceeds from thine anger, in it we are consumed, for we have
provoked thee by our iniquitie^, which, though unknown to us, yet are known to
thee; these, Hence it is, That our days are passed away in thy wrath, which
being brought to an end, vanishes, and no more words made of it.

Many of our forefathers indeed were of a long life, but our days are
contracted, threescore and ten with us is a long time; soon cut off, and we
fly away. This effect and experience we daily have of thy wrath and
displeasure, and yet what man is there amongst us that regards it?

Teach us therefore, O Lord, so to number our days, being taught by thee, let
us cast up the account of our lives to be short and fading, that the total is
labor and sorrow; make us wise to falvation upon this account, and laying to
heart, that these ou^eries have overtaken us by thy wrath, and thy wrath
provoked by our sin; make us so to fear thy wrath here, that we be no object of
thy wrath hereafter.

O Lord, in mercy return to us, receive us once more to thy former favor: Let
it repent thee concerning thy servants; and let not thy Spirit always strive
with man, for he is but flesh, weak and sinful flesh, who must perish at thy
wrathful indignation;

No action of our's can be beautiful, except the beauty of the Lord our God be
upon it; idle we may not be, for God blesses not the idle; work we may,

PSALM. XCI. (...).
THE full intent and purpose of this Psalm, is to encourage and exhort the
godly in all extremities, pressures, troubles, temptations, afflictions,
assaults, inward, or outward; in a word, in all dangers to put their trust and
confidence in God, and to rely upon his protection.

Two parts of the Psalm. 1. A general Proposition, in which is given an
assurance of help and protection to every godly man, ver. 1. Who so dwells,
etc. 2. The proof of this by three witnesses. 1. Of the just man, in whose
person David speaks, ver. 2. I will say to the Lord, etc. 2. Of the Prophet,
ver. 3. Surely he shall deliver thee, etc. which he amplifies by an enumeration
of the dangers, Gods assistance, and the Angels protection, from ver. 3. to 14.
3. Of God himself, whom he brings in speaking to the same purpose, from ver.
14. to the last verse.



The first part or verse, The first part. An assurance of Gods protection.
is a (...), or an universal Proposition, in which is contained a comfortable
and excellent promise made by the Holy Ghost, of security, viz. That Gods help
shall never be wanting to those who truly put their hope and trust in him: He
that dwells in tho secret place of the most High, shall abide or lodge under
the shadow of the Almighty.

1. To the godly, and he that puts his trust in God.
He; be he who he will, rich or poor, King or people, God is no Respecter of
persons. 2. That dwells; for that he must be sure to do so constantly, daily,
firmly, rest and acquiesce in God, persevere in the faith of his promise, and
carry that about him, as the Snail does his shell, for else he cannot be
assured by this promise. 3. In the secret place; for his aid and defense is not
as some strong Hold or Castle, which is visible; it is a secret and invisible
Fortress, known only to a faithful soul; in that he may repose his hope, as a
means and secondary defense; but he dwells, relies, rests in that help of God,
which is secret, and is not seen, except to the eye of faith. 4. Who can,
Of the most High; And upon this he relies, because he is the most High; Above
he is, and sees all, nothing is hid from him; and again, above he is, sits in
the highest Throne, and rules all; all things are under his feet, he can
therefore deliver his from all troubles and dangers.
Yea, And will defend him.
and he will do it; for this faithful man, he that relies and trusts in him,
shall never be frustrated of his hope, protected he shall be, he shall be safe.

1. He dwelt, therefore he shall abide, he shall lodge quietly, securely;
pernoctabit, Ithlonan. 2. He dwells in the secret place, therefore he shall
abide under the shadow, in refrigerio, in the cool, the favor, the cover from
the heat. 3. He dwelt in the secret place of the most High, therefore he shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty, i. e. of the All-powerful God, of the
God of Heaven; of that God, whose Name is Shaddai, All-sufficient; by which
Name, he made his promise to Abraham, Genesis 17.1.
This Proposition being most certainly true, The second part. This the Prophet
proves by three Witnesses.
in the next place the Psalmist explains it, and that no man doubt of it,
descends to prove it by three witnesses: First, of a just man; secondly, of the
Prophet; thirdly, of God himself.

1. First, He brings in the just man thus speaking in his own person, I will
say unto the Lord, He is my Refuge, my Fortress, my God, in him will I trust:
Shall he that dwells in the secret of the most High, Of the just man, that
applies the protection to himself.
abide under the shadow of the Almighty? therefore I will say in the person of
all just men, to the Lord that has no Superior, that has no Peer; to that
Lord, to whose command all things are subject, and who can be commanded by
none; I will say to him: 1. Thou art my Refuge: If pursued, I will fly to
thee, as a Sanctuary. 2. Thou art my Fortress: If set upon, I will take my self
to thee, as a strong Tower. 3. Thou art my God: If assaulted by men or Devils,
Thou the most High, Thou Almighty, a God able to defend me, and therefore I
will hope in thee; I will dwell, trust, rely upon thee, and this thy promise,
in every temptation and danger.


2. Next to assert the truth of this, By the attestation of the Prophet, who
enumerates the particulars from which he shall be delivered.
he brings in the attestation of the Prophet for being moved by the Holy Ghost,
he says as much, Surely he shall deliver thee; and then falls upon the
particulars, from which the godly man shall be delivered, set down in many
Metaphors.

1. He shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler; from the deceits of
evil men or Devils. 2. From the noysom pestilence; all danger to which we are
incident, by plague,
Again, when thou art little in thy own eyes, as it were, but a Chicken: 1. He
shall cover thee, as the Hen does her young Birds, with his feathers, secured
from the Kite, the rain, the storm, and heat of the Sun. 2. When thou art grown
up, and able to encounter an enemy in the field, he shall help thee to a shield
and a buckler, and that shall be his Truth, Thou shall not be afraid. 1. For
the terror by night; any hidden, secret tentation, danger, treachery,
detraction, conspiracy. 2. Nor for the arrow that flies by day; any open
persecution, calamity, proud assault, invasion. 3. Nor for the pestilence that
walks in darkness; 4. Nor for the destruction that walks at noonday; the bold
Threats and Decrees of Tyrants and Persecutors.



Moller observes rightly, that the promises of deliverance here made, do not
belong to one or other kind of evil, but to all kind of calamities, open or
secret, and so may be appliable to any; some of which steal upon us, as in the
night secretly; other overwhelm us, as in the day, openly: But the promise is
general, as Bellarmine well observes, whether the danger come by day or night,
those that trust in God are armed with his shield of Truth against it. For if
God be with us, who can be against us? Romans 8.

The Prophet goes on, and confirms the godly in their security, by the
dissimilitude, or unlike condition of wicked men; when thou shall be safe, But
with the wicked it is not so, they shall fall.


1. A thousand shall fall at thy side, on thy left hand, overcome by adversity.
2. Ten thousand on thy right hand, flattered into sin by prosperity: But not
the night fear, nor the arrow by day, shall not come nigh thee. 3. And which is
another cause of comfort and pleasure; Only with thy eyes shall thou behold,
which sometimes falls out in this life, as the Israelites saw the Egyptians
dead upon the Seashore; Moses and Aaron, Dathan and Abiram swallowed up quick,
etc. But shall be fully fulfilled at the last judgment, Mat. 23.
Of which security, Prophet in the next verse gives the Reason, But not the
godly, because God is their help.
the danger shall not come nigh thee; when they fall, thou shall see it, and
consider it with content; Because thou have made the Lord, which is my Refuge,
even the most High, thy habitation; Thou trustest in him, as I do, and
therefore shall have the like protection, deliverance, comfort, that I by his
promise have: Farther yet,

There shall no evil befall thee, The meaning of which, No evil shall befall
them. Not from sin: Nor punishment.
is not, as if the godly man should be free either from the evil of sin, or
punishment; for while they carry about them this body of flesh, they are
subject to both: But evil from sin may well be said not to befall them, because
it humbles them, makes them more cautelous, causes them to love God the more,
to adhere to him the faster, and sue forth a Pardon and Petition for grace to
resist; and so though evil in it self, yet is not a destructive evil to them:
Again, the evil of punishment is to them a fatherly correction to mend and
better them, not to ruin them; and in this sense we may justify the Prophet
in his words, There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling: Be it sin or punishment, all shall work together for the
best for those that love God, and then not properly evil.

Well, For the Angels have a charge to keep them.
I am (the just man may say) secure, that no evil shall befall me, but I desire
to know, how I shall know that I may be kept so, that I fall not among Thieves?
Objection the Prophet prevents, saying, in effect, Fear not:

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, In which verses consider:
1. That the good man is protected by Angels; many Angels have a care of one
poor man. 2. That they are commanded by God to do it; for are not they
ministering Spirits sent by God to that end? Hebr. 1. 3. That it is a particular
administration, a charge given, De te, the poorest, the meanest Saint. 4. That
they are to keep, to look to, defend thee, and what is thine; Thou have an
invisible Guard. 5. But then mark the limitation and restriction, it is, in all
thy ways, in the walk of thy Vocation to which God has called thee; either
walk in them, or the Angels have no charge to keep thee. 6. Lastly, In all thy
ways, not in one, but all; for the ways of men are many, and in all he needs
the custody of Angels. 1. The Law is a way, and the way of the Law is manifold.
2. Our works and operations are manifold, which are our way too. 3. Our life is
a way, and there be many parts and conditions of our life, various ages,
manifold states; and in all these ways we need a Guardian, for we may slip in
every Law, in every operation, in every age, in every state of life.

Which that it be not done, God has given his Angels charge over us to keep
us; to keep us only, nay, which is more: 1. They shall bear thee, as kind
Mothers and Nurses do their Children. 2. They shall bear thee in their hands;
the will, the understanding, wisdom and power are, as it were, the Angels
hands, with all these they will bear us. 3. That thou dash not thy foot; that
is, thy affections, which carry the soul to good or bad. 4. Against a stone;
which are all difficulties and obstacles, which as stones the Devil casts in
out way to hinder us; that we be not scandalized at these, we have the help of
Angels.


And which is yet more, under their custody, we shall tread under foot Satan,
And they shall tread under foot all their enemies.
and all his Accomplices; him, a roaring Lion, an old Serpent, a fierce Dragon,
and all his Associates, Tyrants, Persecutors, all Heretics and Hypocrites; for
such is the promise, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion
and Dragon shall thou trample under feet.

3. In the mouth of two or thrte witnesses shall every word stand, says God;
and here we find the Law strictly observed: To be proved it was, that all who
truly trust in God, were to be protected by God; of which one witness, The
third witness that the good man shall be protected, God himself, who is here
brought in to attest all this on three conditions.
was the just man, ver. 2. Another, the testimony of the Spirit by the Prophet,
from ver. 3. to this verse. To which a third, we have here even God himself;
for in these three last verses, the Prophet brings in God himself testifying
this great and comfortable Truth with his own mouth, and adding much to what
was formerly said: But yet upon these three conditions presupposed in the
protected. 1. His love. 2. His acknowledgment of Gods Name. 3. He shall call
upon me with vehemence, with an earnest desire.

1. Because he has set his love upon me, Chasak, pleased me, loved me, The
good man's love to God.
2. Because he has known my Name, acknowledged my Power, Wisdom, Goodness, His
acknowledging of God
these are the causes and the conditions presupposed in the protected. 3. He
shall call upon me; Invocation necessary also. His Invocation.

Therefore I will deliver him, I will answer him, I will be with him in
trouble, Therefore says God.
I will honor him; which Bellarmine supposes to belong to this life.

I will glorify him, or set him on high; and the second, I will deliver him; I
will deliver him.
with long life I will satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

1. I will deliver him, by the shield, by my Angels, by other ways, mediatly,
I will glorify him.
or immediately, yet so, that it be remembered that I do it; I will answer his
prayers.
2. I will answer him; answer his desires, answer his prayers, so they be
cries. 3. I will be with him in trouble; join my self close to him, I will be
with him in trouble.
go into prison with him, as it were, suffer with him, and think my self
pursued, when he is persecuted; give him comfort even then: Martyrs non
eripuit; sed nec deseruit; They sung in prison. 4. I will h^^our him: For the
names of those who suffered for his sake, I will honor him.
are honorable; right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of all his
Saints.
These Promises may belong to this life, to the other, those which follow.

1. I will deliver him: For the just by death, and by death only, The promises
for the other life repeated.
are freed from the present, and all future miseries: Blessed are the dead, for
they rest from their labors. 2. I will glorify him: As if it were not enough
to deliver him; Rest.
such a thing in this life may fall out, as it happened to Joseph, Job, David,
Glory.
Daniel: But the true glory no question must be, When the righteous shall shine
like the Sun, be set upon their Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.
3. With long life will I satisfy him, i. e. with eternal felicity, Eternity.
even the length of days cannot satisfy; as appears by old men, who yet have
complained of a short life. 4. And that the Prophet speaks of this eternal
felicity, The beatifical Vision.
is more than probable, because he adds, I will show him my salvation; Salutare
meum; My Christ, his Jesus, or salutem meam, my salvation; that is, I will
bring to pass, that when through his whole life I have given him sufficient
evidences of my fatherly affection, I will at last translate him to a place,
where he shall no longer live by faith, but shall see, and experimentally feel
what he has believed; I will make all manifest, and show it unto him. Happy he
shall be in the enjoyment of the Beatifical Vision, which nor ignorance, nor
trouble, nor labor, nor sorrow, nor death it self, nor fear of it shall
interrupt.
The Prayer.
O Gracious God, who have made so comfortable promises of security, aid and
help to all those, that with faith, love and hope, adhere and trust to thee;
Teach us in all our temptations, pressures and sorrows, to dwell in thy secret
place, to rely upon thy visible assistance, and to abide under the shadow of
the Almighty: Make us know, That thou art our Refuge, That thou art our
Fortress,

Assaulted we are secretly and openly, the Fowler, the Devil, sets his snares
for us, Cover us, as the Hen does her tender Birds, with thy feathers, and give
us confidence under thy wings, assure our hearts by a lively faith of the Truth
of thy promises, and let thy faithfulness in the performance, be unto us a
Shield and a Buckler, by which we may receive and quench all the fiery darts of
the Devil. O Lord, we have made thee, who have no Superior, our Refuge, our
Sanctuary to fly to; we have made thee our habitation to rest, who art the
most High, above all, and see what is done below, and sits in the highest
Throne, and over-rulest the whole World: When then a thousand shall fall by our
side, let not thy heavy indignation come near to us, let no evil befall us,
that repose our confidence in thee, Pharaoh and his Host are drowned in the red
Sea; Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up by the gaping earth; if it be thy good
pleasure, O let our eyes behold and see the reward of the wicked; let us lay it
to heart, and consider it, and rejoice, when we see the vengeance, but not for
the calamities that befall these miserable men; but because thy justice is
magnified, thy wisdom exalted, thy love and care of thy people, the poor flock
of thy pasture, in a strange manner made apparent, by the punishment and
recompense taken upon these impudent, obstinate and rebellious sinners, who
have not set thee before their eyes.

As for thy people, direct them in thy Truth, and preserve them in the right
way, in all their ways, let them bear them up in their hands, employ their
wisdom, power, will and intelligence for their perseverance, that through their
misguided affections of love and fear, they stumble not, and fall at those
impediments, obstacles, scandals, and discouragements, laid in their way as so
many stones, by the common enemy of thy Church, and his accomplices.

He is a roaring Lion in our way, that goes about, He is an Adder in our path,
that is ready to bite our heel; give us power to tread upon him, and bruise his
head: He, and the Tyrants, Persecutors, Sectaries and Hypocrites he has
raised, are as young Lions and Dragons to us, arm us with magnanimity and
constancy to trample them under our feet.

Our love we set upon thee, therefore deliver us,

And in thy good time, O Lord, take us from our miseries, and take us to thy
self; honor and glorify us with thy Saints, in those Mansions which thou have
prepared for us, set us upon our promised Thrones, where we shall shine as the
Sun in his glory; Even so come Lord Jesus, This life, because short, and full
of misery, will give no satisfaction; satisfy us with that, in which is length
and eternity of days; here we live by faith, but there we shall experimentally
see and feel, what we have believed; show us therefore, O Lord, thy salvation,
and let us be happy in thy presence for evermore. Amen. Amen.

PSALM. XCII. A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day. (...).
THE Title of this Psalm shows to what end it was to be composed, viz. To be a
part of the Jewish Lyturgy, and on the Sabbath Day to be sung to the honor and
praise of God, whom, on that day especially, they were to magnify for his
goodness and faithfulness in creating, and by his especial Providence governing
the World; of which Providence, the Prophet gives two especial instances; the
sudden fall of the wicked, the prosperity and security of the godly; the parts
then of this Psalm,

Are two: 1. First, A general Proposition, Thesis, Axiom, or Maxim, ver. 1. It
is good to give thanks to the Lord, etc. which is explained, ver. 2. and 3. and
applied, ver. 4. 2. A particular Narration of such works, in which the goodness
and faithfulness of God does especially consist, viz. The Creation and
Government of the World, ver. 4, 5. And of the last he gives two instances. 1.
One in wicked men: 1. Of their sottishness and stupidity, 6. 2. Then of their
sudden extirpation, ver. 7, 8, 9. 2. Another in the godly, whose prosperity is
great, from ver. 10. to 14. and security certain, ver. 15.



He begins with a Maxim. The first part. The general maxim.
It is good, i. e. just, profitable, pleasant, and commendable, to give thanks
to the Lord. 2. And to sing praises, with heart, to thy glorious Name, O thou
most High.

2. The explanation of it.
And both parts he explains. 1. That we give thanks at all times, Morning and
Evening, in Prosperity and Adversity, and in our praises especially to remember
his loving kindness, Good to praise God at all times for his loving kindness.
It is good to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy
faithfulness every night, verse. 2.

3. It is good also, to add to our voices, Instruments of Music, to that end,
To sing praises to thy Name and glory, upon an Instrument of ten strings, and
upon the Psaltery, verse. 3. As it was then usual in the Temple. Good to express
it always.


4. This he applies, and shows the reason, viz.
and shows his own practice, and the reason of it. For thou, Lord, have made me
glad through thy work, I will triumph in the works of thy hands, verse. 4.

1. The delight he took in Gods works.
Thou have made me glad. He was first delighted and affected with Gods work. 2.
And then he exults and triumphs in it. The heart must be first truly affected
with the work of God, before a man shall take any true content or delight in
it. He must see God and his goodness in the Creature, before he shall take any
delight or content in the Creature: Which yet came from Gods Spirit.
He must discern Gods faithfulness in his works and ways, before he shall take
any content, and exult in his works and ways. And this content and delight, is
also a work of the Spirit. Tuexhilarasti. Thou have made me glad.
2. The second part.
Mention he had made of the work and works of God, and now he farther opens
what they are. First, The Creation of the Universe. Secondly, His especial
Providence in ordering the things of this world, He shows what these works are
in which he delighted.
particularly about man.

1. First he begins with the work of Creation, upon which he enters with an
(...), O Lord, how great are thy works? Of Creation, which he admires.
and thy thoughts are very deep. As if he said, I cannot be satisfied in the
contemplation of them. Expleri mentem nequit, ardescitque tuendo. There is such
a depth in them, that I cannot attain to it, nor comprehend it. 2. And he ends
it, not without an indignation, that the wise men of the world, But fools
disregard.
should not consider it. In the Creature they look after nothing, but profit,
and pleasure, in which regard they are but fools, for this brutish man knows
not, how great are his works, this fool understands not, how deep are his
cogitations.
2. Of Governance of the world, about which the mistake is, That fools judge
those that flourish, happy men.
And that he may illustrate their folly the more, from the work of Creation, he
comes to Gods work of Governance of the world, and shows, that as they who
would be, and are reputed wise, are mistaken in the one, so also they are
mistaken in the other. For they think the ungodly, and such as flourish in
power and wealth, happy, and that the righteous men sometimes oppressed, are
unhappy, and upon these two instances he insists to the end of the Psalm.

First, He instances in the ungodly. When the wicked spring up, rise on a
sudden (for such a time there is) as the grass, that grows insensibly, and in a
night, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, become very
conspicuous, But this is not so.
exalted in pride, and power, and abound in wealth. Who would not now take them
for happy men? For their felicity is but for a moment, and ends in infelicity.
No, says our Prophet, it is not so. He that governs the world, has another
end in it.

1. This their felicity, is the greatest infelicity. It is, that they may
perish, be destroyed. 2. That they may perish for ever. Remember Dives. 3. And
this their destruction is from God, that sits in the Throne, and is immutable
in his decrees and ways. They flourish, and are aloft, but it is but for a
Moment: But thou, Lord, And thou will execute thy decree upon them. 4. Which
the Prophet fully opens in the next verse, Epizeuxis makes more Emphatical. For
lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish, and all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered. 1. Behold, they were green, they
flourished, but the change shall be sudden. 2. They were enemies, thy enemies,
workers of iniquite: therefore cursed with a curse. 3. They shall perish, they
shall be scattered, they rose, But with the godly it is quite otherwise; whose
happy condition he demonstrates.
they flourished as grass, and they shall be scattered as dry grass, which the
wind blows from the face of the earth.

His second Instance is in the Godly, whose happy condition he demonstrates.
First, in Hypothesi, or in himself, verse. 10, 11. And in (...). In all others,
that be true members of the Mystical Church of Christ, from verse. 12. to the
end. In himself.


1. He instanceth in himself, that his condition is not like the ungodly. 1.
But my horn shall thou exalt as the horn of an Unicorn, which has one, lofty,
and strong horn; that is, my power and glory, and felicity, shall still mount
higher. 2. And I shall be anointed with fresh oil. Anointed to be King over
Israel by Samuel with a horn of Oil, by God with the gracious sweet Oil of
his Spirit. 3. And that which adds to my flourishing estate. My eye shall see
my desire on my enemies, and my ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that
rise up against me. Which he lived to see and hear in the ruin of Saul and his
house.
2. And that which the Prophet said of himself, In all other righteous persons;
that are like the
he transfers now to all just and righteous men, whom he compares to the Palm,
and Cedar.
1. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree. Of which the Poet, Palm Tree.
Nititur in pondus palma, and consurgit in altum
Quo magis and premitur, hoc mage tollit onus. So a good Christian.
2. He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. And Cedar.
Cedar wood is not consumed by worms or time: Nor the Church by antiquity,
Of which the reason is, because these Palms and Cedars, The reason, they
planted in the house of God.
rooted by Charity in the Church, which is the house of the Lord, and therefore
they shall flourish, be green and vigorous in the Courts of our God. Every
plant that our heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out, In which
they 1. Shall flourish.
as are all those wild Olives, that grow out of the Pale of the Church, or
those that are in it, but were never truly engraffed into it, but the true
plants shall flourish.

2. Nay, which is yet more, they shall be full of Sap, and laden with fruit.
1. They shall bring forth fruit in their old age. Be fruitful.
It shall be contrary to them, as to other trees: Those grow fruitless, and
bear not, when they grow old: These are then most laden with the fruits of
grace. 2. Abound in grace.
They shall be fat and flourishing: Other trees, when old, are zere and dry;
These then are fat in juice, and flourish in good works. It Is conceived, that
in the end of the last days, the estate of Christ's Church shall most flourish.
3. And the reason of this their vigor, of the continuance of this their
radical and vital moisture to their old age, Which is done for that end, that
they may extol the praises of God.
is, that they bring forth fruit, which is specified in the last verse. Vt
annuncient: That they might show forth Gods faithfulness, praise him for that,
as it is at the second verse. 1. That they might show, that the Lord is
upright. Just and righteous in himself. 2. That he is a Rock. A sure, stable
foundation to trust to. 3. And that there is no unrighteousness in him. No
injustice, though for a time he suffer the wicked to flourish, and the just to
be under the Cross. For in his good time, he will show his Justice, in
rewarding the just, and punishing the unjust.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, Enable me by the power of thy Spirit, that with heart, and
tongue, that upon an instrument of ten strings,

Make me glad, O Lord, and give me delight in the consideration in thy work and
beauty of the whole Universe,

Sinners, for thou, Lord, art the most High for evermore. Their raising is for
their ruin, and their end to be destroyed for ever.

But, Lord, I fear thy name, and tremble at thy judgments, I admire thy power,
and adore thy wisdom, be gracious then to thy Servant, and let me, partake of
that blessing, which thou have promised to thy Catholic Church.

O Lord, exalt her horn as the horn of an Unicorn, she is depressed, raise her,
she is weak, strengthen her, she is in sadness, and her ointment putrified,
anoint her, O Lord, with fresh oil. Her enemies are many that rise up against
her, bring upon them a sudden destruction, But for thy righteous Servants, who
adhere to the Truth, let them flourish like a Palm tree, grow higher and
greener by their pressures, let no time consume them, nor storm of persecution
more shake them than a Cedar in Lebanon, the more they are hewed, the more make
them to grow; the more they are cut, the more cause them to spread.

These being by nature, Cyences of the Wild-Olive, that they may flourish in
the Courts of the house of our God, let them be fat and full of sap in this old
age of the world, and when other Trees are barren, let them still bring forth
fruit. Be unto them a strong Rock, to which they may fly in every storm, Let
them live to praise thy name, and show that the Lord is upright, and
acknowledge that there is no unrighteousness in thee, though thou do suffer
the wicked man to flourish for a time, and thy best Servants to lie under the
Cross. Ah, good Father, cherish our fainting hearts with this hope, comfort us
with this thy loving kindness and faithfulness in Jesus Christ our Lord, and
only Savior.

PSALM. XCIII. A Doxology. (...).
IT IS the purpose of the Prophet to comfort the Church opposed by Tyrants and
Persecutors, and yet she shall not utterly fail. The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against her, because Christ sits in his Church as King. The Sum of it
is, 1. The magnificence and power of Christ our eternal King, verse. 1, 2. 2.
That he defends his Church in the day of a storm, verse. 3, 4. 3. That his Laws
are holy, and his Church also, verse. 5.


The Prophet in the first verse describes our King, 1. From his Office. He
reigns. He is the great and chief Monarch; The King of the Church described.
The first part. 1. From his Office.
He is no idle Spectator of things below, but wisely, and justly, and
powerfully he administers all things. 2. He is a glorious King. For he is
clothed with Majesty. 3. He is a potent King. The Lord is clothed with
strength. 4. He is a warlike King. For he has girded himself, for offense of
his enemies, His Majesty.
for defense of his Kingdom. His Power.



Then for his Kingdom. His Ammunition.


1. It is first Universal. The World. His Kingdom universal.
2. It is fixed, firm, and stable. The World is also stablished, and cannot be
moved. 3. It is an everlasting Kingdom, from everlasting to everlasting. Firm,
immutable.
Thy Throne is established of old: Thou art from everlasting. Everlasting.
Aeternus Rex, aeternum Regnum.
2. The second part. Against this Tyrants arise.
But in this his Kingdom, there be those who raise tumults, commotions, and
rebellions. These he compares to swelling waters, and foming waves.

1. The floods, i. e. Tyrants, Persecutors, etc. have lifted up, O Lord, The
Church dwells in the Sea, and the waves of tyranny, ambition, malice, beat
furiously upon it. 2. But to no purpose.
Well, be it so: yet the Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many
waters, yea than the mighty waves of the Sea. He wonderfully and strangely has
showed his might,
3. The third part. The Laws of his Kingdom unalterable.
And as his Kingdom is immovable, so are also the Laws by which it is
governed; fixed, and unalterable also. Thy Testimonies are very sure. The Gospel
is an eternal Gospel, the Doctrine thereof holy, and inviolable, by which God,
testatus est, has witnessed his good will to man, and what he will have done
by all his loving Subjects: which is, that they be a Holy people.

2. And holy: as are his Subjects also.
For Holiness becomes thy House for ever. The Temple, the Priests, the people,
must be a Holy Nation: for ever correspondent to the Holiness of his Law and
Testimonies. Be ye Holy, for I am Holy. Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for
ever.

The Prayer collected out of the ninty third Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord, which framedst the whole world by thy power, and orderest
all things by thy wisdom, and yet in mercy have made choice of some only to be
a peculiar people to thy self,

Let it be thy pleasure, we believe that thou, O Lord, art mightier than the
noise of many waters, yea than the mighty waves of the Sea, stir up then thy
strength, and come amongst us. Cast them then down in thy power, still the
waves of this troublesome Sea with thy word, break in pieces the heads of
Leviathan in these waters, that we may have just cause to glorify thy name.

Other Lords now reign over us, clothed with Majesty, fortified with power and
strength, girded with thy sword upon thy thigh, revenge thine own cause upon
thy enemies, and defend thy little flock. Thou art from everlasting, thou art
the sole Monarch of the World, thou reignest, thy Throne is established of old,
let not man then have the upper hand, lest he grow too proud: Show that thou
have so established the World, and thy Church in the World, that it shall never
be moved.

In thee, and the decrees of thy Kingdom immutable. They require of us, Faith,
Obedience, and Holiness. Oh thou who art our King, and our God, give us Faith
to rely on thy promises, Obedience to submit to thy Laws, and a study of
Holiness, constantly and ever to perform such holy services and duties, that
thou requirest, and becomes thy house, and those that dwell in it. Make our
bodies Temples of the Holy Ghost, that the Holy Ghost may take delight to dwell
in this Temple for ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXIV. (...).
IN this Psalm our Prophet prays, complains, inveighs against wicked men,
Oppressors of the innocent; reproves their Atheism, and informs them of Gods
Omniscience: Comforts the godly, and encourages the just to put their trust in
God; assuring them that God will reward the wicked, and defend the righteous.
In this Psalm then,

The parts are, 1. A Petition for vengeance upon the wicked, verse. 1, 2. 2. A
pitiful complaint, with the causes of it, which were two. 1. The delay of Gods
judgments on them, verse. 3, 4. 2. Their insolence, oppression of the poor,
blasphemy against God, to 7.
3. A sharp reprehension of their blasphemy and Atheism, and the refutation of
it, from verse. 8. to 12. 4. A consolation to all good men, that God will reward
the wicked, and defend the righteous, from verse. 12. to the end. Which is
confirmed 1. From Gods faithfulness, who has promised, and will perform it,
verse. 14. 2. From David's own experience, from verse. 16. to 20. 3. From Gods
hatred of injustice, tyranny, oppression, verse. 20, 21. 1. Which will cause him
to be a Rock and defense to his people, verse. 22. 2. A severe Revenger to the
Oppressors, verse. 23.




1. He begins with a Petition, The first part. He petitions for vengeance on
the wicked.
that God would take vengeance of the Oppressors of his people, which that he
might the easier persuade, he makes choice of an Attribute, and to show the
ardour of his prayer, ingeminates it, which is peculiar to God, for mihi
vindicta, ego retribuam. O Lord God, As if he had said, Thou art the most
powerful Lord, a God of power and justice, and have vengeance into thy own
hand. Therefore now 1. Show thy self, appear, shine forth, evidently and
apparently show thy justice, verse. 1. 2. Lift up thy self, thou Judge of the
earth: Do thy Office of Judicature, 3. Render a reward to the proud. For the
proud humble not themselves to thee, they repent not, pronounce therefore the
sentence of condemnation against them.


2. And now the Prophet begins to Complain, The second part. He complains that
it is delayed: by which
that by the delay of Gods vengeance, wicked men were hardened in their impiety,
and gloryed in their villainy.

1. How long? how long? This thy forbearance seems tedious to us, especially
since the wicked grow worse and worse by it, and insult over us the more. 2.
For they triumph of their strength, they glory in their prosperity, The wicked
are encouraged in mischief.
3. They utter and speak hard things, boldly, rashly, threaten ruin to thy
Church, they breath nothing but blood, and eversion of Kingdoms, and Cities,
freely, and without fear they talk of nothing else, but what they have done,
and what they will do. 4. They are workers of iniquity, and they boast
themselves. It Is not sufficient for them to do ill, but they boast of it. Of
their strength they boast, of their power they boast, of their success they
boast, as if nothing were able to withstand their counsel, their sword, their
wisdom. Especially to insult over, and oppress the Church and poor.

Now to what end do they make use of all these? (for of that I must complain
also) the consequence is lamentable, the event sad, the effects are lamentable,
for in their fury and injustice, 1. They break in pieces thy people, O Lord.
The people elect, separate, dedicated to thee. 2. They afflict thine heritage.
The people, that thou have chosen for thy possession. 3. They slay the widow,
destitute of the comfort of an Husband. 2. And the stranger, a man far from his
Friends and Country. 3. And murder the fatherless, all which thou have taken
into thy protection, and commanded that they be not wronged, Exodus 22. Deuteronomy.
24. Yet such is their fury, that they spare not Sex, nor age, nor any condition
of men.


Nay, And to blaspheme God himself.
it were yet tolerable, if their rage would stay here, it were but against Man,
but they add one wickedness to another; to their injustice and cruelty, they
add impiety, and blasphemy. And of that I complain next.

Yet they say, Jacob regard it. That he nor hears, nor sees, nor regards what
they do.
What tell you us of the Lord, what do you talk to us of the God of Jacob, that
God of revenge, tush, he has nor eyes, nor ears, or if he has, he is far
removed, and cares not for these things below, he shall nor see, nor hear, nor
understand, nor consider, nor examine, what we do in this world. This is their
impiety, this their b asphemy. This the true cause of all their injustice,
tyranny, cruelty, oppression.

Now our Prophet sets himself seriously to reprehend and confute this; The
third part. Whom David reprehends for their Atheism, confutes, and derides.
By an Apostrophe he turns to them, and calls them fools, and proves by a
manifest Argument, that they are fools, demonstrating that God is nor deaf, nor
blind, as they presumed and conceived, from the cause to the effect: and urges
them Emphatically (...).

1. Understand, ye brutish among the people. Oh ye fools, when will ye be
wise? Shows that God 1. Understands.
what will you be brutish always? will you never have common sense in your
heads? 2. He planted the ear, caused you to hear, and shall not he then hear?
Hears.
3. Sees.
He formed the eye with all the tunicles, and put into it a visive faculty, by
which you see, and shall not he see? Nil dat quod non habet. To say the
contrary, is as if you should affirm, the fountain that sends forth the stream,
had no water in it, or the Sun that enlightens the world, had no light, or the
fire that warms, had no heat. Are these affirmations fit for wise men? Neither
is it, that the God of Jacob does nor hear, nor see. Farther yet. He chastises
the heathen, as Sodom, Gomorrah, etc. Chastises.
or he chastises them by the checks of their own conscience, the Synderesis
being set in their souls to that purpose, their thoughts accusing them, or
excusing; and shall not he then correct you, who go under the name of his
people? and yet so impiously blaspheme? 5. Knows the vain thoughts of man.
He that teaches man knowledge, has endued him with a reasonable soul, and
made him capable of all Arts and Sciences, is he stupid? is he without
understanding? Shall not he know? Nay, nay, say or think what you will, it is
not so; so far he is from being deaf, that he cannot hear your words, or blind,
that he cannot see your actions, that he looks into your hearts, and knows your
thoughts, counsels, and judges them all vain. The Lord knows the thoughts of
man, that they are but vanity. With which (...) he concludes his reprehension.
4. And so from them, he comes to the Good man, The fourth part. David shows
the happinness of good men, who are Blessed.
and shows his happiness, whom he labors to comfort in his extremities, whom
he pronounces Blessed. Blessed is the man; and his blessing lies in these
things.

1. In his sufferings; because when he is punished, he is but chastised, and
his chastisements are from the Lord. Blessed is the man, whom thou chastenest.
2. In his teaching; that when he is chastised, In his sufferings, in that
taught thereby Obedience.
he is but taught obedience to the Law of God, taught by book, taught out of
thy Law, which because he has not well kept, therefore he is whipped, and by it
taught to heed it, to love it, to affect the observation better hereafter. 3.
In consideration of the end; that he sret not, And patience, in regard of the
end.
why God chastises, and teaches thee out of his Law, is, That he may give
thee rest, a quiet and even soul from the days of adversity, and that thou
should expect with patience, Domc., so long, till the pit be dug up for
the ungodly. Such a day there is, and the day will come, Hell as ready to
receive the sinner, as a Grave dug up for a dead body: Expect it therefore
with a quiet mind. 4. And the reason is, That though God for a time seem to be
angry, Of which the 1. Confirmation is from Gods faithfulness and equity.
and suffer his people to be afflicted, yet he will not utterly neglect, and
forsake them. For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he
forsake his inheritance. 5. A day of judgment, and execution of justice, shall
come, when judgment shall return unto righteousness. that all those who are
upright in heart, shall follow it. Applaud, acknowledge it.
A second confirmation of the comfort he gave to the Church in affliction,
Confirmed by his own example. Object.
is fetched from his own experience, from the 16. to the 20. verse.

Object. Yea, but this time of judgment may be long, in the mean while, it is
necessary to have some helper and help against the persecutions and injuries of
cruel men. Who will arise for me,

Resp. Even he that then stood up for me. No man, but God alone, Resp.
and unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. I
had been inter silentes, laid in the grave among the dead, says David, verse.
17.

2. If I said, and complained to him, that I was in any danger, My foot slips,
I was tempted, and ready to fall, Thy mercy, O Lord, held me up, in mercy he
lent me his hand, and sustained me. 3. In the multitude of the thoughts within
me, thy comforts delight my soul. 1. The thoughts within me, were sorrows of
heart, and many they were, occasioned from within, from without, a multitude of
them: and yet I did not only patiently undergo them, but found comfort in them.
2. Thy comforts delight my soul, as were the troubles in the flesh, so were
comforts in my soul, which did mitigate the sorrow of my heart, which did arise
from that which grieved the outward man; so that the sad thoughts of my heart
were turned into matter of joy, 2 Cor. 7.4. I am filled with comfort, I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.

Can then the sorrowful thoughts of the heart? The prolepsis.
can tribulations and afflictions delight any soul? Yes, they may the soul of a
pious and righteous man, while he considers, That 1. Apodosis, showing the true
use and end of afflictions.
Either by them he is purged from the impurity of sin, that cleaves so close to
him. 2. Or that he is by them proved and tried by God, whether he will cleave
fast to him. 3. Or that God does this to make him conformable in his
sufferings, to his head Christ Jesus. 4. Or that, his reward in heaven for his
patience, shall be the greater. For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. In the multitude of the greatest sorrows, these are Gods comforts, and
they may delight a soul.


3. Confirmed from the nature of God, that will revenge injustice.
His third Reason to comfort the Church in affliction, is drawn from the Nature
of God, to whom all iniquity, especially committed by those in the seats of
justice, is hateful, of which because those, who are in high places are most
guilty, for they most oppress his people, therefore he will be sure to take the
severest revenge on them. And with this also he comforts the people of God
under the Cross.

1. Shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee? Thou art a just
God, Especially in Magistrates: who hope to bear it out, 1. By their Throne. 2.
By wicked Laws.
and will thou have any thing to do, any society with those that sit upon
Thrones, and Seats of justice, and execute injustice? which they hope to bear
out by their power. 2. Which frame mischief by a Law? i. e. Frame wicked Laws,
or under the color of Law and Justice, oppress the innocent? Summum jus, summa
injuria, and injuries may and are too often done ex prava interpretatione
legis. With those who do injustice by the sword of justice, God will have no
fellowship. 3. By their Council.
The first was their Throne. 2. The second was the Law. And the third is their
Council, and consultations in them. These they call to that end. Coeunt
turmatim. Jagheddu, Congregabuntur, Convenient. They meet by Troops as Thieves,
they Assemble, they Convene in Synods, they gather themselves together, and
that to a most wicked end. 1. Against the soul of the Righteous. (...).
Septuag. To hunt. 2. To Condemn the Innocent Blood. Their Laws are Dracc's
Laws.

Now what shall the poor Innocent do in such a case? From whom God will defend
his people.
How shall he be comforted? Help he must expect none from man, from man it
cannot come, it must come from Heaven, and therefore let him say with David,
Let my enemies rage as they list,

1. But the Lord is my defense, that their treachery and plots shall not hurt
me. 2. My God is the Rock of my refuge, on whom my hope shall safely rely. 3.
I am fully assured, for I have his Word and his promise engaged for it. 1. That
he shall bring upon them their own iniquity; that is, And punish them for their
injustice.
shall return upon his own head; As thy Sword has made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women, says Samuel to Agag, 1 Samuel 15.33.
Judges 1.7. 2. And shall cut them off in their own wickedness, in malitia
eorum: not so much for their sin, as the malice of it. 3. Which, for assurance
of it, he repeats, and explains who it is that shall do it. Yea, the Lord our
God shall cut them off; the Lord, whose providence they derided, our God, the
God of Jacob, whom they contemned, verse. 7.

The Prayer collected out of the ninty fourth Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord God, slay the widow and stranger, and murder the fatherless,
but they are come to that height of pride and madness, that they break in
pieces thy people, and afflict thine heritage; yea, they set their mouths
against heaven, and blaspheme thee to thy face, The Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard it.

O Lord, how long shall the wicked,

Man, I see, being advanced to honor, has no understanding, that he that
planted the ear, and gave him power to hear, should not hear: Or so foolish, as
to think, that he who framed that admirable Organ of the eye, and placed in it
the visive faculty, should not see himself? be deaf, and not listen to what is
proudly spoke, against him? and blind, and not regard what is maliciously done
against his people? Is it conceivable, that any man should be so follish and
stupid, as to suppose, that he, who has fallen in fury upon many Nations for
their sins;

O Lord, never let any of thine fall into this bruitishness, far remove from
them this folly, make them wise to know, that thy ear of jealousy hears all
things, and that thy eyes run through the world, and tryes the children of men,
that thou art present in all our ways, see our actions, hear our words,
nay, searchest into the secrets of our hearts, and the depth of our counsels,
and that it is but in vain to offend thee, and think to be hid, to break in
pieces thy heritage, and murder the innocent, and think to escape. The Lord
knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

Thou, Lord, at this time have showed thy people heavy things, thou have given
us a Cup of deadly wine to drink. they have framed mischief by a Law, Who shall
now rise up for us against the evil doers? Or who dare stand up for us against
these workers of iniquity? In the multitude of the thoughts that we have in our
hearts, send down thy comforts, that may delight our souls.

Make us know, Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, Out of thy Law we learn,
That God will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance, O let this
quiet our hearts, and set them at rest in these days of adversity.

Laughed we are again out of thy Law, that thy judgments, which now seem to
sleep, will at last awake, that the pit shall be dug up for the ungodly;
till that be done, let us wait with patience,

In the mean time be thou our help, our defense, our rock, or refuge; our help,
when these wolves are ready to devour us; our defense, when they strike at us;
when they come as the waves of the Sea about us; and our City of refuge, when
they pursue us. But as for them, the time is best known to thee, and we submit
to it, and when that time is come, bring upon them their own iniquity, cut them
off in their own malicious wickedness;

PSALM. XCV. A Psalm to be sung at all times, in all places, Bellar.
by all men. (...).
FOR it contains an invitation to praise God with internal and external
worship; and therefore is fitly chosen by the Church to be sung in the
beginning of our Liturgy, to excite all men present to serve God infear, and
rejoice with reverence.

Two parts of this Psalm. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, to adore, worship,
kneel, ver. 1, 2, 6. 2. Reasons to persuade to it. 1. Gods mercies, ver. 3, 4,
5, 7. 2. His judgments in punishing his own people Israel for their neglect of
this duty, from ver. 8. to 11.



1. David begins this Psalm with an earnest invitation, including himself, The
first part. David calls an Assembly.
crying: 1. O come, let us; come along with me, though a King, he thought not
himself exempted. 2. And the Assembly being come together, he acquaints them
what they came for. 1. To sing to the Lord, heartily, merrily, joyfully;
Exaltemus. To sing to God.
1. Let us make a joyful noise; make a Jubilee of it, Jubilemus. 2. Openly, and
with a loud voice; Let us make a joyful noise with Psalms. 3. Reverently, as
being in his eye, his presence. 4. Gratefully; Let us come before his presence
with thanksgiving. To adore and worship, outwardly, inwardly.

2. To worship, to bow down, to kneel, ver. 6. Adoration, humble Adoration,
outward worship, that of the body, as well as inward, that of the soul is his
due; and that for these reasons.



2. For God calls for nothing from us, which there is not great reason, The
second part. His Reasons to persuade it.
but that we yield him; serve him then we ought with heart and body, out of
many respects.

1. Because he is the Rock of our salvation, whether temporal or spiritual,
Because our Rock.
safe we are from the tyranny of men, from the wrath of God, from the power of
the Devil, death, hell. 2. Because he is a great God, and a great King, above
all gods. Jehovah, I am, an incommunicable name to any other; A great God and
King.
for his Essence is from himself, and immutable, all other derivative and
mutable; and the great Jehovah, great in Power, Majesty, Glory, and greater
than all other Nuncupative gods, Idols, Kings, for he is above them all, above
all gods. 3. The whole orb of the earth is under his power and dominion; Under
his Dominion the whole World.
In his hands are the deep places of the earth, the strength of the hills is
his also. The globe of the earth in all its extensions is subject to him. 4.
And no marvail, for he is the Creator of both, The Creator.
which is another Argument: The Sea is his, and he made it, 5. He is our Maker,
the Creator and Lord of man also. Our Maker.
6. Our Lord God in particular; Our Lord God.
for he has called us to be his inheritance: For we are the people of his
pasture, and the sheep of his hand.
Now all these laid together, and well weighed, being wonderful expressions of
his mercy and loving kindness, are of strength enough to persuade us heartily,
reverently, openly to sing to, and praise him, to adore, bow down, and kneel
before him. In which duty if we fail, he proposes what is to be expected by
the example of the Israelites.


2. In which if we obstinately and stubbornly fail, we have a fair warning
given us what is like to follow, by the example of the Israelites, purposed
here by the Prophet, That if mercy will not win upon us, then judgment may:
Lege Historiam, ne fiat Historia, Numb. 14. Exodus 17. The sum is this: 1. God
gave them a day, and he gives it you, it is the hodie of your life. 2. In this
day he speaks, he utters his voice; outwardly he speaks by his Word, To whom
God gave a day.
inwardly by his Spirit. 3. This you are bound to hear, to obey it. 4. And it is
your own fault if you hear it not, for you may hear it if you will, to that
purpose he has given you a day: T day if you will hear his voice. 5. Harden
not your hearts.


For then it will be with you, But they hardened their hearts.
as it was with the Israelites.

1. As in the day of temptation in the Wilderness, at Meribah and Massah. 2.
When your Fathers, the Israelites, that then lived, tempted me, and proved me.
And tempted God.
They asked whether God was among them or no? They questioned my power, whether
I was able to give them bread, and water, and flesh? 3. And they found that I
was able to do it, They saw my works; for I brought them water out of the Rock,
and gave them bread from Heaven, and flesh also.
But these were not the sole tentations and provocations I found from them,
their stubbornness was of a long continuance, and often repeated, for it lasted
forty years, so long as they were journying through the Wilderness: Forty years
long was I grieved with this Generation, Therefore God censured them for a
stubborn people.
which very much aggravates their rebellion; and this drew God to pass this
Censure and Verdict upon them.

1. His Censure was, that they were an obstinate, stubborn and perverse people;
A people that did always err in their hearts, that were lead with their own
desires, and run a head their own way, which caused them to err; the way of
God they would not go in, they knew it not; that is, they approved, they liked
it not,; they thought themselves wiser than God, and knew better how to make
provision for themselves, than God could; They have not known my ways. 2. Unto
whom I swear in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my rest; And swore
they should not enter into his rest.
i. e. literally into the land of Canaan that I promised them; the Oath is
extant, Exodus 14. As I live, says the Lord, your carcasses shall fall in the
Wilderness; and in the Wilderness they did fall, every one, except Caleb and
Joshua; a fearful example against stubbornness and disobedience, and to that
end produced and amplified by the Prophet; and the Apostle, Hebr. 4. by it
warns the Hebrews, that they be not incredulous, hard-hearted, obstinate, lest
a worse thing happen to them, lest they be excluded the rest of the celestial
Canaan, of which the earthly was but a Type.
A Meditation collected out of the ninety fifth Psalm.
MANY, O Lord, are the ways by which thou workest upon the weak and untoward
nature of man to win him to his duty, Thou remembrest him of thy
loving kindness, Thou set before his eyes fearful examples of thy justice,
executed even upon a people, whom thou made choice of before all the Nations
of the earth, that he should be dutiful, and not dare to be obstinate and
harden his heart at thy voice; it is thy desire that his service unto thee be a
reasonable service, and powerful are the reasons used here by the Prophet to
persuade unto it.

Bound we are to sing unto the Lord, and shall we not do it? to adore, worship,
bow down and kneel, and dare we plead, Will Majesty and Excellency? He is the
great Jehovah. Will Sovereignty? He is above all Princes of the Air, Nay, his
hand went upon thee, O man, he stamped upon thee his own image, and was thy
Maker and Creator.

O my soul, why then art thou so dull, so heavy, so flack, so negligent in the
performance of this Duty? suffer not thy brutish flesh hereafter to overruled
and depress the Spirit, come willingly, and prostrate thy self humbly, and
adore reverently; sing cheerfully, and give thanks heartily in the presence of
thy God. He is the Lord that made the whole World, he is the Lord that rules
the whole World; the strength of Mountains, the depths of the Earth and Sea,
the height of Princes are as the dust of the balance in comparison of his Power
and Majesty, fall then low before his footstool, confess thy weakness and
meanness, and kneel before the Lord thy Maker.

I said too little, for this is a general mercy, and common to all creatures,
for not the least and vilest of these, but is the work of his hands, and over
these thou have set man to be a Lord, in which Dominion a Heathen partakes with
a Christian, because he partakes of the name of man, and has thy image of
reason, understanding, will, memory, stamped upon his soul; bound then upon
these Arguments he is, to bow and kneel as well as I, and obliged to worship
and adore as much as any Christian.

But thou have tied us unto thee in a stronger Bond, and obliged us to these
duties by a nearer and more precious favor, when we were straggling in the
Wilderness thou wentest after us, and brought us home to thy Fold, when we
were not a people; Thou have laid thy hand upon us, and seized us for thy own
people, and ever since become unto us a Rock of salvation, saved us from the
fury and rage of Tyrants, saved us from our sins, saved us from thy wrath,
saved us from the wrath to come; O come then, let us worship and bow down, and
kneel before the Lord our Savior and Redeemer.

And now, O my soul,

Ever have in memory the Israelites and their obstinacy, their sin; They were a
stubborn Generation that set not their heart aright, they provoked the most
High, they tempted the Holy One of Israel; But they escaped not unpunished,
vengeance, and their carcasses fell in the Wilderness, nor above two of six
hundred thousand souls entered into that rest promised them, the land of Canaan.

I read and tremble, I tremble and pray; Lord keep me from this disobedience,
this obstinacy, this hardness of heart, melt my soul with the fire of thy
Spirit, and soften it with the oil of thy grace, that when thou speak. I
may answer, and at the sound of thy voice I may be obedient; so that showing
not the least reluctation to thy commands, and never murmuring at thy doings, I
may obtain by thy infinite goodness, after the manifold errors and furious
storms of this life, that secute Port of Heaven, where there remains a
perpetual rest to the people of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. XCVI. (...).
ALthough this Psalm was composed by David at the bringing back of the Ark, 1
Chr. 16.23.
yet with one voice all Christian Expositors acknowledge it a Prophecy of
Christ's Kingdom and Church to be enlarged by the access of all Nations, and of
his coming to judgment.

Two parts of the Psalm. 1. A general Exhortation both to Jews and Gentiles to
praise God. 2. A Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, described by the Greatness, ver.
4, 5. the Honor and Majesty, verse 6. of the Majesty of the King, verse 6, 7,
8. 2. The amplitude of it, ver. 10. 3. His judicature in it, from ver. 10. to
the end.


1. The first part. An invitation to praise God.
The first three verses contain a general Exhortation to set forth Gods praises
for the benefits exhibited to the whole earth by Christ.

1. First, That the praise be full, he thrice repeats, Cantate; O sing, sing,
sing to the honor of the Trinity, Bellarmine, obscurely insinuated in the Old,
but plainly to be preached in the New Testament. 2. Show forth, Benedicite, i.
e. Cantando laudate, or gratias agite. 3. Declare, Hashern. (...), carry good
news, a fit word for the Gospel, Evangelium, glad-tydings.
2. The Song that was to be sung, was to be a new Song; Sing unto the Lord a
new Song; New, for a new benefit; New, to be sung by a new people.

3. It was to be sung by the whole Earth; by new men, and all men, all the
World over; for God was not now to be known in Judaea only, but to all Nations.

4. It must be continually sung, from day to day, without cessation, or
intermission; for as one day succeeds another, so should there be a continual
succession in this praise.

After he expresses the benefit or matter that all the earth is to praise him
for, For the redemption of the World by his Son.
which in one word, is the Redemption of the World by his Son.

1. Show forth his salvation, which he has conferred on Mankind by Christ.

2. Declare his glory among the Heathen, his wonders among all people: His
glory and wonders, which is the self-same with salvation, which was a glorious
work, and full of wonders; and this now was to be Evangelized, as before to the
Jews by the Prophets, so now to all people by the Apostles.
2. The second part. To this end he presents God as a great King.
And that his Exhortation might seem more reasonable, he presents God as a
King, and sets down the Greatness, the Amplitude, and Equity of his Kingdom.

1. Sing to the Lord all the Earth, for he is Lord of the whole Earth. 1. The
Lord is great; great in power, great in wisdom, great in goodness, great in
mercy, great in dominion and riches, great every way, that any thing can be
great. 2. Worthy of all praise.
He is greatly to be praised, or worthy of all praise, for his innumerable
benefits he bestows, spiritual, temporal, his Creation, Redemption,
Preservation of the world. What can be found praise worthy in any King, may be
found superlatively in him. To be feared above all gods. Moller. Quasi (...)
Non dii. Bellarm. Muscul. Supreme, not so any of those gods. They Deastri.
3. He is to be feared above all gods. For he can cast body and soul into hell.
They, though called gods, can do nor good, nor hurt. The devils that set them
up, do believe him to be above them, and tremble, Jam. 2. Sing to him then, and
not to them, for the Supremacy is his. He is Super omnes Deos. Gods did I call
them, alas, they are nothing less, they are all of them Elilim. Deiculi, petite
gods, or Deastri, ridiculous gods: or Elilim, Vanities, Idols, no gods. If they
be Gods, show their works, produce the heavens they made, or the earth they
framed, whereas, our God made the heavens, and all things that ^^e in it, and
under it;

In which (...), the Prophet does elegantly deride the heathenish gods,
Especially the gods of the heathen.
and the heathen for fearing such gods. 1. For the multitude of them. For they
were many: which is contrary to the nature of God, who must be but one, in
reason there can be but one Supreme. 2. For their division, one of the
Ammonites, another of the Moabites, one of the Philistines, many of the
Assyrians, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, according to the number of the Cities,
were there gods, three hundred Jupiters, thirty thousand of these Deities. 3.
They were Elilim, petite gods, Moloch had the rule of the Sun, Astarte of the
Moon, Ceres over Corn, Pluto his dominion in heaven, Neptune in the Sea, etc.
Their power was not universal, as the power of God ought to be. 4. For their
Vanity, they could not help. If Baal be a god, let him plead for himself, Judge.
6. Bell boweth down, Nebo stoops, etc. they could not deliver the burden, they
themselves are gone into captivity, Isa. 46.1, 2. For an Idol is nothing in
nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.

4. Lastly, in the opposition, They Dii. facti, he Factor.
which lively shows the difference betwixt God and Idols. It was man that first
made them gods, and made Idols for them. They then are at best but works of
men's hands. But our God is Factor, a Maker, a Creator. He made the Heavens,
those great and beautiful bodies, and all that is contained in and under those
Orbs. He then is terrible, he to be feared, and not those diminutive, those
vain, those unprofitable gods of the Nations, and their Idols.

2. And so having removed out of his way all the gods of the Nations, he
returns to the description of our God and King. He said he was great; greatly
to be praised, to be feared above all gods; and now he adds that which makes
farther for his honor. For he presents God under the person of a mighty King,
in whose Palace, all things, that may set forth his Majesty, To be praised also
for his Honor, Majesty, etc.
are presented to the eye of the Subject and Strangers. Honor, Majesty,
Strength, Beauty. So says our Prophet.

Honor and Majesty are before him,

God is indeed invisible, but his Honor and Majesty, his Strength and Beauty
may easily be seen in his ordering, governing, and preserving the whole world,
and his Church, both which may not be unfitly called His Sanctuary, and the
last His Holy Palace. Which he moves all Subjects to give their King.


3. God he has proved to be an universal King, and now he persuades all his
Subjects, that is, all kindreds of the people, or the Families of the Nations
to return unto their King his tribute, his due, their debt, to wit, his due
honor and worship, which he comprehends in these words, Give, bring an
offering,

1. Give unto the Lord, and again, To give him freely Glory and Strength.
Give unto the Lord Glory and Strength. Give freely to him, and solely
attribute to him the glory of your being and well-being, that he made and
redeemed you, and that by the strength of his right hand, (...), he has
plucked you out of the hands of your enemies; This was the glorious Work of
Mercy and Power. Sing for this with the Angels, Glory be to God on high. 2.
Give unto the Lord the honor due to his Name. Remember it is a debt, The Honor
due to his Name.
is, To acknowledge him to be Holy, True, Just, Powerful, The Lord, the
faithful God, good, merciful, long-suffering, etc. all that was proclaimed
before him, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7. Defraud not his Name of the least Honor. 3. To
bring him Offerings.
Bring an offering, and come into his Courts. Appear not before the Lord empty,
as the Jews were commanded, to which out Prophet alludes: They had their
Sacrifices, and we also have our spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, to bring, 1 Pet. 2.5. And these are the Sacrifices of a contrite
heart, Confession of sin, Mortification, Prayer, Fasting, Alms. Bring these
when ye come into his Courts, into his presence, and into his House of Prayer.
4. O worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. They that come into the
presence of a King, To Adore him.
presently fall on their knees, in token of their submission and homage, when
you come into the presence of your King, do the like: Adore. 2. And remember to
do it in the Beauty of Holiness, which if referred to the material Temple,
consider that it is by relation a Holy place, In the Beauty of Holiness.
and should not then be profaned; a Beautiful place, and should not then be
defaced, but kept beautiful. But if to be referred to the Spiritual Temple, the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, that also is to be beautified with Holiness. A holy
life, holy virtues. 5. And to do it in fear and reverence.
Fear before him all the earth. Join fear to your Worship, for a man may be too
bold and saucy in the presence of this King. Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice with reverence. There is a fear that arises out of the apprehension of
greatness and excellency in the person, together with our dependence on, and
our subjection to him, which both in body and mind makes us step back, and keep
a distance: And this kind of fear causes and produces all Acts of Reverence
and Adoration; and this is it which the Prophet here calls for. 6. Say among
the Heathen, The Lord reigns: Or as some point it, Say, Proclaim him to be King.
The Lord reigns among the Heathen. Be, as it were, Heralds, and proclaim as
with sound of Trumpet, God is King. Christus Regnat. Vive le Roy. Hosannah.
Now here the Prophet begins to set forth the Amplitude of Christ's Kingdom. The
Amplitude of Christ's Kingdom.


1. Before it was confined to Judaea, but now it is enlarged. All Nations are
become his Subjects, he reigns among the Heathen. 2. The Stability of it.
The stability of it. The world shall be established, that it shall not be
moved, the Laws of this Kingdom not to be altered, as were those given to and
by Moses, but fixed, and to last for ever. The Gospel is to be an eternal
Gospel, a standing Law. 3. The Equity in it.
The equity to be observed in it. He shall judge the people righteously, for he
shall give to those who observe his Laws, great rewards, but to such as contemn
them, break them, and say, Nolumus hunc regnare, a condign punishment.
4. The Prophet having described the King, and the state of his Kingdom,
exulting in spirit at it, Gentiles only, whom it did very nearly concern, but
all creatures to rejoice with him: heaven, earth, the Sea, the fields, the
trees, the woods. And he calls all creatures to rejoice at it.
Although there be that by heaven understand the Angels, by the earth, men, by
the Sea, troublesome and restless spirits, by the trees, fields, and woods, the
Gentiles who were to believe. But this needs not, because such Prosopopeia's
are frequent in Scripture. The meaning is, that as the Salvation was Universal,
so he would have the joy for it to be Universal; To the words then, Let the
heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let the Sea roar,
Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein, then shall the trees of the
wood rejoice before the Lord.


He incites all Creatures to rejoice for Christ's coming, both for the first,
And for his coming
and the second; for the first, in which he consecrated all things; for the
second, at which he will free all things from corruption, Romans 8. from verse.
19. to 22.

1. For he comes, for he comes to judge the earth. To judge the earth
Which first part of the verse, the Fathers refer to his first coming, 2. And
again, He shall come to judge the world with righteousness, With Equity and
Truth.
and the people with his Truth: Which coming, though terrible to the wicked,
yet will be joyful and comfortable to the righteous. For says our Savior,
Lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws near. And to comfort them, and
terrify the wicked: He tells them,
That he will judge in equity, that is, justice, and in Truth, according to his
Word and Promise.

He will accept no man's person, but render to every man according to his works.

The Prayer collected out of the ninty sixth Psalm.
O Merciful Lord, so deep is the Sea of thy mercies which has from everlasting
flowed over unto us, and thy daily favors, we must sing unto thee a new Song
for new blessings, and bless thy name for fresh gifts and graces. Thou who
made the heaven, the great God of heaven and earth, a God greatly to be
praised, a God to be feared above all gods, and worshipped the inventions of
his own brain, and the works of his own hands.

But all this did not cool thy love, nor retard thy mercy, even when all the
kindreds of the Nations did serve other gods, thou sentest them Redemption,
thou sentest thy Son to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory
of thy people Israel. Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty,
just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints, Warm therefore our cold
hearts with thy love, that we may show forth thy Salvation from day to day.
Make our flow tongues eloquent and powerful, that we may publish this
glad-ridings, and declare thy glory unto the heathen, and thy wonders to all
people.

So resplendent is thy Honor and Majesty, so immense thy strength, thee glory,
and proclaim thy name to the whole world, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin.

Offerings we have none that are worthy of thee,

Our desire is to worship thee in the Beauty of Holiness, but being conscious
to our selves of the impurity and imperfections of our own hearts, and sensible
of thy excellencies, we step back for very fear, and retire for shame. Bold and
impudent we cannot be in thy presence, but we worship thee with trembling
spirits, and adore with reverence.

Yet thus much we are and may be bold to proclaim among the heathen, The Lord
reigns; Let the Angels and Saints in Heaven rejoice at it, let the fullness
thereof, the impious spirits that move them, bow at the Name of Jesus. Yea, let
the wildest tree in the field and wood, be brought at last to confess, that
Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

O thou great King of all the world, rule thy people with thy Word and Spirit,
and judge the adversaries of thy worship, and enemies of thy Gospel; bear rule
and dominion among the heathen, that yet have not submitted unto thee, let the
whole world be established by thy Gospel, and thy Laws take place among them,
and never be removed.

Lord, hasten thy Kingdom, and appear in thy glory. Even so come Lord Jesus,
Come to judge the earth, seat thy self upon thy Throne, and call all the
Nations of the world before thee, and make it known, that thou art not an
accepter of any man's person, but that thou will judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with thy Truth, and that those that have done
ill, shall go into eternal punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

Be thou my King, O sweet Jesus, inform me in thy Law, guide and rule me by thy
Spirit, cause me so to worship and fear thee, to offer such spiritual
Sacrifices unto thee, to give what I owe, such glory and honor to thy Name,
that at thy coming I may be set on thy right hand, and be one of that number to
whom thou will say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. For thine is the Kingdom, the power
and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXVII. (...).
IN this Psalm David sets forth Gods power and glory, and being moved by the
Spirit of Prophecy, foretells the downfall of Idolators, and the happy estate
of those who serve God with an honest heart.

Three parts there are of this Psalm. 1. A Prophetical description of Christ's
power and glory, especially at the day of judgment, from verse. 1. to 7. 2. A
manifest difference put betwixt Idolators, and the people of God. Confusion he
imprecates to the first, verse. 7. And gives notice of the joy of the second,
with the reasons, verse. 8, 9. 3. He exhorts those that love God, to a good
life, encouraging them upon Gods favor, verse. 10. And upon the joy that is
like to follow it, verse. 11. for which he stirs, them up to rejoice, and to be
thankful, verse. 12.


He begins with a Solemn Acclamation, The Lord reigns: The first part. God is
the Supreme King.
being the self-same that he commanded to be proclaimed in the former Psalm,
verse. 10. As if he had said, By the coming of Christ, the Empire of Death, And
he will use his Scepter now, and at the day of judgment.
Jehovah is become the Supreme King, and all other Kings and Powers, become his
Vassals and Servants; A benefit so great, that he moves the world to be glad of
it: Let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles, that is, the
inhabitants of both, be glad thereof. All men wheresoever, and whatsoever, for
if they be oppressed by Tyrants, yet the Lord they serve is Mightier, the
Kingdom is his, all Power in heaven and earth given into his hands, and he can
repress and bring into order the proudest Tyrants. He has this name written on
his thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. For the good


2. And it is most certain, that he will make use of his Scepter for the good of
his Subjects, and for the confusion and ruin of their and his enemies, which
is often done in this life, but if deferred, for some reasons best known unto
him, yet it shall be certainly done at the last day, when his appearance will
be very terrible, yet comfortable to His.
For, 1. Clouds and darkness shall be round about him, Sinai. Of his Subjects.
2. Righteousness and Judgment the habitation, the Basis of his Throne. 1.
Righteousness, justly to pass sentence in the defense of his people. And so
comfortable to them. 2. Judgment, to be poured out upon his enemies. And so a
terrible day to them.
3. A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about. For the
confusion of his enemies.
In which three verses are set down the terror of that day, as it is described,
Mat. 24 29, etc. 2 Pet. 2.10, etc. Psalm. 18.7, etc. Which fire yet shall not
hurt the godly, it shall burn up only his enemies, as is here said. 4. And at
this day, the heavens declare his righteousness, When his appearing shall be
glorious.
when the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and the Trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. And all people his
glory, appearing in the clouds of heaven, with all the Angels about him, when
every knee of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the
earth, shall bow unto him, Phil. 2.


2. Upon the consideration of Christ's Sovereignty, The second part. Upon which
the Prophet,
and his glorious appearance at the last day, our Prophet imprecates, and
exhorts.

1. He imprecates that confusion and a curse may fall upon all Idolators.
Confounded be all they that serve carved Images; Which is indeed their shame.
Imprecates.
2. Exhorts.
He exhorts. Adore him all ye gods; ye that excel in power on earth, ye Angels
that excel in power in heaven, adore, worship, invocate, submit to this King.
For this was, and ought to be the practice of Gods people. 1. heard of it,
heard that the Lord reigned, that he would come to judge the quick and dead,
And the people of God exult.
that Idolators should be confounded, that Christ only was to be adored, and
rejoiced at it, and was very well pleased with the News, and desired it should
be so. 2. The daughters of Judah, that is, the people of God rejoiced, because
of thy judgments, O Lord; did exult, because thou, O Lord; do judge all men
with a just judgment. 3. But that which did most of all excite and heighten
their joy, was, the exaltation of Christ to the Throne, that the Lord of Gods
people, was now to be the Supreme Lord. Glad they were, because, Thou, O Lord,
art high above all the earth, high above all Kings, and earthly Monarchs, that
thou art exalted far above all gods, i. e. far above all Angels, who are called
gods by participation; and far above all Devils, who are worshipped as gods by
an error of judgment.

3. The third part. The Character by which Gods people may be known.
At the eighth verse he made mention of the Church, and called them Zion, he
spoke of the people of God under the name of the daughters of Judah, and he
says, they did exult, and rejoice at it. But that no man footh up himself with
this Title, for there be many who lay claim to Zion, that belongs not to Zion,
and seem to rejoice, that Christ is King, who wish in their hearts it were
otherwise; viz. The Love of God; and the infallible consequent of it: The
Hatred of evil; to which he exhorts, Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

1. They love God.
O you that make God your choice, and Christ your King, not feinedly, but
truly; not with the lips alone, but with the heart; that fear and worship God,
not according to the external work, but according to the Spirit of the Law: 2.
They hate evil.
See that ye hate evil; it is not sufficient to fly it, to decline from it, but
you must detest and hate it, which without the work of the heart, will never be
done. For the heart is the fountain of all actions, good or bad, from it before
God they have their denomination and acceptance. As out of the heart proceeds
the love of the chief good, so out of the heart again proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, etc. Mat. 15.
And that we lend the easier ear to this counsel, The reward for this work.
the Prophet proposes two great rewards to those that love the Lord, and hate
evil.

1. Enemies they have in this life, that hate them, that seek to oppress them,
against these God promises protection, from these deliverance. 1. He
preserves the souls of his Saints, often their lives, but always their souls,
Preservation.
which is a benefit beyond the other. The Accuser of the brethren shall not
hurt them. 2. He delivers them out of the hand of the wicked, sometime out of
their hand, that they fall not into it, and sometime out of their hand, when
they are in it. Ovis erepta lupo. Now this is their first reward.
2. verse. That in their miseries they shall be filled with content, In
miseries they shall find comfort.
and find comfort, when they little expected it: but then they must be
righteous, and upright in heart. 1. Light, content.
Light is sown for the righteous; or as the old Translator reads out of the
Septuagint. Light is risen up to the righteous. The diversity as Moller and
Bellarmin^, arose out of the nearness of the two Hebrew words, Zarahh, and
Zarach; Zarahh signifying Seminare, and Zarach, oriri. By the first the
Metaphor is more hard, by the second the more easy and sweet, but the sense
will be the same. 1. By light then here is understood Gods favor, the light of
understanding, truth, goodness, with the effect of it, or that which arises
from it, comfort, content of soul, tranquillity, peace of conscience. 2. Now
this is sown, as seed, it often times lies hid under the clods, but at last it
shows it self. 2. Or as light is obscured by some cloud, which at length breaks
forth, or rises to some height, as the Sun in the morning. The sense then is
this. Such a time there is, when the just man may say, Wisd. 5. 6. The light of
righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of righteousness rose not
upon us. The favor of God has seemed to us to be hid, and buried, as it were,
in disfavour. But this, says our Prophet, shall not be always, the favor of
God is sowed, and it will spring up again; The light of comfort, of peace of
conscience, though it be clouded and darkened, yet it will break forth, and rise
again.
2. Again, There shall be gladness for the upright in heart. Gladness of heart.
For uprightness does direct, and establish the heart, whence there arises an
ineffable joy in the conscience, when a man is a Witness to himself, that his
will is conformable to Gods Will, and all those things, and only those things
please him, which please his God. Which is the second reward or fruit that he
reaps, who loves God, and hates evil.

3. He concludes: Therefore
And out of these premises the Prophet draws his inference and conclusion,
which he forms into an advice. 1. You that are just, rejoice not in the
vanities of this world, Rejoice in the Lord.
as do the unjust, but rejoice in the Lord, who gives you this justice, Be
thankful.
and rewards it with this joy. 2. Then again be thankful for it. Give thanks at
the remembrance of his holiness. It is his holiness, his righteousness, not
your own that you carry in your hearts, and so often as this comes to your
remembrance, bless and thank him for it.


The Prayer collected out of the ninty seventh Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord; I never think of that great day, when I must stand before
thy Tribunal, and render an account of my words, thoughts, and actions, but my
heart trembles for fear, and my knees are ready to smite one against another.
Terrible thou were upon Mount Sinai, when thou gave, and terrible thou will
be, when thou will exact an answer for the breach of thy Law. The clouds and
thick darkness then round about thee, amaze my sinful soul; the fire that shall
go before thee, flasheth in my eyes; the lightning darting out of the clouds,
makes me tremble. call to the Mountains to cover them,

My heart, O Lord, is hard like one of those Rocks, hardened it is by the
deceitfulness of sin, send down into it the fire of thy holy Spirit, that may
dissolve and melt it as war, and make it apt to receive thy impressions of
grace; of a hard heart, make it soft and tender; of a heart of stone, make it a
heart of flesh, that I may hear thy Law and obey it, that I may repent for the
breaches of it, and every day judge my self, that I may not be judged of the
Lord. Never let that day flip out of my memory, when the heavens shall declare
thy righteousness, when that general Summons shall be blown abroad, Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment.

A day indeed this will be of darkness, and gloominess, a day of sorrow, These
would not that thou should reign over them, Confounded therefore on that day,
be all they, that serve graven Images, and that boast themselves of Idols.

Thou art our King, Jacob, and we are sur^ thou will send help, and reignest,
that thou might do good to those that are upright in heart. as in judgment
thou will proceed against the workers of iniquity, so will thou also in justice
deal with all those that love the Lord, and hate iniquity. At the hearing of
this it is, that Zion rejoiced, and the daughters of Judah were glad.

O make me one of the inhabitants of this Zion, that I may lift up my head, and
not be amazed at the remembrance of that fearful day, being fully assured,
preserve my soul, and the souls of all thy Saints, Able thou art to do it, for
thou, Lord, art far above all the earth, thou art exalted far above all gods.
If thou will, thou can save us, and we believe thou will, because it was the
end thou came into the world, the end why thou suffer that painful and
shameful death of the Cross to save sinners. Sinners, O dear Savior, we are,
we desire in uprightness of heart to serve thee; and show us the light of thy
countenance; the comforts of our souls are buried under the thoughts of thy
displeasure, oh that the day were come, that they might shoot again, and spring
up, then would we hope,

This if thou will grant us, Then will we rejoice in thee our Lord and King,
and give thanks at the remembrance of thy righteousness, thy holiness, thy
merits, thy innocent life and undeserved death, which alone we can trust to at
that day.

PSALM. XCVIII. Propheticus, and (...).
THIS Psalm is an evident Prophecy of Christ's coming to save, to judge the
world, and therefore the Church has well subjoined it to the Magnificat, for
what is here foretold by David, is there chanted forth plainly, suppose then
David to be the voice, and Mary the echo, and thus you may easily see the
return.

1. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, says David; My soul does magnify the
Lord, says Mary. 2. David the voice says, He has done mavelous things. He
has magnified, says the echo. 3. With his own right hand, and with his holy
arm, has he gotten himself the victory, says David. He has showed strength
with his arm, and scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts, says
Mary. 4. The Lord has made known his salvation, his righteousness has he
openly showed, etc. says David. His mercy is on them that fear him throughout
all generations, etc. says Mary. 5. He has remembered his Mercy and Truth
toward the house of Israel, says David the voice. He remembering his Mercy,
has helped his Servant Israel, says Mary the echo.
An Egg then cannot be more like an Egg, than this Hymn is like the Magnificat,
and both sung for the same end, viz. To praise God for the Salvation of the
world by Christ.

Two parts of the Psalm. 1. An exhortation to sing to the Lord, and the reasons
of it, verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. A new invitation to praise him, and that it be
universal, from verse. 4. to 9.


1. He begins with a very fervent and earnest exhortation, it has an O. The
first part. He incites to praise God.
before it.

1. O sing. Cantate, not canite: 2. A Song; a Hymn it would be. 3. To the Lord,
not men. 2. A new Song; because a new occasion is given for a Song; it is not
for your Creation, or Preservation, you are now to sing, but for your
Redemption. Nova, res, novum Canticum. No common, no ordinary Song will now
serve turn, but as Gods Mercy in this Work was extraordinary, so our thanks
ought to be more than ordinary.
And that men may yield to this motion, and put it in practice the more
readily, and cheerfully, the Prophet subjoins his reasons. The reasons to
persuade it. 1. His Miraculous work of Redemption.


1. For he has done mavelous things, he has opened his greatness and
goodness in this great work of Redemption especially. In this work there be
mavelous things indeed, He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, he was born of
the Virgin Mary, he cured the blind, healed the lame, raised the dead, etc. And
which is yet more mavelous, though he were the Lord of life, yet dyed, raised
himself, ascended into heaven, sent down the Holy Ghost, and by unlearned men,
converted the world. Domuit orbem non ferro sed ligno. A mavelous thing, that
men should believe in a Crucified God. 2. His right hand, and his holy arm,
has gotten him the victory. A work of power and holiness.
It was his own work, he had no Coadjutors in it. And it was a work of his
right hand, and of his arm; that is, of his Son, who in Scripture is called the
arm of God. 2. Of his holy arm, for the work was not done by Swords and Warlike
Weapons, but by his Holiness, manifested by his Humility, Patience, Obedience,
Submission to the Will of God, and a Holy life, and an undeserved death. 3. He
has gotten himself the victory, to himself first, then to all his, over Sin,
Death, Hell. 3. The Lord has made known his Salvation. First, This work made
known.
by himself to the Jews, after, by his Apostles to all Nations. His Salvation;
that is, 4. His righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the
heathen. And applied to us.
1. His righteousness, by which he makes us just, by remission of sin, and
imputation of his justice, by which we are alone justified at the Bar of God.
2. That which moved him to it, Mercy and Truth.
This he has openly showed, plainly revealed in his Gospel. 3. In the sight of
the heathen, for it is now made known to them, as well as the Jews.
5. He has remembered his Mercy and Truth toward the House of Israel. 1. To the
House of Israel, for to them were the Prophecyes given, and with them the
promise made, which yet concerned us Gentiles. 2. His Mercy in promising. For
it was out of mere mercy and grace, and not any merit of man's, that he should
promise, That the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. 3. And he
remembered it, when he performed it, by sending Salvation by his Son. Then he
remembered his Truth, and performed the Oath which he swear to our forefathers,
by visiting and Redeeming his people. 4. Which now all Nations have seen.
For all the ends of the earth have seen the Salvation of our God. The Nations
have heard the Apostles, and their Successors, they have believed the Gospel,
and so by a heart purified by Faith, and experiment of Grace, they have
actually seen the Salvation of our God. By the eye of faith they embrace it,
love it, and labor by a holy life to be partakers of it.

2. The second part.
Upon these reasons he persuades us, to sing unto the Lord a new Song, that
Salvation was by him alone wrought for us. 2. Proclaimed, and made known to us.
For this again he persuades,
3. That he had performed his Covenant, and applied it, making all the ends of
the earth partakers of it: And now he returns to exhort us to do that with
which he began; and as if he could never sufficiently express his desires, he
runs descant upon it, Praise him with a loud voice, sing with your tongues,
exult with your hearts, take in the help of all Instruments, and call to all
creatures to accompany you, and complete your mirth. This is the Sum of the
following verses.

1. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the whole earth. Jubilate, keep a
Jubilce for it; To praise him all ways we can.
Cantate, Chant it out aloud. Exultate, Fetch, as it were, a leap for it. And
Psallite, Sing praise all the ways you can. 2. And let all the earth do it,
because all the earth is partaker of the Savior, and Salvation. 2. Sing unto
the Lord with a harp, with the harp, and the voice of a Psalm, With Vocal, with
Cordal, with Pneumatical Music. All ways we can, are too little to express
our joy. 3. Make a joyful noise before the Lord our King. You are in conspectu
ejus, his eyes sees, and his ear hears what you do, let it be done heartily. 4.
And call all creatures to join with us.
and feet to dance at it, he calls to them to join with him in the mirth. Let
the Sea roar, Let the floods clap their hands, It is a Prosopopeia, frequently
used in Scripture: as before, Psalm. 96.11, 12.
5. And let it be heartily and sincerely done. For it is before the Lord; in
his eye, For he comes to judge.
in his sight, in his presence, who can judge with what affection any thing is
done.
And for this he gives a reason, For he comes to judge the earth; which may be
referred to his first, or second coming.

1. Either in humility, as at his first.
If to the first, then the sense is, Let all creatures rejoice, because he
comes to judge, that is, to govern and order with just and excellent Laws, the
whole Orb of the world, not only by the invisible Majesty of his Divinity, but
being made into the similitude of man, and in form now found a true man. 2. If
to the last, his second coming, then let all creatures rejoice, Or in Glory as
at his second coming.
because he shall root out sinners from the earth, and make new heavens, and a
new earth. The whole creature shall be delivered from corruption, under which
it greans and travails in pain together until now, and shall be restored into
the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8.21, 22.
3. Now both these shall be done with that rectitude of judgment, that there
be nothing crooked, nothing oblique, nothing savouring of iniquity in it. With
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with his Truth.

A Thanksgiving and Meditation upon the Redemption of Mankind, taken out of
the ninty eighth Psalm.
I Will sing unto thee, O gracious God, and merciful Lord, a new Song, as it
becomes me for a new savor, an ordinary hymn might be in my mouth for ordinary
blessings, but this was extraordinary, and therefore requires thanks more than
ordinary. That thou did create me after thy image, was a great mercy; that
thou have governed me by thy Word, preserved me by thy Power, provided for me
by thy Fatherly goodness ever since I was born, are all acts of mercy; but that
thou have set thy love upon me from all eternity, and in the fullness of time
did send thy beloved Son to be born, to live, to dye for me, and redeem my
poor soul from thy just wrath, and the consequents of it, is a favor more than
I could expect, more than I could deserve, and therefore I sing with the
blessed Virgin. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoiceth in God
my Savior. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people.

This is a favor so beyond all favors, and so nearly concerns all the world,
that I wish all men had hearts, and all creatures tongues to sound it forth. O
come and make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth, Your voices are not
sweet enough, take then the Harp, and join to the Harp the voice of a Psalm.
Your voices are not loud enough, call then for Trumpets to sound it out, and
blow it abroad with the wind of a Cornet. Let the praise us illustrious, and
the noise joyful,

And O that the inanimate creatures, who shall be by this one day freed from
the bondage of corruption, had tongues also to join with you. However in their
kind let them do what they can,

For he has done mavelous things. Things which we may admire, For without
controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness: God was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into glory.

Mavelous, O sweet Savior, was thy conception, mavelous thy incarnation,
mavelous thy life, mavelous thy death. We cannot choose but wonder, that
the Lord of life should dye, that the Lord of heaven and earth should be buried
in the earth. And that which increases the wonder, is, that he should rise
from thence to justify us, that he should ascend in our nature to heaven to
prepare a place for us, that he should sit on the right hand of God to be our
Advocate to plead for us, to be our Intercessor to step between, and make our
peace when our God is offended with us. And that we yet marvel the more, all
this was done for us, when we were without strength, and could not help our
selves; without grace, and could not deserve his, when we were ungodly, and
thought not of him, sinners that did provoke him, enemies that did cebell
against him. In this then God commended his love, that while we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us. O sweet Jesus, thy love to us was wonderful,
passing the love of women.

This was a work that passed the power of men and Angels; Angels were too weak,
and man too sinful to undertake in it. Yet so great was thy love to lost man,
that rather than he should perish for ever, thou, who were without sin, that by
thy right hand, and thy holy arm, thou have gotten to thy self the victory,
conquer and triumph thou did over Sin, Death, and Hell, and over all the
power of the Prince of darkness. It was thine own right hand without any other
power, that did it; thine own arm without any assistant, that led Captivity
Captive, and received gifts for men, yea even for thine enemies, that the Lord
God might dwell among them.

We the heathens, Thy righteousness, which is now our righteousness, blessed be
thy name for it, by which our pardon is sealed, and we are justified, is not as
a Candle hid under a bushel, but is openly showed in the sight of the heathen:
It is not in Judaea only that God is known, but all the ends of the earth have
seen the salvation of our God, all Nations now see and know that thou were a
merciful God in promising, and a faithful God in performing thy Holy Covenant,
that thou have remembered thy Mercy and Truth toward the house of Israel.

This is a mercy beyond all mercies, and in mercy, good Lord, continue this
mercy unto us. Never remove our Candlestick, or remove the light of thy Gospel
from us. And though at this time it be eclipsed, and that very justly for our
unthankfulness in the use of this light, for our undervaluing of it, and not
rejoicing in it, yet, we beseech thee, upon our contrition and amendment of our
lives, let it repent thee of the evil that thou have brought upon thy people,
and all mists of error and heresy, all darkness of profaneness being
dispelled, show forth the bright beams of thy countenance unto those thousands
of Israel, who seek and sigh after thy Truth with an honest heart.

Descend, in equity raise their grieved souls; Let thy Truth flourish, the
Gospel have a free passage amongst us, and bring to a speedy confusion, all
that are enemies to thy peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

PSALM. XCIX. (...).
THE Subject matter of this Psalm, is the self-same with the former, for it
sets forth the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, the Majesty, Power and Justice of the
King, and exhorts all by the example of his former servants, to exalt, call on
him, and praise him.

Two parts of this Psalm. 1. A Description of Christ's Kingdom. 1. From the
Majesty and Terror of it, against his enemies, ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. From the
Equity of it in execution of judgment and justice, ver. 4. 3. From the King 's
Patience and Clemency in giving Audience to his servants, 6, 7, 8.
2. A Demand of praise and honor of all that acknowledge him for their King,
Psalm. 93.
begun at the third verse, repeated at the fifth,


This is the third time he begins his Hymus with this solemn Acclamation, The
first part. Christ is King.
The Lord reigns, Jehovah is King: And then, as is usual in Music, Rests,
and pauseth, as it seems to me; after, as if he had recovered breath,

1. The Terror, Power, Glory, and Majesty of it. He bids the defiance to his
enemies, and comforts his people.


1. He bids a defiance, as it were, to all his enemies; (...), irascantur,
commoveantur, fremant populi; let the people be angry, fret, and be unquiet, as
Psalm. 2.1. Let the earth, that is, the Tyrants of the earth, be movd at it, yet
let them know, that all their endeavors are but vain: For, 1. God is present
with his Church.
For, 1. He sits between the Cherubims; the Cherubims were over the Ark, by
which was signified the presence of God with his people, and they covered the
Propiatory and Ark with their wings: The sense then is, God is always present
with his people, to them, and therefore no fear, though the earth be moved. 2.
The Lord is great in Zion, of great power, and high above all people, He is
potent, and higher than all people
in Majesty, Power, Wisdom; no fear then for this also, though the earth be
moved. 3. His Name is great and terrible: Great, holy, and therefore venerable.
In a word, His Name great and terrible, holy.
his Regal Majesty, and Regal Sanctity is such, that he is a most potent, and a
most just King, and therefore no fear yet, though the earth be moved; rather
let them give the praise and honor due unto his Name.
2. Our Prophet describes the Kingdom of Christ, He is a just King.
from the justice and equity which is administered in it, and thereby moves his
not to fear, though the earth be moved.

1. The Kings strength; Hoz. heb. strength, honor, dignity, authority,
holiness, etc. loves judgment, judges righteously out of the love he bears to
justice, not constrained by fear, passion or necessity. 2. And this he shows by
the following Apostrophe, in which he thus speaks to the King. 1. Thou do
establish equity; Confirm and establish just and equal Laws. 2. Thou executest
judgment and righteousness in Jacob: In thy Kingdom thou executest these Laws
also justly, by punishing sin, and rewarding good works, of which there be
examples in both Testaments; for though for a time he suffered the godly to be
afflicted, and the ungodly to be exalted, yet he at last frees his servants,
and crowns their patience; but he falls in fury on the wicked, and damns them;
he punishes sometimes in this life, always in the life to come.

Upon which the Prophet collects, That God is to be adoted, to which he
earnestly exhorts: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his Footstool,
for he is holy. For this he exhorts us:


1. Exalt ye, by praising his Majesty with the heart, To ^^alt him
2. To adore before his footstool.
And worship at his footstool; not his footstool, as some read it, that have a
months mind to have Images worshipped. In which expression David had an eye to
the Ark of the Covenant, for so I find it called, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. Lam. 2.1.
Toward which the Jews were bound to bow. And his intention is, that all our
approaches and applications to the Lord our God, be with the greatest reverence
and submission of mind and body that may be. All is too little. 3. For he, or
it is Holy.
For he is Holy, or, it is holy; for the skilful in the Hebrew confess it may
be read in either gender. Holy, the Jews called whatsoever was eminent,
excellent, perfect, chaste, entire, sincere. God then is holy, because he is so
in himself, and his house, his Priests, his Day, etc. The Ark his footstool, is
Holy in relation to him; when then we approach to him, or any place where he
ordinarily shows his presence, Holy and Reverent actions and gestures are
required of us. Take heed to thy feet; Profane not what is holy.
3. He is a kind King. Hears and grants petitions. As is evident
The third way by which the Prophet sets out the excellency of Christ's Kingdom,
and the Clemency and Mercifulness of our King, is in that he is ready to hear
Petitioners, and receive Petitions, and of an inclinable nature to grant them
also, for which he brings examples of three illustrious men, all eminent in
their generations; Moses a Prince, Aaron a Priest, and Samuel a Judge in
Israel, who all fell down and worshipped at his footstool, called upon, and
were heard in their intercessions.

1. and Aaron among his Priests. The Hebrew word here used, (...), In Moses,
Aaron.
always signifies not a Priest, but a Prince and chief Ruler, as 2 Samuel 8.18.
1 Chronicles. 18.17. and so it may have reference to Moses, a chief Prince, but in
the proper sense to Aaron, for he was the chief Priest. Samuel.
2. And Samuel no Priest, but a Levite, yet chief Judge among those called on
his name. 3. They called upon the Lord for themselves and the people, and he
answered them. Of Moses the story is extant, Exodus 32.31. Of Aaron, Numb. 16.
46, 47, 48. Of Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.5, 9, 10. 4. He spoke unto them, that is, to
Moses, Exodus 33.8, 9, 11. and unto Aaron, Numb. 12. from 5. to 8. But unto
Samuel we read not that he spoke in the cloudy Pillar.
And now he aptly adds the reason why God so readily heard these three, Why he
heard them.
it was because they were his servants, and obeyed the commands of their King.
For as Christ says, He that loves me, will keep my Commandments. He then that
will be heard in his prayers, Because they were obedient servants.
ought to hear God in his Commands. So did they.

1. They kept his Testimonies, those Precepts that were common to all others.
2. And the Ordinances he gave them, as Public persons, who were to rule in
Church and State.
And that this was a great mercy and favor to them and the people, the Prophet
acknowledges by his Apostrophe to God in the next verse.

1. He answered them.
Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God. Which the Story confirms. 2. He forgave
them.
Thou wast a God that forgavest them; that is, the people for whom Moses, and
Aaron, and Samuel prayed. For as Moller observes in Hebrew, the Relative is
often put without an Antecedent. 3. Even when he punished the people.
Though thou take vengeance on their inventions. The Calf was broken, Exodus
32. and the false gods put away, 1 Samuel 7. Though their sin was remitted, yet a
temporal and corporal punishment followed them, Numb. 14.23, 30. and Numb.
20.12.
2. The second part.
The Prophet concludes the Psalm Carmine Ambaebaeo, with the repetition of the
fifth verse, The Conclusion of all. That we;
only what he calls there Gods footstool, he here calls Mount Zion. And in the
verse is contained the full scope and intent of the whole, which is, That we
exalt our King, and adore him.

1. Exalt the Lord our God; not that we can do it, Exalt God.
which is then done, when we gratefully acknowledge his Power in defense of his
Church, and his Clemency in hearing our prayers, and the Intercessions of his
servants for us. 2. Worship at his Holy Hill; Adore.
which literally is to be understood of Zion, the place which he had chosen for
his worship, where now the Tabernacle was, and after the Temple was built. But
concerns us also that live in the Catholic Church, to serve him in unity,
meeting together in such holy places which are set apart for his worship. 3.
For the Lord our God is holy; which is the (...), or reason, For he is Holy.
why Zion was Holy, and many other persons and things in relation to him. A
consideration very necessary, as Musoulus well observes, for this profane age.
The Prayer collected out of the ninty ninth Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord, who reignest, sitting above she Cherubims, and governest
the whole world by thy wisdom, though the whole earth be moved, yet will we not
be afraid. For the Lord is great in Zion, and high above all people. Yet
because the united force of our enemies is great, and their iniquity twisted
together for the ruin of thy Church; arise, O Lord, and make them know, that
thy name is great, terrible, and holy; so great that thou can, and so holy
that thou will, and so terrible that thou will in fury take vengeance upon
pride and iniquity.

We are assured, O Lord, Arise up for us therefore in the judgment that thou
have commanded, and reward the just according to the integrity of their hearts;
stir up thy strength, and come amongst us, and help us for thy Namesake, O
God, our King and Savior.

And if at any time our wickedness go over our heads, Moses, or Aaron, and
Samuel could be for thy people. He is our High Priest, be mindful of his
invocation, his Sacrifice, his Blood, his tears, his cries, which he offered
upon the Altar of the Cross for us. His blood speaks better things than that of
Abel. That of Abel shed by us, cries aloud for vengeance against us, and what
we suffer, are the effects of that cry, the revenge of that blood. O blessed
Savior, still the cry of that blood with thy blood, wash the stains of it away
with those streams which issued from thy bloody side, and for the merit of that
blood, hear the prayers of Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, who had no hand in that
blood, but kept,

They daily call upon thee, hear them, O Lord our God, and answer them;

PSALM. C. A Psalm of Praise. (...).
THE Title shows the Scope, that it was composed for a form to praise God, yea
and in the public Congregation, and therefore is well chosen to be a part of
our Liturgy.

There be two parts of this Psalm. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, verse. 1, 2,
4. And the manner how to be done. 2. The reasons that persuade to it, verse. 3,
5.


1. He exhorts to praise God.
In his Exhortation to praise God, required it is, 1. The first part.
That the praise be Universal, none exempted from it. All ye lands, or all the
earth. 2. Make a joyful noise; Universally.
that it be done in gladness, and singing. 3. Heartily.
That it be not partial and restrained, but complete, the Copia verborum in
which the Exhortation is offered, Completely.
shows it. Jubilate, colite, scitote, 4. Sincerely.
That it be sincere, and not feined; done as in his eye, and presence. 5.
Knowingly.
That it ought to be well grounded, arise from knowledge. Know ye that. 6.
Thankfully.
But thanksgiving be a part of it. 7. Publicly.
That it be, as often as occasion is offered, Public. Enter into his Courts with
Thanksgiving.


2. The second part.
The Duty being set down; reasons the Prophet sets down also to persuade to it,
The reasons for it.
drawn from the Nature of God. 2. The benefits he bestows on us.

1. First from his Essence. Know ye, if you know not so much already, that the
Lord he is God. He is God. Which showed by his works of
And therefore none to be served but he. 2. And this he shows himself to be by
his work of Nature and Grace upon you. 1. Nature or Creation.
By his work of Nature, for he is your Maker. It is he that has made us, and
not we our selves. Parents are said to get chilcren, but that ability is from
God. He makes the barren to bear, and to be a joyful Mother of children. Thou
have fashioned me in my mothers womb. What says Elkanah? Am I in the place of
God? when his Wife was displeased she had no child. 2. Of Grace.
By his work of Grace. For we were out of the fold, but he called us into it,
and ever since accounted of us as his people of his pasture. He governs us,
feeds us.

And that we be yet the more cheerful and ready to perform this duty, in the
last verse he puts us in mind of three Attributes of God; His Mercy, his
Goodness, his Truth; for which he is worthy to be praised by us, because we the
better for them; for be cause he is good, he has mercy upon us; and because he
is merciful, He is
he promises us aid and assistance; and because he is faithful and true, he
will perform it.

1. For the Lord is good. O how good to those that are true of heart! He is
reconciled to us, A good God.
pardons our sin, justifies us, adopts us for his children, and that freely,
without any merit of ours. 2. His Mercy is everlasting. He is the Father of
Mercies, Merciful.
and begets Mercies, as often as we bring forth sins. It is the Mercy of the
Lord, that we are not consumed. 3. And his Truth endures to all generations.
Faithful.
For he never made promise, but either he has or will perform it. God is not
as man, that he should lie.
The Prayer collected out of the one hundred Psalm.
O Omnipotent and holy God, that we appear in thy presence, But being conscious
to our own unworthiness, which arises from the thoughts of our manifold
transgressions, afraid we are, that we dust and ashes, sinful dust and ashes,
should take upon us to speak unto our Lord, we tremble at thy presence, and are
ready to sink under thy displeasure; If thou, Lord, should be extreme to
mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?

Remember yet, we are thy creatures, and the work of thy own hands, Remember
that when we were not a people worthy of love, thou calledst us, and made us
thy people; when we were clean without the pale, that wentest after us, and
broughtest us home to thy fold, and made us the sheep of thy pasture. Give us
grace then, O thou great Shepherd of our souls, that we may lament our
unthankfulness and forgetfulness of these favors, and the heinousness of our
rebellions being removed, be reconciled unto us, and enable us, that instead of
a corrupt and impure life, we may serve thee in righteousness and holiness all
our days.

Of this we have yet some hope, because thou art good, from thy goodness
proceeds thy mercy, and because thou art merciful, thou have made promises to
penitent believing sinners, and we are assured thou will perform them, because
thou art faithful and true. O seal these promises to our disconsolate hearts by
the graces of thy Holy Spirit, then we will be thankful unto thee, and bless
thy holy Name. Amen.

Here ends the Third Book of the Psalms, according to the Hebrews.
PSALM. CI. A Psalm of David. Didascalicus.
DAVID being Anointed by Samuel to be King, or as most conceive, newly made
King, promises and vows to God to reign in Righteousness and Holiness. In a
word, he would so govern Himself, his Palace, the Church, the State, that all
wicked doers being taken away, and all good men countenanced by him, God should
be honored, and justice, peace, temperance, piety flourish.

Two parts of the Psalm. 1. The Syllabus, or brief of the Psalm: with the
Dedication of it, verse. 1. 2. The full Explication of what he means by Mercy
and Judgment, and how practiced 1. Toward himself. For he shows what his life
shall be, from verse. 2. to 5. 2. Toward ungodly men, verse. 4, 5, 7, 8. and the
end of it, verse. 8. 3. Toward all good men, verse. 6. These should be his
Counselors and Servants.



1. The sum of the Psalm. The first part.
He Summarily sets down what he will treat of in this Psalm, viz. Mercy and
Judgment, the two great virtues of a King. I will sing of mercy and judgment.

1. Mercy, Judgment, which he really vows.
Mercy, in countenancing, giving audience, judging for, and rewarding the good.
2. Judgment, in discountenancing, punishing, and being a terror to evil works,
and workers.
And that he would do this really, not talk and seem to profess a great love to
Mercy and Judgment, as Princes use to do, when they mean no such matter. He
makes a Solemn Vow to God to perform it. Unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. From
thee proceed these gifts, to thy honor they shall be referred, and by me, as
in thy sight, impartially executed. This I Vow and Promise to thee.

2. The second part.
And first I will begin with the reformation of my self, and my own house, that
I may be an example to my whole Kingdom.

1. In himself; for he would walk wisely in his house.
I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. 1. Via, is Vita, and my life
shall be perfect, pro statu viatoris. The way I shall choose, shall be the way
of perfection. 2. And then I will walk wisely in it; I will be wise as a
Serpent, and as innocent as a Dove; for, for want of wisdom, even in a perfect
way, a man may be mistaken. It is good to be zealous in a good matter, and in a
good manner. We see in a good matter, zeal, where there wants prudence, commits
foul errors. 2. God assisting him with his grace.
When will thou come unto me? Which some read with an interrogative point? and
then it is an Ejaculation, When, O Lord, will thou perform thy promise to me?
for as yet it is supposed by some, that he was not King: Or else, When will thou come unto me with thy assistance of grace? Others tead it, without the
interrogative, and couple this clause to the former words, thus, I will behave
my self wisely, when thou come unto me, intimating that he was not able to do
what he professed, without the aid and help of Gods grace. But yet signifying
thus much, that if God would come unto him to illuminate him, to teach him, to
inflame him, to move, and enable him, he then would behave himself wisely in a
perfect way. 3. I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. 1. I will
walk, it should be his delight, his constant course, And with a perfect heart.
as men take in their Garden-walks. 2. I will walk in my house; Not abroad only
carrying himself modestly, but within doors, in his private Closet. Or else he
would have a care of his Family. 3. I will walk in my house with a perfect
heart. My heart, which is the fountain of life and death, I will keep with all
diligence. That shall be sincere, upright, innocent; though I may slip in my
walk, yet it shall be far against my will. I will always walk with a perfect
heart:

Affirmatively he has showed what he would do; and in the next verses,
Negatively.
Negatively he declares what he would not do; he had manifested the innocence
of his heart, and now he shows what should be the innocence of his eyes, and
hands.

1. I will set no wicked thing before my eyes. says Jeremy. No wicked thing
should be esteemed by him.
Eve saw the forbidden fruit pleasant to the eye. A chan saw the Wedge of Gold,
and goodly Babylonish garment. Ut vidi, ut perii. So innocent he would be in
judging his Subjects, and distributing honors, that nothing of Belial, His eye
not love it.
as the Hebrew has it, should come in his sight, that might pervert his
judgment. Oportet judicem non solum manus, sed oculos habere continentes. 2. I
hate the work of them that turn aside. I hate it; for so he must, His heart
hate it.
that means to leave it; for when there is not a hatred of evil, the temptation
will work too strongly. 3. It shall not cleave to me. No part of it, God
willing, His hands not touch it.
shall cleave to his fingers.
2. Declared he has, what he would be in himself, To others, if wicked, he
would be severe:
and now he sets forth what he would be toward others, both bad and good. And
first as touching naught and evil men.

1. A froward heart, that is, a man of a perverse, froward, and crooked heart,
shall depart from me. 2. I will not know, that is, approve, uphold,
countenance, For instance such he would be,
love a wicked person.
Of which froward, malicious, and wicked people, he gives three instances in
the following verses, Detractors, proud, and fraudulent men. Such he would not
endure.

1. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: To slanderers.
from the Court, from my friendship, from his government, from life it self, if
the flender deserves it. 2. Him that has a high look, is proud. To proud men.
For pride is showed in the look and eye. 3. And a proud heart. Heb. Latus
cord, To the ambitious and covetous.
a heart so extended with ambition and coverousness, that it cannot be
satisfied with riches and honors. Him I will not suffer. He shall not eat with
me.
These shall not be about me, nor find any countenance from me, But to good men
a kind Prince.
such I will punish, and not favor. Others there are whom I will prefer and
honor, faithful and honest men: For he shows now how he would carry himself to
honest men.

1. My eye shall be upon the faithful in the Land, be my Servants, sit at my
Table, and be my Counselors. These should be his servants
2. He that walks in a perfect way, that serves God, shall serve me. For
certainly, he that will not ferve God sincerely, will never faithfully serve
man.
And so having opposed by way of Antithesis to the fifth verse, But he would
give no countenance,
what kind of men should be of his Court and Counsel. He proceeds in his
Negative, and adds, whom he would not entertain; before not slanderers, no
proud men, not ambitious, 1. To dissemblers.
No fraudulent persons. He that works deceit, shall not dwell in my house.
Enter they might, but upon discovery, stay they should not, dwell they should
not there. 2. To Liars.
Nor Liars. He that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. He shall not
find grace in my eyes.


And in Conclusion, To no evil Doers.
that he need not instance in more, he shows his dislike to all evil doers, and
his zeal to purge the City of God from scandalous persons.

1. With such he would make quick work. I will early, that is, speedily, and
maturely do it, before the evil be too fast rooted. 2. I will destroy all the
wicked of the Land. All of them shall go one and the same way, These he would
destroy.
who are worthy of death, and whose life may endanger innocent persons. 3. His
end in this severity was. That I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of
the Lord, i. e. That to the Church, which is a holy and a peaceable City, I may
restore Holiness, Piety, and Peace; and to the society of men that live within
it, tranquillity, and administration of justice, all disturbers of Peace and
Piety, being utterly unrooted, which under Saul's government bore too great a
sway.
A Prayer for a King, or Chief Magistrate, collected out of the one hundred and
first Psalm.
O Thou mighty King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings and Princes
decree justice, that especially which thou requirest of thy Vicegerents on
earth, is, That they show Mercy, and execute Judgment, that they extend acts
of Grace and Charity toward the good, and to be a terror to evil doers.

Come, Cause me to walk wisely with zeal and prudence in a perfect way. Give me
power to walk constantly, and with delight in my own family, with a perfect
heart,

Slip, Lord, and fall I may, but it shall not be willingly and maliciously, for
I will set no wicked thing before my eyes, that I should be tempted thereby;
Thou, Lord, have hitherto put into my heart, a hatred of the works of them that
turn aside,

Give me so much courage, O Lord, as to execute judgment upon the wicked; that
every man of a crooked and perverse, froward heart, be afraid of me, and depart
from me; let me never know, countenance, or show the least friendship to a
wicked person Embolden me to cut off every one that privily slandereth his
neighbor. As for the men, who show the pride of their heart with the rolling
of their eyes; and for such, who have a heart so full swollen with ambition and
covetousness, that nothing can satisfy, suffer me not to have any familiarity
with them, not so much as to admit them to my Table.

Thou know, O Lord, how full the world now is of fraudulent persons, and men
of lying lips, make my sevetity so awful, and my authority so reverential, that
he that works deceit, do not dare to dwell, stay and remain within my house,
and he that tells lies, be afraid to tarry in my sight.

As on the contrary, move me to discern,

Justice and Religion are the Pillars of any Kingdom, and at this time the
foundations of the earth be out of course, make me to beat up the Pillars of
it. Write the book of thy Law within my heart, and let the advancement of true
Religion be my chiefest care. that the wicked of the Land be by me early and
speedily destroyed, and all wicked doers be unrooted and cut off from the City
of my God. This is a City of Saints, far, far be removed from it, all yride and
covetousness, all fraud and lying, all Idolatry and false worship, all impiety
and injustice. Let righteousness flourish in the Gates, and piety in the
Temples thereof, and holiness show it self in the lives of the Citizens, to the
glory of thy Holy name, and the salvation of our poor souls, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

PSALM. CII. The Title of this Psalm, is, A Prayer of the afflicted when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before God. It is by the Church
chosen for one of the Penitentials.
IT seems to me to be composed by the Prophet to be a form of prayer to be used
by the faithful Jews in the time of their Captivity at Babylon. For in it is
expressed the sad condition they were then in, in the person of an afflicted
man, the present state of Religion, under the desolation of the Temple, which
the Prophet laments; and yet again comforts himself and his people, upon the
consideration of Gods Eternity and Immutability, and that therefore he will
perform his promise, have mercy on Sion, build again the Temple, restore them
again to their own Land, in which they should quietly and happily dwell.

This, no question, is the literal sense of the Psalm, but it cannot be
doubted, but the Prophet had a farther intent in it. For the faithful among the
Jews knew, that the Restitution of Solomon's Templ^, was but a Type of that
Temple, which the Messiah would build up of living stones, and inhabit by his
Spirit. This then they prayed for, and for the erection of it, when they prayed
for the re-edification of the other, as appears by very many passages in this
Psalm.

Two General parts there are of this Psalm. 1. A description of the Calamity of
the Church under the person of an afflicted man, from verse. 1. to 12. 2. The
comfort yet she took in these Calamities, and the ground of it, from verse. 12.
to 28.


1. The whole is formed into a prayer, A Prayer. The first part.
which is proposed in the two first verses, and an earnest motion made for
audience.

1. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. 2. Hide not thy face
from me in the day, when I am in trouble, incline thine ear to me, In which he
complains, and shows his sad condition.
in the day when I call, answer me speedily.
2. And he presses his prayer by way of complaint, showing many ways, what a
heavy case he was in.

1. My days are consumed as smoke, In many respects.
which though it swells into the air in a great thick body, yet it is suddenly
dispersed, and vanishes. 2. And my bones, which are, as it were, are burnt and
dried up, A Consumption.
as it were an hearth, or the stones of the hearth, which the fire by
continuance burns out. 3. My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; that
either cut down, withers to hay; or standing, is burnt up by the scorching heat
of the Sun. 4. To this pass I am come, that I can take no sustenance, I forget
to eat my bread. 2. By reason of the voice of my groaning, Grief.
my bones cleave to my skin. 3. Clausa fides miseris. Solitude.
I am become like a Pelican in the Wilderness, I am become like an Owl in the
Desert. 4. Watching.
From his continual watchings. I watch, and am as a sparrow alone on the house
top. As Moller observes this kind of bird, impatientissime viduitatem ferunt.
5. Reproach.
From the reproach of them, who had been his friends, but were now his enemies,
for a wicked man thinks himself reproached by a good man's honest conversation,
Wisd. 5. Mine enemies reproach me all the day long, and they are mad against
me, are sworn against me: have conspited by an Oath to undo me. 6. Sadness.
and tears in my eyes. I have caten ashes like bread, my daily food; and
mingled my drink with weeping, I drank tears with my wine: that is, I was fed
with bitterness, and sustained with tears, which they derided.
And now behold the reason why every true penitent is thus humbled, All these
increased by the sense of Gods anger.
it is not for want, nor yet for want of wit, but it is out of a true sense of
Gods anger, which he hopes to pacify by his sorrow and humiliation.

1. Because of thine indignation, and thy wrath, for my former sin. 2. Which I
collect thus. Thou have formerly lifted me up, then sure I was in thy fovour;
but have now cast me down, whence I may well conclude, that I am in disfavour
with thee. 3. And the effect plainly shows it. For my days are as a shadow
that declines, Become mortal, flying, fading from thy wrath, raised by my own
default.
2. The second part. He yet comforts himself in Gods promises.
Hitherto the Prophet has petitioned and complained. His case was lamentable,
yet he is notswallow'd up of sorrow. Heart he begins to take, and comfort he
promises himself in the Eternity and Immutability of God, and his love to his
Church. Hence he conceives hope of reconciliation, and being moved by the
Spirit of God, foretells the restoration of Zion and Jerusalem, and typically
the state of Christ's Church.

1. To his Church, on which he will have mercy, and had, when he restored them.
True, I wither away as grass, and so shall all Individual men. But 1. Thou, O
Lord, shall endure for ever: and therefore thy Church, and promises to thy
Church. 2. And thy Remembrance from generation to generation. The Covenant
which thou have made, shall be remembered from father to son,
2. Thou seem now to sleep. But thou shall arise. 1. Thou shall have mercy
on Zion, and save thy people. 2. For the time to favor her, yea the set time
is come; Literally, the seventy years of the Captivity were near expired.
Typically, by the Spirit, the Prophet foresaw, and conceived the Redemption of
the Church in the future, as a thing present. And both he calls a time of
favor; for from the favor and mercy of God, both proceeded.
3. And this Consideration wrought a double effect. This wrought a double
effect.
1. One upon Gods people for the present, viz. an earnest desire to have it so.
Jerusalem should again be built, the Church set up. For thy servants take
pleasure in her stones, A desire to have it so.
and favor the dust thereof. 2. The other upon the Heathen. Another on the
Heathen; viz. Compassion, Conversion
So the Heathen shall fear thy name; which began when Darius and Cyrus saw and
acknowledged the Prophesies, and obeyed them. 2. And all the Kings of the earth
thy glory; which was truly fulfilled, in the conversion of Constantine, etc. to
the Faith.

And he adds the cause why Kings and Nations should be so strangely converted,
because he had beyond all belief and expectation of man, When, or because the
Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in glory. Before, he cast his people
into the grave, as it were, without any hope of life, or restitution; but when
he shall bring them from thence, he shall make his glory and honor manifest.

And that which moved him to it, was the prayers of his people. He will regard
the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. Which effects
followed on their prayer. Of this mercy a Record to be kept.


Now lest the Jews should conceive, that what was done for them, did concern
them only, and not their Children, or to speak more properly, the whole people
of God in all ages to come; God would have a Record kept of it.

1. This shall be written for the generation to come. 2. And the people, which
shall be created, shall praise the Lord,
And of this he assigns two reasons, even the self-same set down at the 16. and
17. Verses.

1. For be has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, 2. To hear the
groans of the prisoners, That the glory be returned to God.

Now this Mercy from God, calls upon us for our Duty: for the proper end of it
was, and the effect that it should work upon us, is, that we should be
thankful. Therefore he looked down, therefore he heard the groans of the
prisoners, etc. That being freed, 1. They should declare the name of the Lord
in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem. 2. And this praise should be completed,
When the people are gathered simul, or in unum, united together, and the
Kingdoms to serve the Lord. The Gentiles join with the Jews in it.


And here methinks I hear the Prophet breaking off his comfort, The Prophet
laments he shall not live to see it.
and breaking out in the midst of his prophecy, with Balaam. As if he had said,
I am assured all this shall come to pass, and be done for Gods people, but
alas, who shall live, when God does this? Whosoever shall, I shall not
certainly. For he weakened my strength in the way, and has shortened my days.

Yet my desire is, it might be otherwise; Yet he desires he might.
and in this my desire is but the same with many Kings and Prophets that have
gone before me, all which long and desired to see the flourishing estate of the
Church under the Messiah, and therefore, I said, O my God, take me not away in
the midst of my age; But suffer me to draw out my life to see that, that all
good men have aspired to see, to wit, that I may behold Christ promised in the
flesh, and be a partaker of the glory of his Kingdom.

Which Petition, And presses that he might. Persuading God to it, upon 24. The
consideration of Gods eternity and immutability.
that it might be the easier granted, he presses it by a Collation of Gods
Eternity and Immutability with his own life. As if he should say, Spare me a
little before I go hence, and be no more seen, for I am nothing unto thee.

Thy years are throughout all generations, and therefore it is but equal that
thou indulge an ample space of life to thy image, that he may attain eternal
happiness.

And he proves God to be Eternal, because he is Immutable, not so the earth,
not so the heavens.

1. Not so other creatures, all they change, corrupt.
Not the earth, for it had a beginning, and that from thee, Of old, though long
ago, yet a beginning it, and thou placed it not upon a foundation already laid,
but laidst the very foundation thereof, broughtst it out of nothing to what it
is, and placed it in the midst of the World, as now it is. Ponderibus
libratasuis. 2. Not the heavens. For they are the work of thy hands, i. e. thy
Wisdom and Power. Heaven then, and all Creatures in it; Earth, and all below
cannot be Eternal. They began. 3. They shall perish; be either annihilated, or
altered from their present condition. They shall not be, what they are now, no
not heaven, nor earth. As then they are not Eternal, so neither are they
Immutable.
Now in opposition to these, he puts the Almighty God. But thou shall endure.
And yet more fully he expresses this Truth in the following words.

1. Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, make a farther step and
access to a final period, in regard of their duration. 2. As does a garment,
their use shall cease together with man, as does the use of a garment with him
that uses it, Isa. 34.4. 1 Pet. 3.10. 2. And as a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed, as the Curtains and Carpets, and Hangings, are
folded up, when the Family removes. 3. However, they shall not wax old by the
course of Nature, but by the mighty power of the God of Nature. Thou shall
change them, and they shall be changed.
Well, But God always the same.
be this so, as is most true, and must be granted, yet it is not so with thee,
O God.

But thou art the same, Thou art Immutable, Eternal; and because Immutable,
Eternal. Now the reason why God cannot suffer any change, is evident, for every
thing that is mutable, is endued with a power to attain to something by that
change, which it had not before. But God is actus purissimus, and an Essence of
infinite perfection, and therefore when he wants nothing, nothing can be added
to him, and consequently, he is Immutable.

Now the Eternity and Immutability of God being confirmed, Prophet draws hence
a comfortable Conclusion for the servants of God, His Church and servants shall
therefore continue also.
and for their children, viz. such as imitate their piety, for they shall be
partakers of eternity also. So is the Covenant, Genesis 17.7.

1. The children of thy servants shall continue. That is, The Apostles with the
Patriarchs their Parents, shall dwell in thy Kingdom, in the heavenly
Jerusalem. 2. And their seed, and as many as they have begotten by the Gospel,
if they remain in the faith, which works by love, they shall be established,
persevere, remain, continue before thee, live in thy presence for ever. As thou
art Eternal, so shall they be Eternal.
The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and second Psalm.
O Almighty God, great Lord of heaven and earth, we miserable sinners, with
fear and shame cast down our selves before thee, to accept the Sacrifice of a
broken and contrite heart, now, when we are in trouble, incline thine ear unto
us; in this day when we call upon thee our heavenly Physician, hear us, and
answer us, and that with speed,

For, O Lord, we are in a very lamentable condition, for the days of our life
and prosperity are consumed as smoke, that vanishes in the air, and the
pillars of our bodies, our bones, a bird that delights to live alone in the
Wilderness; and like an Owl, which flying the company of other birds, the
light, and sight of men, dwells in a secret, dark, and retired place, where she
sings a sad tune, and we a heavy song. as the Sparrow that sits alone, and
laments the loss of her mate, upon the house top.

And in these our distresses, we find no comforter, Thy wrathful displeasure
goes over us, Thou, who in mercy did lift us up, have in judgment cast us
down. The sad consideration whereof, does, beyond all that man can do, afflict
us.

But how long, O Lord, will thou break a leaf driven too and fro? our days are
like a shadow, and decliues, and we are withered as grass, whose beauty and
glory fades in a moment.

But why art thou thus vexed, O my soul? Call to mind, that he endures for
ever, and the remembrance of his Covenant to all generations. It Is thy promise,
O Lord, we look to, it is thy Covenant only we hope in, according to thy word,
arise and have mercy upon Zion, pity thy poor afflicted people, for the time to
favor her is now very seasonable, not so much those stones with which those
goodly structures, as those living stones built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, In the dust, Lord, we favor them, and for these we
pray, that they may be restored to their places in thy Sacred Temple. for this
will tend to thy honor, and enlargement of thy Kingdom, being alsured,

Look down then, O Lord, from the height of thy Sanctuary, and from heaven
behold the earth. May we but obtain so great a mercy, it shall be written for
the generations to come, and the people, our children, that shall be born,

That thou will make an Inquisition for innocent blood, I am assured, that
those who have profaned thy dwelling place, shall be as a rolling thing before
the wind, I do believe; that they who have swallowed down riches, shall vomit
them up again, I know, for God shall cast them out of their belly. But thou
have so weakened my strength in the way, and so shortened my days, that it is
not likely I shall lide to see it; Lord, might my eyes see thy salvation, I
would willingly sing with old Simeon, Yet will I pray, O my God, take me not
away in the midst of my age. I am thy Creature, for thy years are throughout
all generations. spare me a little then, because I am a creature of a short
continuance, and can bear no proportion to thy esernity, But I yield my self to
thy Will, I submit my self to thy dispose; if I cannot arrive to what I desire,
to see Jerusalem in prosperity, yet grant, that I may see my Lord in the Land
of the living, for I am assured, that the children of thy servants shall
continue, and their seed shall be established before thee, and live in thy
presence for evermore. Amen.

PSALM. CIII. (...). A Psalm to David.
THE Title shows the Psalm to be inspired into David by the Holy Ghost, and the
end is to comfort a soul heavy and laden, but especially with the burden of
sin. To him every word in it drops like an Honeycomb, so that had not the
comfort been revealed and sent from heaven, it could never have been believed,
that Almighty God should be so merciful to sinful man.

Three parts there are of this Psalm. 1. The Exordium, in which David by an
Apostrophe turns to his own soul, and stirs it up to bless God, ver. 1, 2. 2.
The Narration, or an ample Declaration of the Benefits, from the first to the
last, conferred by God upon him, and others; and the causes of them, from ver.
3. to 20. 3. A Conclusion, in which he makes a motion to Angels, and all other
Creatures, to join with him in the praise of God, from ver. 20. David stirs up
his soul to praise God. The first part.
to the last.


1. David being fully persuaded that he was one of the number of the Elect,
stirs up himself in the person of the Elect, to praise and speak well of God in
the two first verses.

1. Bless God, think on the Benefit, and bless the Benefactor; Extol him with
praises. 2. O my Soul bless him; because the Soul alone can know, and inform
the whole man what God deserves for his blessings. 2. Again, he would not have
it a lip-labor, but come from a heart affected with it: Heartily done; for,
quod cor non facit, non fit. 3. Not the Soul alone, but that all that is within
him: Totum hominis; And the whole man.
whatsoever is within his skin, every part, every faculty about him; Will,
Understanding, Memory, Affections, Heart, Tongue, Hand, Eyes, etc. All join. 4.
And bless Jehovah; for he gave them their Being, and their Properties and
Operations. 2. Praise his holy Name, his Essential Properties, his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, Justice; for to oclebrate God in all these, is, To praise his
holy Name. 5. Bless the Lord, O my Soul; for he comes over it again, 6. And
forget not all his benefits. He repeats it, and adds: That we forget not, His
Benefits.
1. Forget not; He would not be guilty of the common Error, forgetfulness of a
good turn; for (...) Which if it happen, it is impossible to be thankful; and
therefore, Omnium ingratissimus, qui beneficii accepti non reminiscitur: Forget
not then 2. All his benefits: Not all, no nor indeed any of them; for, not one
but deserves a blessing. 3. His benefits: Some read Munera, the Vulgar,
Retributiones: If Munera, they are freely given; if Retributiones, they are
more than we can deserve, yet it pleases him to account them so. Let but a man
well consider, how many evils we return daily to God for his good things he
freely bestows on us, and how many good things he returns to us daily,
notwithstanding the evil we return him, and we shall easily understand how
great is the goodness of God, That retributes good for evil, and makes his Sun
to shine on the just and unjust, Luke 6. And Beneficia they are to us, for we
are the better for them. The second part. Which now he begin^ by an (...), to
number the Benefits: 1. Done to himself.


2. At the third verse the Prophet begins his Declaration, and by an Induction
of particulars, reckons up the benefits, and that in this order. 1. Those done
to himself, in which yet he excludes not others, as if they might not share
with him. 2. Done to the whole Church: But of the first he had a true sense and
experience what others felt, he could not say: Now these benefits to himself
were either spiritual or temporal.

1. spiritual Benefit was Justification, or Remission of sin; by which of an
unjust man, Spiritual, as: 1. Justification.
he made him just; of an enemy, a friend; of a slave, a son. Bless God, who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, freely forgives thy Debt, or unjust Actions,
although many. All, everyone, Original and Actual. 2. Regeneration.
The second Benefit, is Regeneration, by which the Power of Concupiscence that
dwells in us, is daily weakened and subdued, though not wholly abolished. The
full cure must be expected in the life to come, but such a cure is done upon us
in this life, That it shall not reign in our mortal bodies, and we obey it in
the lusts thereof. And of this cure in himself, David was sensible, and
therefore he says, Who heals all thy diseases, or infirmities, is daily
cutting away, and snubbing these roots of sin. 3. Redemption, Who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, Redemption.
from the Pit, from the Grave, from Death, and that which follows it, eternal
Destruction. 4. Glorification, all out of mercy.
The fourth Benefit, Glorification: Who Crowns thee, gives a Crown of Glory;
and the cause of this, and the other Benefits, be conceals not, it is with, or
out of loving kindness and tender mercies; ex visceribus miserecordiae.
Neither is he behind with thee for temporal Benefits; for however Bellarmine
refers these and the following words to the felicity of the Soul, Temporal.
and immortality of the Body in the life to come, which I dislike not in the
Anagogical sense; yet I conceive the Literal sense of the words may properly be
referred to this present life, in which God feeds and nourishes our Bodies,
and supplies what is necessary for Food and Raiment, and also conserves us in
this life, and gives us health and strength;

1. Abundance.
Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: He gives not sparingly, and with a
Niggards hand, but gives abundantly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. He satisfies; and good
things they are, till we abuse them. 2. Long life and health.
So that thy youth is renewed like the Eagles: An Eagle is a youthful and lusty
Bird in her old age, and of long life; and this often God grants to many of
his, that they be long-lived, healthful and lively, active and vigorous old
men, as to Moses, Joshua, Job; which if it happen, it is a Gift of God.
2. Benefits to the whole Church.
As man is to pray, so also is he bound to bless God for the good that befalls
his Neighbor, which course David here takes; for he blesses God not only for
the Benefits of God bestowed upon himself, but such as were common, and did
belong to the whole Church; and in two he gives his instance. The first is, the
defense of his people, and deliverance of all that are oppressed. The second
is, the Manifestation of his Will by his Servants, the Penmen of Scripture to
them.

1. Deliverance.
Most just God is to his, and good, in punishing their Adversaries. The Lord
executes righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed with wrong, 1. A
righteous portion to his servants. 2. Judgment, and a just revenge to his
enemies, to all that are oppressed with wrong. The Israelites were preserved in
Egypt, but Pharaoh plagued.
2. Manifestation of his Will.
Most kind in making known his Will, which had he not declared to his servants,
That he made known his Ways to Moses, his Acts unto the children of Israel.
And here the Prophet interserts four Epithers or Attributes of God, Both the
Benefits bestowed, because God is,
which declares unto us the true cause of all the former and following favors.
The Lord is Merciful and Gracious, flow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.

1. Merciful: Rachum, because he bears a pate^nal Affection to pious men. 2.
Gracious: Channum, the Giver of Grace and Benefits: For he that loves with a
fatherly Affection, will give. 3. Slow to anger: Not easily drawn to strike, he
will bear long and much, as a Father, before he punish. 4. Plenteous in
mercies: When he does us good, being moved by no merit of our's.
Of all which Attributes, the Prophet shows the effects, and applies them
singula singulis, in the following verses.

1. He is merciful, bears a paternal Affection to his Children: Merciful.
He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever. For every father
chastises the son that he loves. But his anger shall not last long; for in his
heart there remains the love of a Father from whence the stripes proceed. 2. He
is gracious; For if he should deal with us according to our deserts, Gracious.
who could abide it? Psalm. 130. For what does a sinner deserve, but death? Romans
6. Whereas he forgives us, and gives us Life, Grace, Glory; and therefore we
may truly say with David here, He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities. This Grace and Favor the Prophet
amplifies by two Comparisons. 1. The first is, the distance of the Heaven from
Earth, which from the Center. to the highest Orb, is of an immense Altitude:
Yet look, As high as the Heaven is above the Earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him. 2. The second is, the distance of the East from the
West, which is of an immense Longitude; and yet look, As far as the East is
from the West, so far has he set our sins from us: Let the sin be of what
extent it will, it is not the interposition of our sin, so it be repented, and
left, that can hinder his Grace to shine upon us, and remove it.
3. He is slow to anger; and he has this of a Father also: Slow to anger.
For no men more patient than Fathers, in tolerating the infirmities and
childishness of their Children; this in him also: For like as a Father pieth
his Children, 4. Plenteous in mercy: Plenteous in mercy.
He takes into his consideration what frail Creatures we are, and fading; For
he knows our frame, he remembers we are dust. And this fragility and
instability of our's, causes him to be exceeding merciful to us; David
expresses in the next verse by way of Antithesis: But the mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting; ab aeterno in aeternum, from the Eternity of
our Predestination, to the Eternity of our Glorification; yet not bestowed hand
over head, it is with thy Restriction and Limitation. But to those that fear
him, and keep his Covenant.
1. Upon them that fear him. 2. And his righteousness; that is, veracity and
faithfulness in performing his Covenant; not to the Fathers alone, but to
Childrens children. 3. To such as keep his Covenant; Yea, and are obedient.
observe the conditions of Faith and Repentance. 4. Yea, and of obedience also:
That remember his Commandments to do them.

These Benefits are many and wonderful, and the mercy from which they proceed,
infinite; but that no man doubt of the performance of it, That fear him, and
keep his Commandments, This mercy God is able to make good.
what he has promised; and in the Close of this Part, the Prophet puts us in
mind of his Power.

1. He is Dominus in Coelo; not like our Lords on Earth, his power is no where
circumscribed. 2. He has prepared his Throne in the Heavens; there he fits pro
Tribunali, can see and judge the World. 3. And that we suspect him not to be
some under-Judge set over us, and appointed by another, David tells us, His
Kingdom rules over all: The Supremacy is his, he is the Supreme Monarch.
3. The third part. For these Benefits he invites all Creatures to praise God.
And thus the Prophet having particularly remembered Gods Goodness and Benefits
to his People, as being not able to return sufficient thanks alone, he invites
all the Creatures to join with him in his praise, and first the Angels: Bless
the Lord ye his Angels; whom he describes: 1. Angels.
From their excellency, Ye that excel in strength. 2. From their obedience, And
do his Commandments. 3. From their celerity, readiness, and cheerfulness in it;
That hearken to the voice of his words, that you may show you selves faithful
Ministers and Servants.


2. Armies of God.
He invites all the Armies of God to join with him, by which, Bellarmine
understands all the Superior Order, which is the Militia of Heaven, Luke 2.
together with the Angels before-named: Bless the Lord all his Hosts; ye, who
how glorious soever, yet are but Ministers of his that do his pleasure,
faithfully receive your charge, and do it diligently,

3. All his works.
He invites all the Creatures of God to join with him also, as if they had
sense, All his works.
and understood him; Bless the Lord all his works: All; for that no man should
think, that he meant only rational Creatures in Heaven and Earth. 2. He adds,
in all places of his Dominion, which extends over the whole world: All
Creatures then without exception, and all in all places he desires would do it;
and good Reason, for he made all, and rules over all, and is in all places,
with all, and fills all, and preserves all, and moves all; and in their kinds
they have done it, the Water at the Flood, the Fire at Babylon, the Crows in
feeding Eliah, the Lions in sparing Daniel, etc. And they do it, when all keep
their own stations, and work according to that Law of Nature which God has put
upon them.

4. Himself.
Lastly, That no man should imagine that he that called on others, would be
backward in performing the Duty himself, as he began, so he concludes this
excellent Psalm, Bless the Lord, O my Soul. At all times let his praise be in
thy mouth.

The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and third Psalm.
BOund I am, perpetually to acknowledge thee, to praise thee, and laud thy holy
Name: Wherefore, O my Soul, Bless thou the Lord, and all faculties within me,

My actual sins are many and grievous; but thou, O Lord, in mercy have forgiven
my iniquities; Lord, what was I? or what could I deserve, that thou should
bestow these wonderful Benefits upon me? when I think upon them, I am not able
to comprehend them; and when I comprehend them, I should be never able to
believe them, had thou not revealed them, and assured them to my foul by thy
boly Spirit. O my Soul, then bless the Lord, bless his holy Name, and forget
not all his Benefits.

But as if all these high favors had been too little, Thou have over and above
added many temporal blessings: I enjoy by thy bounty, food and raiment, So that
my youth is renewed as the Eagles, in this my old age. I find my body
healthful, my senses not altogether impaired, my understanding quick, and my
judgment bettered. Bless the Lord, O my tongue, and all that is within me,
bless his holy Name.

But what do I insist upon the Benefits which thou have bestowed upon me in
particular, when thou have been merciful to thy whole people? Execute
righteousness and judgment, help the afflicted, comfort them who are in want,
And because ignorance and error has brought a missy darkness over thy Truth,
shine forth again, and make thy ways known, as thou did to thy people by
Moses; direct them in the right way of a good and a happy life, and by the Acts
already done for thy children of Israel, assure them, what in all Ages thou will do for thy people.

Thou, O Lord, art merciful and gracious, flow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy; Be merciful then to the sins of thy children, and be not always
chiding; Why should thy Spirit always strive with those to whom thou beatest a
paternal love and affection? Be gracious then, and out of mere grace seal them
a pardon, Deal not with them after their sins, Make it appear, That as the
Heaven is high above the Earth, Show that it is not the interposition of any
sin, Thou art slow to anger, Pity them then, O God, pity them, and me an
undutiful Child with them: Yea, as a Father pitieth his own Children, so pity
us that fear thee. Remember, O Lord, our frame, how thou have fashioned us;
Remember, that we are but dust, and must return to dust; that suddenly shoots
up, or as a flower of the Field, which is to day in its pride and beauty, and
to morrow flags and falls; a nipping sharp wind passes over it, shrivels it
up, and it is gone, Thus frail, thus vanishing is man, when the Spirit of thy
indignation, But thou art plenteous in mercy; it is not so with thy mercy, as
with the life of man, that fades and decays; But thy mercy is from everlasting
toward them that fear thee.

O Lord, we desire to live in thy fear, and to keep thy Covenant; and as we are
the Children of those who have dyed in and for the Truth, Bring these desires
into Acts, that so keeping thy Covenant, For thou have prepared thy Throne in
Heaven, and thy Kingdom rules over all. To thee then we his as Supreme, for
pardon and mercy.

Thy mercy is above thy works, and the Benefits flowing from the Fountain of
thy mercy infinite, as it cannot be exhausted; so I desire the praise for it
should not be dried up. Men are sinful, and praise is not comely in the mouth
of a sinner: then join with me, Bless ye the Lord, ye that excel in strength,
ye that do his Commandments (which I to my grief keep not) and cheerfully and
readily hearken to the voice of his words. Ye are the multitude of the heavenly
Host, Galilee, Glory to God on High; Bless ye then the Lord, all ye his Hosts,
ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. And you also all ye works of his,
join with the Angels, and do what you can: Bless ye the Lord, and sound forth
his praises by your obedience and subjection to his Will in all places of his
Dominion.

Lastly, so freely pardoned and justified, so graciously regenerated and
sanctified, so dearly bought, and wonderfully redeemed, so undeservedly to be
glorified with this my body, which in the mean time is satisfied by him with
good things, and shall at last in youth be renewed as an Eagle: Bless the Lord,
Thou never can do enough, that have received so much; Tender then unto him
all laud, all honor, all praise, all glory, through Jesus Christ thy Lord,
thine only Savior and Redeemer. To God the Father that created us, to God the
Son that redeemed us, to God the Holy Ghost who sanctifies us, three Persons
and one God, be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Power, and Dominion, for ever and
ever. Amen.

PSALM. CIV. (...).
THE scope and intent of this Psalm, is the same with the former, viz. to
excite men to praise God upon the consideration of his Benefits, but yet upon a
different ground. In the former, for the Benefits of Grace conferred upon his
Elect. In this, for the Gifts of Nature bestowed in general upon all: Those
flow immediately from his mercy, these from his power, wisdom, goodness, and
depend upon his Providence, which are manifest in the Creation, Governance, and
Preservation of all things. The Creature then is, the Subject of this Psalm,
concerning which, in it we have a long, but very methodical Narration, by the
meditation of which, he invites all men to sing Hallelujah.

The parts of the Psalm, are four. 1. The Exhortation proposed briefly, ver. 1.
2. The Exhortation persuaded by Inspection of the Fabric, the beauty, the
order, the government of the World, from ver. 1. to 33. 3. The Duty practiced
by himself, ver. 33, 34. 4. An Imprecation on them that neglect the Duty, ver.
35.


1. The first part.
He begins with a double Apostrophe.

1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul; which was the Conclusion of the former Psalm. He
exhorts to praise God, because of his works.
2. To his God, O Lord my God; whom he describes to be great and glorious.
And that he may set forth his Majesty and Glory, he uses a most elegant
(...), borrowed from the Person of some great King, who presents himself very
glorious to his people, in his Robes, in his Pavilion, with a glistering Canopy
extended over his Throne, sometimes in his Chariot drawn by the swiftest
Horses, with all his Nobles, Ministers and Servants about him, and attending
his pleasure. And in this manner he presents the Majesty of God, which were the
work of the first and second day; for by that order he proceeds in setting
forth Gods works, viz. by the order of the days they are made.

1. His Robe is the light, the work of the first day, which is the purest, The
second part.
the most beautiful, the most glorious, illustrious, vivifical, he is clothed,
as with a garment; Of the first day.
for he is light, John 1.1. and be dwells in that inaccessible light that no
man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6. 2. His Pavision stretched round about
him, is the Heavens, Of the second day.
the work of the second day; these, as it were, the Hangings, the Curtains of
his Chamber of Presence; by his fiat and power stretched out, He stretched out
the Heavens as a Curtain. 3. His Palace built in a most miraculous manner; the
beams thereof laid, not as is usual, upon some firm and solid body, but upon
that which is most fluent, He lays the beams of his Chambers in the waters. In
Genesis 1.7. we read of waters above the Firmament, which were a part of the
second days work, and of these surely the Prophet speaks. What is to be
understood by waters above the Firmament, is no dispute for this place, Vide
Zanch. de op. Dei. lib. 2. c. 1. 4. His Chariot, the Clouds: Who makes the
Clouds his Chariot; upon these, he, as it were, rides, and in a wonderful
nimble manner is in all places he pleases, no otherwise than the Clouds, who
are now in this place, and instantly removed to another. 5. The Horses that
draw it, the Winds, Alipedes, as the Poets feigned the Horses that drew the
Chariot of the Sun; by it, his intent is, to show, That by the power of God are
brought upon the face of Heaven, and removed at his pleasure. 6. His
Attendants, Angels: He makes his Angels Spirits, In which his Majesty appears.
his Ministers a flaming fire. No Creature of greater quickness and agility,
than a Spirit; no Element more active, than fire: These blessed Spirits he
sends forth as he pleases, to defend his Servants, and as a flame of fire to
consume and burn up his enemies; in which appears his Might and Majesty.
2. Next the Prophet descends from the Heaven, and out of the Air, Of the
third day, in which his Power and Wisdom. The Earth created.
and comes to speak of the work of the third day; and he begins with the Earth,
that Element which is best known to us, in which he shows the power and wisdom
of God many ways.

1. In the foundation of it upon its center, that whether it have the motion of
Verticity as some do teach, or else is fixed, and moves not at all; ponderibia
librata suis: In foundation.
This the Prophet attributes only to the Power and Providence of God: Who laid
the foundations of the Earth, that it should not be removed for ever. 2.
Another part of his Providence about the Earth, was, that whereas the water
being the lighter Element did at first cover the Earth, The raising it above
the waters by his Fiat.
and made it useless; God, either by taking of some parts out of the upper
superficies of the Earth in sundry places, and made it more hollow; and laying
them in other places, made it more unequal; or to speak more plainly, by raising
some, and depressing others, made room for the Sea. This was a work of Gods
Word, and the Prophet speaks of this in the three following verses. 1. First,
He shows in what condition the Earth was in the first Creation, it was
covered, and under water: Thou cover'dst it with the deep, 2. He shows how the
Earth became uncovered, it was by the voice, power, and fiat of God: Let the
waters be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear, Genesis
1. This the Psalmist here calls the rebuke of God, the voice of Thunder; for
God had no sooner spoke the word, But it was so: At thy rebuke they fled, at
thy voice of Thunder they were afraid; whether they were such waters as are
now, or thick mists and vapors after to be condensed into vapors, afraid they
were to stay any longer, and to cover the Earth, when God rebuked them, spoken
as it were in Thunder, and bid them remove. 3. Jussit and extendi campos,
subsidere Valles: Confining the Sea.
The Mountains and the Valleys take the lower place: Or else, as we read, They,
the mists and vapors go up by the Mountains; for quanti montes volvuntur
aquarum; but they stayed not then, nor yet do stay upon the Mountains, But they
go down by the Valleys unto the place which thou have appointed for them, still
failing along to Sea. 4. His Providence about the Rivers.
There thou inclosest them, as with doors and bars: Job 18. Thou have set a
bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the Earth;
yet not violently kept there, as some suppose; but restrained by an ordinary
way of Nature, it being natural for water to descend to the lower places, which
by Gods power was not hollowed for them to remain in; that they once did
return, and cover the Earth, was by Gods extraordinary Command.

3. And next he comes to speak of the Rivers and Springs, and shows Gods
wonderful Providence about them.

1. He sends the Springs; that is, the streams of water, from the Hills into
the Valleys; Their Springs.
which yet at first run among the Hills; for who knows not that the domus
fluvii, the Spring and Well whence the greatest Rivers stream is seated,
commonly in the foot of some Mountain. 2. Their Use.
And the end of this infinitely declares Gods Providence, it is for the
sustenance of Beasts and Fowls, perish they must for thirst, were it
otherwise, and therefore he adds: 1. They, i. e. the Springs and Rivers, give
drink to every Beast of the Field, the wild Asses quench their thirst. 2. By
them shall the Fowls of the Heaven have their habitation, which sing among the
Branches.

4. But the Springs and Rivers cannot water all parts of the Earth, were it not
then for another part of his Care and Providence, The Rain and Dewes.
the Hills and higher places would be altogether barren and unfruitful, his
Wisdom therefore found out a way to remedy this also, and that was, by sending
Rain out of his Bottles, the Clouds, a gift so great and peculiar to him, that
he is called by Job, the Father of the Rain.

He waters the Hills from his Chambers; 1. Their use in general.
In general, the satisfaction of the Earth, which being thirsty, gapes for
Rain, and drinks abundantly from Gods plenty: The Earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works, by the Rain, which is by thy hand prepared, and is thy work
in the Clouds. 2. In particular.
In particular, the effects, ends, and consequences of these dewes and showers
are many, which all yet are from God as the prime cause; for quod est causa
causae, est causa causati. 1. Grass for the Cattle: He causes the Grass to
grow for the Cattle. 2. And Herbs for the service of men. 3. All kind of Food:
And that he may bring forth Food out of the Earth; which without Rain would not
be had. 4. And Wine, which has this lively spirit, That it makes glad the
heart of man; and if we stay there, lawful. 5. And Oil to make his face to
shine: Oil supples, comforts, 6. And bread, which strengthens man's heart:
Where there is bread, there is no Famine, it seems it is the strength of the
Feast; for it is always the chief and necessary part of the Service.



5. The Trees.
Neither has the Providence of God been forgetful to provide us Trees also,
which, besides they serve for diverse uses, as shade, building, fuel, and yield
many kind of fruit; in the production of them, God has not forgotten the very
Birds, they serve them for their Nests, their Songs.

1. The Trees of the Lord also; his Trees, because he first made them, are full
of sap, which is another effect of the Rain: The Cedars of Lebanon which he
has planted. 2. Where the Birds make their Nests; as for the Stork, the Fur
Trees are her house; in them sly builds. Hills.
3. Nay, other Creatures are not forgotten by him, not the Coats, For the high
Hills are a Refuge for the wild Goats, The work of the fourth day, Sun, Moon,
by them:
and the Rocks for the Conies.
3. The Psalmist goes on to the work of the fourth day, the Creation of the two
great Luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, and the consequences of it;

1. He; i. e. God appointed the Moon for certain seasons, that it should shine
in a fit and apt time in the night, and not in the day. 2. And the Sun knows
his going down; that it is not to shine out of season, Night, and for rest.
but to give place to the night.
And in this division of time the Providence of God was admirable both to Man
and Beast: Thou make darkness, and it is night.

1. For the good of the Beasts, even the wildest, that they may be sustained;
for, 1. The night comes, The young Lions roar after their prey, and seek their
meat from God; that is, seek their meat in that manner, as Gods Providence has
ordained. 2. Again, the day appears: The Sun rises, and they appear not;
2. For the good of man; Day for labor.
for this disposition of seasons by the course of the Sun and Moon, are good
for him to; it is, quod caret alterna requie durabile non est: Man goes forth
to his work and labor; See what he was born to, to get his living by honest
labor, and not by preying, murdering, tearing and ravening as a Beast, that
rises in the night to that purpose; but to labor in the day, and not tire
himself out neither; labor he must all day, and then take rest: Labor till
the Evening.
Upon the consideration of all which, the Prophet, as a little raped out of
himself by the thoughts of Gods Providence, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, interserts
this Exclamation.

O God, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom thou have made them all, His
Acclamation to Gods Works.


1. How manifold are thy works, how great, how excellent, how worthy of praise;
such, that I cannot express them. 2. In wisdom have thou made them all: No
thing is rashly, and by chance done; but all with judgment, and with great
Reason; nothing in them does want, nothing does abound. 3. All the Earth is
full of thy riches: No place, no part of it, but in it thy works proclaim that
thou art a most bountiful and most wise Creator, and an open-handed and liberal
Bestower of thy Riches.
4. The Ordinance for the Sea. The Amplitude
The Prophet has hitherto set forth Gods wisdom in his works in the Heaven,
the Air, the Earth, and now he descends into the Sea, in which he shows his
wisdom.

1. It is the great and wide Sea, extended far and wide. 2. The work of the
fifth day, Fish.
In the Abundance of Fish in it, which was the work of the fifth day, Wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great animals. 3. Noah's Ark:
There go the Ships. Creatures in it.
4. Navigation.
In the Whale: There is that Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein.
5. Gods good ness in Conservation of the Creature.
The Conservation of the Creature now follows, from ver. 27. to 30. where
their dependence is showed upon the Providence of God, both for their meat,
their life, and continuation of them in their species: For these words, These
wait all upon thee, though they immediately reflect upon the flesh, he last
spoke; yet they must be referred to all Creatures, all having upon God the like
dependence.

1. For he gives them meat in season.
These all wait upon thee: They are all expectants, and wait they must, till
thou give. 2. That thou may give them their meat: Freely give, and meat fit
for them, and that in a fit opportune season; meat fit for every season of the
year, and when they want it. 3. That thou give them, they gather: That, and
no more, nor less; for it is not meat till God make it so; his power and
blessing must cooperate with the second causes. 4. Being the Author of,
This he farther explains in the following words, Thou openest thine hand, and
they are filled with good; filled and satisfied from thy open hand, without
which, the Husbandmans industry, and the fatness of the ground is to little
purpose.
Farther, Life and Death is in thy Power.

1. Death.
Death, and the Forerunner of it, Trouble. 1. Thou hidest thy Face, seem to
be displeased, and withdrawes thy help and assistance, and they are troubled.
2. Thou take away their breath, they dye, and return to their Dust.
2. And life.
Life also. 1. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, a vital Spirit, by restoring new
Individuals to every species; for so they are created, that is, formed. 2. And
by this, Thou renewedst the face of the Earth; which, if it were not done, The
third part. He votes all praise to God.
the whole World would fail in one Age.

Now after this long Catalogue of the Creatures, and Gods Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, made most manifest in the Creation, Governance, and Sustentation of
them, he descends to what he began with, and votes all praise to God; for so
most read, ver. 32.

1. Let the Glory of the Lord, his Glory, for his Wisdom, Goodness, Power,
endure for ever, And moves man to an honest use of the Creature.
hallowed be his Name. 2. The Lord shall rejoice in his Works: Let man be so
careful to use them well, that by the abuse he put not God to grief, and cause
him to repent that he made them. 3. For if he looks on the Earth with a
threatening brow, it trembles; that Earth, whose foundation, he said, should
not be removed, ver. 5. He touches the Hills, and they do smoke; it was so as
Sinai, Exodus 19.
2. This praise he would give.
Then he makes an open profession of his own practice.

1. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, 2. And this he would do with
delight, My Meditation of him shall be sweet unto me, I will be glad in the
Lord.
3. The fourth part. He imprecates against sinners.
And he concludes with an Imprecation against unthankful and negligent persons,
who regard not the Works of God, and will not see his Glory, Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, in his Creating, Governing, and Sustaining this Fabrique of this
Universe, and therefore very little praise him; against these he prays, Let
the sinners be consumed out of the Earth; and let the wicked be no more; i. e.
Let them so fail from the Earth, that either they be converted, and cease to be
sinners; or else, if they will continue obstinate and perverse, let them perish
out of the Earth.

But O my Soul, be not thou like to them, Bless the Lord; Hallelujah.

The Prayer and Meditation out of the one hundred and fourth Psalm.
O Most Omnipotent, Wise, Glorious, and most merciful God, the Clouds are thy
Chariot, the swift winds at thy Command, and thy Angels, thy Ministers, ready
to take revenge in a flame of fire upon disobedient sinners, if thou give the
word. How can I, that am conscious to my self, of so repeated and continu^^^
sobedience, presume to be a Petitioner unto thee, or offer up any reque^ (...)
There is not a Creature that I cast my eye on, but upbraids me for negligence
and inconsideration, since thy Power, thy Glory, thy Wisdom, thy Goodness is
illustrious in all these, and yet I have passed these by, as if they were not
worthy of my saddest thoughts: Their Natures I have inquired into, but have not
looked up to thee the Lord of Nature. O my Soul, then rouse up this deadness
and dullness of spirit, ascend from the Contemplation of the Creature, to the
Meditation of the Creator, and remember what the whole Universe preaches unto
thee, That he must be a God of Power that has so made, a God of Wisdom that
has so disposed, a God of Mercy and Goodness that to this day governs and
sustains every Creature to thy use and service.

Can thou tread upon the Earth, and not admire? Had it not been for this
great Providence of the Almighty,

But his goodness stayed not here; for, for a necessary supply he has placed
his Bottles in the Clouds, and thence descends in silver showers, That the
whole Earth might be satisfied with the fruit of his Works. O ungrateful man,
ascribe not too much to thy wit, industry, and labor; know that he is the
Father of the rain; and did not he from above water what thou plantest, and
give an increase to what thou sowest; thy early rising would be but lost
labor, and all thy foresight, bread only of carefulness. the Lord above that
causes the grass to grow for thy Cattle: Thou delvest, diggest, weedest thy
Gardens, but it is the Lord of Heaven that gives life to thy Plants and Herbs;
which he commands to shoot for thy service, whether for meat or medicine. Man
does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God, he brings food out of the Earth; an Herb, a Plant, a Root, a Fruit it
may be by that power and virtue which thou have established by the perpetual
Law of Nature; but food it will not be without thy blessing.

Continue to us then, It is thy Wine, that must make glad the heart of man; the
sap in our Fruit Trees is from thee, and the strength of the Cedars from thy
Plantation, Give us, O Lord, our meat, and all other necessaries, and when thou
shall give it us, we will gather it; for we are assured, when thou openest thy
hand, we shall be filled with good: No Creature will be good unto us, except
thou be good.

And here, O Lord, I will step aside to the Seashore, where I may take a
prospect of that great Pond of the World which retired at thy rebuke,
Leviathan, whom thou have made (...) therein: That I say nothing of the Ships
which pass upon it, which thou first taugh'st man to frame, by the example of
Noah's Ark, and provided, that the brinish nature of the Element be able to
support them, when laden with heavy Commodities, and fearful Passengers.

O Lord, How many millions of wonders does this Globe below offer us, which of
the Herbs, Flowers, Trees, Leaves, Seeds, Fruit; what Beast, Worm, Fish, Bird,
is there, in which we may not see the footsteps of a Deity? Their dissolution
a wonder; for thou take away their breath, and they dye, and return to their
dust; but yet the continuance of all of them in their species, matter of
greater admiration; for though the Particulars vanish, yet the Kind lives, and
shall live till the dissolution of all things without any decay in Nature;
which could never be, But that thou renewest the face of the Earth.

And for the assurance of this continuance, Thou have set thy two faithful
Witnesses in Heaven, who, by their constant motions, for the Moon, as thou have
appointed, observes her seasons, and the Sun knows his going down; and so
this light is interchanged with darkness, That Beasts may rest and prey, and
man may labor and rest. The day dies into night, and rises in the morning,
that we never forget that our light of life shall suffer an Eclipse; yet so,
that we shall get up again in the morning of the Resurrection: Say thou the
word, and my Soul shall be renewed again: Say thou the word, and my body shall
be repaired from its dust.

I am a mortal Creature, But thy Glory, O Lord, shall endure for ever; and so
be it, As for thy works, give me wisdom in them to admire thy Wisdom, and grace
so to make use of thy Goodness, That thou may rejoice in them, and not
repent, that ever thou made any of them for my sake. I tremble to think of
the abuse, when I read, That thou look upon the Earth with an angry brow,
and it trembles; and thou do only touch the Hille, and they smoke.

By the assistance of thy Brace I will use them soberly, and to my sobriety I
will add thanks. I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live,

As for those sinners who abuse thy Creatures, thouch their hearts, that they
sin no longer in the profane abuse of them; but if they shall go on to neglect
thy Praise, to blaspheme thy Name, and obscure thy Glory, O my Soul, come not
into their Assembly, but bless thou the Lord; and labor to draw all others to
sing an Hallelujah, to magnify his Power, to exalt his Glory, to sound forth
his Wisdom, to sing of his Goodness, for his wonderful Creating, his orderly
Governing and Disposing, his bountiful Preserving of the whole World. O my God,
I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

PSALM. CV. (...).
THE Title of this Psalm is Alleluja, as is also of the two following; and the
first fifteen verses of it, were sung at the bringing up, and settling the Ark
by David, 1 Chronicles. 16. The scope of it is the same with the two former, That we
praise God: But yet with this difference in the one hundred and third, That he
be magnified for his Benefits of Redemption. In the one hundred and fourth, For
the Manifestation of his Power and Providence, in Creating, Governing, and
Sustaining the World: But in this, For the gracious Covenant he made with
Abraham, and in him, with his whole Church.

Two parts there are of the Psalm. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, from ver.
1. to 7. 2. An Enumeration of the Favors God bestowed to persuade to it, from
ver. 7. to the end.


1. He that loves his Prince truly, The first part. He invites to praise God,
and shows how it is to be done.
desires that others also should magnify and honor him, as well as himself:
This was David's case, he was a true lover of his God, and set a true estimate
upon him, he honored and praised himself, and out of his zeal he calls here
upon others to do it, outwardly, and also inwardly, both with tongne and heart.
He thought all too little, and therefore he comes over this Duty often, and
shows indeed how it is to be done.

1. By giving of thanks: O give thanks unto the Lord. Both outwardly.
2. By Invocation: Call upon his Name. 3. By Annunciation, Make known his deeds
among the people. 4. By Voices and Instruments of Music: Sing unto him, sing
Psalms unto him. 5. By frequent Colloquies of his Works: Talk ye of all his
wondrous Works. 6. By boasting of him: Glory ye in his holy Name, Profess that
you are happy men, that ever Gods holy Name was made known to you: He that
glories, 2 Cor. 11.
He has invited all outwardly to exhibit praise, and now he advises that it
be done inwardly also, with exultation, and gladness of heart: He would not
have men to think it a tedious work, And inwardly.
and to be weary of it, but to perform it with joy.

1. Let the heart of them rejoice: Spiritus sanctus non can nisi de laeto
cord. 2. Of them that seek the Lord: For indeed they only that seek him can
rejoice heartily, they can acquiesce in God and his Promises of Grace, Pardon,
Acceptance, and have reason then to approach him, and praise him with glad
hearts; others conceive God as angry with them, and then can take no delight in
any service they do him.
Which is so necessary in every one that will with comfort make his approaches
to the Throne of Grace, And presses to it.
and have his praise that he tenders accepted, that the Prophet seriously
urges the Duty.

1. Seek the Lord: All other gods, all impiety, wickedness being cast away,
seek him. 2. Seek his strength; which at that time was the Ark, a Symbol of his
Presence: And that it be remembered.
Seek him in his Church. 3. Seek his Face evermore: His Favor, his Grace, his
Reconciliation; seek him in his Word, in his Sacraments, etc. 4. Evermore seek
him; Jugiter: Now and then is too little, it must be our constant work.
He has spoken of the Heart, now he comes to the Memory: Memento te, remember,
forget not; and the things to be remembered, are: 1. His mavelous works. His
wonders. 3. His judgments; which three are the matter of this whole Psulm, and
are after explained according to these heads; and in the next verse he tells us
to whom in particular he directed his Memento at that time, which were the
Israelites, the posterity of Abraham, and the sons of Jacob.

Remember his mavelous works, Especially that by Covenant.
etc. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen:
Remember that he made Abraham, and chose Jacob to be his servants, gave you
Law, and showed you with what Rites he would be worshipped; you then may not
forget it.

2. The second part.
And at the 7th. verse, the Prophet begins his Narration, and tells the
Israelites, and in them us, what mavelous works God had done for his people,
all which he presses as Arguments, that his people praise, honor, worship,
obey him: There is much reason for it; for, 1. He is the Lord our God.
He is the Lord our God: The same Argument prefaced to the Commandments, I am
the Lord thy God. 2. His judgments are in all the Earth: He is a mighty
Monarch, and has all men under his Empire. A mighty Monarch.



And if neither of these move, yet there is another drawn from his many and
infinite favors and benefits bestowed upon you, O you Israelites, and indeed
the chief upon all mankind, which was the Covanant he promised upon the fall of
man, That the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, and this he
forgot not: He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the Word which he
commanded to a thousand Generations.

1. Established his Covenant with Abraham, etc.
Which Covenant he made with Abraham, and confirmed it by a facrifice, Genesis 15.
and 13. 2. And his Outh unto Isaac, Genesis 26.3, 4. 3. And confirmed the same
unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting Covenant, 4. With his
seed.
The Form of the Covenant recited, Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of
Canaan, for it was divided to the Tribes by lots.
Which Covenant God made with their fathers, When few, strangen.
and them; not out of any merit that could be in them, Deuteronomy. 8.4, 5, 6. Josh.
24.2. For this Covenant and Promise was made to them.

1. When they were but a few men in number, yea, very few. 2. And they
strangers in the Land; Canaan. 3. Yea, when they went from one Nation to
another, and from one Kingdom to another people, as did Abraham, Genesis 12. and
Jacob.
2. Now when they were in this condition few, very few, Strangers, Sojourners,
These he protected.
Pilgrims, God protected and defended them, which was a second Favor over and
above that of the Covenant; for, 1. He suffered no man to do them wrong, no not
the greatest; but reproved even Kings for their sakes; as Pharaoh, Genesis 12. and
Abimelech for Abraham's, and Abimelech for Isaac's, Genesis 26. and Esau and Laban
for Jacobs sake, Genesis 31. and 32. 2. For he gave a Command to these Kings
concerning them, Touch not mine Anointed, viz. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, who were
anointed with the Holy Ghost, though not with material oil: Nor do my Prophets
no harm; i.e. the same men, for they were Prophets. Abraham foresaw the bondage
of his seed in Egypt, etc. Isaac foretold what should befall to Esau's
posterity, Genesis 27. Jacob by a Prophetical Spirit gave his blessings, Genesis 49.
Of Abraham it is expressly said, He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee,
Genesis 20.7.


3. Two of these mercies, the Covenant and Protection, are already named, and
now he goes on, and insists upon the third, from ver. 16. to 23. For which,
there was infinite matter of praise for the wonderful wisdom of God, Sustained
them in the Famine which he brought.
that brought out of the greatest evils, the chiefest good, by preserving their
lives in Aegyp^ in an extreme famine; the story is extant in the Book of
Genesis, in the 37. and the following Chapters.

1. Moreover he called for a Famine upon the Land: He called for it, that is,
2. He brake, still it is his doing, the whole staff of bread, which is the
staff, the stay, the upholder of our lives; and this he brake, when he
ordered, That for seven years there should be nor plowing, nor sowing, nor
earing, nor harvest, Genesis 45. 3. By this occasion of the Famine which was to
come, He sent a man, By Joseph in Egypt.
He sent a man, virum, a wise man before them. God our of Providence sent him,
when he suffered him to be sold to the Ishmalites, and carried down to Egypt.
4. He tells us who this man was, Joseph, sold by the envy and cruelty of his
Brethren, to be a Bond-servant; for the Ishmalites sold him to Potiphar. 5. And
now he comes to his base Usage: 2. His Advancement. 1. By the false Accusation
of Potiphar's Wife, Who was first sold, imprisoned
His feet they hurt with fetters of Iron. 2. He was laid in Iron; or as some
read, the Iron entered into his Soul: The grief was great that he suffered from
the Irons; but that which added to his grief, that he should lie under the
Aspersion of so foul a Crime.
6. There he lay, Donec, Until the time that his Word came: For a time best
known to God.
God has then his Donec for his servants to suffer, and when that Donec comes,
they shall suffer no longer. 1. Until the time his Word came: His Word, i.e.
Gods Word for his deliverance: 2. Or as others, Joseph's word to the Butler
came to pass. 2. The Word of the Lord tried him; God tried his patience: Or,
the Interpretation of the Dreams proving true, were a sufficient trial, that it
was the Word of the Lord which he spoke. He spoke by the Spirit of God.

2.

1. But taken thence, and exalted.
Pharaoh by his Butler hearing of Joseph's wisdom, He sent and loosed him from
Prison. 2. Even the Ruler of the people let him go free; a work fit for a King.
2. To be the Rulet in Egypt.
And his Advancement follows: To free an Innocent, a signal Favor; but to
advance him, a greater; this Pharaoh did.

1. He made him Lord of his House, Majordorno. 2. And Ruler of all his
Substance: He was his Treasurer, Genesis 41.40, etc. Indeed a great Viceroy, a
grand Vizier. 3. To feed them. To instruct them.
but for the good of their fouls also. 1. To punish the Rebellious: To bind his
Princes at his pleasure. 2. To instruct them his Counselors in that Wisdom,
those Arts, Sciences, Religion, which he excelled in; exalted he was, to teach
his Senators the great Counsel of his Kingdom, wisdom; and it is supposed, That
all the learning in which the Egyptians excelled, was first taught them by
Joseph.

4. Jacob and his Family descends thither.
The fourth Benefit follows, of God toward his people, from ver. 22. to 37.
which was their nourishment, their increase in Egypt, their oppression, and
deliverance thence.

1. He begins with Jacobs descent thither. 1. Israel also, Joseph's father, went
down into Egypt, read Genesis 45. 2. Sojourns there 222. years.
And Jacob with all his family, seventy souls sojourned, there then to remain
for a time, viz. two hundred and twenty two years in the land of Ham, viz. in
Egypt, so called, from Cham the father of Misraim, that first peopled it after
the Flood.
2. And multiply.
He proceeds with their strange increase there; for it is wonderful, that in so
short a time they should so multiply, and grow into such multitudes, Exodus
Exodus 12.37. And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger than
their enemies, Exodus 1.9.
This was the Occasion of their Afflictions, 1. But are made Bondmen.
He turned the Egyptian hearts to hate his people: i.e. He suffered them to be
turned: For there arose another King which knew not Joseph, Exodus 1.8. 2.
Afflicted, and subtly dealt with.
And to deal subtly with his servants: Come on, say they, let us deal wisely
with them, Exodus 1.10. and their wise work was: 1. To set over them
Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens, Exodus 1.11. But when they saw,
That the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew, ver. 12.
2. Then they ordered, That all the male-children should be strangled by the
Midwives, ver. 16. And when this way took not neither: 3. Then Pharaoh charged,
That every son that was born, should be cast into the River, ver. 22. Thus
subtly they dealt, but it hindered not their Multiplications; God sends Moses
to deliver them.
there is no Counsel against God.



Now God seeing their Affliction, and hearing their Groans, sent them a
Deliverer.

1. Hesent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen. 2. By signs and
wonders which were.
They showed his signs among them. 1. To the Israelites. 2. And wonders in the
land of Ham; then to the Egyptians, of which the Caralogue follows.

1. He sent darkness, and it was dark; and they, i.e. Moses and Aaron rebelled
not against his Word. 2. He turned their waters into blood, and slew their
fish. 3. The Land brought forth Frogs in abundance, 4. He spoke, 5. He gave
them Hail for Rain, and flaming fire in their land. 6. He smote the Vines also
and Fig Trees, 7. He spoke, and the Locusts came, and Caterpillars, 8. He smote
also the firstborn of their Land,
These were the wonders that God wrought in Egypt by the hand of Moses and
Aaron, for the deliverance of his people, which therefore the Psalmist briefly
Records, that they might remember to be thankful, and praise him.

5. The fifth Benefit which God bestowed upon his people, is, He brought them
out, and entiched them
that he brought them not out Beggars, but enriched them with the Spoils of
Egypt; nor in a sickly, but healthful condition.

1. He brought them forth with silver and gold; Egyptians, can show such an
immediate Commission from God to do it, content I am, that they borrow, and
never restore; rob and spoil whom they please, till that be shown, they are
Thieves and Robbers, and Sacrilegious persons. 2. Farther; Gave them healthful
bodies.
whereas they left the Egyptians afflicted with some strange disease, of which
their firstborn was dead in every house, they came forth with healthy bodies.
There was not one, no not one feeble person among their Tribes, not one among
six hundred thousand men.
The terror of them was so great, and the fear of death so instant, And
brought fear upon the Egyptians.
that little regarding their Jewels, Gold and Silver; they urged them to be
gone, they thrust them out, as glad at heart they were upon terms rid of them;
which the Prophet thus expresses: Egypt was glad when they departed; for the
fear of them fell upon them; for Exodus 12. They said, We are all dead men.

6. The sixth Benefit follows after their departure, which was, After their
departure.
The Pillar of a Cloud by day, and the Pillar of fire by night: He spread a
Cloud for a covering, and Fire to give light in the night. Which most
interpret, As if the Cloud by day did overshadow them, and keep off the heat of
the Sun: He gave them a Pillar of a Cloud and Fire
And therefore the Prophet says, He spread it for a covering: But Bellarmine
conceives it somewhat otherwise, grounding his conjecture upon the 13th. of
Exodus, ver. 21. And the Lord went before them by day in a Pillar of a Cloud to
lead them the way, and by night in a Pillar of Fire to give them light, to go
by day and night. This is it then which he judges true, That the cloudy Pillar
did not cover them, but went before them, to show them the way, till they came
to the red Sea, till Pharaoh and his Army followed, and then the Angel of the
Lord with this Pillar of a Cloud, interposed betwixt the Israelites and
Pharaohs Army, that they could not come to each other, in which sense, the
Cloud might well be said to be stretched out for a protection and covering. And
he adds, That besides this Pillar of a Cloud, which was (...), there might be
another Cloud which might protect the Israelites from the heat of the Sun in
their journey, of which yet there is no mention in Exodus; and this, Hieroms
Translation out of the Hebrew seems to countenance: Expandit nubem in Tentorum.
And the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chap. 10. ver. 17. And was unto them a
Cover by day.

The seventh Benefit, Quails and Manna.

1. Quails.
The people asked, and he brought Quails: He means, those given, Exodus 16. not
those in the first of Numbers, for these last were given by God in anger, and
were no Benefit. 2. Manna.
And satisfied them with the bread of Heaven; that is, with Mann^, which he
calls the bread of Heaven, because the sweet dew whereof it was made, descended
from the Air, the Earth had nothing to do in the production of it.
8. Waters out of the Rock.
The eighth Benefit, the water he gave them to drink out of the Rock; for they
traveled through a dry Wilderness, where there is great scarcity of springs
and waters, and therefore he opened the Rock, and the waters gushed out, and
they ran in dry places, as a River.

1. He opened the Rock; turned not the Rock into water, as some think; but only
opened it, and made a passage for some River which ran in the bowels of the
Rock. 2. And this most likely; for the waters gushed out upon the passage made
for them. 3. And they ran in dry places; for it is conceived they made a new
River, by whose Banks the Israelites journeying, needed not a new Miracle to
quench their thirst.
Now here he interserts the Reason both of the former and the following
Benefits, His Covenant the reason of all.
which was, his Covenant, his Promise made to Abraham; for he remembered his
holy promise,

9. For these they triumph.
that they had Reason to exult and triumph at it, as indeed they did, Exodus 15.
where Moses sings his (...), for the overthrow of Pharaoh's Host in the red Sea.

And he brought forth his People with joy, and his Chosen with gladness.

10. He brings them into Canaan.
the Complement of all the rest, and the exact fulfilling of his promise, his
introduction of them into Canaan, ejection of the Inhabitants, and the Donation
of their Inheritances to his people, which they after possessed, being enstated
by Joshna.

And gave them the lands of the Heathen, and they inherited the labor of the
people; the Houses which they built, the Vines which they planted, the Lands
which they tilled, fell to them.

For all which Benefits, The end of all, their obedience.
as it were his Due, and his Tribute; so many Benefits he bestowed on them, for
one end only.

That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws, Hallelujah. So let
your light shine before men, that they may glorify your Father which is in
Heaven.

A Meditation upon the One hundred and fifth Psalm, and a Prayer.
O Lord, at first, all that thou made, was good; and man, the best at things
below, perfect in righteousness, excellent in knowledge. But it could not
content him to know the Creator, and the Creature; but through curiosity he
affected that which thou never ^adest, the evil of sin, which he indeed made
himself, by seeking to know it. And this in him defaced thy Image, and brought
thy displeasure, and death it self upon him. In Justice thou might have cast
him off, as thou did then out of Paradise; but thou came to him in the
cool of the day, and freely and mercifully made a prouise unto him, That the
Seed of the woman should break the Serpents head; that the blessed fruit of the
Virgins womb should conquer and break to pieces the head, the wit, the policy,
the strength of that first enemy of mankind, the Devil. This was thy Covenant
made to stand for ever; this was thy Word which thou have commanded to continue
to a thousand Generations, to all Ages, to all persons; and this thy Covenant
thou made good, when in the fullness of time, Thou sentest thy Son made of a
woman, made under the Law.

A long Tract of time there was, before the World heard any more news of it:
Age had defaced it, and Antiquity in all like lihood had blotted it out:
Abraham thy friend thou appearest with him, Thou renewedst thy Covenant, and
all his seed; What thou made with them, Thou confirmedst, and have made good
also to us, and under a Type of an earthly Canaan, have given us an assurance
of an inheritance in Heaven.

I wonder at thy love, I can never sufficiently magnify thy free Grace, but I
bless thy Truth; Thou might justly have passed by us, when we were polluted
in our blood, but even then thou did cast thy skirt over us, and made it
the time of love: Offended we had, and deserved no favor; but thou then out of
thy free Grace did enter into a Covenant of Pardon and Salvation for us, and
confirmedst it with a Seal and an Oath: And this in thy good time thou
performedst, and made it apparent to all Nations, that it was not sworn in
vain; for out of the society of men thou call'st a Church, and out of this
Church, Thou chosest a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, to
whom thou will give the Celestial Canaan, the lost of their inheritance.

Thy Counsel, O God, was wonderful, thy Power, thy Wisdom infinite, That thou
did vouchsafe to choose out of the whole World one Family, They were thy
Appointed, and they might not be touched; they were thy Prophets, and these few
strangers in the land: They then went from one Nation to another, from one
Kingdom to another people; yet the Charge was, Nolite tangere.

And in them, Thou have given us a pledge and pown what thou will do for thy
Church; in comparison of the great multitude of profane men and unbelievers,
it is but a little flock, few in number, yea, very few. In the World these are
strangers, and they used as strangers, they wander up and down in many
Kingdoms. Repress their wrongs, suffer not the Devil and his Im^^ments for ever
to pursue them, reprove the prondest Kings for their (...) Give forth thy
Command, as once thou did, and let the Tyrants tremble (...) it; Touch not my
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

And he unto those who will not hear it, what thou wast unto Pharaoh, and pour
down the plagues of Egypt upon their heads, from ver. 27. to 33.

At this time, There is a King risen amongst us, that knows not Joseph; he
has taken Counsel against us, and works wisely and subtly with thy servants,
as he thinks, to root us out; Joseph is sold for a Bond-servant, This, we hope,
Make him, O Lord, Ruler of thy House, Put power in his hands, To bind Princes
at his pleasure; and give unto him so wise a heart, That he may teach his
Senators wisdom.

But we pray not for him alone, we pray also for our selves, who groan under
Egyptian bondage, and a darkness that may be felt: Hear our cries, and ease
our sorrows; Send Moses thy servant to be our Deliverer, and Aaron whom thou
have chosen to be our Teacher, that so Truth and Peace may be restored at once
to thy poor afflicted people.

The mercy is great we ask, and far beyond our desert to crave, and we except
not to receive it upon any other Score, upon thy Holy Promise made with thy
servant Abraham; We are the seed of Abraham according to the Spirit, Jacob, thy
chosen; O remember thy holy Covenant which thou made for ever: Then,

We will give thanks unto thee, Seek thee we will hereafter with an honest and
sincere heart; our endeavor shall be, to live righteously, soberly, and
godlily in this present world; being conscious to our own infirmities,

Be merciful, O Lord, look down from Heaven, remove thy angry Brow, For we will
observe thy Statutes, and keep thy Laws: And with a loud voice, sing we will,
Allelujah, Allelujah, for evermore.

PSALM. CVI. (...).
THE Intention of the Prophet in this Psalm, is, To express Gods Long-suffering
in bearing with rebellious sinners, and yet his Mercy in pardoning them, upon
the Confession of their sins, and turning to him; both which he does
exemplify, by a long. Narration of Isreal's Rebellions, Repentance, Turning to
God, and Gods dealing with them; which gave him just occasion both to praise
God, and to pray for his Church and People.

The Contents of this Psalm, are these. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, with
the Reasons in general, ver. 1. and who are fit to perform this Duty, ver. 2,
3. 2. A Petition and Prayer directed to God in his own person for the whole
Church, and the end of it, ver. 4, 5. 3. A Confession of fin, particularly of
the Israelites, together with Gods patience to them, and his healing them upon
their Repentance; Toties, quoties, from ver. 6. to 46. 4. His Prayer, that God
would collect his Church out of all Nations, that they might meet and praise
him, ver. 47, 48.


1. Allelujah, Praise ye the Lord; O give thanks unto the Lord. The first part.
He incites to praise God.
To this the Prophet invites, and that we stick the less at the performance, by
two Reasons he persuades unto it.

1. Because he is good; he is beforehand with us, 2. Because his mercy endures
for ever; his mercy is everlasting, and far exceeds our sins and miseries; for
after men have offended him, and deserve no mercy, yet his mercy is
unconquerable; for he receives to mercy penitent offenders: It Is but Reason
then we praise him, and magnify his mercy.
Yea, but now it may be said, Quis idoneus ad haec? Those fit to do it, who
keep judgment, and do righteousness.
Who can utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? that is, the infinite Benefits in
mercy exhibited to his people: Or, Who can show forth all his Praise, in
conserving, pardoning, defending, propagating his Church? This is the (...).

To which the (...), or right answer should be, Who can? none can; Praise being
not comely in the mouth of a sinner: But the Prophet gives in his answer
another way: They are only happy men, who keep judgment, and do righteousness
at all times; and by consequent fit to do this Duty, they may speak of the
mighty Acts of God with comfort, and show forth all his praise.

1. They are happy in prosperity and adversity; they dwell in the house of God,
under his protection. 2. They keep his judgments; follow in their lives the
strict Rule of Divine Law, by which they judge of all their Actions, and so
keep faith, and a good conscience. 3. They do righteousness at all times:
Always they approve, and do what is right, true, and just; condemn, hate, and
punish what is unjust; these then are fit to praise God with their tongues,
because they praise him in their lives.
2. After the Prophet had invited to the praise of God, The second part.
and showed who were fit to do it, he falls upon his Petition, which he
proposes in his own person for the whole Church, in the two following verses.
He prays for himself.


1. Remember me: Vulg. Nostri. Me, but not me alone, rather thy whole Church:
By what we suffer, 2. Which I expect not yet for any desert of mine, but merely
out of thy good will: Remember me with the favor thou bear to thy people.
3. O visit me, but yet not in wrath; for such a visitation there is: but in
mercy and grace. 4. With thy Salvation: Save me at this time from my sins, and
from my present calamities.
And to this end I desire thy Favor, thy gracious Visitation, thy Salvation.
With the Church, who are:


1. That I may see the good of thy Chosen: Be a partaker of, and in their
happiness. 2. That I may rejoice in the gladness of the Nation: Partake in the
joy of the Nation, which is the consequent of happiness. 3. That I may glory
with thine inheritance: Glorify thee with them, and glory in thy Salvation.
But observe here the three eminent Titles given to Gods Church, by which is
set forth their happy condition.

1. Gods chosen
First, They are Electi, a chosen people; which is a glorious and a gracious
Title, and intimates, being coupled to Beneplacitum, Favor; in the former
verse, that it proceeded not out of merit, or foreseen works; but out of
free grace, and mere love: He chose whom he pleased; and this foundation
remains sure, God knows who are his. 2. His Nation.
They are his Nation, his peculiar people; chosen out of all other people,
brought to be of his Household and Family, that they might be partakers of his
Salvation, for which they were to worship and praise him. 3. His heritage.
They are his inheritance: Fallen to him, and given to his son, as the reward
of his Passion.
In these two foregoing verses, we find the happy condition of Gods people,
their Predestination in his favor, good will, and election; their
Justification in his Salvation; their Glorification in the Vision of Gods face,
where they are to rejoice in the gladness of his people, and glory with his
inheritance.

3. The third part. To move God to mercy.
In the following part of the Psalm, from ver. 7. to 46. he makes use of a new
Argument to move God to mercy: He presents not the present condition the people
of God were in, not their captivity, miseries, afflictions; but ingenuously
confesses how they had offended God, and how justly they suffered; for which
being penitent, he hopes for pardon. He knew, (...). Nazianz. and therefore he
begins with that.

1. We have sinned with our fathers, trod in their steps, and filled up the
measure of their sins. He confesses their sins, and aggravates them.
2. We have committed iniquity, not only upon infirmity, but upon malice and
choice. 3. We have done wickedly; the intent and purpose in it was evil: And by
these three steps he exaggerates the sin; the act, the frequency, the intent:
As every true Confessionist to God ought, never to extenuate, but to aggravate
the offense against himself.
And because he had mentioned their fathers at large, Enumerates their
rebellions.
now he instanceth in their Rebellions; they began betime, not yet gone out of
Egypt, but they murmured and rebelled.

Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt:

1. At the red Sea.
They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the Sea,
even at the red Sea. When they saw Pharaohs Army on one side, and the Sea on
the other, they grew heartless, diffident, and murmured, as is apparent, Exodus
14.10, 11, 12. 2. This was their sin at that time: But not Obstante, God was
then merciful to them: Nevertheless he saved them; of which he assigns two
causes. When yet in mercy God saved them for his glory.
1. For his Names sake: To advance his glory, his honor. It was not for any
worth or desert that was in them, but that he might make it known that he was a
God, true in his Promises. 2. That he might make his mighty power to be known.
Pharaoh and the Egyptians might have taken notice of it, by the plagues he had
already upon them; but it seems they contemned, and laughed at it: Now
therefore they should know his power to their utter ruin.

And in the following verses, by a distribution, he shows the manner of their
deliverance.

1. By Gods rebuke, and drying up of the Sea: He rebuked the red Sea also, 2.
By the unheard of way he led them; so he led them through the depths, as
through the Wilderness, no more water there to offend them, than in the sands
of Arabia. 3. By the Consequent of it: And he saved them from the hand of him;
Pharaoh, that hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy. 4. And
the waters covered their enemies,
The effect was, that for the present. The effects on them for the present.


1. It extorted, will they, nill they, from them a confession, that God was
true in his promises: Then believed they his words. 2. It incited them to
praise him: They sang his praise; Faith.
and the Song is extant, Exodus 15. Praise.

2. This was their first Rebellion, which begot in them belief and thanks, But
they rebelled again.
which the Prophet interserted; not to commend their piety, or to extenuate
their sin and ingratitude; but rather to aggravate both: For these very men
that were forced to confess his power, and sing his praise for the overthrow of
Pharaoh in the red Sea, were scarce departed from those Banks; but they for
want of a little bread and water, grew as impatient and distrustful, as they
were before, and this was their second Rebellion, Exodus 15.22, etc.

1. Festinaverunt and obliti sunt; They made haste to forget: Or, They soon
forgot, which aggravates their sin. 2. They forgot his Omnipotence, his
Providence; And forgot him quickly.
as if they had not had but now a sufficient proof of both. 3. They waited not
for his Counsel; Murmured.
with patience they expected not the end, why God in his Wisdom and Counsel
suffered them now to want, which was, to prove their faith, their hope, their
love: But they not understanding the end of Gods Counsel, murmured, as if God
had cast them off, and had no care of them, and could not relieve them. 4. And
what they did at this time, they did also at others: Lusted.
For they lusted exceedingly in the Wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert;
as is evident, Exodus 16. and 17. and Numb. 11. and 20.
Now God yielded to these desires of the people, he gave them bread, flesh, But
he gave them bread, flesh, water.
and water.

1. And he gave them their request; Exodus 16.12. 2. But he sent leanness into
their souls; which certainly has reference to the Quails in Numb. 11.20. and
33. where the people eat, Kibrothhattaava.
3. Another rebellion yet there was, which the Prophet now touches, They
rebelled a third time, rose against Moses, Aaron.
when they rose up against the King and the Priest, the story of which is
extant, Numb. 16.

1. They envied also Moses in the Camp; objecting unto him, that he had usurped
a power over them, and taken it upon him of his own head, which arose out of
envy; for they envied. 2. And Aaron, the Saint of the Lord: Him whom God had
chosen, and sanctified to the Priests Office.
The punishment follows, which at large may be read, Numb. 16.

1. The earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan, For this punished.
and covered the Congregation of Abiram. 2. And a fire was kindled in their
company, the flame burnt up the wicked; i. e. the 250. men that presumed to
offer Incense, and presently after the 14700. that murmured, and objected to
Moses and Aaron that they had killed the people of the Lord.
4. Made the golden Calf.
Still the Prophet goes on in his story of Israel's stubbornness and rebellion,
and now he comes to their grand sin, their Idolatry, in erecting the golden
Calf, which he detests; and withal, praises the mercy of God, that would be
pacified by Moses prayer; the story is extant, Exodus 32.

1. They made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image; quite contrary
to the second command. 2. Thus they changed their Glory: That is, the true God,
who indeed was their glory, into the similitude of an Ox, a brute Beast, that
eats grass; a base creature, Jews conceive, that it is not expiated to this
day; for they have usually these words in their mouths; Non accidit tibi, O
Israel, ullaultio, in qua non sit uncia de iniquitate anrei vituli. 3. Prophet
aggravates their stupidness and folly: They forgot God their Savior, which had
done great things in Egypt, wonderful works in the land of Ham, and terrible
things by the red Sea.
In the following verse is expressed Gods just anger and mercy.

1. Against this, God shows his anger.
His anger against their sins: Therefore he said, pronounced his will to
destroy them. 2. Moses intercession; for destroyed them certainly he had: But
spares them at Moses prayer.
1. Had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach: That breach and
division which this sin had made betwixt God and his people, like some breach
made in the Wall of a besieged Town, in which some valiant Captain stands, and
opposes himself against the assault of the enemy; so did Moses. 2. For his end
was the same; it was, To turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy: And the
effect was answerable; for by his intercession the wrath of God was turned
away; so powerful are the intercessions and prayers of Gods Saints, servants,
friends with him.

5. A new rebellion, viz. their murmuring at the Spies report.
Farther yet, he calls to mind a new rebellion, which fell out upon the report
of the Spies sent to search the Land, Numb. 13.26, etc. and Numb. 14. For when
the Spies told them, that it was a land that eat up the Inhabitants, that the
sons of Anak were there, in comparison of whom, they were but as Grasshoppers.

1. They despised the pleasant Land, and had a mind to return into Egypt,
Numb. 14. from ver. 1. to 5. 2. They believed not his Word; for they said, Has
the Lord brought us unto this Land to fall by the Sword, 3. But murmured in
their Tents, and hearkened not to the voice of the Lord, Numb. 14.10.
As their sin, Which God punishes on them:
so their punishment is also extant, Numb. 14.29. at which the Prophet here
points.

1. Therefore he lift up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the
Wilderness: Your carcasses shall fall in the Wilderness, doubtless ye shall not
come into the Land. 2. This punishment fell upon the Murmurers themselves: but
if their children should be guilty of the like rebellion, And their seed.
they should not escape neither; for God then would lift up his hand against
them too, and overthrow their seed among the Nations, which we have lived to
see fully brought to pass.
6. Their re bellion at Baal-Peor.
The Prophet joins to that of the golden Calf, another piece of Idolatry in the
Wilderness, to which there was joined Fornication also, by the Connsel of
Balaam, and the policy of Balaac; this caused them to eat, and sacrifice to
their God, Numb. 25. which the Prophet insists upon next.

1. They joined themselves to Baal-Peor, because the Idol was set up upon that
Mountain. 2. And eat the offerings of the dead: That have eyes, but see not;
and hands, but handle not.
Upon which there followed Gods wrath, and their punishment.

1. God was angry: For they provoked him to wrath with their inventions, Gods
wrath and vengeance
inventing a new god. 2. And the plague brake in upon them: It rushed in upon
them, as some mighty waters; or as an Army into a City, at a breach; Numb.
25.9.
In the former Idolatry Gods anger was averted by Moses intercession, in this
by Phinehaz execution of judgment; for, 1. Then stood up Phinehaz, Phinehaz
averts it.
moved no question with the zeal of Gods honor. 2. And he executed judgment
upon Zimri and Cozbi; for which, let men conceive as they please, I see nothing
to the contrary, His zeal rewarded.
but he had his Commission from Moses, or God rather, Numb. 25.4, 5. 3. The
event was, and so the plague was stayed; execution of Justice on Offenders,
pacifies God.


Which zeal of his was well rewarded: This was accounted to him for
righteousness unto all Generations for evermore. God that knows the heart,
knew his good intention, and so accounted it not murder, but a just punishment,
that deserved both praise and a reward: And an ample reward he had for it; for
God established the dignity of the high Priesthood in Phineaz, and in his
posterity, as long as the Commonwealth of the Jews continued. Another
rebellion at Meribah.


7. The Prophet comes to another remarkable sin of the Jews, extant, Numb. 20.
where the people chode with Moses for want of water.

1. They angered him also at the waters of strife: That is, God, when they
contradicted Moses. 2. So that it went ill with Moses, for their sakes, He
spoke unadvisedly with his lips: When Moses smote the Rock, and offended God.
Hear now ye Rebels, etc. and he smote the Rock. By their murmuring and
grumbling, they so provoked his spirit to bitterness, that he who at other
times was cheerful, and ready to obey all Gods Commands, did now somewhat
strike at it. Their rebellion after they came into Canaan.

8. Hitherto the Prophet has set down seven several rebellions of the Jews
during their abode in the Wilderness; now he proceeds to show us, how they have
behaved themselves after they came into, and were seated in the land of Canaan:
Better, a man would think, they should be, now that God had made good his Word
to them: But I see, a Blackmore cannot change his skin, nor they their manners;
disobedient, stubborn, and rebellious they were still, which the Prophet
confesses, and is upon Record in the Book of Judges. They destroyed not the
Heathen.


1. God had expressly commanded that the Nations of Canaan should be destroyed,
Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 3. But they did not destroy the Nations concerning whom the Lord
had commanded; this was Disobedience. They married with them
2. But were mingled among the Heathen: They made Leagues and Marriages with
them, Judge. 2. and 3. 3. And learned their works: Many superstitious, many lewd
customs. Learned their works.
4. But which went beyond all, they learned to be Idolaters of them, Became
Idolatrous.
forsook God for the Devil. 1. They served their Idols, which was a snare unto
them; for, for that, Judge. 2, etc. 2. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and
daughters unto Devils; that is, to Moloch. This polluted them, and the land.
3. With inhumane sin, that the Prophet might aggravate, (...), he comes over
it again, And shed innocent blood; that is, the blood of innocent children,
even the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the Idols
of Canaan.

The Consequents of which were double: First, a double pollution. Secondly, a
heavy judgment.

1. The land was defiled with blood. 2. A pollution of their own souls: Thus
were they defiled in their own works: Polluted, as a Harlot, that pollutes her
body, by the prostitution of it; so they polluted, when they went a whoring
after their own inventions. Espoused they were to God their husband, but they
left him, and followed Idols, they were to be accounted no better than Whores;
which Idols, were properly their own inventions; For which they were punished,
abominated.
for they learned to prostitute themselves to them, neither from God, nor
Moses.
The judgment or punishment now follows, and a signification whence it
proceeded; it came not by chance, nor merely by the hand of man, it was by Gods
Order and Anger.

1. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: Therefore,
for their Idolatry, 2. Nay, he took so great dislike to them, that abominatus
est, insomuch, That he abhorred his own inheritance. It must be a very foul
offense, that will kindle the wrath of a mild King against his people, And
justly given into the hand of the Heathen.
and a strange dislike, for which a man will renounce and abhor his own
inheritance; it shows how heinous a sin Idolatry is.
And the punishment he took upon them was very just.

1. He gave them into the hand, i. e. the power of the Heathen; and this, E
Lege Taliouis: God had given the Heathen into their hands to destroy them,
which because they did not, but learned their works; therefore now God gave
them into the hands of the Heathen. 2. Who were hard Lords over them.
He made them their Lords, and hard Lords they were, as easily appears in the
story of the Book of Judges, and the first of Samuel; and no wonder, for they
hated them; yea, even when they made Leagues and Contracts with them: Their
case must be then very miserable, when those that hated them, ruled over them;
from such they were to expect little favor.
3. And little they had; for the Prophet in the next verse acquaints us, that,
1. Their enemies also oppressed them; Tyrants, Oppressors they were, read the
Book of Judges, etc. and very often, if they sought to free themselves. 2. They
were brought into subjection under their hand; to wit, under the hand of the
Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, etc.


In which state and condition yet God did not forget them; For many times did
he deliver them: Gideon, Jephtha, Deborah, Sampson, and others. Yet God
delivered them.


But O the ingratitude of a sinful Nation; whereas being delivered, they should
have served; But they provoked him again.
being delivered, they provoked him with their Counsel; that is, by following
the Counsels of their own hearts, and not the directions of God.

And so were very justly brought into the case they were before: And again,
punished.
For they were brought low for their iniquity; that they might know that God
that had humbled them, Yet again received to grace; for God is moved by their
affliction.
as he often did.

And now the Prophet adds that, which indeed he drives at through the whole
Psalm, the wonderful and immutable good will of God to them; though he forgave,
and delivered them upon their Repentance, and in a short time provoked him
again, Nevertheless he received them to Grace, even after their Recidivations
and Relapses; and the Causes that moved him to this, were external, and
internal.

1. The (...), that outwardly and occasionly moved him to it, was their
affliction and cry: He regaraed their affliction, 2. But the (...) that
inwardly swayed him, was, his word past to them, But more out of Mercy, and his
Word.
and his mercy. 1. His word and his promise was past to Abraham, to be their
God, and he would not break it: And he remembered for them his Covenant. 2. His
tender affection that he always bear them; this caused him to repent and
grieve, that they should be in misery: He repented according to the multitude
of his mercies.

And the effect which all these Causes had, was beneficial to them, even in the
time of their bondage and captivity; for even their very enemies hearts were
often turned to do them good, as is evident in Jeremiah, David, Daniel, Ezra,
Zerubbabel, Mordecai, and indeed the whole Nation under the Babylonian,
Philistian, Egyptian, Persian Kings, which the Prophet has set down, ver. 46.

He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them Captives: When a
man's ways please God, And caused their Oppressors to pity them.
he will make his very enemies at peace with him, Prove. 16.7.

But it seems this verse may be read otherwise, and it is by the Vulgar.
Moller, Musculus, Dedit eos in misericordias, or miserationes in conspectu
omnium, quo caeperant eos; so that the sense is not, as if all of them had from
all that carried them away captive received mercy; but that God in their
afflictions, put them into the bosom of his mercy, even they seeing and
wondering at it, whose Bondslaves they were; for beyond all hope, he freed his
people from Egypt, the Ammonites, Philistines, etc. so that they, under whose
Captivity they were, must needs confess, that God in mercy did defend, and
fight for them: And this sense Bellarmine receives, as more probable; nor yet
utterly rejecting the other.

4. And this sense makes the way plainer to what follows, the Petition, The
fourth part. This consideration moves them.
and the Doxology; for if God showed himself merciful in the time of his anger,
and made it apparent, even to the very view of their enemies, encouragement
they might have: 1. First, To pray: Save us, O Lord our God, To pray.
and to triumph in thy Praise. 2. Then to give thanks. 1. Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, To give thanks.
from Generation to Generation. 2. And for it, let the people do their Duty,
viz. Let all the people say, Amen. Allelujah.



The Prayer out of the One hundred and sixth Psalm.
O Lord God, which art great and fearful, The children of Israel were not more
rebellious at the red Sea, in the Wilderness, after thou had brought them
into the Land, counsels. We have envied, nay, murdered Moses in the Camp, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Horeb, nor worshipped the molten Image: But we
worshipped the Calf of our own brains, and fallen down to our own imaginations;
in Maozim we have put our trust, and to this Idol of power we have cried, Thou
art our god, and thou shall save us; Thou have promised to bring us to the
celestial Canaan, but we have despised that pleasant land; Egypt, and set our
affections on the Leeks and Onions, We have shed innocent blood, even the blood
of thy sons and daughters, whom we sacrificed to our ambition and cruelty, so
that the Land is polluted with blood.

O Lord, we confess that we have done wickedly, and foully, and unthankfully
have revolted from thee,

Then thou were pacified with the intercession of Moses, and the atonement of
Aaron; and when Phineas arose, and executed judgment, thy plague was stayed.
There be yet lest among thy people, those who are zealous for thy Name, who day
and night intercede for pardon and mercy. O Lord, hear their prayers, and let
their cries come unto thee, and spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with
thy precious blood. Though they have provoked thee with their Counsels,
Nevertheless, regard their affliction, and hear their cries that they send up
unto thee; Remember for them thy Covenant, And so soften and mollify the
hearts of those,

O merciful Lord, let not thy wrath for ever be kindled against thy people;
neither let it proceed so far, We confess, That it has gone ill with Moses for
our sakes, insomuch, that he is denied an entrance into the land of Canaan, But
remember him, O visit him with thy salvation, that he may see the good of thy
chosen, that he may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation,

Our Fathers have sinned even from the first time of their Vocation, to the
clearer and purer knowledge of the Gospel, and thou did oftentimes sharply
rebuke them; and yet in the sharpest of those Visitations, Thou remembering
mercy, Thou savedst them from the hand of them that hated them, and redeemedst
them from the hand of the enemy: Therefore now also, although we know and
confess, that we have grievously offended thee with our sins, and provoked thee
to bring these heavy judgments upon us for our rebellions, Save us, O Lord our
God, and gather us from all lands, whether we are dispersed; which we earnestly
beg at thy merciful hands; not that we are brought from a troublesome, to a
quiet; from a miserable, to an easy; from a poor and needy, to an opulent and
a voluptuous life (which the many aim at in their prayers) but the end of this
our Request, is, That thanks may be given to thy holy Name, and that we may
triumph in thy praise; that the purity of that Religion which thou have
delivered and committed unto us, may be conserved and propagated, and thy
worship, now intermitted, may be restored, and thy praises, which by the
sadness of these times have been silenced, may again with triumph be heard in
the Congregation.

Then with joyful lips, we shall give thanks unto the Lord, and by experience
make it known, That thou art good, and that thy mercy endures for ever: Not
indeed as we ought, not as thou deservest; for who can utter the mighty Acts of
the Lord? or who can show forth all his praise? But we will do what we can,
exalt with our voices, and honor thee with our lives. We will keep thy
judgments, and do righteousness at all times, that thy praises may be comely in
our mouths, and our lives become thy Gospel. Grant us this mercy, O Lord,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and all the people shall say with a cheerful
heart, Amen. Hallelujah.

The end of the fourth Book of the Psalms, according to the Hebrews.
PSALM. CVII. (...).
THE Title of this Psalm is Allelujah, because in it are set forth the praises
of God, for delivering, such as are oppressed, from four common miseries; after
every of which, is expressed those intercalary verses, Oh that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, etc. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble.
As also for the effects of his Providence, who only by his power orders and
governs the change and vicissitudes we see in the World.

There be four especial Points handled in this Psalm. 1. A Preface, in which he
exhorts all to praise God, especially the Redeemed, ver. 1, 2. 2. A Declaration
of his goodness in particular. 1. To the banished and strangers, famished, from
ver. 3. to 9. 2. To the prisoners and captives, from ver. 10. to 16. 3. To the
sick, from ver. 16. to 23. 4. To the Mariners, from ver. 23. to 32.
3. A praise of Gods Power and Providence, which is evidently seen, in the
changes and varieties of the World, of which he gives several instances, by
which it is proved, That he is the sole Disposer and Governor of the Universe,
from ver. 33. to 42. 4. The Conclusion, which sets forth the use we are to make
of it, ver. 42, 43.


1. The first part. He incites all to praise God.
This Psalm begins, as did the former, and the intention in it is the same,
viz. That we celebrate and set forth Gods praise; yea, and for the same Reasons.

O give thanks unto the Lord: For he is good: 2. And merciful; For his mercy
endures for ever.

2. And those who he invites to perform this Duty, are indeed all who are
sensible that they have received any mercy or goodness from him any way,
Especially the redeemed.
in Soul, or Body, whom he calls the Redeemed of the Lord, that men may know
when they are freed from any evil, that it is only by chance, or by their
wisdom, etc. Gods hand is in it, he is the first and chief cause of it, the
rest, inferior instruments to bring to pass his Providence.

1. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so; i. e. that he is good, that he is
merciful. 2. They say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy. If
the Holy Ghost by the enemy means the Devil, then he speaks of our Redemption
by Christ; if by the enemy, some Tyrant, Tribulation, etc. then a corporal and
temporal Redemption; but the last is generally understood, and especially is
referred to the first afflicting misery, Banishment; and the next verse
intimates so much. 3. And gathered them out of the Lands, from the East, and
from the West; from the North, and from the South; which is yet as true of our
spiritual Redemption, and Christ's collection of his Church from all parts of
the World, Mat. 8.11. John. 10.16. and 11.52.
2. Most Expositors therefore begin the second part at the second verse: But
some at the fourth; The second part.
but the matter is not much material. In those two there was mention made of
Gods goodness in their deliverance, in their collection from all lands: But in
the following, is an evident Declaration of what they suffered, during their
absence from their Country; which is the first misery described here by the
Prophet, to which a man's life is subject. And it is the heavier Cross, when a
man is forced to it by Banishment, as is apparent by the complaints that have
been made of it, by those that have suffered; they are sine foco, sine lare.

Curat nemo vagos, and laedere nemo veretur.
Exul non curae creditur esse Deos.
Omnes exhausti jam casibus, omnium egeni.
And this is the misery which the Prophet first instanceth in this place, which
first he describes, then shows the course the Banished took, and lastly,
acquaints us with the manner of their deliverance, which is the method in the
rest.

1. The first kind of misery, Banishment.
Their misery was: 1. That they wandered, no small discomfort to an ingenuous
nature, to be a Vagrant, In which they, 1. Wandered. 2. In solitary places.
Gods people were for a time, (...), pilgrims and strangers, and all that time,
few and evil were their days. 2. The place adds to the misery; Banished men
are not confined to solitary places always, though that they have not the
company they desire, yet company they may have; but the case of these Banished
was, That they wandered in the Wilderness in a solitary place, they found no
City to dwell in: Literally it was fulfilled in the Israelites, while they
traveled through the Wilderness. 3. Hungry and thirsty, omnium egeni. Men may
wander, and be in solitary places, Suffered hunger and thirst.
but yet have a supply of necessary food: To this pass sometimes Gods people
come, that they have nor meat, nor drink, as Eliah, the Israelites, David, etc.
4. Even to fainting.
And the Famine may be so great, that their souls; that is, their life is ready
to faint in them. This is the Incrementum that the Prophet uses, to aggravate
the misery of Banished men, and are the several steps by which it rises.


2. The course they took.
Next the Prophet shows us the Course that these banished and hungry souls
took for ease and help, and that it failed them not; no, nor the rest following
that took the same Course, and therefore he four times repeats it, versu
intercalari. The way was, That when all humane helps failed, they implored the
aid and help of God Almighty.

1. Then in their trouble. When no other Course will work, this will do it,
They cried to God.
the heart of the best man is often too secure, and thinks not on God; but let
such a one be brought into some extremity and straight, and he will cry: They
did so here. 2. They cried. In their Petition they were very earnest, 'twas not
a cold prayer, that might freeze in the way before it came to Heaven; but it
was fervent, a Cry. 3. And they cried. Not to any false god, as did Baals
Priests; nor relied wholly on any humane help: But they cried unto the Lord;
their cry was rightly directed.
Now the success was answerable to their desire.

1. In general: He delivered them out of their distresses. He delivered them.
2. But in particular, the deliverance was every way fit, and accommodated to
the exigence they were in, the manner being this. 1. They wandered in the
Wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell in, ver. 4. But he
led them forth by the right way, 2. They were hungry and thirsty, and their
soul fainted in them, ver. 5. But he satisfies the longing soul, and fills
the hungry soul with goodness: Which mercies are every way correspondent to
them, expressed in ver. 4, 5.

And upon this he inculcates his Exhortation to praise God, For which he
exhorts them to praise God.
with which he began, ver. 1. But is so earnest to have it done, that he
interserts between the mercies, as if he were loath to have it deferred; which
Course he also perpetually takes, as may be seen after in the Psalm.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,

1. The Lord delivered, the Lord led them forth; let him then have the praise,
it is his due. 2. It was out of mere goodness he did it, not out of desert: For
he is good, ver. 1. 3. And the effect of his goodness was seen in his works,
his wonderful works. He would then have his praise be as public as were his
works, open, manifest: And it was his hearts desire it should be so; Oh that
men would praise.
2. The second Corporal Misery to which men are subject, is Captivity and
Imprisonment, which as before he first describes; The second misery, captivity.
then shows the Course the Captives and Prisoners took, and the consequent of
it; viz. Gods mercy in their deliverance, upon which he exhorts them, as he did
the banished and hunger-starved, to be thankful.

1. He describes their misery.

1. Captives they were, taken by the enemy, put into Dungeons and Prisons, In
which they suffer often very sorely.
For they sat in darkness, and shadow of death; for such is a Dungeon, and
they in it, are in daily expectation of death. 2. Besides in this place, They
were fast bound with affliction and iron, the iron enters into their souls. For
disobedience against God.
3. And the farther it will enter, if the cause be, as it is of the most, their
rebellion against God; when they are conscious of this, their irons will be far
the more afflictive: To others, as Joseph, the Apostles, Jeremy, the Dungeon
will be the less troublesome. But as I said, this is the cause of few; the most
come thither, Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord, as did the
Israelites in the time of the Judges, and after. And therefore he brought down
their heart, took down their pride, with labor; they fell down, and there was
none to help.
2.

1. The remedy as before.
They cried unto the Lord in their trouble. 2. And found the same favor. And
he saved them out of their distresses. 3. 1. For they sat in darkness, and
shadow of death, ver. 10. But he brought them out of darkness, When the same
course is taken.
and shadow of death. 2. They were bound in affliction and iron, he brake their
Bands asunder; yea, For he has broken the gates of Brass; and cut the bars of
iron in sunder. The Prison was not so strong, but he was stronger; and in mercy
did deliver his, from the severest and sharpest Captivity.

Now he interposeth, as before, his Exhortation to be thankful. Oh that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness,

3. The third misery, some great sickness.
The third Misery in which the Prophet instanceth, is, some great sickness, or
pining away of the Body under some grievous disease, incurable by man, such as
was that of the Israelites, when stung by fiery Serpents, or after of Hezekiah:
And about this he uses his former method.

1. Describes the danger and dolor under which the sick parties languish. 2.
Shows the Course they took for recovery, which was the very same with the
Exiles and Captives. 3. And the Consequent upon it, their recovery; upon which,
he the third time calls upon the delivered to be thankful. 1. Which God sends
on foolish sinners.
The appellation he fastens upon these diseased persons, is, Fools: Not but
that they may be wise enough in other things; but in that they sin with a high
hand against God, for which they draw some plague upon them, they are Fools. 2.
For some grievous sin.
Now such Fools God often smites with an incurable disease. Fools, because of
their transgression, and because of their iniquity, are afflicted. Not but all
sickness is from sin; but this that the Prophet here speaks of, being
extraordinary, was for some general Apostasy, Rebellion, Contempt of God and
his Word, some more than ordinary sin. You have the first description of their
sickness from the Cause. 3. For which the sickness sharp.
The next is from the Effect, which was lamentable, and double. 1. Their soul
abhorred all manner of meat. Meat, with which the life of man is sustained, 2.
And deadly to the eye of man.
Yea, and deadly too, no Art of Physicians able to cure them; For they draw
near to the gates of death, i. e. the Grave, where death exercises his power,
as the Judges of Israel did in the gates.


2. This causes them to cry to God.
But these being but dead men in the eye of man, took the same Course as they
before.

1. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble. 2. 3. This was the manner
of their Cure, He saves them out of their distresses. 1. And he restores them
to life and health.
He sent his Word, and healed them. He said the word only, and they were made
whole; or if any Dos were applied, as put case, a Brazen Serpent, Wisd. 16.12,
13. And therefore the Prophet uses an apt word to put us in mind of this, He
sent his Word; no otherwise than some great Prince sends forth his Ambassador
to do his Command; and I little doubt but the Centurion had this in his mind,
when he said to our Savior, Say the word only, and my servant shall be whole,
Mat. 8. 2. And he delivered them from their destructions; which is opposed to
the danger they were in, ver. 18. They draw nigh to the gates of death. For
which he calls on them to be thankful.


3. But again he remembers the delivered to acknowledge the Cure with a
grateful heart.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

And he adds: 1. And let them sacrifice their Sacrifices; their (...). 2. But
yet with these conditions and limitations. 1. That it be with a thankful heart;
they must be Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, an outward Sacrifice was nothing worth
without it. 2. That with the Sacrifice there go an Annunciation; that men
declare his works, publish what great things God had done for them, that the
Cure was his. 3. That it be done with rejoicing; that we have an experience of
Gods presence, his mercy and favor; in which the heart ought more to rejoice,
than for the Cure done upon the Body.



4. The fourth Misery, arises from the danger at Sea, of which, all
Travelers, The fourth misery, Shipwreck
Merchants, Mariners, have experience; which, 1. He describes. 2. Shows the
course they take in a storm. 3. And the event following upon their prayers. 4.
Upon which he calls upon, as upon the three before to praise God. 1. They that
go down to the Sea in ships: Go down; The storm described, to which he
prefaceth.
2. That do business in great waters. Have a Calling and Vocation to go down,
as Merchants, Mariners; for, as for Pirates, they have no Vocation, they may
perish, they have no promise of Protection, nor Audience. 3. These men see the
works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. 4. For he commands. Now he
begins to describe the Tempest, 1. From the cause. God it is that says the
word, and his word is a Command. 2. And with his word, He raises the stormy
wind. Incutit vim ventis. 3. Which, inspired with his word, lifts up the waves
thereof, that is, the Sea. -- Fluctus ad sidera tolli. Virgil. Aenead. 1.

4. They, that is, the passengers, mount up to heaven, Hi summo in fluctu
pendent, his unda dehiscens.
-- Terram inter fluctus aperit.
5. Their soul is melted because of trouble. Their strength fails, and their
spirit for fear and horror faints. Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra.
6. They reel too and fro, they are tossed this way and that way. Tres curus ab
alto in Brevia and Syrtes urget.
7. They stagger and totter, as a drunken man; an apt similitude. -- Cui dubii
stantque labantque pedes.
8. And are at their wits end: Or, Omnis sapientia little absorbetur. Their
Judgment roves, their Art fails, their Skill is at end. Et meminisse viae media
Palinuras in unda. -- Denegat, Acts 27.14.





Hitherto the Prophet has Poetically described the Tempest and Storm, Then
they cry to God.
and now he comes to acquaint us with the Course they in this danger took for
to save their lives: They all fly to the common Remedy; this they thought was
safest, and might do it, when all failed.

Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble. Jonah took, Jonah 1. I see the
old Proverb will be true, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare.

And the Consequent was as before, And he quiets the Tempest.
And he brings them out of their distresses: The manner this.

1. He makes the storm a calm. Dicto cirius tumida aequora placat. 2. So that
the waves thereof are still. Et cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor. 3. Then are they
glad, because they be quiet, which is the first Effect: No more reeling too and
fro, no more at their wits end; but taken out of the jaws of death by a sudden
calm, whence arises much joy. -- Laeto testantur gaudia plausu.
4. And sets them safe on shore.
And to increase it, at last he sets them safe on shore: So he brings them to
their desired Haven. Magno telluris amore Egressi, optata nautae potiuntur arena
Et sale tabentes artus in littore ponunt.

3. For which he calls on them to praise God.
And now in the last place he puts them in mind of their Duty, and wishes that
they would pay their Tribute for the miracle done upon them, in saving of their
lives out of so great danger.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,

And it might be, that in their danger they had made some Vow, as was usual for
men in a great danger at Sea to do. Read the life of Nazianzen, who in such a
case vowed himself to God: This the Prophet would have paid, and yet openly.

1. Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the people. In a
Congregation, where all the people are assembled to praise God. 2. And that,
not only before the promiscuous Multitude, but in the presence of those who
excel in Authority, Wisdom, and Power, even the Princes: Let them praise him in
the Assembly of the Elders. Me tabula sacer votiva paries indicat, vida
suspendisse potenti vestimento Maris Deo.
3. The third part: Gods Providence in the alterations of Kingdoms.
After the Prophet had exalted Gods mercies in freeing men from these four
former Miseries and Calamities, Banishment, Captivity, Sickness, and Shipwreck;
now he manifests his Power, Providence, and Wisdom, in the vicissitudes and
alterations we find in things below, which proceed not from Chance and
Casualty, but from his wise Dispensation. In the Earth we see strange
Mutations, in Kingdoms wonderful Revolutions; and though for these, we are apt
to assign inferior Causes, and fix on them, yet we must go higher, and not
rest, till we acknowledge Gods Hand in all, whose Wisdom orders all, and whose
Power has an influence in all these Alterations and Revolutions; let Epicurus
and his Scholars think what they please to the contrary. Now of these Changes
the Prophet produces some Instances, upon which Tertullian very wittily
descants in his Cap. 2. de Pallio. His first Instance is in the Earth, for in
that he finds a great Change; but yet so, as God is the Cause of it, that he
would have remembered.

1. He turns Rivers into a Wilderness, and Water-springs into a dry ground.
Changes in the Earth.
The fertility of any Land arises from the Rivers, Egypt, which is made so
fruitful by the overflow of Nilus: From fertile to barren, and e contra.
And when Elisha would free the Soil from barrenness, he first healed the
waters. Now when God pleases to bring sterility upon a Land, he can dry up
these Rivers, or stay them, that they shall not overflow, as it was in Egypt
in the seven years Famine: And easy it were to produce examples of Rivers that
have left their Channels, and diverted their Courses, by which, the Land that
was formerly fruitful, is become barren and desolate as a Wilderness; and when
there were Springs of water, now very dry ground; so that a fruitful Land is
turned into barrenness; as Sodom, Genesis 14. and 19. And if stories be true, the
whole Land of Canaan, which was a Land flowing with milk and honey; but is now
in comparison of what it was, very barren. 2. And the Cause of this is, The
iniquity of them that dwell therein. Iniquity the cause.
Sodom is an instance. In my ears are the cry of your sins, says the Lord of
Hosts, and therefore of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and
fair without an Inhabitant; yea, ten Acres of Vineyard shall yield one Bath,
and the seed of an Homer shall yield an Ephah, Isa. 5.9, 10.
2. And now on the contrary, From barren to fruitful land.
that which more yet illustrates his Mercy and Providence, is, the Change we
find in barren, dry, and incultivated grounds, which at his will become
fruitful, inhabited, and abundant in all necessaries, for the life of man,
which must be ascribed to his Power; for no Power is able to turn Nature into a
better course, but that of God: Or if it be done by man's industry, yet it is
God that teaches him the skill to do it, and gives the blessing to his labor.
It was an impious Speech of Cyclops in Euripides: (...),
-- (...).


Now this our Prophet in this place insists on, and amplifies at large. This
from God.


1. He, that is, God, turns the Wilderness into a standing water, i. e. He
has brought to pass, that in desert and dry places, there should be Pools of
water; and the Earth, which had no water, should abound with Springs and
Rivers; which is all one, as if he had said, They should be very fertile and
fruitful; which is done for man's sake. 2. For there he makes the hungry to
dwell. He puts into men's minds to plant Colonies.
and such who live in want and hunger at home, betake themselves to these
Foreign Plantations, which yet is done so much upon their own choice, as Gods
secret direction: For there he makes the hungry to dwell. 3. Yea, and to build
houses, That they may prepare a City for habitation. Pars aptare locum tecto,
Aenead. 1, etc.
pars ducere muros.
4. Farther yet, the studies and endeavors of these new Colonies are: 1. To
sow Fields. 2. To plant Vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase. That
innocent work of Husbandry is their Profession, which was the first Trade in
the World.
5. He blesses them also. 1. In Children: So that they are multiplied greatly.
2. In Cattle: And suffers not their Cattle to decrease.

2. But even in these changes.
But there is nothing in this World perpetual and stable, which leads the way
to his second Instance, even those that God sometimes had blessed, and by
blessing, multiplied and enriched, continue not always at the same stay.

1. These are minished and brought low. 2. These are worn out by oppression,
affliction, and sorrow; by some public Calamity or other; either War, Famine,
Pestilence, Invasion, Inundations, etc. Neither is this only true in common
men, but even in the greatest Princes, Monarchy mutable.
Principalities and Monarchies, even these are subject to Changes: All the
Monarchies are fallen. 1. He poures Contempt upon Princes. This, to our grief,
we have lived to see and feel: And it is a heavy judgment, both to Princes and
people, and a great Argument of some grievous precedent sins, that he suffer
Princes, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, to become contemptible; for then the
Reins of Discipline is let loose, confusion follows, and all things grow
worse; which effusion of vengeance, when it happens, is sometimes caused for
the sin of the Prince, sometime of the people, sometime of both. It Is
certainly, as he said before, For the iniquity of those that dwell in the Land.
2. Monarchs brought low.
And causes them to wander in the Wilderness, where there is no way; which
Clause is subject to a double Interpretation. 1. Either that he suffers Princes
to err in their Counsels, in their Lives, and Examples; being destitute of the
light of Wisdom and Grace, they live vitiously and scandalously; or, they enact
unjust Laws, favor wicked men, and oppress the good, in which there is no way
of God. 2. Or else he suffers them to be Wanderers in the World, as banished
Persons; which I read with tears, well knowing, That there cannot be a greater
Calamity to a Noble and ingenious spirit.


But yet there is some Comfort in the following verse, To whom he will look,
and raise them.
That it shall not be so always.

1. Yet sets he the poor man on high from affliction; 2. And make him
Families like a Flock: He will yet multiply him, gather him and his Family into
one Fold, become his Shepherd, feed him, and govern him by his singular
Providence and Manuduction.
4. The fourth part. All this written for our meditation.
He concludes the Psalm with an Epiphonema, in which he persuades all good men
to consider the former Premises, and lay it to heart: To observe the whole
course of Gods Providence, that they impute not the Changes of the World to
Chance and Fortune, nor be overmuch dejected at them, but rather bless God for
all, as Job did.

1. The righteous shall see it: Consider, and seriously meditate upon it. 2.
And rejoice; when they are assured, that God is their Guardian, and that
therefore the Crosses which he lays upon them, are trials for their good, not
for their ruin. 3. And all iniquity shall stop her mouth: By observation of
the event at last, evil doers shall not have occasion to laugh, and blaspheme,
and find fault with Gods ways, but confess, That all was by God justly done,
and wisely disposed.
But this is a Consideration not for every brain, it is for wise men, that look
afar off, and think on it.

1. Who is so wise, will observe these things: That is, 2. And they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord: It shall appear unto them at last,
how ineffable his mercy is toward them which truly fear him, and call upon his
Name; but our life is hid with Christ in God.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and seventh Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, when we look upon the strange vicissitudes and alterations
of the things of this World, our faith would waver, and our hearts would faint,
were we not assured, that all things are guided by thy hand, and overruled by
thy Providence, and secret Will and Counsel,

Be it then, that we are brought to wander in the Wilderness in a solitary way;
that we be pilgrims and strangers, and have no City to dwell in; that we are
oppressed with hunger, and dried up with thirst, so that our soul is ready to
faint within us; yet will we not despair. In our trouble, since thou art good,
we are in good hope, Thou will do for us. Redeem, O Lord, So shall we praise
thee for thy goodness, and declare thy wonderful works which thou do for the
Children of men.

Long it is, O merciful God, That we have sat in darkness, our back is bowed
down with many iron hands, that we cannot lift up our head; our heart is
brought low through affliction, and we find none to help; and all this is
justly come upon us, rebelled against the words of our God, and contemned the
Counsel of the most High. We have not done thy Will, nor kept thy Commandments;
but have set up abominations, and have multiplied offenses: But now, O Lord,
Save us, Lord,

O Lord, I confess against mine own soul, that I have been seduced, and pielded
to many foolish lusts of the flesh; That my soul abhors all manner of meat;
and my vital spirits so far spent, That I am drawing to the gates of death. To
whom, O Lord, should I fly, and in judgment remember thy mercy, So shall I,
whom Thou have redeemed from the jaws of death,

O Lord, our Vocation calls upon us to go down to the Sea in Ships, and to
negotiate, where we see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. At
thy Command the stormy wind arises, Tossed we are, and mount up to Heaven, and
by and by we go down to the bottom of the Sea; so that there we dwell in the
shadow of death, for our wisdom and our skill then fails us, our sole refuge is
in our prayers. In this instant of our trouble, as thou have commanded, We cry
unto thee, look down upon thy servants, who in the abyss of the Seas, and the
abyss of our trouble, Make the storm a calm; Rebuke the furious winds and
waves, to the desired Haven: So will we praise thee, O Lord, for thy goodness,
and for thy wonderful works to the children of men. And when we come to land,
We will exalt thy Name in the Congregation of thy people, and praise thee in
the Assembly of the Elders.

O Lord, we set our minds too much upon earthly things, and attribute too much
to Nature, and second Causes; whereas, all the power that is in the Creature,
is from thee; and that restraint that is upon the Creature, proceeds from thee.
Remove from our hearts this heavy and gross ignorance, and impiety, and make us
know and acknowledge, that it is thy hand, That turns Rivers into a Wilderness,
But in this change, thy Justice, O Lord, is exalted, by this thou show thy
hatred to sin, and incorrigible sinners; for this is caused, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein. Good God, so let us lay to heart this judgment,
That our Houses be not desolate, great and fair without an Inhabitant; that ten
Acres of Vineyard yield not a Bath, and the seed of an Homer yield not an Ephah.

And in this vicissitude, thy Mercy is as conspicuous as thy Justice; for on
the contrary, Put into the hearts of thy hungry to dwell there, thither lead
their Colonies, let them prepare their Cities for habitation, give life to the
seed of the Fields which they sow, and water the Vineyards that they plant,
That they may yield them fruits of increase. Bless them also, O Lord, so that
they be multiplied greatly in the fruit of their bodies, But yet if these sin
against thee, and kick after they are waxed fat, visit their offenses with the
rod, and their sin with scourges; as thou did multiply them,

My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart, my eyes do fail with
tears, where yet they can find no way, no way of relief, no way of help. In
mercy return good God, and visit the seed of the righteous, cast not his Crown
to the ground for ever; but set the poor man on high from affliction; build him
a sure house, gather him and his family into one flock and fold; become his
Shepherd, feed and govern him by thy singular Providence and Manuduction; and
let thy work in it be so manifest, that all who see it, may fear, and say, This
is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Make us wise, O Lord, to observe, and in observing, to consider, and by
considering, to lay to heart these things; That thou sitting in thy Throne
above, yet orderest the things below; that honor and contempt are from thee,
we understand the loving kindness of the Lord. O that men would praise the Lord
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men. O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. Let the
redeemed of the Lord say so, those whom he has redeemed from the hand of the
enemy, and gathered them out of all lands, and brought them into his Church,
that they bow their knees at the Name of Jesus, by whom all mercies pass to us,
and to whom be all praise, honor, laud and dominion this day, and for evermore.

PSALM. CVIII. (...).
THIS Psalm is wholly composed and drawn into one out of two Psalms. The first
part of it, until the 6th. verse, is verbatim taken out of the 57th. Psalm,
beginning at the 7th. verse; the latter part, from ver. 6. to the end, is taken
out of the 60th. Psalm, beginning, as it does here, at the 6th. verse, and is
continued, as here, unto the end. I shall not need therefore to Analyze and
explain, or insert a Meditation upon it, since it is done already; and
therefore I pass on to the next.

PSALM. CIX. (...).
THE later Expositors expound this Psalm, of Doeg, Achitophel, and other
Persecutors of David, and so it may be understood in the Type: But the Ancient
Fathers apply it to Judas the Traitor, and the Jews that put Christ to death;
which opinion, because it is more probable, being occasioned by those words of
Peter, Acts 1.20. which by him are applied to Judas out of this Psalm; I shall
expound it of Christ, whom David does personate; and of Judas, and the
malicious Jews, very fitly understood in the persons of his wicked and
slanderous enemies.

There be four parts of this Psalm. 1. A short Ejaculation, ver. 1. and the
Reasons of it expressed in a Complaint of the fraud and malice of his enemies,
ver. 6. 2. A bitter Imprecation against them, from ver. 6. to 21. 3. A
Supplication presented to God for himself, from ver. 21. and the Reasons, to
ver. 30. 4. A profession of thanks, ver. 30, 31.


1. The first part. He begins with an ejaculation.
He begins with an Ejaculation: Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise, ver. 1.
Observe, 1. O God of my praise. In the reading Translators vary; O God.
for thus they read: Deus laudis meae, Deus laus, mea, Deus laudabilis mihi;
and they expound it: 1. Either actively; that is, O God, whom I praise, even in
my greatest pressures or calamities. 2. Or passively, Who art my praise; the
Witness and Advocate of my innocence and integrity, when I am condemned by
malicious tongues; which sense seems fittest for this place, and to this the
Vulgar gives more light, that thus reads it, Domine laudem meam, ne tacueres:
And Bellarmine puts the words into Christ's mouth, in which he desites that God
would not conceal his Charity, Innocence, and other Virtues, being very like
that prayer, John 17.5. Father, glorify thy Son.
2. Hold not thy peace.
Hold not thy peace. Tacere, in Scripture, when referred to God, is to connive,
and rest, and seems as it were, not to regard; and the contrary, loqui, to
speak, to do somewhat for revenge or deliverance: This then is that which David
here asks, That when the malice of his enemies arrived at that height, that it
could be no longer endured, that God would connive at them, suffer them, and
hold his peace no longer, but would declare his displeasure against them.


2. The reason, the malice of his enemies. Whom he describes to be:
And after by way of Complaint he describes unto us their malicious nature, and
unsufferable conditions, which he aggravates by an elegant Gradation: For the
mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful, are opened against me,
they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

They were, 1. Impious. 2. Deceitful. 3. Liars. Impiety, deceit, lying, were
then the ingredients of their sin.

1. Turpious.
For the mouth of the wicked. Caiaphas, Judas, the Priests, the Jews, moved
with envy and malice. 2. Deceitful.
And the mouth of the deceitful is opened against me. Deceitful those words
were, Master, Thou teach the way of God truly: Tell us whither, They sought
to entrap him in his words? 3. Liars.
They have spoken against me with a lying tongue. He casts out Devils,
through Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. He said, he would destroy the Temple,
and raise it in three days.
And yet the mischief rises higher; for this deceit and lying, arose from
hatred and malice.

1. They compassed me about with words of hatred, manifesting in plain words
the malice which they carried in their hearts, Malicious.
saying, This man is not of God, behold a gluttonous person, and a wine-bibber,
Away with him, Crucify him. Yea now, but what evil has he done, that would be
known? why so much spoken against? why so hated? But such there was not, which
aggravates their fault. 2. Without cause.
They hated me, gratis, without a cause. Hate, and lie, and speak ill they
would, because they would, John 15.
4. Farther, They were not only wicked, deceitful, and malicious, but very
ungrateful persons also. I went about doing good, healing every sickness,
Ungrateful.
and would have gathered them. Now he is of a very ill nature, that being
beloved, will not love again; but he of a worse, that for love will return
hatred; and this they did.

1. For my love, they are my adversaries. Enough this to turn the heart of any
man from them: But, 2. I give my self to prayer. I prayed for them on the
Cross, Father,
Which base ingratitude of theirs he yet farther opens in fuller words, ver. 5.
And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love. I see that of
Theognis is most true.

(...).
Fluctere naturam gratia nulla potest.
A Jew will ever be a Jew.
2. The Prophet having complained of the malice, hatred, spiteful usage, The
second part. An Imprecation.
and ingratitude of his Nation, their crafty dealing with him, the lies and
slanders which they heaped upon him, proceeds to pray against them, and that in
a most bitter and fearful imprecation. Enemies he foresaw they would be to the
Son, God; and hinder, so much as lay in them, the flourishing estate of Christ's
Church; yea, and that nothing was of force to restrain or amend them, and
therefore he curses them with a curse, the most bitter that ever fell from the
lips of man; and had it not been directed and inspired by the Holy Ghost, not
justifiable. In particular, Judas that was guide to them, who took Jesus, is
pointed at: But as Augustine observes, he represented the person of the whole
Synagogue, the Imprecations then that are prayed for against him, do also
involve them respectively.

1. The first is a fearful imprecation: Set thou a wicked man over him, That he
be under the power of the wicked.


1. Subject him to the will of some impious and wicked man, to whose lust and
violence he may be no better than a slave. Others, by a wicked man, understand
some false Teacher, that may seduce him by false Doctrine: But Bellarmine by
Peccator here, understands the Spirit of Covetousness, which was set over
Judas, when he sold Christ, to whom he unhappily served till death. 2. Let
Satan stand at his right hand; have full power over him, let him stand, And
Satan.
which signifies a perpetual, and indefatigable endeavor, to urge and press
him forward, till he effect the mischief intended; and so it was in Judas, and
the Jews; for after that Satan had put into his heart to betray his Master,
and the Jews had taken counsel to crucify him, Satan would never permit them
to give it over, till they had brought him to the Cross; the Devil was their
Guide, and they followed him.
2. The second is, When he shall be judged, let him be condemned. When judged,
condemned.
but have the sentence of condemnation pronounced against him at the Bar of
man, and at the Bar of God. Literally it fell out in Judas, when his own
conscience accused and condemned him for betraying the innocent; the very High
Priests that bribed him, would not acquit him; and he went out; and became his
own Executioner, He hanged himself.

3. The third, Let his prayer be turned into sin; his supplication be
abominable, Let his prayer be sin.
Prove. 28. For he turns his ear from hearing God, why then should God hear him;
no prayer can be acceptable to God, but through Christ; none; but from a heart
purified by faith: Nor any impious man that lives in a constant course of sin,
has such a heart; nor the Jews, nor Judas, offer any prayer through Christ,
and therefore David's curse is fallen upon them, Their prayer is become sin.

4. The fourth is, the shortning of their life and their honor.

1. Let his days be few. Length of days is promised to the obedient, His life
and honor short.
and is a blessing; wherefore David prays, that this man may be of a short
life, which fell out in Judas, for he enjoyed not long his bargain. 2. And let
another take his Office; which, without contradiction, must be applied to
Judas, since St. Peter, Acts 1. so interprets it. And is at this day as true of
the Jews, for they have no High Priest: Another, after the order of
Melchizedech, has succeeded into the Priesthood of Aaron.
5. Let his Children be fatherless, and his Wife a Widow; which must needs be
the consequent of the former curse; His children fatherless.
for if his days be few, a Widow must on necessity be left behind, and
fatherless children also: This curse reaches to his Family, and he adds to it.

1. Let his children be Vagabonds, and beg. Vagabonds the Jews are to this
day; Vagabonds, and beg.
and upon the overthrow of Jerusalem, no better than Beggars for a longtime.
Juven. Sat. 3. In qua te quaero proseucha. 2. Let them seek their bread also
out of desolate places. Have no houses at all to dwell in, but such as ruinous,
fallen, and desolate, i. e. dwell among old walls, His Goods spoiled by the
Extortioner.
as Beggars, and thence rome abroad to seek their bread.
6. The sixth Execration, is upon his Goods.

1. Let the Extortioner catch all that he has. The Extortioner might be the
Publicans, Jews. 2. And the stranger spoil his labor; which was verified in
Titus Soldiers, that rip't up the Bellies of the captive Jews for gold. And
to this day, in the Turkish Empire, they are used as Spunges, suffered to
gather riches, as the Sponge sucks in water, for no other end, but to be
squeezed.
7. No pity showed to his children.
But the Prophet again returns to his Children, and lays yet other curses upon
them.

1. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him, neither let there be any to
favor his fatherless Children. To beg, to want, is a misery; but there is some
comfort in it, when the Beggar meets with some one, that will pity and relieve
him. This our Prophet votes against, Let there be none to pity him and his; and
probatum est, upon Judas; for he found no pity from the High Priests: What is
that to us, say they, look thou to it. And the posterity of those Murders did,
have, do find as little; for who pities a Jew? 2. His posterity quickly cut off.
in their issue, they would have their houses to continue for ever. That such a
happiness befall not these Reprobates, David prays, Let his posterity be cut
off, and in the Generation following, let their name be blotted out: He would
have a quick dispatch of them. It Is acutely observed by Bellarmine, That Judas
in the place he was in, his Bishops had no seed; for Matthias that came into
his place, derived not his Office from him. And for the Jews, though a
posterity of them yet remain after the flesh, yet in the very next Generation,
their Ecclesiastical and Civil Policy was at an end; and since their
dispersion, they sit without King, without Priest, without Sacrifice, without
Altar, without Ephod, without Teraphim, as it was foretold by Hosee. 3. Prophet
continues his Imprecation against the posterity of these Reprobates: The sin of
the father revenged on the child.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord, and let not the
sin of his mother be blotted out. This Imprecation answers Gods threat in the
Commandment, I will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children; and
the Jews have found this curse to come upon them to the uttermost, they
devoted themselves, and their posterity; Let his blood be upon us, and our
children: And it is known to the whole World, that it has taken its effect to
the full. The guilt of his blood is yet upon them, the iniquity of their
fathers is remembered; and the sin of their mother, the Synagogue, is not yet
done away. 4. And he repeats again, what he mentioned of the iniquity of their
fathers, and the indelible Character of the Synagogues sin; verse is but the
expolition of the former. 1. Let them be before the Lord continually: As if he
had said, Let the memory of their father and mothers sin live for ever, never
let God cast it behind his back. 2. That he may cut off the memory of them from
the Earth: Never let there be any memory of them, except it be in contempt;
which that ungrateful Nation has found true.

And so the Prophet having ended his Execrations, acquaints us with the causes
of this bitterness: 2. And then prays, that they pierce far, and work
effectually upon them. The causes of these Imprecations.


The causes he assigns, are these.

1. The first was, their want of pity toward men in distress: Hard-hearted men
they were, without any bowels of compassion. Their want of compassion.
By the Prophet Jeremy this is complained on, Lam. 1.12. Have ye no regard all
ye that pass by? Never was there sorrow like my sorrow, and yet nor Judas,
Jews considered it: It Is but just then, That they find judgment without mercy,
that would show no mercy, Jam. 2, Let his memory be cut off, etc. Because he
remembered not to show mercy. 2. So far from that, That he persecuted the poor
and needy man, They persecuted the afflicted. i.e. Christ, who was:
that he might even slay the broken in heart; which is the second cause, the
inhumanity and cruelty of Judas, and the Jews, against Christ, who is here
called: 1. Poor, because when he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor, Poor.
that we through his poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 9. 2. The needy man: For the
Foxes have Holes, Needy.
and he Birds of the Air Nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his
head, Luke 9.58. 3. The broken in heart: For he was in an agony, and his soul
was troubled, Broken in heart.
and besieged with sorrows, when he sweat drops of blood, when he cried, My
God, my God; but not with Compunction, or Contrition for any fault he had
committed; but out of the sense of pain, and anxiety, and solicitude, which he
bore in his heart continually for the salvation of Mankind.

In this verse then there is noted the extreme cruelty and inhumanity of the
Jews; for they that persecute a man for his life, have some reasons that move
them unto it: Either they are incensed to do it by anger for some injury
received, or moved by hope of gain by spoiling some rich man; or else through
envy, that grudgeth at another felicity. But Christ was humble and low in
heart, a poor man, that never did any man wrong: He contemned the World, was
needy, and had not what should provoke the eye of any covetous wretch. Lastly,
he was broken in heart, and wept for other men's sins; not in so happy a
condition, that any man should envy him. It then aggravates their sin, that
they should persecute him; and because they did it, they are justly accursed.

3. And yet there is a third cause behind, He loved cursing; He loved cursing.
and then it is but reason, that he have what he loved; he delighted not in
blessing, why then should any man delight to bless him? As he loved cursing, No
man can love a curse, or hate a blessing, if it be proposed to the will under
the form of cursing and blessing: But a man is then said to love a curse, and
hate a blessing, when he is the cause, by his own choice, of a wicked course,
that he be cursed, and not blessed. This Judas, and the Jews did; Judas, by
loving money more than his Master; love a curse, he forsook Christ, and would
not be blessed. The Jews refused him, and would have his blood upon them; as
they loved then, so let them have; as they delighted not in blessing, so let it
be far from them.
-- Neque enim lex justior ulla est, etc.

Yea, Let this then sit close to him
and let this curse, as our Prophet adds farther, come with effect upon them,
sit as close to him, as the garment about him; let it be converted into his
very substance, as is the water he drinks, and pierce his marrow and bones, as
the oil, with which he anoints him; let him carry it perpetually along with
him, as he does his garment, and his girdle: For this is it which the Prophet
intends by the following similitudes, who would have the curse be not only
piercing and efficacious, but lasting and perpetual.

1. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment; loved to have
it always about him, Efficaciously
as a man does the clothes he most delights in. 2. Perpetually.
So let it come, as waters into his bowels; that the stomach concocts, and
turns into the very flesh of the Animal; so let this curse be converted into
his nature and manners. 3. But water pierces not the bones, oil will do that,
and therefore let it come as oil into his bones. The intent of the Prophet is,
That it be wholly, outwardly, and inwardly accursed, deprived of all good, and
filled with mischief, and all evil.
And as he would have the curse to be of great efficacy, so he would have him
carry it always about him.

1. Let it be unto him, as the garment that always covers him: That is, let it
always stick close to him, as his garment, which he puts not off, least his
nakedness appear. 2. And for a girdle, with which he is girded continually; i.
e. compass him, and go round about him, being fastened either with buckles or
knots. 1. Moller, for a garment, reads Pallium, which is a Cloak that a man
puts off at home, and calls for when he goes abroad: By which he conceives the
Prophet desires, that God would set some external mark upon him, as a note upon
him, that he may be known to be a Castaway. It Is noted of the Jews, that they
carry an illsent about them, and their ears are grown into a Proverb; some say,
their Visage betrays them. 2. If Doeg were the Type of Judas, as most agree,
in this Psalm, then by the girdle also might be understood, Cingulum militare,
which they cast not off while they were of that profession: And he Doeg being a
misitary man, he would have the curse cleave as long to him, and encompass him,
as did his girdle.

Prophet concludes this part of the Psalm with an Exclamation and Vote, He
concludes the Imprecation with a vote.
by which he shows, that he was persuaded, that his execrations were not in
vain.

Let this be the reward of my Adversaries from the Lord, and of them that speak
evil against my soul; The third part. He prays for protection. For himself,
and his Church
that say I am a Deceiver, a Seducer, and deny me to be the Son of God.

3. The Prophet now turns from cursing, into prayer, and in the person of
Christ directs his prayer to God for protection and deliverance, both of
himself, and for the whole Church; and as before he prayed against Judas and
the Synagogue, and indeed foresaw the evils that were to fall upon them; so
does in this, pray for himself, and in that for the Church, foreseeing the many
good things that should be conferred on that Body, of which the Messiah was to
be the Head.

1. He begins his prayer in this Form: But do thou to me, O God the Lord, Help
he asks against his Persecutors, on three grounds. 1. Because his Lord was
Jehovah, the Fountain of all Being, of all Power; and therefore could, if he
would, Upon Gods mercy.
repress his Persecutors. 2. Because it would be for his honor: Do it for thy
Names sake; thy Name, i. e. thy Clemency, thy Goodness, thy Faithfulness in
defense of thy Church, and Justice in executing Vengeance on her enemies, will
be thereby celebrated, and declared; for the Name of God imports all this. 3.
Do it, because thy mercy is good; Deliverance.
is easily inclined to succor such as are in misery, which animates me also to
ask, being assured that out of mercy, thou will do it.
2. Deliver thou me; Father, save me from this hour, John 12.27. O my Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26.39. For the reasons to
persuade it are the same. 1. Deliver me, for I am poor and needy, destitute of
humane help; And that because:
the Disciples slept, fled. 2. Deliver me, for my heart is wounded within me,
my soul it exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Mat. 26.38.

And to these, he adds many other Reasons; the first of which, illustrated by
the two similitudes of the Evening shadow, and the Locust; Bellarmine very
acutely refers to his apprehension in the Garden, His life short, and he
patient and silent.
and his being posted off from the High Priests to Pilate, from Pilate to
Herod, and so back again.

1. I am gone like the shadow, when it declines; which passes away in a moment
silently, without the least noise: So was Christ pulled from his Disciples, and
led away as a Prisoner, without any murmur, Unworthily used.
without any resistance, without any defense: He was led as a Lamb to the
Slaughter, Isa. 53. 2. I am tossed up and down, as the Locust: Tossed from one
Tribunal to another, as the Locusts, base Creatures, that the wind carries from
place to place, Exodus 10.12, 19. Pains with trouble.
And so also it fell out to the Apostles and Martyrs, who dyed patiently, and
were (...), tossed up and down the World.
2. A second Reason, from his debility, or weak condition his body was now in.

1. My knees are weak through fasting: The little sustenance Christ took in the
night before the Passion, his watching in prayer that night, makes this good.
2. And my flesh fails of fatness; through the loss of much blood,
Opprobriously used.
so faint he was, that they compelled Simon of Cyrene to carry his Cross.
3. A third Reason yet to move God to pity and deliver, is, I am become also a
reproach unto them; when they looked upon me, they shaked their head; He prays
for the Resurrection.
which needs no illustration, the four Gospels being an ample Comment upon this
verse, and so he concludes the Passion.

This is the first part of his prayer: A second part there is of it, which
follows, Psalm, which was also a Psalm of the Passion, which is there set out
to ver. 18. And then he prays, as here, that he might not lie long in the
Grave, ver. 19.20, 21. Help me, Acts 2.24. according to thy mercy.

And he backs his Petition with a strong Reason, drawn from the final cause,
Help me, save me, that they may know, that this is thy hand, that thou, Lord,
have done it: That all men, especially the Jews, may know by my rising again,
in despite of their watch and seal, that it was not their malice, nor power,
that brought me to this ignominious death; but the whole matter, my Passion,
suffering, and death, proceeded from thy hand, Acts 2.23. and cap. 3.18. And by
his Resurrection he was declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4.

And in the close of his prayer, His vote.
he sings, as it were, a Triumph over all his enemies, the Devil, Judas, the
Jews, those great enemies to him and his Church; over them he insults in a
bitter Epitrope.

1. Let them curse; speak evil of me, call me a deceiver, blaspheme me, as the
Jews do in a solemn manner to this day; That God bless him.
let them esteem my followers, as the offscouring and outcasts of the World.
2. That the Jews be confounded.
But bless thou: So thou return me good for their cursing, 2 Samuel 16.12. And
not only to me in glorifying me, and setting me on his right hand; but for my
sake, bless all Nations, that by faith in Baptism shall give up their names to
me. 3. When they arise: For, 1. Arise they will, plot, endeavor, and oppose
all they can, both by force and fraud the establishment of my Kingdom. 2. But
let them be ashamed, confounded and astonished, that all their attempts are
frustrate.
4. That he rejoice.
But let thy servant (for Christ took upon him the name and condition of a
servant) rejoice; not only that they are saved, and their enemies confounded,
but because thy Name is thereby glorified.
And he continues his Imprecation, But his adversaries clothed with shame.
and comes over it again by way of Expolition: Let my Adversaries be clothed
with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a
Mantle. Confounded at the last day for their ingratitude, vest talari, as with
a Robe, or a lined Mantle, that comes about, and covers every part of the body.

4. And at last, he closes all with thanks, which he opposes to the confusion
of the wicked; The fourth part. For which he would praise God publicly.
they, for amazement and astonishment of heart, shall be struck dumb, as the
man without the wedding garment; but, 1. I will greatly praise the Lord with my
mouth, with great affection, with a ^great Jubilee. 2. yea, I will praise him
among the multitude.


Of which praise he renders this reason.

1. He shall stand at the right hand of the poor, i. e. such poor, who are poor
in spirit, God will defend and save his people.
meek and humble; and being conscious of their own wants, and lack of strength,
are always begging, and beating at the door of God, who is rich in mercy; 2. I
will stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn
his soul; from the Devil, and all his instruments. Christ is the (...) to his
Church, and he has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against
us, and nailed it to the Cross, Col. 2.14. So that cum a mundo damnamur, a
Christo absolvimur. Tertull.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and ninth Psalm.
O Almighty, Merciful, and Gracious Father, They have compassed us about with
words of hatred. They hate and malice us, and what foul aspersions their malice
could invent, those they have cast upon us: But with this, their malice was not
satisfied; for from words, they came to blows; our blood have they shed like
water, by the fury of War, and defiled their hands with the slaughter of
innocents; our Mothers Children have risen, and sought against us without a
cause.

For what cause have we given them, except it were, that in charity we would
have taught, and informed them in the Truth, and continued them in the bosom of
thy Church? What cause, except it were, that we prayed for them, Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do? but such is their ingratitude,
That for our love, they are become our Adversaries; they have rewarded us evil
for good, and hatred for our love: And for our good will, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge: Or, if they shall persist, and go on in their wickedness,
against them, as thou have taught us in this Psalm.

O Lord, the Curses are bitter, the Execrations are fearful, and we know of
what spirit we are, we shall then leave it to thy Justice to execute them, as
on whom, and when thou shall think fit, not looking so much what these men of a
reprobate mind have deserved, as what is our Duty, taught and enjoined by thee,
To love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate
us, to pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute us. Afraid we are,
lest we indulge too much to our humane affections of self-love, anger, hatred,
and impatience, even in using this Form that thou have taught, and therefore we
will forbear to curse them, and solicit for our selves.

Conscious we are to our selves, that we have not lived a life worthy of thy
Truth and Gospel revealed unto us, which is the just cause that at this time,
for thy Names sake, because thy mercy is good, deliver us. Thou art the mighty
Jehovah, Thou then can, and thy mercy is great, and therefore we hope thou will do it for us; we plead no merit, we ask it not for any desert, but merely
for thy Names sake; for we are assured, that by the doing of it, thy Name will
be magnified, thy Clemency, thy Goodness, thy Faithfulness in defense of thy
Church, and thy Justice in executing vengeance upon the enemy, will be exalted
and celebrated.

Our condition, O Lord, at this time, is very low, poor we are, and men of a
troubled spirit; needy we are, being robbed and outed of our worldly Goods;
against Heaven, drawing we are to our last home, as the shadow, that at Even
departs, and yet we can have no rest, but are tossed up and down from Herod to
Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, as the Locust; we have chastised ou^ soul with
fasting, And yer all this we could digest with patience, were it not for the
opprobrious language and usage we sustain from them;

Arise, They blasphemously entitle thee to all their Actions, they impute all
to thy Providence; ashamed they are not, to declare, That thou art pleased with
all their enormities: But, O our God, arise, and in thy good time make them
know, That they were but thy Rod and thy Scourge; and that thou, Lord, have
done it; and that being done, Thou will take them, and cast them into the fire.

Let them, Let them speak evil, as they do, of us; let them vlaspheme, and
account us the offscouring of the World, outcasts, and a spectacle to men and
Angels: But do thou, O Lord, bless; bless thy people, bless thine inheritance.
They arise against us, but let them be ashamed, and astonished, Let our
Adversaries be clothed with shame, and cover and enwrap themselves with their
own confusion, as with a Mantle.

This at the last day will be certainly done, when they shall desire, if
possible, to fly from the presence of the Almighty; whereas thy servants then,
with great boldness, shall stand in the presence of the Almighty, and lift up
their heads, and rejoice.

O Gracious God, defend and help thy poor Church, stand at the right hand of
every one that is poor in spirit, So will we greatly praise the Lord with our
mouths, Amen.

PSALM. CX. Propheticus de Regno Christi.
THIS Psalm is short in words, but copious and deep in Mysteries; the Subject
of it, without doubt, is Christ, which no Christian can deny, since both St.
Peter, Acts 2.34. and St. Paul, Hebr. 1.13: expounds it of Christ, and Christ
applies it to himself, Matthew. 22.44. In this then Christ is described as a
King, and a Priest.

In it are to be considered: 1. Christ's Kingdom, in the three first verses. 2.
His Priesthood, in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh.


1. The first part. Christ a King.
As touching his Kingdom, the Prophet first acquaints us with his Person. 2.
His Power, and the Acquisition of it. 3. The Continuance of it. 4. The
Execution of it; first over his enemies; and secondly, over his own people;
which is the sum of the three first verses.

1. The Person that was here to reign was David's Lord, His Person.
his Son according to the flesh, but his Lord, as equal to God, Phil. 2.6, 7.
As made flesh, David, as born of a Virgin, the Son of David; but as Emmanuel,
the Lord of David; which the Jews not understanding, could not answer Christ's
question, Mat. 22.45. 2. As for his Power, the Author of it was God: The Lord
said to my Lord. His Power.
The Lord said; said it, that is, Decreed it from everlasting: And said it
again, when he made it known, The Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents
head. 3. And of this Kingdom, as I may so say, he then took Possession, His
Inauguration to his Kingdom at his Ascension.
when the Lord said unto him, Sit at my right hand. Christ, as the Son of God,
was ever at Gods right hand, equal with him in Might and Majesty; but as Man,
was not exalted to this honor before his glorious Ascension, Acts 2.34. Ephesians.
1.20. Phil. 2.8. This then was the day of Inauguration to his Kingdom. 4. For
the continuance of it: It is to be donec, The continuance of his Kingdom.
which notes not a piece of time, but a perpetuity: Sit, till I make all thy
enemies thy footstool. Sit he shall at Gods right hand; that is, in power and
glory, till he shall say to all Tyrants and Heretics, and Hypocrites, and
Antichrists, Depart from me, Mat. 25. Yet not so, as if he were to be dethroned
then, but till then he shall reign in a secret manner; for now though he
executes his Power, yet it is not seen, Tyrants acknowledge it not: But when
once all his enemies shall be made his footstool, then he shall openly and
visibly Rule, Sitting at his Fathers right hand for evermore. Bellarmine
interprets it well, Go on to reign, neither desist to propagate and enlarge thy
Kingdom, by converting men to faith and obedience, until there be not an enemy
alive, not a man which will not bow his knee to thy Name, till all Opponents be
beaten down. 5. The beginning of this Kingdom was in Zion: The beginning of his
Kingdom in Zion.
The Lord shall send the Rod of thy strength out of Zion. 1. The Rod of his
power and strength, was his Scepter; and his Scepter, is his Word, the Gospel,
the Wisdom of God, 1 These. 2.13. The Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. The
mighty power of God unto salvation, For the Gospel began to be preached in Zion.
Romans 1.16. Able to cast down, etc. 2 Cor. 10.5. 2. And this was to be sent out
of Zion, Isa. 2.3. Micah 4.2. It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
the third day, that repentance, and remission of sins be preached in his Name
to all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. The sound of the Apostles
words went into all Lands, but at Zion it was, and must be first heard, Acts
13.46. and Acts 1.8.
6. And now the Prophet comes to the execution of his power, The execution of
his power.
which was either over his enemies, or his good Subjects. 1. As for that over
his enemies, Over his enemies, that converted or confounded
he ushers it in with a Vote and Acclamation, Dominare, Rule thou in the midst
of thy enemies; converting such enemies as appertain to Gods Election, and
confounding such enemies as are the sons of Perdition: Now, 1. These are the
greatest number; for the Church, however it be propagated, and increased, yet
is in the midst of enemies, of Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics, etc. 2.
Dominare then, be thou Ruler, go on, and set up the standard of thy Cross in
the midst of these Pagans, and will they, nill they, yet erect thy Kingdom.
2. For thy good Subjects they are easily dealt withal, Over his good
Subjects, which are a willing people.
and continue them in obedience. 1. For thy people shall be willing; not
enforced by compulsion, but coming in upon love: They confluunt, they will flow
together as water; which runs downward, by a natural inclination, Isa. 2. and
will bring free will offerings. 2. Upon grace offered them.
But yet not before thy grace has wrought upon their hearts, Tracti sequentur,
in the day of thy power; i. e. in the days of thy solemn Assemblies, in the
days of thy Gospel, when thou shall send forth thy Apostles to preach, and by
preaching, to collect and constitute thy Kingdom, then they will show
themselves to be a willing people, and in pure devotion, and cheerful
obedience, they will do their homage to thee their King.

3. And a holy people.
The third quality of this good people, is, That they be holy: For some read
the words thus, They shall offer free will offerings with an holy worship; our
last Translators point it somewhat otherwise, for they read, The people shall
be willing in the day of thy power: There they pause, and read on thus, In the
beauty of holiness from the womb of the morning: The Vulgar, in splendoribus
sanctorum. Moller, in ornatibus sanctis, and stops there. Tremellius, in
decoris sanctitatis: But let the reading be as it will, agreed, for ought I
perceive, all Expositors are, That holiness must be an eminent and resplendent
Ornament of Christ's good Subjects. 4. Which holiness is from grace.
Which Sanctity yet these good people have not from themselves, it is by some
secret and efficacious work of the Spirit: They shall worship in the beauties
of holiness, from the womb of the morning; Thou have the dew of thy youth.
This is a very difficult place, and the rendering of it is so various, so
perplexed, so altered by the several pointing of it, The sense of these words
inquired into.
Three opinions I find about the words. The Fathers expound them of Christ
himself. The later Divines, of his people, that were willing to serve him,
which indeed is most likely, and will best consist and cohere with the sense of
the former words.

But those that expound them, Expounded of Christ.
and apply them to Christ, run not one way neither: Some suppose the Prophet
speaks of his Godhead, some of his Manhood, some of his Gifts and Graces: Thus
they open themselves.

1. The Prophet, say they, Notes out here Christ's eternal Generation before all
Worlds, following the Septuagints Translation, that reads it, (...), of the
womb; that is, of mine own Essence, says the Father to the Son, before the
morning Star; that is, before there was Light or Star, which was the first
Creature; i. e. before the World was, I have begotten thee, or, Thou have the
dew of thy youth; that is, thy Nativity or Birth.

2. Others apply the words to Christ's Nativity of the Virgin Mary, and open
thus their meaning: From the womb of the morning, that is, the Virgin, Thou
have the dew of thy youth; i. e. Thy birth, which birth is therefore compared
to dew, because as a celestial dew the Son of God sent from Heaven, was at his
Incarnation conceived in the Virgins womb, without the seed of man.

3. Others, yet applying them to Christ, expound the words of the fullness of
those dewes, as it were of Gifts and Graces, with which his Humanity was
invested and beautified, even from the womb, which is also very true; for he
was (...), that holy one from the womb, and even then received those Gifts and
Graces in an abundant and plentiful manner, without measure, which he after
communicated by portions to his Church: For of his Fullness it is that we
receive; He was anointed with the oil of gladness above his Fellows, but yet
for his Fellows.

4. Of the Church his people.
Now this Interpretation, as I conceive, gave occasion to our Modern
Expositors, to apply the words not to the Messiah, nor to the plenitude of
Grace in him, but to our new Birth, and the Graces then bestowed upon his
Subjects and people.

By their Youth, they understand their Regeneration; by the Dewes, the Graces
then bestowed on them, which they have not from the will of man, nor from the
will of the flesh, but of God; or as the Prophet phrases it, from the womb of
the morning. As if the Holy Ghost had said, By the preaching of thy Word thou
shall bring forth a people, not only good, but great, whose increase shall be
so plentiful and wonderful, as the drops of the morning dew: For as the dew
that secretly falls from Heaven abundantly, covers and refreshes the Earth; so
thy power regenerating the hearts of men by thy Gospel, and secret operation of
thy Spirit, distilling as the dew, and as the showers upon the herbs, is that
immortal Seed, by which an incredible number of children are begotten to God.
How properly may it be said to, and of every regenerate man, from the womb of
the morning; that is, not from thy self, or any other womb, but from above,
from the Spirit of God, Thou have the dew, those sweet and comfortable dewes of
grace which do better and beautify thy youth, thy new birth, thy youthful and
lively condition in Christianity, hence is thy birth, thy vigor, thy growth.
And because the Prophet in the beginning of the verse spoke of Gods people, of
their holiness, their willingness, methinks it is most consonant to the drist
of the Text, to expound these words of their Regeneration also, of their
increase, of their growth in grace, and the causes of it; the Word of God, and
the operation of his Spirit, which as I said, is the dew: But I leave to every
man to take for his guide in this case, either the Ancient, or Modern Divines.

Now I go on with the Psalmist.

2. The Prophet having foretold Christ's Kingdom, The second part. Christ a
Priest.
now descends to predict his Priesthood, under which his Prophetical Office may
well be implied; for the Priests lips were to preserve knowledge,

1. The Lord swear. His Word had been enough; but for Assurance, Confirmed by
an Oath.
he has given his Oath: Beatos nos quorum, causa jurat Deus, sed miseros nos,
sine juranti quidem credimus. It seems, that in the Priesthood of Christ lies
the main weight of our Redemption, that God takes an Oath to assure us he
should be a Priest, that he should be a King, that he should be a Prophet; he
swears not, though he was to be both, but he secures to us this Office, because
nor his being a King, nor Prophet, could have redeemed us, had he not been a
Priest to offer himself to dye, to intercede, to satisfy Gods wrath for us. 2.
Sworn he has, and he will not repent. Of which God repents not.
as in the case of the old World, in the case of Nineveh, then he was to do
justice, and to destroy, which Isaiah calls, opus alianum: But now he was to
save the World by this Priest his Son; and he takes an Oath to do in, and he
repents not, nor ever will repent of it. His sentence for judgment is ever
conditional, and then he is said to repent, when he executes it not; his words
have not the effect: Non affectu vertitur, sed avertitur nostra penitentia, and
orationibus: But his Decree for mercy is absolute, as it was here, he will not
repent, nor alter the thing gone out of his lips. 3. The matter of the Oath
follows: The matter of the Oath.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech: Not a word here,
that ought to pass without a Note. 1. Thou, is emphatical: Thou, David's Lord,
art a Priest, Thou. Thou art a Priest.
2. Art: For this Priest was (...), I am, and then it might rightly be said of
him, Thou art, 3. A Priest; whose Office thus the Apostle describes, Hebr. 5.1.
To be a person taken from among men, yet ordained for men in things pertaining
to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, who can have
compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he
himself also is compassed with infirmity. 4. For ever.
For ever: They truly, viz. Aaron and his Successors, were many Priests,
because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; but this man,
because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, Hebr. 7.23,
After the order of Melchizedech.
24. 5. After the Order; that is, the Right, the Law, the Custom, the
Tradition, or Rites. 6. Of Melchizedech, which is opposed to the Order of
Aaron; he was not then to be a Priest after the Order of Aaron, but by a former
and higher Order; The difference betwixt the Aaronical Priesthood and Christ's.
the difference lies in this.

1. In the Constitution of him to the Priesthood: He was made with an Oath, and
so were not any of Aarons Order. This Saint Paul observes, Hebr. 7.20, 21.

2. In the Succession. In Aarons Priesthood, the High Priest being mortal, as
he began, so also he ended; he dyed, and another succeeded: But this Priest
after Melchizedech, had no Successor; as Melchizedech, he was without father on
earth, without mother in heaven; he had neither beginning of days, nor end of
life, Hebr. 7.

3. Melchizedech was King and Priest, and so was Christ; Aaron a Priest only:

4. Aaron and his sons offered up Oxen, Sheep; first for their own sins, then
for the people, Levit. 16.6. But Christ being holy, blameless, undefiled, Hebr.
7.26. offered not any Sacrifice for himself, but for our sins, Isa. 53.9.

5. Aaron was a local Priest, tied to the Temple at Jerusalem, a Priest of one
people; but Christ an universal Catholic Priest, a Priest for all persons, all
places, John 4.21.

6. Aaron anointed with material Oil, Christ with the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.18,
21.

7. Aarons Priesthood temporary, Christ's for ever. The difference betwixt his
Priesthood, Christ a Priest, having the characters required by St. Paul.
and that of Aaron, is evident; though then no such Priest, yet a Priest, and
according to Saint Paul's definition, Hebr. 5.1, 2.

1. A Priest is to be a person taken from among men; a man then he must be,
though a select, a choice man, every man not fit for the Office; and so was
Christ a perfect man, A man. 2. Ordained.
yet a choice man, one of a thousand, Cant. 1. 2. A Priest must be ordained by
God; For no man takes upon him that honor, who is not called by God, as was
Aaron; so Christ glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest, but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, For men.
this day have I begotten thee, Hebr. 5. 3. The High Priest was ordained for
men in things pertaining to God; for men he is ordained, that he may plead
their cause to God, to be their Advocate, Mediator, Interpreter, and Reconciler
in all those things in which men make their Addresses to God, or God is to
signify his Will to them: And so was Christ; for he is the Advocate, the
Mediator for his people, he reconciles man to God, he interprets his Will to
us, by preaching the Gospel to the poor. 4. To offer sacrifice.
The High Priest was ordained, that he might offer Gifts and Sacrifices for
sins. Their Sacrifices were the blood of Bulls and Goats, which could not take
away sins: But as a Priest, Christ offered also a Sacrifice, a Sacrifice of
blood, but far more precious than that of Beasts, being himself, and his own
blood, Ephesians. 5.2. and Hebr. 9.26. Hebr. 10.10, 11, 12. 5. Compassionate.
The High Priest must have compassion on the ignorant, and on those that are
out of the way: And such a Priest was Christ; For we have not an High Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Hebr. 4.15. 6.
Lastly, The High Priest must be compassed with infirmities, Compassed with
infirmities
and so was Christ, In all things like us, sin only excepted; He took our
infirmities, and bare our sorrows; and in all things it behoved him to be like
unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people,
for in that he himself has suffered; being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted, Hebr. 2.17, 18.
2. A Priest then, it is evident, Christ is, it remains now to show, A Priest
for ever.
1. How he is a Priest for ever? 2. How a Priest after the Order of
Melchizedech?


1. A Priest for ever, Christ is said to be, in respect of his Person, his
Office, the Effect.

1. In respect of his Person: For he succeeded no Priest, In his Person.
his Vocation being immediate, neither is any to succeed him in this
Priesthood; for he lives for ever, and therefore needs not, as the Priests
under the old Law, any Successor to continue his Priesthood to posterity;
whosoever since do any service for him, are but his Underofficers, and
Authorized by him: The plenitude of his Power shall never be transferred to any
other, he lives, and keeps it in his own hands; it is but in vain to talk of a
Successor. 2. A Priest he is for ever, in respect of his Office. Not of
offering, In his office of intercession.
for that is ended, and was, when he offered himself upon the Cross; but in
respect o^^ his Intercession, in that for ever he does intercede in Heaven to
his Father for his people. 3. A Priest he is for ever, in respect of the
Effect; In his effects 1. Redemption 2. Salvation.
because by that Sacrifice which he once offered on the Cross, he becomes to
all his the cause of these inestimable Effects, Redemption, and eternal
Salvation; in which sense, that his Sacrifice once offered on the Cross, may
well be said to be Eternal.
2. That Christ is a Priest, that he is a Priest for ever, is evident; After
the order of Melchizedech.
it remains now to be examined, How a Priest after the Order, the Rite, the
Manner, the Word, and Power given and prescribed to Melchizedech, or the
similitude of Melchizedech.

1. This Melchizedech (suppose it were Sem) was King of Salem, King and Priest.
and Priest of the most High God, Genesis 14. So was Christ a King of Jerusalem,
above Gods own City, and a Priest, offering himself a sacrifice for sin. 2.
Melchizedech is by interpretation, King of righteousness; so is Christ, Our
righteousness.
The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30. 3. Melchizedech is King of
Salem, i. e. peace; Our peace.
so Christ is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. 4. Melchizedech was without
father, without mother, to us so, God for ever
as being to us revealed by God; so was this our Priest, Having nor beginning
of days, nor end of life, as touching his Godhead, Apoc. 1.11. 5.
Melchizedech, blessed; Abraham ex Officio, the greater, the less; He blesses.
and Christ blesses us, In turning every one of us from our iniquities, Acts
3. ult. 6. Ordains the Sacrament.
Melchizedech brought forth bread and wine to refresh Abraham's Army, and Christ
has in the Sacrament set forth bread and wine to refresh hungry and thirsty
souls. Thus much we can grant, and yet not admit of the Popish Sacrifice.
Now I proceed in the Exposition of the Psalm.

The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath.
His Kingdom and Priesthood must continue.


After that the Prophet had said, That the Messiah should be a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchizedech. He intimates in this verse, That
notwithstanding all opposition that should be made against him, yet his
Priesthood should be eternal; as if he had said, Many Kings of the earth shall
conspire, as did Herod, Domitian, Decius, Maximinus, Dioclesian, Julian, etc.
to overthrow Christ's Priesthood, and overturn Religion; but it shall never be
done, his Priesthood and holy Rites shall stand and continue; for, 1. For God
has given him power to revenge the enemies of his Church.
The Lord is on thy right hand: Given thee power, who sits at his right hand,
which thou will use in defense of thy Church. 2. And this thy Lord shall strike
through Kings, the greatest, the potenst enemies. 3. In the day of his wrath:
For such a day there is, and that will come; and when this day of revenge and
vengeance comes, the proudest Tyrant shall not escape: He will recompense the
slackness of revenge, by the sharpness of the punishment; he has leaden feet,
but iron hands, he will lay on, Confringet.


Which the Prophet farther explains in the following verse, This David explains.
in which Christ is described as a valiant Conqueror over his enemies.

1. He shall rule and judge; not only over the Jews, but the Heathen also; set
up his power, and judge the people in righteousness. 2. He shall fill the
places with dead bodies; make such a slaughter among his enemies, as enraged
Soldiers do in the storm of a City, that fill the Trenches with the dead: The
meaning is, that the execution upon his enemies will be great and furious, not
one spared. 3. He shall wound the heads over many Countries: Even Kings and
Monarchs, those in the greatest Power and Authority. Of this, Herod, the
Persecutors, Maximinus, Dioclesian, Julian, etc. are Examples.
The Prophet through the whole Psalm had spoken of Christ's Exaltation; verse,
he acquaints us by what means he came to this honor; His Cross the way to the
Crown.
his Cross was the way to the Crown, his Passion and Humiliation to his
Exaltation. He, says David, shall drink of the Brook in the way, therefore
shall he lift up his Head; as if he had said with the Apostle, He humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore
God has also highly exalted him, etc. Phil. 2.8, 9. Hebr. 2.9. and 12.2. Isa.
5.11, 12.

1. He shall drink: To drink, is to be afflicted, Jer. 49.12. Matthew. 20.22. 2.
He shall drink of the Brook, de Torrente, and that is more than of the Cup; His
Passion set out by a Torrent.
for a Cup contains a certain portion of sorrows, but a Torrent a whole Ocean
of miseries. 2. In a Cup, that which is ^^unk may be clean and clear, but in a
Torrent, a man can expect none but muddy, troubled water; that then the Prophet
says, He shall drink of the Torrent, intimates, That the drink offered him
should be much, and troubled. And at his Passion, he descended into the very
depth of the Torrent, and drank very deep of it. 3. In the way: That was, while
he was Viator, in his Journey, all the time of his life, that preceded his
Resurrection and Ascension.
2. His Ascension and Honor.
But Claritas Humilitatis praemium; because he thus humbled himself, and
willingly underwent his Death and Passion, for the Glory of his Father, and the
Salvation of Mankind, therefore shall God lift up his Head, he shall ascend
into Heaven, sit at his right hand, and be constituted the Judge of quick and
dead; he shall rise from the dead, and have all power committed to him in
Heaven and Earth.

The Prayer out of the One hundred and tenth Psalm.
O Almighty God, most gracious and merciful Lord, sinned all Mankind has, and
by it incurred thy displeasure, and by the disobedience of our first Parents,
had we not since added to that disobedience, been utterly lost; it was not in
the power of any creature to save us, it was not within the compass of any
humane or angelical ability to make our peace, to get our pardon, and to
reconcile us again unto thee. The sentence of death was passed upon us, and
nothing could respite the execution, but thy own Ordinance. A Mediator was
wanting to interpose and hear all differences; a Priest to step in, and make an
Atonement; an Advocate to plead for thy people, and allay the anger that was
gone forth. And such an one, O merciful Lord, Thou, out of thy mere love, have
in mercy provided for us. Thou said to thy own Son, Thou art a Priest for
ever; and thy own Son said, Lo, I come to do thy Will; and so by thy wonderful
Decree, and his willing Obedience, we are redeemed.

Who ever heard so strange a thing? who could, or would ever believe this
report, had not thou, O God, revealed it? The zeal of the Lord has done this
for us, the zeal of the Son of God has done this, brought to pass that which
flesh and blood would never believe, were it not, That thou have commanded it
to be believed. O mystery, beyond comprehension! which when we seem to
comprehend, yet we understand not, the secret so far passes what our weak
capacity can reach unto. And in this thou, O merciful Father, have condescended
to our infirmity, for that thy Decree, and thy Sons love, be never more
doubted; Thou have secured us by an Oath, an Oath of which thou will never
repent, That he is a Priest for ever.

A Priest must have something to offer, and he offered himself; a Priest must
offer blood, and he offered his own; a Priest must step in, and appease thy
anger, when it was at the highest; a Priest must reconcile, when the terms of
difference were the greatest, And such an High Priest thou have sworn thy Son
shall be, given him for us, and to us; not only to them that lived then, and
before, but to all thine that are now, and shall be hereafter; for thou have
ordained to be a Priest for ever.

O holy and good Father, how much have thou loved us, who have not spared thine
one only Son, but have delivered him to be our Priest, and our Sacrifice; and
therefore our Priest, because our Sacrifice, to Sacrifice himself upon the
Altar of the Cross, that he might cancel, and nail there the Handwriting that
was against us, and by death, destroy him that had the power of death, the
Devil.

This could not be done, till he had drank of the Brook in the way, till all
thy storms and waves had gone over him; for so it behoved Christ to suffer, But
now all those indignities, that agony, those unknown sufferings are at an end,
and thou have lifted up his head. He that sacrificed himself on Earth, is an
High Priest, an Advocate, a Mediator, an Intercessor for his Body in Heaven,
and there applies his purchase, and continues this his Office for his Servants
and Saints.

O Lord, I am the meanest, the most sinful of this Society, so often as I
provoke thee to anger by infirmity, or surreptitious, by enormous or
presumptuous iniquities, turn thy face from me a wretched Caitiff, and behold
those wounds in his hands, feet, and side, and accept of that precious
Sacrifice which he made upon the Cross for me; hear the cry of those wounds
that intercede for me at thy Throne of Grace; I rely upon no other Advocate, I
will sue to no other Mediator; if he be not able to save me, then let me perish
for ever; speak peace to my soul in his Name, be reconciled unto me in his
blood, and make his intercession so powerful unto me, That I may be purged from
my sins, and turned from mine iniquities.

And this Supplication I do not only offer unto thee for my self, but for all
thy people, and said unto my Lord, Sir thou at my right hand. All power is now
given unto him both in Heaven and in Earth; for he is not only a Priest, but a
King also; a Scepter he has, and a Rod in his right hand; this is the Rod of
his strength, and it came first out of Zion, I mean, his Gospel, that Law which
came first out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. O set thy King
upon thy holy hill of Zion, give him the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, break them with a Rod of Iron,
and dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. Oppose all those that oppose the
growth and enlargement of his Kingdom: Let him rule in the midst of thine
enemies, and sit at thy right hand, until thou have made all his enemies his
Footstool. O Lord, let him preside, and have the Dominion over all, till there
be no Adversary left, that shall dare to oppose him in his Offices.

Behold, we humbly beseech thee, how in these our days, there are risen up
blasphemous and wicked men, cruel and bloody Antichrists, who go about to break
his Bands asunder, We will not have this man to reign over us? Be present then,
O Lord our Savior, at the right hand of thy people, and strike through Kings,
Princes, and Potentates in the day of thy wrath: Exercise judgment against
these blasphemous and heathenish Rebels,

O Lord, pronounce a favorable sentence for thy Church, and let thy Gospel,
which came out of Zion, and was planted by thy Apostles, and diffused by the
impulse and power of thy good Spirit, That this is the day of thy power.

Thy power it must be, that can collect us, whom Heresy, Schism, and Tyranny
has dispersed; thy power, to cause us to meet in our solemn Assemblies; speak
but the word, O Lord, and appoint the day, and thy people will be a willing
people, they will meet out of love, and joy of heart, and offer thee free will
offerings in the beauties of holiness.

O holy Father, we must with shame confess against our own souls, that we have
profaned thy Sanctuary, by entering into it with our shoes on our feet; and
when we have been in it, we have too often offered the Sacrifice of Fools;
holiness is that virtue which becomes thy house for ever; and this holiness is
from the womb of the morning, it comes not from the will of man, it proceeds
not from the will of the flesh, it is a sweet and Virgin dew that distills from
thy holy Spirit; and as by the silver drops that descend from above, the roots
of the Herbs are moistened, refreshed, and cherished, so by these secret dews of
grace our dry hearts are quickened, and recover life; vouchsafe, we beseech thee
therefore, to descend upon us with these dewes, that being regenerate, and born
again, we may grow and increase in holiness, in obedience, in alacrity in thy
Service; refresh us when we are weary, make us shoot when we are at a stand,
ever let us retain the dew of our youth, that being lively in all the exercises
of Christianity, we may at last be exalted, and set at thy right hand, as thou
art seated at the right hand of thy Father, and enjoy those heavenly Mansions
which our Lord is gone to prepare for us.

Grant us this, O heavenly Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with
thee, and the Holy Sprit, three Persons, and one God, be ascribed all Honor,
Glory, and Praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXI. (...).
IT IS conceived that this Hymn was set by David, to be sung at the Passover,
and that it might be the easilier learned and remembered, the Colons of it are
in number as many, and digested by order of the Hebrew Alphabet. The Sum of it,
is an Exhortation to praise God for his wonderful favors and benefits bestowed
upon the World at large, and in special toward his people Israel, and the
Church.

Three parts there are of this Psalm. 1. A Protestation of David to praise God,
and the manner how, and the company with whom he would do it, ver. 1. 2. An
Expression of the Reasons that moved him to it, viz. his admirable benefits
bestowed, both general and special, which he enumerates from ver. 2. to 10. 3.
A Conclusion, or Inference upon the premises, by way of a (...), in which he
commends the fear of God, ver. 10.


1. The Title of the Psalm is Allelujah, Praise ye the Lord: Allelujah. The
first part. He praises God himself.
And that this his Exhortation might pierce the deeper, and that his Subjects
might the more readily follow his example, presently he vows and protests.

1. I will praise the Lord: And expresses the manner how he would do it, and
as indeed it ought to be done. 2. Not hypocritically, with the lips and mouth
only, In sincerity.
but with the heart. In unity, and with the Church.
3. Not with a heart and a heart, but with the whole heart. 4. Not separately,
or Schismatically, but in the Assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation.
1. Both in that Assembly, where good and upright men are met. 2. And also in
the company of many, even with the mix't multitude; secretly among good men,
and openly in the Congregation he would praise God.

2. And having made a pious confession of his readiness to practice the Duty,
The second part.
next sets down the ground and matter of his praise, which contains the Reasons
that moved him to it; as if he had said, Which he doing, and persuading, sets
down his Reasons for it.
There be great and urgent causes that may move me, and all others, to praise
God.

1. The first of which is, His works of power, be it the Creation of the World,
and its Conservation; or, be they the favors showed to his Church; these are
his works, And these works of the Lord are great.

1. Great; not only for variety and beauty, Because his works great. 1. Of
Creation
but that also in the least and most base creature, his Wisdom admirable, his
Power wonderful, there is nothing that came from his hand, which is not very
great, and greatly to be admired. 2. Great; Of Election
for it was a great work of his to take to himself a people out of another
people, to make a Covenant with them, to them to reveal his promises, to give
them a Law, to settle among them a policy for Church and State, etc. This was
also a great and admirable work. 3. Fools and impious men indeed, little
consider these works; Which fools little think of, but wise men consider.
they think not of the Author, and therefore esteem them not much: But in the
eyes of all wise men, they are exquisite works, and they are sought out,
searched into, by all them that take pleasure therein: That are pleased both
with the Author, the work, and the use, and end of them.
2. His work of Wisdom, in the governing of those creatures which he has
created, His work of wisdom, in governing the World, his Church, which is, 1.
Honorable.
and his Church, which he has collected, and this his work is.

1. Honorable; worthy of honor, worthy of praise, and therefore much more the
Author. 2. And glorious: Many Princes have done very glorious works, but not
to be compared to any work of God; the Glory, Magnificence, and Majesty, far
exceeds them all. Glorious.

3. Is his work of Justice.
The third work is, that of his Justice: He is a righteous God, and his
righteousness endures for ever. Men may complain, that they see wicked men
exalted, and his servants under the Cross, oppressed and afflicted: But the
judgments and ways of God may be secret, and hid from us, unjust they can
never be; for he never departs from the exact Rule of Justice, though we cannot
discern it, nor search it out.

4. His work of mercy.
His fourth work, is a work of mercy, of which he would have a Record kept.

1. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered, as in the Jewish Feasts.
2. And these proceeded from his mere mercy: For the Lord is gracious, and full
of compassion. A gracious God.
1. Gracious, in doing these works; for they came from his mere grace, pity and
favor, Full of compassion.
and not from any desert of man's. 2. And full of compassion; Rachum, affected
with the bowels of a father toward his children; The instances of his mercy,
are:
gracious in habit, compassionate in act.

Of which the Prophet now descending to particulars, gives in several
instances; gracious, 1. Manna given
He has given meat to them that fear him: He nourished his people for forty
years in the Wilderness, and gave them Manna from Heaven; this meat he gave
especially to those that feared him, and for their sakes to others; or else the
whole Congregation might well be said to fear him, because at that time they
took him for their God, and worshipped him. 2. Keeping his Covenant.
He will be ever mindful of his Covenant, which is his second instance. A mercy
it was, to make a Covenant with them; but notwithstanding their high
provocations, to be ever mindful of it, and keep it, is a higher degree of
mercy. 3. Doing miracles for them.
He has showed his people the power of his works, which is a third instance:
His works were the turning of Jordan backward, the overthrow of Jericho, by the
sound of Rams Horns, the staying of the Sun and Moon in the valley of Ajalon at
Joshua's prayer, etc. All these were works of power, which he then showed his
people. 4. Giving them the land of Canaan.
And these he did, That he might give them the heritage of the Heathen, which
is his fourth instance: For who can deny, but it was a work of mercy to expel
the Canaanites before them, and bestow upon his own people their inheritances.


Now as before, he used an Acclamation, when he entered upon the works of God in
the Creation of the World, The works of the Lord are great, honorable,
glorious: So after these instances of his works of mercy, lest any man should
suspect him unjust in this last instance, especially, viz. ejecting the
Canaanites, and giving away their inheritances, he aptly interserts this Elogy
of them. The Elogy of these done.


1. The works of his hands are verity and judgment. 1. In verity. 2. In
judgment The Elgoy of the moral Law.
Verity; these works had truth in them, for by it he had made good his promise
made to Abraham, to give them the land. 2. And secondly, Judgment; for by it
his Justice was executed upon Idolaters, and profane persons.
2. Which shows unto the whole World, that, 1. All his Commandments are sure:
That his Laws, It is sure.
especially that which is Moral, are certainly true, and that he deceives none
in the promulgation of them; but that they bring a punishment to the
Transgressors, and a reward to the Observers of them; as it appears, by the
example of the Canaanites, that were ejected for the breach of them, Levit.
18.24, etc. 2. That these Commands being but the Law of Nature, stand fast for
ever, Eternal.
that they are indispensable and immutable, and for this reason, because they
are done and established in truth and uprightness, containing in them the most
absolute Justice, Equity, Rectitude, and Truth, that is conceivable.

5. The Elogy of Gods Law being ended, His last instance of mercy, Redemption
he at last instances in a work of mercy that exceeds all the rest; to wit, the
work of Redemption of all Mankind by his Son; for however it be true of the
Redemption of Israel out of Egypt, yet it is better, with the Fathers, to
expound it, of that Redemption purchased by Christ, of which he says: 1. He
sent Redemption, i. e. a Redeemer, so often promised, to his people, who
redeemed them from the power of darkness. 2. And with them in him, he
established an eternal Covenant: For he has commanded this his Covenant for
ever, which is extant, Jer. 31.31. Hebr. 8.8.


3. Thus the Prophet having enumerated many of Gods works, both of Power, The
third part. For all these his Name to be accounted,
Wisdom, and Mercy, concludes the Psalm with three Epiphonema's, which show us
the manner how God is to be praised, holily, reverently, fearfully.

1. The first Epiphonema is, to the Name of God: Holy.
Holy and Reverent is his Name, i. e. his Service, or any thing whereby he is
signified: This is, 1. Holy: It may not then be polluted with a false
hypocritical Service, the Command being, Be ye holy, for I am holy. 2.
Reverent: Not then rashly, carelessly, negligently to be performed, Reverent,
Terrible.
but with the greatest Reverence that may be: Or, as some read it, Terrible;
and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


2. The second Epiphonemn follows upon the other; Holy and Reverent, then it
is wisdom to fear him: Wisdom therefore to fear him.
Now, 1. This fear, is the beginning of wisdom; for then men begin to be wise,
when they begin to fear God, eschew evil, and do good; and it is best out of
filial fear, out of love, rather than dread of punishment. 2. This fear, if it
be right, will be practical, And this fear will be practical.
and this practice will proceed out of science and knowledge of what is to be
done; all other knowledge is but vain: For a good understanding have all they,
that do his Commandments; for to him that knows what is good, and does it not,
to him it is sin, Jam. 4.


3. The third Epiphonema, or Acclamation, is, His praise endures for ever; Hi.
praise and fear will continue for ever.
which some refer to God, others, to the man that fears God, and both are true.

1. For the praise of God will and must continue for ever; his power, his
wisdom, his mercy is for ever, and then his praise must continue for over. 2.
But if referred to the man that fears God, then the sense will be, that, 1. His
praise, that is, the praise with which a man that fears God, praises him, will
endure for ever; For they that dwell in thy house, will be always praising
thee, Psalm. 84.4. 2. And the praise of him that fears God.
Or his praise; that is, the commendation of a good man will be had in
everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. The name of the wicked shall rot, but the
memorial of the just is blessed, Prove. 10.7. The Lord will say to such a man,
Well done, thou good and faithful servant, Matthew. 25.21. His praise is in this
World lasting, in the future everlasting.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and eleventh Psalm.
O Omnipotent, most wise, and merciful God, it is our Duty to praise thee, not
with the lips only in an hypocritical manner, but with the whole heart,
sincerely and truly; yea, and to set forth thine honor, not privately only,
but openly, in the Assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation of the
faithful, for thy wonderful works expressed toward the children of men.

I never look upon the Creature, but I admire thy Power: How great a work was
it, in such variety, in such beauty? How great a work, to preserve the same,
being created in so decent and constant an order? I take pleasure in the search
of it, and the more I search, the more I admire, and the more I admire, the
readier I am to magnify, praise, and adore the Author of it.

For their sins, O Lord, Thou oftentimes layest thy Rod heavy upon thy best
servants, and for their sins, Thou exaltest the wicked, and suffer impious
Atheists to have dominion over them, at which the hearts of thy best servants
have been troubled, and their treadings had well nigh slip't: But when we cast
our eyes upon our deserts, thy righteousness endures for ever.

We never call to mind thy great works which thou have done for thy people,
That thou art a gracious Lord, and full of compassion; no fathers bowels can
yearn more over the fruit of his own loins, than thy heart has been pitiful to
thine own children; ever mindful of thy Covenant, and showed thy self a
merciful and compassionate Father.

O Lord, notwithstanding our ingratitude, forsake us not in the depth of our
sufferings; remember the Oath that thou swaredst to our forefathers, and
established for a thousand Generations; and quench not the light of thy Gospel
that once shined amongst us. This, O merciful God, is that, this is that
chiefly which we beg at thy hands: Then send Redemption unto thy people,
Egypt; supply us that fear thy Name with necessary food, as thou did give
them meat; show thy people the power of thy work, Thy Truth has been verified
upon us, in bringing a judgment upon a sinful Nation; and we acknowledge thy
judgments to be just, because we have broken all thy Commandments: They are
sure, and the punishments which were threatened in them, is come upon us; by our
abominations we had defiled the land, and therefore the land is ready to spue
us out.

But, O compassionate Father, turn once more the light of thy countenance
toward us, teach us to know, That thy Commandments must stand fast for ever,
that they are immutable and indispensable, and that they are established in
truth and uprightness, containing in them an everlasting truth, and the most
absolute equity that can be conceived: Quicken our hearts then with such a
measure of grace, that we may never dispense with them, nor go about to change
them, or bend them to our corrupt affections, making our depraved hearts the
rule of our actions, and not thy eternal Law.

Establish thy Covenant with us, which thou have commanded for ever; be to us a
God, and make us to be thy people; make us to know thee, from the least to the
greatest; and when being compassed by infirmities, we fall from thee, then send
us Redemption, and a Redeemer, thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; and for his
merits, be merciful to our unrighteousness, and remember no more our sins, and
our iniquities, as thou have promised.

Thy Name, O Lord, is holy, make us a holy people. Thy Name, O Lord, is
terrible, make us with reverence approach thy Hajesty. the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom, make us so wise,

So let us live, and so let us dye, that whereas the name of the wicked shall
rot in oblivion or ignominy, our memorial for the present may be blessed, and
in the World to come, Thou with thine own mouth may call to us, and say, It
is well done, thou good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy: Which
we beseech thee grant unto us, for the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

PSALM. CXII. (...).
DAVID having put it down for an infallible Maxim in the close of the former
Psalm, That the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; in this, sets down
the felicity of that man in many particulars.

Two parts there are of the Psalm. 1. A Proposition in general, that he is
blessed, ver. 1. 2. An Enumeration of particulars, in which that blessedness
does consist, from ver. 2. to the end.


1. To the first part, he prefixeth an Allelujah, Praise the Lord, Allelujah.
The first part.
which is the intent and scope of the Psalm, That God be praised for those
rewards of piety, which God bestows upon such as fear him; and so he enters
upon the matter.

2. And delivers this one general Postulatum, or Proposition, which by diverse
instances he proves through the whole Psalm, that he may persuade men to piety.

Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, He that fears God, is blessed with an


1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord; that believes in him, honors
him, serves him.
2. But because a man should not be mistaken, supposing that he fears him, when
he does not, he adds these three Restrictions to his Proposition.

1. Obediential fear.
That it must be an obediential fear: For he must keep his Commandments. 2. A
filial fear.
That it must be a filial, no servile fear; out of delight, not compulsion, He
delights in them; is pleased with the equity of them, and loves them. 3. An
affectionate fear.
That it must be a cheerful, ready fear, performed with all alacrity,
earnestness, care and study, He delights greatly in his Commandments. Done with
all the heart, with all the affection, exceedingly well-pleased to do them.
2. The second part.
In the rest of the Psalm, he insists upon that in which this blessedness does
consist, and makes good St. Paul's words, That Godliness is great gain, and has
the promises both of this life, and that which is to come.

1. For temporal Goods in this, the wicked may have, but they have no promise
made to them that they shall be blessings; but the righteous have a promise
made to them both for these temporal Goods, and that they shall be blessings.
2. Then again, That for these temporal blessings they shall enjoy them, yet so,
that they are not exempted from the Cross, 2 Timothy 3.12. 3. That God in his
certain counsel distributes them in this life, not to every person equally, but
as may be most profitable for him; so that the promises made unto the Church
for temporal things, He shows, in what these blessings consist.
are conferred upon every one, as God thinks fit for him. The promises for
spiritual blessings to him that fears God, are absolute; but for temporal,
conditional only.
This being premised,

1. His seed mighty.
The first felicity, is for his seed and offspring: His seed shall be mighty
upon earth; the Generation of the upright shall be blessed, which was verified
in Abraham and his posterity, in them God made good his promise in the second
Commandment, I will show mercy to thousands in them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. 2. Abundance.
The second felicity consists in wealth, riches, honors: Wealth and riches,
that is, shall be in his house, and remain in it: For his mind is not corrupted
with these things, content he is with what God bestows, and seeks not to
amplify them by ill means: And therefore his righteousness, his Goods
well-gotten, endures for ever, Phil. 4.11, 12. 1 Timothy 6.6. His just dealing
preserves his wealth to his posterity. 3. Comfort in afflictions.
The third felicity, is the comfort he finds in turbulent times, which the
Prophet calls here darkness; but when this overspreads the face of the Church,
yet he that fears God, will acquiesce in him, and thence receive joy and
comfort: Unto the upright there arises light; the light of counsel, the light
of consolation, in the thickest darkness, of all doubts, tribulations, and
afflictions, which the Prophet ascribes here to the mercy of God; comfortable
he is, because God is his light, who is gracious, full of compassion, and
righteous. 4. Compassionate bowels.
1. a good man, shows favor, he easily forgives an injury, Forgiving Injuries.
is easily reconciled to an enemy; forgives, that he may be forgiven, Luke
6.37. 2. Giving.
Tenacious he is not; he thinks not that he was born for himself alone, but for
the good of others, and therefore he exercises the acts of charity, and lends;
and it is a part of happiness to be able to do it, Luke 6.34.
5. A fifth felicity, is in his Discretion: He will guide his affairs with
discretion, with prudence, with judgment. Discreet in his words.
Discreet he is to discern betwixt truth and falsehood, just and unjust acts;
and therefore in judgment he is no accepter of persons, nor in his bargains
fraudulent and injurious, nor false in his testimonies, but true and constant
in word and deed; discreetly he manageth all his Affairs. 6. A sixth felicity,
is h^s constancy and patience; Constant and patient.
yet in these he looks for help from Heaven, and remains firm in his
principles. Justum and tenacem propositi v^rum, non civium ardor prava
j^ben^um, non vultus instantis tyranni mente quatit solida. Surely he shall not
be moved for ever. 7. A seventh felicity is, that there is a Commemoration of
him with honor: His Name remembered with Honor.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. His name is written in
the Book of life, his Name is precious in the Church. Records are kept of his
doings and sufferings, as are of the Martyrs; with much honor he shall be
spoken of: His memory shall not live, as does that of Judas, Cain, Pilate, etc.
that are indeed mentioned, but with detestation; whereas at the mention of his
name, all men shall have a veneration of him in his Grave. At the last day good
men shall be called to, Come ye blessed; wicked men dismissed with, Go ye
cursed. 8. The eighth felicity is, that the scandals raised upon him, Not much
moved with Scandals.
calu^^nies and false reports little move him: He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings. He may be called a troubler of Israel, a seditious person, a
wine-bibber, a gluttenous person, a murderer, an idolater, a superstitious
person, a blasphemer; he knows that it was his Saviors case, the condition of
his servants, the Prophets and Apostles; but he is not much moved at it, he
bears it patiently. And the Reasons are, For his hear is fixed, confirmed.
1. Because his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord: He has a sure Rock to
fly and trust to, God will clear up his innocence. 2. His heart is
established, he shall not be afraid: until be see his desire upon his enemies,
till God bring them to confusion, which he knows he shall either live to see
now, or believes he shall see hereafter.
9. A ninth felicity is, He distributes his Charity wisely.
that God gives him a heart to put his Goods to a right use in his distribution
of his charity. 1. He has dispersed; he thinks not that he only lives to
gather and reap; but he sowes also, and that liberally, as men do their seed,
never grudging that they commit to the earth; many, not one only, To many.
are the better for him. 2. And he does it freely, without looking for any
thing again: He gives; Freely.
and there is nothing freer than gift. 3. And he does it wisely; for it is not
to such as need it not, To the needy.
but to those that need it, it is to the needy; He has given to the poor.

Now for this liberality, he is a great gainer in two respects, By this Charity
a great gainer.
for both which he may well be called a blessed and happy man.

1. Though he has by it lessened his money, His righteousness thereby
increased.
yet he has increased his righteousness, his piety and charity is more
conspicuous. The good work he has done endures for ever, and shall in its
time receive an ample reward, Prove. 28.27. and 22.9. 2. Nay by it increased his
honor, and perhaps his wealth also: And his Honor.
His Horn, that is, his power, dignity, glory, shall be exalted with honor.

10. He shall overcome all Envy.
1. That the wicked shall see it; consider the prosperity and liberality of him
that fears God, and be grieved with his felicity, and pine with envy. For the
wicked shall envy him.
2. That as a mad Dog, he shall gnash his teeth at it, and for very grief melt
away, But not hurt him.
and seek his ruin. 3. But yet he shall not be able to harm him, all his
endeavors shall be frustrate, and his labors ineffectual: The desire of the
wicked shall perish. He then that fears God, is a happy man; he that fears him
not, most unhappy.


The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and twelfth Psalm.
O On impotent God, it is thy fear alone that can make men truly happy; for
where thy fear is truly rooted, to run the ways of thy Commandments. Make our
will conformable to thy Will, and our affection^ correspondent to what thou
do affect, so shall we find no labor or difficulty in thy precepts, but be
greatly pleased to be thy obedient servants.

It is time of the greatest of our desires, which cannot be expected without
thy blessing; create in us then an upright he art, that so the Generation which
succeed us may be blessed. We desire that wealth, That Piety is great gain,
when the mind is satisfied with what thou give.

We now live, O Lord, in a difficult time, we know not what to do, but our eyes
are to thee: let therefore thy light arise to us in this darkness, let thy
counsel direct us, and thy comforts shine unto us, That we may guide our
Affairs with discretion, discreetly putting a difference betwixt Truth and
Falsehood, just, and unjust acts; and though we be violently assaulted,

Let it not be our aim to heap up wealth, but give us grace to use it well, to
disperse, as well as to gather, and to be content to give, as well as to
receine; that so the loins of the needy may bless us, and the bellies of the
poor pray for us. With this unrighteous Mammon let us make our selves friends,
that when they fall, we may be received into everlasting habitations; this is a
righteousness that will endure for ever; this is a means not only to increase
our reward in the life to come, to exalt our Hor^, our power and dignity with
honor: For a good man always lives in the memory of good men, his name is
precious, his memorial is honorable; whereas the memory of the wicked shall be
buried in oblivion, or remembered with reproach, the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance.

Write our names, O Lord, in the Book of life, So shall thy people, and sheep
of thy pasture, that fear thee the Lord, Amen, Amen.

PSALM. CXIII. (...).
THE Scope of this Psalm is the same with those that went before, viz. to
excite men to praise God.

Three parts of this Psalm. 1. An Exhortation to praise him, directed to his
servants, ver. 1. 2. A Form set down for it, expressing how, when, and where to
praise him, ver. 2, 3. 3. The Reasons that persuade us to it; first, his
infinite Power, ver. 4, 5. secondly, his Providence most conspicuous in Heaven,
and in Earth, ver. 6. in Earth both in Commonwealths, ver. 7, 8. and in
private Families, ver. 9.


1. The Prophet exhorts men to praise the Lord: And, 1. First, He doubles and
trebles his Exhortation, Praise the Lord, praise, The first part. He exhorts to
praise God.
praise the Name of the Lord; that it be not coldly and dully, but zealously
done; or else to show, that he alone is worthy of all praise; The Kingdom is
his, and therefore the Glory. Especially his servants.
2. He shows us by whom he would have it done, by his servants; Praise the
Lord, O ye servants; He is your Lord, you his servants, praise him then, and do
it with a pure heart: For praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner.


2. The Form in which it is to be done, is this: Say, The second part. A Form
of thanksgiving.
1. Blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1. 2. And say it at all times: Begin
it ab ipso nunc, From this time forth, and continue in it, from this time forth
for evermore. In prosperity, For all times.
3. And let it be said in all places, even all the World over: From the rising
of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, All places.
the Lords Name is to be praised.


3. And now follow the Reasons, The third part. The reasons for it.
by which he persuades men to praise him.

1. The first is his Majesty, his infinite Power, Glory; this extends not to
men alone, but to the Heavens, and all above the Heavens: The Lord is high
above all Nations, and his Glory above the Heavens; above Princes, Gods Majesty.
Heavens, Angels; therefore praise him. 2. The second is, his admirable
Providence, Benignity and Bounty, His. Providence, and Condescension
which being joined with so great Majesty, appears the more admirable. Who is
like the Lord our God, who dwells on high? None in Heaven and Earth to be
compared to him; and yet, which sets forth his goodness, has of all things:
He, as it were, humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and in
earth. Two instances of it.

Now of his Providence, in humbling himself to behold the things on earth, he
gives two instances; the first is, in States and Kingdoms; the second, in
private Families.

1. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
Dunghill: In Kingdoms, in which he exalts men of low degree.
The examples of it, may be Joseph, Moses, David, Daniel, Job, Mordecai; let
then no man say, Non vacant exiguis rebus adesse Jovi. And the end is, That he
may set him with the Princes, even with the Princes of his people. He
vindicates their name, not only from contempt, but exalts them to the highest
places of honor. 2. In private Familes, opening the womb.
In private Families: As the infelicity of men is a low and despised condition,
so the infelicity of women, is barrenness; as therefore he looks upon humble
men, and raises them to a Crown; so he looks upon humble women, and makes them
fruitful, in which the happiness of a Family consists; and therefore the
Prophet adds this other instance of his Providence, He makes the barren woman
to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. for that women rejoice in
nothing more than in bearing of children; the examples may be Sarah, Rebeccah,
Rachel, Annah, Elizabeth, Jo. 16.21.
But by most Expositors, This appliable to the Church of the Gentiles.
this last verse has a higher meaning, and relates unto the Church of the
Gentiles, which was the barren woman before Christ's coming, but has now more
children than she that has a Husband, i. e. the Jewish Synagogue: Isa. 54.1.
Rejoice, O barren, that did not bear, break forth into joy, and rejoice thou
that did not travel with child, for the desolate has more children than the
married wife; and is to this purpose applied by St. Paul, Gal. 4.27.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and thirteenth Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord, Blessed be the Name of the Lord our God,

O Lord, thy Majesty is great, thy Glory illustrious, thy Goodness, Clemency
and Providence wonderful, humble thy self, and descend from thy Throne of
Majesty, to behold the things that are in Heaven, to take a care for the things
that are done in, and on the Earth; there is no action, no event, either in
Heaven or Earth, which thou rulest not, which thou guidest not, and orders not.
If the proud Angels in Heaven aspire to thy Throne, Thou beholdest it, and they
shall feel thy power. If insolent men on earth shall exalt themselves against
thee, they shall drink of the cup of thy wrath; when thy servants sin against
thee, and yet shall humble themselves before thee, Thou will behold their
contrition, and accept their tears, and forgive their ungracious behavior.

Look down, O Lord, at this time from thy dwelling place, and behold the
afflicted slate and condition of this thy Church; who raisest the poor out of
the dust, and liftest the needy out of the Dunghill, vouchsafe to stretch out
thy arm of power, and right hand of help to our Princes and Armies; set our
King, whom thou have hitherto dejected, once again with Princes, even the
Princes of his people.

O Lord, who make the barren woman to keep house, take pity on the afflicted
woman, thy Church, and let her not mourn and longer for her barrenness; grant,
that by thy Word and Spirit, Amen.

PSALM. CXIV. (...).
DAVID in this Psalm, chants forth the wonderful works and miracles that God
wrought, when he brought forth the people of Israel out of Egypt.

Two parts there are of this Psalm. 1. A Narration of Isreal's deliverance,
amplified by the state they were in, ver. 1. The state to which they were
brought, ver. 2. The miracles then done, first, at the red Sea, and Jordan,
ver. 3. and at Sinai, when the Law was given, were. 4. 2. A Prosopopeia, set
down by way of Dialogue; first, For the Prophet asks the Sea, and Jordan, Why
they fled, turned back? ver. 5, 6. secondly, To which the answer is made by the
brutish Earth, which is enough to strike a terror, a veneration and fear into
all men, That it trembled at the presence of the Lord, ver. 7, 8.


1. In the Narration, Isra^ls condition is set down by way of comparison, The
first part. Isreal's condition in Aegype set down.
that so their deliverance might make the deeper impression. First, we are to
know that Israel, and the house of Jacob and Judah, in this place, signify the
same thing, viz. The whole Nation of the Israelites, that descended out of
Jacobs loins; but of the house of Jacob there is peculiar mention, because with
him they came into Egypt; and of Judah, because from him they were called
Jews.

This being premised, I come now to Analyze and explain the Psalm, in which is
described, 1. The condition of the Jews before their deliverance, they were in
Egypt; They were in bondage.
nor formed into a State, nor into a Church. 2. Among a barbarous people, or a
people of a strange language. 2. The condition of the Jews after their
deliverance, But delivered by God.
they were then his Sanctuary, and his Scigniory: When Israel went art of
Egypt; etc. then Judah was his Sanctuary, and Israel his Dominion.


1. His Sanctuary, a holy people.
as holy Temples and Sanctuaries, and having holy Priests to govern them in
points of Piety. 2. His Seigniory, he their Lord and King.
His Dominion or Seigniory, in whom he reigned as a King by his Laws and
spirit, and appointed godly Magistrates to rule them in matters of Policy; for
the Government among them, was, first a (...), till they cast it off, by
choosing to themselves a King; whence God told Samuel, They have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7.
2. The manner of their deliverance, by wonders done.
The Prophet sets down the manner of their deliverance, which was not by
ordinary means, but extraordinary, by signs, miracles and wonders, of which he
gives us these instances.

1. The Seasaw that, and fled: That is, the Sea seeing Gods people come toward
it, At the red Sea.
and desirous to pass through it, at the presence of the Lord turned back all
night, Exodus 14. Wisd. 19.7. Where in a Poetical, st^rein he attributes sense
to the Sea: The Sea saw that. 2. In and at Jordan.
In or at Jordan forty years after, when they were entering the Land, when
Jordan was driven back, and suffered a reflux for a long time, Josh. 4. 3. At
Sinai.
At Sinai, where the Law was given, where the greater parts of that Mountain,
and the lesser Hillocks about it trembled and quaked: The Mountains skipped
like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs. The sum is, That all the Creatures
at the Commandment of the Creator, were then turned upside down, ready to do,
or not to do; to continue in, or to change their natural courses, according to
his good will or pleasure, Wisd. 19.18.
2. The second part.
The Psalm is composed after a Poetical vein, and therefore having related the
wonderful deliverance, His Expostulation.
and the manner of it, he expostulates with the Sea, Jordan, and the Mountains,
what the matter was with them, that they so strangely altered their course,
with what passion they were affected, and why?

What aileth thee, With the Sea and Jordan.

O ye Mountains, And the Mountains.

To which, The answer of the Prophet.
in the person of the earth, speaking to her self, the Prophet answers, so that
it is both a Prosopopeia, and an Apostrophe.

1. Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God
of Jacob. That Gods presence was the cause.
As if it had been said, Would you know the reason why we fly, turn back,
move? The cause is this, The Lord has appeared, and showed his Force and
Power, and laid his Commands upon us, and therefore not abiding his Presence,
trembles, the Mountains are moved, etc. 2. Now of his Power, let this miracle
suffice for an instance; it is that God, Who turned the hard Rock into a
standing water, Caused not only waters to flow from thence, but turned the very
substance of a flint, which is apter to yield fire than water, into that fluid
Element, Numb. 20.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and fourteenth Psalm.
O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the World? Thou art
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, able to do whatsoever
thou will, Judah, whom thou have adopted to be thy Sanctuary, wherein thou will
be served; and Israel thy Dominion, over whom thou will reign as a King by thy
holy Word and Spirit.

O God, Thou have been very gracious unto us, that were Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel; for in every Nation, every one that fears God, and
works righteousness, is now accepted of thee; all true believers are now
become the seed of Abraham, and the house of Jacob. Thou have brought us out of
Egypt, out of that Kingdom of darkness and ignorance in which we lived, into a
mavelous light; Thou have freed us from the bondage of Pharaoh, the Prince of
darkness, under whom we served and groaned. and cancelled the Handwriting that
was against us, laying upon our necks an easier yoke, and upon our shoulders a
lighter burden. Thou have overturned, as it were, the Chariots and Horsemen,
and destroyed the Host of our enemies, by su^^uing our iniquities, and casting
all of them into the bottom of the Sea, that they may never appear before us
again, to confound our Consetences in this World, or condemn our Souls in the
next.

O Lord, shall the dumb and insensible Creatures tremble at thy presence, and
shall not we be moved with so great mercies? Shall they all in their kinds
praise thee, and shall not we, who are endued with reason, always sing of the
loving kindness of our God? Shall the Sea flee, and the waters r etire, and the
Mountains and Hills skip at the presence of the God of Jacob, and shall not
Jacob himself serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in trembling?
Shall the hard Rock be turned into a standing water, and shall not our hard and
flinty hearts, in consideration of our own miseries,

And yet, O Lord, such are our hearts, so hard, so flinty: O touch thou the
Mountains, and they shall smoke; touch our lips with a Coal from the Altar, and
they shall show thy praise: Smite, Lord, our flinty hearts, as hard as the
nether millstone, with the hammer of thy Word, and mollify them also with the
brops of thy mercies, and dew of thy Spirit; make them humble, fleshy,
flexible, circumcised, soft, obedient, new, clean, broken; for we know, That a
broken and contrite heart thou will not despise.

O Lord our God, give us grace from the very bottom of our heart to desire
thee, in desiring to seek thee, in seeking to find thee, in finding to love
thee, in loving thee, utterly to loath our former wickedness; never let us
return in our hearts back again into Egypt, never let us long after the Leeks
and Onions, and Garlic thereof: But being by thy mercy delivered and brought
from thence, and from the slavery of sin and Satan, let it be our whole
endeavor to walk humbly and obediently before our God, that living in thy
fear, and dying in thy favor, when we have passed through the Wilderness of
this World, we may possess that heavenly Canaan, and happy land of promise,
prepared for all such as love thy coming, even for every Christian soul, and
who is thy Dominion and Sanctuary. Grant this, O gracious God, in the Name of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee, and the Holy
Spirit, one God, World without end. Amen.

PSALM. CXV. (...).
THE Prophet being zealous of Gods Honor, which the Heathens went about to
take from him, and attribute to their Idols, is earnest with God, that it might
be manifest, that Honor did belong to him alone, and might not be given to
another.

There be four parts of this Psalm. 1. His Vote and Petition for Gods Honor,
ver. 1. that did not belong to any Idols, because of their vanity, from ver. 3.
to 9. 2. An Exhortation to praise God, and hope in him, from ver. 10. to 12. 3.
The Benefit that will accrue from it, a blessing, from ver. 12. to 16. 4. A
Profession, that for the blessing they will bless God, ver. 17, 18.


1. The first part. His zeal for Gods honor.
Some join this Psalm to the former, conceiving, that the Prophet having
expressed the goodness of God in the deliverance of his people from Egypt,
would not have any part of the Glory attributed to Moses, Aaron, or any merits
in them, but wholly ascribed unto God himself: And therefore he thus begins.

1. Not unto us, not unto us, nor any Leader amongst us. 2. (...), Not to us;
(...), to thy Name give the praise: Which he desires to assume for three
Reasons.
But unto thy Name give glory: We seek it not, take it wholly to thy self.
And this he desires, he would always show in the protection of his people,
for three Reasons.

1. For manifestation of his mercy: Give glory to thy Name, for thy mercy. 2.
Do it, for thy Truths sake. Of which the last is, that the Heathen do not
blaspheme.
3. That there might not be given an occasion to the Heathen to blaspheme, as
if they his people should be forsaken, and destitute of help: Wherefore should
the Heathen say, Where is now their God?
Well, say it so fall out, that the Heathen impiously ask the question,
Vbieorum Deus? We have in a readiness what to answer them, To the glory of our
God, but to the dishonor of their Idols, Be it they do, yet the answer is, our
God is in Heaven.
which he proves by an elegant Antithesis.

1. As for our God, he is in the Heavens, and his miracles wrought for his
people testify as much; for he has done whatsoever pleases him. He has, and
can deliver his people when he pleases; Their gods are all Idols, as appears,
and if it be his pleasure, they must suffer also. 2. But now I may better ask,
Where are their gods? gods did I call them? nay, nay, they are but Idols, they
deserve not the name of gods, as is evident by the matter, By their matter.
whereof they are, 2. the Makers of them. 3. Their vanity and inutility. 1.
Their Idols are silver and gold; at the best; of no more precious stuff; 2.
Their makers.
The work of men's hands. Works they are, and not Masters of the work; they made
not themselves, but were made, and therefore baser, than the basest Smith that
made them.
3. Of no use, of no power at all; Their uselessness, of no power.
for they can make no use at all of those parts which they seem to have; for
having the shape of men, they can do nothing as men. For they have mouths, but
they speak not; eyes they have,
They have ears, but they hear not; noses they have, but they smell not.
They have hands, but they handle not; feet they have, but they walk not;
neither speak they through their throat.
They cannot do that which Beasts can, send out of their mouths an inarticulate
voice or found, so far they are from speaking. 4. And thus the Prophet having
derided their Idols, he goes on, He derides the Idol-makers:
and derides, 1. The Idol-makers: They that make them, are like to them; 2. The
Idol-worshippers: So is every one that puts their trust in them; And Idolaters.
trust and relies on that which cannot help. In this life they are like to
them; for they seem neither to see and hear, than hear and see indeed; when
they will not hear and see what belongs to their good, and the Truth; whence
Christ says, out of the Prophet, of such, Having eyes, they see not, and ears,
but they hear not, Mark 8.

2. And so the Prophet having passed this Sarcasme upon the Idols, The second
part.
and Idolaters, he leaves them, and turns his speech to the Israelites, whom he
exhorts to trust in God. He exhorts Israel to trust in God.


1. In general, the whole Nation; O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: Let the
Heathen trust in their Idols, but you are Gods servants, In general, all Israel.
He is their help, and their shield; the Lord Protector of the whole Nation. 2.
In particular, the Tribe of Levi; O house of Aaron trust in the Lord: In
particular the Levites.
You are the Leaders and Guides in Religion, and God is your portion, He is
their help, All that fear the Lord.
and their shield; a shield you need, and he will be the Lord Protector of your
Tribe. 3. In a word: Ye that fear the Lord, Jews or Proselytes, in what Nation
soever ye live, see that ye trust in the Lord; and that for the same reason;
For he will be their help, and their shield also. In every Nation those that
fear him, and do righteousness, are accepted of him: He will be a Lord
Protector even to these, as to Job, Naaman, etc.
3. And that his Exhortation to trust in God might take the deeper root, The
third part. The blessing upon it.
he tells all three that they should be no losers by it; for it was it that
had, and would bring a blessing upon them: For God does not use to forget those
that trust in him; but he has been mindful of us:

1. To you of the Nation: He will bless the house of Israel. To the Nation.
2. To you of the Priesthood: He will bless the house of Aaron. 3. To all you
that fear him: He will bless them that fear the Lord, To the Priesthood.
both small and great.
And the Prophet taking his example from God, To all that fear him. This the
Prophet seconds with his prayer.
poures forth his blessing upon them also; he thought it not enough to exhort
them only to trust in God, and acquaint them that God would bless them, except
he seconded it with his prayer, and therefore to Gods blessing he adds his own,
and desires the blessing may rest upon the heads of them, and their children.

1. The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children. 2. Let
the World curse you, and speak evil of you; yet I say, Ye are the blessed of
the Lord; Deutr. 28. 3. That Lord which made heaven and earth; which words are
added, that they be assured that their blessing is a real blessing coming from
him, in whose hand is the dew of heaven, and fatness of the earth; in which
form Isaac blessed Jacob, Genesis 27.28. 4. 1. For the heaven, even the heavens
are the Lords. In them he especially shows his Presence, Majesty, Glory, from
thence descend the dewes of grace, and the drops of rain that water the earth.
2. As for the earth, he has made a Deed of Gift for that, He has given it to
the children of men; that by his blessing upon their labor, they may be
sustained with food and raiment; so that while they live in it, and enjoy the
Goods thereof, they praise him.

4. The fourth part.
For that is the true end of their being here, the chief, nay, the sole end,
they live upon it, And that for their blessing they again bless God.
the end that God gave it to them; an end, which they that are dead, cannot
attain unto. This he illustrates by an Antithesis, betwixt the dead and the
living.

1. For the dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into the
silence. Among them there is great silence of the dewes of heaven, and the
fatness of the earth, they need neither; and therefore they praise not God for
them. The blessing of the City, and blessings of the Field, are nothing unto
them, they have no mouths to fill, and therefore no mouths in a corporal manner
to open in the praise of God. Him they praise, but it is after their manner,
not ours; him they praise, but it is for other blessings than ours. 2. We will
bloss the Lord from this time forth for evermore. By our selves, while we live;
and desire it may be done by our posterity when we are going down into silence.
3. However, ye that are alive this day, Praise ye the Lord.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and fifteenth Psalm.
O Omnipotent and Gracious God, in all Ages thou have been merciful to thy
people, and even in their greatest afflictions raised up the spirits of some
one or other of thy servants, by whose hands thou have delivered them. At this
time we are in great misery, at this time we are in affliction, send us help
from thy Sanctuary, raise us up some Moses to go before us, some Joshua to
sight for us, Sampson to deliver us; wherefore should the uncircumcised triumph
over us, and say, Where is now their God? The reproach, O Lord, redounds to
thee, this insultation is to thy dishonor; arise then, O Lord, and give the
glory unto thy Name, show thy merciful countenance, and that thou art a God of
Truth, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name, which is now
blashemed and vilified, Make them know, that have so long trusted in lying
vanities, and worshipped the imaginations of their own hearts, That our God is
in Heaven, that he has done whatsoever pleased him; that as it has been his
pleasure to humble us, so it is his pleasure to exalt us; he has brought us
very low, but he can set us again on high, when, how, and by whom he pleases.

O Lord, heal our backslidings, and love us freely, turn away thine anger from
us; be as a dew to thy Israel, make his branches ^oread, That have hands, and
cannot help; and ears, and will not hear? Thee, O Lord, will we hear, For thou
art our help; and our shield. Thou will be the Lord Protector to thy Israel,
Thou will be a shield to the house of Aaron, Thou will be a helper to all those
that fear thee; therefore renouncing the arm of flesh, we will trust to thee
alone.

O Lord, be mindful of us, and bless us; bless the house of Israel, that people
which thou have chosen to thy self, and gathered from among the Nations: Bless
the house of Aaron, that Tribe that thou have chosen to thy self, and set apart
to come near unto thee among this people. O Lord, bless them all that sear thy
Name, in what part of the World soever they remain, Blessed of the Lord; give
then, good God, to these the dew of heaven, and the famess of the earth;
multiply and increase them more and more,

Of this nothing can deprive us, but our abuse and unthankfulness; that may
make heaven brass, and the earth iron under us: So touch our hearts then with
thy grace, that we never receive a blessing, but we be as ready to return a
blessing; that we use not the gift, without blessing thee the Doner; The dead
praise thee not; for the gifts of the earth, because they have no use of them;
they that go down into the stlent places of the grave, are altogether silent
for thy sweet dewes and showers wherewith the earth is impregned and fatned,
because they stand not in need of any of her supplies. We are the men, who yet
live, and draw our breath, which must be nourished and sustained by the dugs of
this good mother, which we will never praw without thankfulness. We will bless
the Lord while we live upon the earth, even from this time, to the end of our
life;

Since therefore, O merciful Lord, Thou have given the earth for a possession
to the sons of men, and to that end, that there may be upon the earth some to
celebrate thy Name, we beseech thee to defend thy little flock from the hands
of violent men, and suffer them not by their rage and fury, to be taken from
their possessions, by a violent and immature death. But much more, O Lord,
preserve them from eternal death and damnation, in which no man can praise
thee; and grant unto them, that while they live on earth, they may live by the
life of thy Spirit, that both now, and for ever, as it is their bounden duty,
they may praise and magnisle thy Name, and set forth thy mercies in Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

PSALM. CXVI. Didascalicus.
THIS Psalm is gratulatory, for it shows some great straits to which David was
brought, from which God delivering him, he vows to be thankful.

The points of this Psalm are three. 1. David makes profession of his love, and
shows the Reasons of it, viz. Gods goodness to him in hearing him, when he was
in a sad condition, and helping him, from ver. 1. to 9. 2. He professes his
duty and faith, ver. 9, 10, 11. 3. He vows to be thankful, and in what manner,
from ver. 12. to 19.


1. Deum David diligit.
He begins with the expression of his content and love, I have enough, I love
the Lord; The first part.
and presently sets down his Reasons.

1. Because he has heard my voice and my supplications; good reason then to
love him. Ratio prima, That God heard him.
2. Because he has inclined his ear to me; a certain evidence that he was
heard.
Upon which certainty and experience of Audience, Therefore will I call upon
him as long as I live. Secunda Ratio, Amoris auditum in sua angustia.


2. Another Reason that moved him to love God, and acquiesce in him, was, That
he heard him in his greatest need and extremities, which he describes in the
next verse: Neither can there be any greater; for he suffered in body and soul
by the sense of Gods wrath, which, how great they are, those only can tell you,
that have had experience of them.

1. The sorrows of death compassed me; even death it self is the King of fear.
Describet angustias.
2. The pains of Hell gat hold upon me: He feared the anger of God for his sin,
and the consequent of that anger. 3. Both these brought him into a heavy case;
many compassed about with the sorrows of death, living in prosperity, they
observe it not, they consider it not, and therefore they nor fear, nor grieve:
But David was sensible of his condition, he found where he was, and therefore
in grief and fear he-professeth, I found trouble and sorrow; but at last faith
seems to conquer them, he despairs not.
For he betakes himself to his old and safe remedy, a remedy that never had
failed him.

1. Then, in these sorrows, these pangs, these troubles: 2. Invocatio refugium.
I called upon the Name of the Lord: Invocation was his sole Refuge. 3. And he
sets down the very words of his prayer, for our use in the like case: O Lord, I
beseech thee, deliver my soul, i.e. from the sorrows of death, and dangers of
hell.
And then, Ostendit quibus fundament is nixus ad Deum fugit, oravit. viz.
that he might show that he prayed to God in faith and hope, he acquaints us
upon what ground he did it, viz. those Attributes of God, of which every one
that happens to be in his case, has especial use, or else he is not like to
find comfort; for then, no talking of merits of predestination, of Enthusiasms,
in such a case, these are no Cordials to a soul under the sense of Gods wrath:
That which will then comfort any man, is to remember and believe, what David
does here.

1. That God is gracious; he inspires prayer and repentance into a man, Dei
Attribut is.
and receives to favor all such as by a lively faith fly to him. 2. And
righteous and just, that will perform what he has promised, and grant an
induigence upon those terms that he has promised. 3. Yea, our God is merciful;
he mingles mercy with his justice, and though he scourges every son that he
receives, yet it is with a fathers hand, which is more prone to forgive, than to
punish. 4. The Lord preserves the simple; i. e. Men, sine plicis, Job was,
these being without counsel or help, he keeps, he saves.
Of which David gives an instance in himself: I was brought low, and he helped
me: And the like favor others may find, that call upon him on those grounds
that I did, relying on him, because he is gracious, righteous, and merciful,
and preserves the simple.

3. Another Reason he had to love God, was the great rest, quiet, Tertia Ratio,
Amoris acquiescentia animi, orta ex reconciliatione.
peace and tranquillity he found in his soul, after this storm was over; and
therefore after he had described the Tempest, and the means he used for his
deliverance out of it, viz. Faith and Invocation, and found them effectual: By
an Apostrophe, he speaks thus to himself.

Return unto thy rest, O my soul: Return to thy rest, O my soul.

1. For the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; 2. And then he turns his
speech to God, attributing to him the whole work. 1. Thou have delivered my
soul from death. The face of death and damnation was before me, but thou have
removed, and presented me with life. 2. Thou have delivered mine eyes from
tears, turned my heaviness into joy, and wiped all tears from my eyes. 3. Thou
have delivered my feet from falling. When my infirmity is great, and the Devil
thrusts sore at me, that I might fall, Thou have settled my feet, that I may
stand fast, fight, resist, and not fall.

And this God does for those who call on him, and trust to him; he frees them
from the sorrows of death, and raises them to life; he delivers from all
sorrow and grief, and will at last wipe all tears from their eyes, Revel. 21.
And will give them not only a happy life, but also secure, that they never
shall fall, David expresses upon the favor.
or be deprived of it; they shall be possessed of joy, rest, eternal peace and
quietness.

2. David having expressed his sorrows, The second part.
and Gods goodness unto him in delivering him from them, now professes how
ready he would be to do his Duty ever after.

1. By his obedience. 2. By a faithful confession of his mistake, and future
confidence. 1. Careful he would be ever after to please God; His obedience.
I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. This life is both the
Region of death, and a land of the living; there be those that are dead, viz.
which live after the flesh; they in this truly live, which live after the
Spirit. David professes that he would be one of these, live the life of grace,
and serve his God in righteousness and holiness all the days of his life; walk
with God, coram Domino, as in the presence and eye of God, as did Henoch and
Noah. 2. His faith and confidence
He professes his faith whereon he did rely, when he was humbled, whereon he
will rely, if humbled again. 1. I believed, and therefore have I spoken, the
Lord is gracious, etc. ver. 5. Such a confidence came from the Spirit of faith,
not from any humane demonstration, 2 Cor. 4.13. 2. I was greatly afflicted;
that is, I therefore believed, because I relied not upon mine own thoughts, but
showed my self very humble and docile to the Spirit of God, that reveals such
things to Babes, Mat. 11.


Or else David again comes over the struglings and doubtings he found in his
soul, Luctam.
I was greatly afflicted, even then when I spoke, and protested that I did
apprehend the promises, For I said in my haste, all men are liars; which clause
is diversely expressed.

1. Moller.
For some make it an amplification of his former grief; I was so amazed and
overwhelmed with sorrow, that when I found no help, I was ready to despair, and
if any man went about to comfort me with Gods promises, I said in my haste, all
men are liars; as if he should have said, Let them say what they will, I will
not believe them, God has no care of me, I am cast out of the sight of his
eyes. 2. Bellarmine.
Others refer these words to that clause before, the land of the living; of
which, many speak great matters: They talk of happiness and felicity in this
life, but whatsoever they speak of it, there is no truth in their words; every
man is but a liar, that places felicity in these decaying and mortal things;
for true happiness is not to be found, but in the land of the living after this
life; in excessu mentis, in an ecstasy, or a heavenly rapture, I said this. 3.
Musculus.
Some refer the words to Absolon, that deceived David by his Vow at Hebron, or
to Achitophel, that revolted from him; or to Ziba, that brought him a lie of
Mephibosheth; of whom he might say truly that they were liars. 4. Tremellius.
Junius.
Some conceive, that in these words, he taxes even Samuel himself, that he
spoke not by Gods Spirit, but came of his own head, and was swayed by humane
passion, when he anointed him King over Israel, of which being persecuted by
Saul, he saw so little hopes, and that for his pains, he was but a liar: But
the first sense is most coherent with the words.
Now for the truth of the Axiom, All men are liars. It is not so to be
understood, as if no man could ever speak truth; for even a liar may sometimes
speak that which is true: But that all men are obnoxious to lying, and may
possibly erte, if they speak of themselves, and moved by humane affections;
whereas God cannot lie, nor any that are moved to speak by his Spirit.

3. The third part.
Henceforth to the end of the Psalm, is set down David's gratitude, or his
thankfulness.

What shall I render to the Lord, As if he had said, I acknowledge the benefits
that God has bestowed upon me are many and great; Gratitudo Davidis.
he has delivered my soul from the sorrows of death and hell, De modo agendi
deliberat. Fig. (...).
he has redeemed me from my iniquity, he has quieted my heart, and has made
good his promises to me; neither is there a desire to show my self thankful
wanting in me, but how now shall I do it? what shall I return unto him? And
when he had cast about, and found that he had nothing that was fit to give, he
professes only that he would give thanks, this only he could, and these he
would return, which he knew to God was the best payment.

1. I will take the Cup of salvation. Here Interpreters vary, the Cup of
salvation: He would bring (...). 2 Definit and statuit quid acturus est (...).


1. The most refer it to the Eucharistical Sacrifices of the old Law, in which,
when any man offe'd (...), that is, a Sacrifice to God out of thankfulness for
so^e deliverance, he made a Feast to the people, Oblat^um (...).
as did David, 1 Chronicles. 16.1, 2, 3. where he dealt to every one of the people a
loaf of bread, a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine; in the receiving of
which, with a joyful voice, they sang praise to God for his benefits. This
then, they say, David here promised, and he calls it the Cup of salvation,
because it was to be offered in thankfulness of the salvation obtained. 2. But
Bollarmine casts this off as too light, and with the Fathers, Pati, and Crucem
far.
understands it of the Cup of patience and affliction, and tribulation, which
is often in Scriptures called a Cup, Matthew. 20.22. Psalm. 75.8, etc. and may
well be called the ^up ^f tribulation, because through many tribulations, we
must enter into the Kingdom of God. This then is it, that David says, When I
have nothing more excellent to offer to God for his many benefits, I will drink
with a willing mind the Cup of the Lord, though it be a bitter Cup, full of
tribulations and afflictions; for I am assured, that it will be a Cup of
salvation unto me; and therefore,
2. I will call upon the Name of the Lord, Invocare.
that he would strengthen me to drink of it, whenever it pleases him to
administer it to me. Or if we follow the first Interpretation, I will call on
the Name of the Lord, offer unto him an Eucharistical Sacrifice for my
deliverance.

3. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all his people. David
did so, Selvere vot^, and ea ratione quia more sanctorum preciosae
and here he promises to pay them, and that not privately, but publicly, in
the presence of all the people. Bellarmine refers the words to his open
confession of his God, and his readiness to drink the Cup, although it were to
Martyrdom.

And in the next words, he renders a reason why he was so ready to pay his
vows, or to confess his Name in the open Assembly; because he had learned,
that pious men are under Gods protection, that even in death it self they are
his care.

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints. Epiphonema.
The lervants of God do trouble themselves in vain, and doubt to no purpose
whether they be a care to him or no while they live, for even their very death
is precious unto him, or they are precious to him in their death, then he takes
care of them, as a man would do of the most precious Diamonds.

4. David yet waxes not proud upon this, nor upon any of Gods favors, Non
superbie David sed profiretur se servum.
but in all humility, though he were a King, yet he was not too great to be a
servant to his God, a son of his Handmaid, the Church; which passionately he
expresses.

1. Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, 2. And yet no slave, but
a voluntary servant: Thou have loofed my bonds, taken from my neck the bonds of
fear, and fallen upon me with the yoke of love, Mat. 11.30. Thou have freed me
from the slavery of the Law, Eumque honestum.
and would have me to be thy servant out of love; Cur servire reguare est. 3.
And therefore I will do what thy servants ought, and so he takes an occasion to
say over again, what he said before.
I will offer unto thee the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, Within the Church he
would do his service, what is without, is nothing worth.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and sixteenth Psalm.
O God most merciful, most gracious in making, and most righteous in performing
thy promises, thou have heard my voice, because thou have inclined thine ear
unto me.

The sorrows of death compassed me, I tound trouv'e and sorrow, I was brought
very low; then I called upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee
deliver my soul, and thou wast ready at hand to help me: Thou have delivered my
soul from ceath, Thou have dealt very bountifully with me, I will call upon
thee as long as I live; therefore I will walk before thee in righteousness and
holiness as long as I have a Being.

I was greatly afflicted, and all the comforts that I could receive from the
lips of man were but vain; In my baste, I said they were all liars, till thou
by thy holy Spirit did secure me, that thou were, and would be unto me a
merciful Father, and sealest unto me an unexpected pardon. This by the power of
thy Spirit I have, and do believe, Return then unto thy rest,

And now, I find by experience, that the death and afflictions of his Saints,
are as precious Jewels in his fight; these, for his sake, I am content, if it
be his Will, to undergo; of this Cup, if it seem good to him, I am content to
drink. A patient son of my mother, the Church; and if it please thee to pour
out to me a full draught of this red wine, Thy Will, not mine be done.

But if thou shall take away the Cup from me, or else proportion it according
to my strength; with a contented mind, and I will offer the Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, I have vowed my self to be thy servant, I will pay my vows unto
the Lord, now in the presence of all his people: Now, even now, while I remain
in the land of the living, I will endeavor, That my light may so shine before
men, that they may glorify my Father which is in Heaven.

Thy praise I will sound forth, thy Name I will magniffe; confess I will, that
thou have been to me a gracious God, and merciful Father, even in the Courts of
the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O jerusalem; in which, I know thou will alone accept of thanks, and hear and grant the pelitions of thy servants,
that are offered unto thee through the merits, and in the Name of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

PSALM. CXVII. A Hymn. (...).
THIS Psalm is short and sweet; it contains a Doxology to God for his mercy and
truth; and it is also Prophetical, in reference to the calling of the Gentiles,
as it appears, Romans 15.11.

Two parts there are of it.

1. An Exhortation to all Nations to praise God, The first part. 1. A Doxology.
both Gentiles and Jews.

1. He speaks to the Gentiles, Praise the Lord all ye Nations; he means, after
they were converted, and made sons of the Church; For how shall they call on
him, in whom they have not believe^^ Romans 10. 2. He speaks to the converted
Jews, whom he notes under the name of people, as they are called, Psalm. 2.1.
and Acts 4.25. Praise the Lord all ye people. Both now make but one Church, and
therefore both now ought to join together in the praise of God.
2. The (...), or the Reason give for it. The second part.


1. Because his merciful kindness is great; nay, confirmed toward us, The
reason,
in sending his Son to be a Savior both of Jews and Gentiles. His Church is
built on a foundation, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail. 2.
Neither is his mercy only by this confirmed, but the truth also of his promises
fulfilled; as he promised to send a Messiah, so he has performed it; and this
his truth endures for ever; for it shall never be challenged, there is no other
Messiah to be expected; now for this, Praise ye the Lord.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and seventeenth Psalm.
O Omnipotent and gracious God, when all Mankind walked according to the course
of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience. When they walked according to the
lusts of the flesh, and fulfilled the desires of the flesh, and were by nature
the children of wrath; Thou, who art rich in mercy, for thy great love
wherewith thou have loved us, wast pleased to send thy only begotten Son Jesus
Christ, and to deliver him to death, for the salvation of the World.

This thy great mercy, it pleased thee to make known to us by thy Apostles, and
to call us, who were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to
the Covenant of Promise, to be partakers of thy merciful kindness. In Christ
Jesus we, who were sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, so
great has thy mercy been even toward us; therefore from us, immortal thanks
are due unto thee, who find our selves saved not for our merits, but by thy
sole goodness.

We therefore beseech thee, that thou would so confirm our hearts by the
Spirit of faith, that without any doubt adhering to thy truth, which endures
for ever, we may apprehend those good things which thou have promised, and
offerest freely to us. O Lord, have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Iufidels, and
Heretics, and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of
thy Word, and so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be
saved among the remnant of thy true Israelites; let us all meet in one Fold,
and have but one Shepherd, that all Nations may praise the Lord, and all people
sing Hallelujah to thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXVIII. (...).
DAVID being freed from many dangers, and confirmed in his Kingdom according to
Gods promise, in this Psalm gives thanks.

The parts of this Psalm are: 1. An Exhortation to praise God for his mercy,
from ver. 1. to 5. 2. A persuasion to trust in God, and that from his own
example, who called upon God in trouble, and was delivered, from ver. 5. to 15.
3. The Exultation of the Church for it, from ver. 15. to 19. 4. A solemn
Thanksgiving kept for it, and in what manner it was celebrated, from ver. 19.
to 28. 5. David invites to praise God. The first part.
A short Doxology, ver. 28, 29.


1. David invites all to praise God, O give thanks unto the Lord; and adds his
Reasons.

1. For he is good, than which nothing could be said more briefly, nothing more
powerfully; he is properly and absolutely good, and therefore ought to be
praised, because there is nothing rightly worthy of praise, but that which is
good. Solum honestum laudabile. 2. His reasons are, 1. Good, Good to us, a
merciful God.
But secondly, He is good, and ever good to us; a merciful God, which flows
from his goodness, and is then most conspicuous, when it is imparted to those
in misery: Praise him, because his mercy endures for ever. His mercy created
us, his mercy redeemed us, his mercy protects us, his mercy will crown us;
there is then no end of his mercy.
This his mercy extends especially to his people, To his people.
and therefore he puts into the mouth of all his people this song of his mercy;
whom he distributes into three parts.

1. Let Israel now say, the whole Nation, that his mercy endures for ever. 2.
Let the house of Aaron, that whole Tribe consecrated now to him, say, that his
mercy endures for ever. 3. Let them now that fear the Lord, Proselytes, etc.
now say, that his mercy endures for ever; that is the burden of the Hymn; so he
begins, so he ends, ver. 29.
2. The second part.
And so in general having given a Commendation of his mercy, he desoends to
that particular in which his mercy did consist, The particulars of his mercy.
viz. A great deliverance of him, when he was in a great strait, which he could
impute to no other cause than his mercy.

1. I was in distress: And that is the case of Gods people, as well as David's.
2. I called upon the Lord: I boasted not of my merits, I complained not, that I
suffered unjustly, but I fled to his mercy, and invoked; so did the Church in
Peter's case, Of which he is an example.
Acts. 12.5. 3. The issue was, The Lord answered, and set me in a large place;
and so it fell out to Peter.
Upon which experience David exults, Showing how God had been merciful to him;
upon which he makes three Conclusions.
as the Church in the like case may; so that all be still attributed to God,
and his mercy.

1. The Lord is my helper: And the first inference upon it, is, The Lord is on
my side, therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. He says, God is
for me, therefore I shall not suffer; for he knew, that he was to suffer many
things: But God is my helper, for the evils that man can bring upon me, because
I know, That all things shall work together for good to those that fear God,
Matthew. 10.28. 2 Cor. 4.17. 2. The Lord takes my part with them that help me:
And his second Inference is, Therefore I shall see my desire upon them that
hate me; I shall see my self in safety, my enemies cast down, and peace
restored to the Church, which last is my chief desire.
Out of which, he deduceth yet a third Inference, viz. that men trust in God;
for, 1. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man;
2. And again, It is better to trust in the Lord, for say they be able to help,
yet they are false, politic, and will not. David found it true in Achish King
of Gath: But the Lord both can and will, and therefore it is far better to
trust in him.


3. Of which being confident, he sings an (...), David's Triumph for his assured
victories.
acquaints us in what dangers he was, and yet how God ever delivered him, and
therefore proposes himself for an example, how good it is to trust in God.

1. All Nations, Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Philistines, But to no purpose;
for in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them. 2. They compassed me about,
yea they compassed me about; 3. They compassed me about like Bees; swarms there
were of them, but they were quenched as fire of thorns, that makes a great
blaze, and a great noise, but suddenly goes out; for in the Name of the Lord
will I destroy them.
A multitude of enemies here were, angry and stinging enemies, and all
compassing, and about him; David a King (for Kings are most opposed, and
subject to be stung) but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them. The arms
that I confide in, and especially prepare against them, is Nomen Domini; I
fight indeed, and war against them, but my special weapons in all my War, in
which I trust, is the Name, the Protection, the Tutelage of the Lord, setting
upon them in his power, with his help, I will destroy them. Now he that fights
in the Name of the Lord, must be sure to have, 1. A Vocation to fight. 2. A
good Cause: And 3dly, He must manage the War with affections conformable to
piety, he must not seek himself, nor his own ends, but Gods glory, execution of
justice, etc.

4. He told us of a multitude of enemies, and for the overthrow of these he
sang his Triumph; now he singles out some one in particular, whether Saul,
Ishbosheth, or his son Absolon, it is uncertain: But to such a one by an
Apostrophe he turns his speech.

1. Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: 2. But the Lord helped me.
I impute it not to my own endeavor, wit, good fortune, that I escaped, nor yet
to any second causes; it was the Lord that did it for me.
Which in the next verse he more fully acknowledges, The Lord is my strength
and song, and is become my salvation.

1. My strength, that I am able to resist my enemies. 2. My salvation, that I
be delivered from my enemies. 3. My song, The third part. The Triumph sung by
the Church.
him whom I joyfully praise and sing of after I am delivered.
3. And that this his song might be the fuller, here David calls for the whole
Quire to sing with him. His delivery concerned the whole Church, and therefore
he desires the praise be sung in full voice, by the whole Church; and so it
fell out, for they kept a Jubilee, a day of Thanksgiving for it.

1. The voice of rejoicing and salvation, is in the Tabernacles of the
righteous: They congratulate their own safety in my delivery, and sing thus to
God. 2. The right hand of the Lord does valiantly. The right hand of the Lord
is exalted. The right hand of the Lord does valiantly. This was the Anthem that
the whole Quire of Saints and Believers sang, and they repeat it, and come over
it again and again, to express their joy.
Now this Anthem sung by the Church, By David again.
was no sooner ended, but David takes his Harp again, and sings this Versicle
by himself, and insulting over his enemies, he chants, 1. I will not dye; as
they desired and endeavored, by a violent death; I will not be brokenhearted
by these griefs and pressures, but I will take heart, and rise, as it were, out
of the Grave, not to live an idle life, and spend my days in pleasure, but to
declare the works of the Lord. 2. And among his works, this is one, upon which
I will especially insist, that, 1. The Lord has chastned me sore. Within I
have strugled with sin, with the Devil, with the sorrows of death; without I
have been assaulted by bitter enemies. 2. But in both these, I must acknowledge
his fatherly affection; for these strokes were not deadly, he has not given me
over unto death.



4. The fourth part.
It is conceived, that this Psalm was composed by David, that it might be sung,
The Anthymn sung betwixt David and the Priests.
when Priests and people were assembled together to give thanks to the Lord,
for that their good King was now fully delivered from his enemies, and quietly
settled in his Throne; that then which follows, may be best understood, if with
Junius, we form it into a Dialogue.

1. David in these words speaks to the Priests and Levites, who had the care of
the Tabernacle: Open to me the gates of righteousness; that is, the gates of
Gods house, in which righteousness ought to dwell: For I will go in to them,
and I will there publicly, and in the whole Assembly of good men, praise the
Lord, and give him thanks for his mercy to me. 2. This is the gate of the Lord,
the sole gate of justice that leads to him, and the just only shall enter into
it; procul este profani. 3. David replies, showing his Reason in brief, why he
entered into Gods house; I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art
become my salvation.
And to the 28th. verse, how God had settled him in his Kingdom, made him the
head of the corner, verses may literally be understood of David: David was but
a Type of Christ; and that these words properly belong unto him, we have a
clear testimony, first from his own mouth, attested by three Evangelists,
Matthew. 21.42. Mark. 12.10. Luke 20.17. and by his Apostles St. Peter, Acts
4.11. and St. Paul, Romans 9.33. These words to be applied to Christ.
out of Isa. 28.16. Of Christ then I shall rather interpret them, than of
David; without doubt the Prophet being wonderfully illuminated by the Holy
Ghost, wrote concerning Christ, as follows.

1. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone of the
corner. 1. The Church is oftentimes in Scripture likened to a building, of
which the Saints are living stones, of which Christ is the chief stone, the
head and corner stone, (...), that joins and keeps together the two walls,
Jews and Gentiles. 2. But the Jews, the Priests especially to whom did
pertain the office of building the Church, refused this stone, and cast him
aside; We will not have this man to reign over us, we have no King but Caesar.
They crucified him, and in his Grave called him a Deceiver; St. Peter lays it
to their charge, Acts 4.11. 3. But God called for him again, and he is become
the head of the corner, Ephesians. 2.20. That is, he is made head of the whole
Church, and such a head, that whosoever is not built upon him, cannot be saved.
2. This, says the Prophet, was the Lords doing; Acts 2.23, 24. 3. And it is
mavelous in our eyes: For who can do less than wonder, that a crucified man,
dead and butied, should by his own power rise again after three days, be
immortal, and have all power given to him, and be made Head and Prince of all
men and Angels, For this mercy a day set apart.
and that by him there should be a way made to mortal men to the Kingdom of
Heaven, to the society of Angels, and an immortal life.
For so great a work, fit it is, that a day be set apart, and such there is,
says David.

1. This is the day that the Lord has made, This is the Lords day. 2. And the
end, why this day was made for joy and gladness. The duty of the day.
The day wherein Adam fell, was a doleful day; but this day wherein Christ rose
from the dead, is a joyful day. The Redemption by Christ is a year of Jubilee,
the Resurrection of Christ is the chief day in the year. We will therefore
rejoice for it, and be glad in it. 3. Yea, and in the midst of our rejoicing,
we will pray, Osanuah to the son of David, which is, being interpreted, Save
now, we beseech thee, O Lord; O Lord, we beseech thee, send now prosperity.
Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: Jerusalem, Mat. 21. That we
may be assured, that the Form of Acclamation belongs nor so much to David, as
to Christ; and it was the opinion of the Jews, That when their Messiah came,
these words should be sung before him; that being the cause that the people
used them then.
The whole Prophecy of Christ's coming, riding into Jerusalem in Triumph, The
Priests duty then to bless.
Rejection, Passion, Resurrection, Benediction, being thus explained, the
Prophet turns his speech to the people, putting into the mouth of the Priests
these words, in which they were to do their Duty, Numb. 6. and to bless.

1. We have blessed you, as we ought to do; all happiness be to you under this
King. 2. And all happiness be to you, out of the house of the Lord; from the
Church, Ye are the blessed of the Lord. 3. God is the Lord, which has showed
us light. Revealed unto his Son the light of the World, and removed from us the
darkness of error, sin, hell, etc. 4. Therefore be thankful unto him, bind the
Sacrifice with cords, even to the horns of the Altar; make a solemn day for it,
and meet in the Church to praise him.
5. The fifth part. Being a Doxology.
The Prophet concludes with a Doxology, fit to be used by the people met and
assembled, in which he sets forth his faith and gratitude.

1. Thou art my God. 2. And I will praise thee; which he ingeminates, Thou art
my God, and I will exalt thee; which ingemination, shows his ardent desire to
be thankful. 3. And so concludes with the same Exhortation that he began the
Psalm, and in the same words.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and eighteenth Psalm.
O Blessed and Holy Jesus, King of the World, and Head of the Church, who have
bought us by thy blood, and espoused us in mercy and lovingkindness;

In these our dangers, we have none to fly to, but thee, we have none to call
upon in our distress, Who art the Lord our God; answer us, O Lord, and set our
feet in a large place. Be on our side, and then we will not fear what man can
do unto us; take our part with them that help us, and so shall we see our
desire upon them that hate us.

We confess, O Lord, we confess before men and Angels, that our sins with which
we have provoked thy justice, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
any confidence in man: It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any
confidence in Princes: For some would, but cannot; some can, but will not help;
but thou art a God of power, and if thou will, Thou can become our salvation;
and we believe thou will, because thou have spared us hitherto, and have not
given us over to death.

Save now, Be our strength, that we may resist; and be our salvation, that in
thy Name we may destroy them that compass us about.

We have been froward and stubborn children, and for this, the doors of thy
house have been shut against us; in mercy, O Lord, open unto us once more the
gates of righteousness, He was the Head-stone of the corner, and yet the chief
builders refused him, and cast him aside; but thou did not forsake him in
this contempt, and low condition, Thou call'ost for him again, and gave him a
Name above every name: This was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes. Look down now, O Lord, from thy Mercy-seat, behold how the living stones
in thy building are refused, and cast aside; call for them again, and set them
in their places, and do it in such a way, that the whole World may say, This is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, In the day of thy power, This is the day that the Lord has made, we
will rejoice, and be glad in it; God is the Lord, that has showed us light.
The Priests then shall bless thy people, as they ought, out of thy house, Thou
art my God, and I will praise thee; Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. How
joyful will be the melody of the whole Assembly, as the Seraphims, crying one
to another, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, because his mercy
endures for ever. It is his mercy that we were not consumed, and his mere
mercy that has brought us together again into his house, to offer unto him
this Sacrifice of Thanksgiving in the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.

PSALM. CXIX. Est mixti generis; (...).
AS this Psalm is the longest of all the rest, so it is of most use, because it
teaches us in what true happiness does consist, and by what means it may be
obtained; to wit, in the keeping of Gods Commandments.

1. To these David shows a singular affection, because there is not any one
verse, except the 122. in which he makes not mention of Gods Word, under some
of these names, Law, Statutes, Precepts, Testimonies, Commandments, Promises,
Ways, Word, Judgments, Name, Righteousness, Tr^th.

2. What he writes of them, he desires no doubt to be committed to memory, and
to help us in that, he has divided the whole into twenty two Sections, and
comprised every Section in eight verses, and every verse in the Hebrew of each
Section, begins with that letter with whith the Section is entitled; as if it
begins with Aleph, then Aleph begins every verse; if with Beth, with Beth, and
so in all the rest; for which, this Psalm may be called the A. B. C. of
godliness.

3. Any other method of this Psalm cannot well be laid; only we may say, that
every verse in it, either contains, 1. A Commendation of Gods Word, from some
excellent quality in it. 2. Promises to those that keep it. 3. Threatenings
against them that keep it not. 4. A prayer of David for grace to confirm him in
the observation of it. 5. Protestations of his unfeigned affection toward it.


The meaning of those Synonyma'es used in this Psalm, under which the
Commandments of God are signified, which are ten.

1. The Law, because it is the Rule of our actions; Torah, Gods Doctrine. 2.
Statutes, because in them is set down what God would have us do. 3. Precepts,
because God, as the great Lawgiver, prescribes the Rule for us. 4.
Commandments, because God lays his Commands upon us for their observation. 5.
Testimonies, because they witness his Will to us, and his Good Will, if
observed by us. 6. Judgments, because they pronounce Gods judgment, of our
words, works, thoughts. 7. His Word, because they proceeded from his mouth. 8.
The ways of God, because they show the way that God would have us walk. 9. His
Righteousness, because they contain an exact righteousness and justice in them.
10. Promises, because they have the promises of life, if kept.
PSALM. CXIX. ALEPH.
IN this first Octonary, The Contents.
the Prophet commends to us the Law of God, and persuades to the practice of
it, by two Arguments. The first is happiness, ver. 1, 2. The second is, the
excellency of the Lawgiver, ver. 4.

2. He shows his affection to this Law, desiring grace to keep it, ver. 5.
upon which he knew there would follow a double effect.

1. Peace in Conscience: He should not be ashamed and confounded, ver. 6. David
persuades to obedience.
2. Thankfulness to God for his teaching, ver. 7.
3. He acquaints us with his Resolution, if God should assist him, ver. 8.

Blessed are they who are undefiled in the way,
Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies,
They also do no iniquity,
1. The first argument, Blessedness.
The first Argument the Prophet uses to persuade men to obedience, is
Blessedness; which is so true, that godliness has the promise of this life,
and that which is to come; eternal and temporal felicity depend upon it. He
then that would be happy, must be obedient; and his obedience, if true, may be
thus discerned.

1. He must be undefiled in the way: Via is vita; and he must keep himself as
much as may be from the dirt and filth of sin. To whom it belongs, viz. the
obedient.
2. He must walk in the Law of the Lord, not after the Law of the flesh. The
Law of God is the Rule of our Faith, Life, Worship, and he must not decline to
the right hand, nor to the left, neither be Heretic, vicious man,
superstitious, idolatrous. 3. He must keep his Testimonies: Search out what God
in his Word testifies to him, and keep it. 4. He must seek him with a whole
heart: Not superficially, not hypocritically; search his Law to the utmost,
both what it bids, and what it forbids. Enquire out the sense of the whole Law,
and the mind of the Lawgiver, and then observe it in sincerity and integrity,
which hypocrites do not. 5. The also do no iniquity; i. e. They are no workers
of iniquity with purpose of heart. 2. Delight. 3. With perseverance and
continuance. 6. They walk in his way. They that work iniquity, walk a contrary
way. They that through infirmity and ignorance offend, walk besides the way:
But holy men walk in the ways of God, because their will is to keep Gods Law,
habitually they remain in it; and when they err and wander, by repentance and
confession they quickly return again to it. Secunda Ratio, The Authority of the
Lawgiver.

2. The Prophets second Argument to persuade obedience, is from the Authority
of the Lawgiver. All man's disobedience to Gods Law, proceeds either out of
Rebellion, or Oblivion; they either forget, or contemn the Lawgiver: That then
our obedience may be the better fixed, David brings to our mind who is the
Author of this Law, and from whom the Command came; they are not the Commands
of men, but of God; and that God, who may lay what Commands he pleases, and
exact obedience from his servants.

Thou have commanded that we keep thy Commandments diligently.

1. Thou, who know when we err, and wilt revenge when we do amiss. 2. Have
commanded: Not only counseled, but absolutely commanded. 3. That we keep thy
Commandments: They may not be dispensed with, or broken at our pleasure. 4.
Diligently: Not negligently, lazily; for cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently; but with great care and zeal: For Satan is diligent in
tempting, we are weak and infirm; and if there be not diligence used, we are
like to fall; and being fallen, it is not so easy to rise: A wound is sooner
made, than healed.
3. The blessedness promised to the keepers of Gods Law, David's prayer for
grace to obey.
and the Authority of the Lawgiver commanding so strictly that his Law be
observed, moved the Prophet to send forth this ardent prayer:

O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.

1. David was a Prince, a great King, and yet he desires to be obedient; much
more others. 2. He answers Gods Command with a prayer; what he commands, he
seeks grace to do it. Domine da quod jubes, and jube quod vis. 3. Oh that my
ways were directed; my counsels, my actions, speeches conformable to the
regularity and straitness of thy Law. 4. He knew of himself he cannot be so
closely united to God, as he ought; that his God and he have but one way, and
therefore he prays to be directed.
Which prayer of his, if it pleased God to hear, Three effects.
then he knew well that two excellent effects, or three rather, would follow
upon it, with which he was much affected.

1. Such a quietness in soul, Peace of conscience.
and boldness to appear at the Throne of Grace.

1. Then shall I not be confounded, nor ashamed to appear before thee. Whereas
if his ways were distorted and crooked, and not conformable to the Will of the
Lawgiver, and equity of his Law, he should be strangely amazed to appear in
his sight, fly from his presence, as did Adam; for that is the fruit of
disobedience. 2. Whereas if God granted him his wish, and directed his ways to
keep his statutes, he should not find any amazement in his conscience, while he
had a care, that his obedience were universal and total, not to one
Commandment, but to all. I shall not be confounded, An eye to them, a care to
keep them in all my actions, even when I weakly break them.
2. And this effect will produce another fruit yet, viz. a joyful and a
thankful heart.

1. I will praise thee: Give thee thanks and praise for thy grace and
assistance. 2. Thankfulness.
With uprightness of heart. His tongue only should not praise God, but his
heart also, and it should be well-tuned, no discord in it; for it should be
upright and honest. 3. But this could not be done, till God had taught him, and
therefore he adds, I will praise thee when I shall have learned thy righteous
judgments. Learned; not to know them only in my understanding, but learned to
love them, and approve them as the most perfect rule of life; which love cannot
be had, but by the infusion of thy Spirit of Grace.
3. A Resolution to be obedient.


1. I will keep thy statutes: So I am fully resolved, so I have decreed with my
self; and it is a great help to godliness, to resolve to live a godly life; for
how shall that be performed, which is not first concluded. 2. And yet this
conclusion he makes not without God, it had been overmuch boldness to resolve
without Gods assistance, and therefore he resolves conditionally, and prays, O
for sake me not utterly. This I am resolved on, but then thou O God again must
not leave me utterly destitute of thy grace and help; for without it, I can do
nothing. And if at any time in thy just judgment thou shall desert me, that I
may know mine own weakness, and learn the better to fly to thee, and rely on
thee, yet let it not be an utter desertion, For sake me not, usque minis,
usque-quaque, overlong.
The Prayer.
THOU, Sinai, and interpreted it upon the Mountain to thy Disciples, and not
counseled, but commanded us to keep thy precepts with all care and diligence.
Of our selves, how unable are we to perform it, it is thy assistance and thy
grace that must make us obedient, give therefore what thou command, that we
might keep thy statutes.

Lord, to keep thy statutes, I have decreed with my self to have respect unto
all thy Commandments; but then thou must be my Master to teach me; O forsake me
not overlong; because being destitute of thy grace and help, I have respect to
all thy Commandments; so shall I praise thee for thy grace and assistance with
an upright, and an honest heart, because thou have taught me to love and
approve thy righteous judgments.

Make me, Amen.

2. BETH.
IN the first Octonary, The Contents.
the Prophet having commended Gods Law from the Author, and the end, which was
happiness, in these eight verses following, sets out to us the efficacy and
utility of it, to a holy life, without which, that blessedness cannot be
obtained.

Secondly, And also the means and way that every one ought to take, The profit
and efficacy of Gods Word.
who intends that the Law of God shall have that effect upon him.

1. The profit and efficacy of Gods Law, he sets down in the first verse,
attributing to it a cleansing power, and for it, he chooses the most unlikely
Subject, a young man; he asks: 1. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his
way? 2. To which the Prophet answers, That the way to amend young men, and
indeed all men, is, by taking heed thereto, by a careful watch over his ways,
that they be conformed according to thy Word; Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. It is good for a man to bear the yoke from his youth; Gods
Word is this yoke, and being born from our tender age, it will be operative,
and produce a holy life.


2. It being granted, The means to attain to holiness.
that the Word of God is of this efficacy to cleanse our way, and cause us to
live a holy life; next, by his own example, he shows the means how this
holiness may be obtained, which are many.

1. The first is by a diligent search, and by prayer.

1. With my whole heart, earnestly have I sought thee. D^ligent search and
prayer.
and would fain have. 2. And then petitions, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments. As our first calling, so our continuance in the state of grace is
from the Lord; David therefore prays that God would not desert him; for
without his grace he must needs wander.
2. The second means of Sanctification is, David. Delight in Gods Word.


1. Thy words have I hid within my heart: Remembered, approved, delighted in
them. 2. Yea, and reduced them to practice: The end was, that I might not sin
against thee.
3. The third means of Sanctification is, to bless God for his grace, David
here. To bless God for his grace, and desire more.


1. He blesses God for what he had given: Blessed art thou, O Lord. 2. He asks
more grace: Teach me thy statutes. He had Nathan, he had Priests to instruct
him, himself was a Prophet; but all their teaching was nothing without Gods
blessing, and therefore he prays, Teach me; Paul may plant, etc.
4. The fourth means of Sanctification, Ardent love to Gods Law declared.
the ardent love which men ought to bear to the Law of God, which is expressed
in the four last verses, both outwardly and inwardly.

1. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. Outwardly.
He was no mute about Gods Law.

2. Inwardly, by 1. Affection.
And inwardly his love was testified these ways.

1. In his affection: I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as
in all riches. They are of great esteem with men, thy Commandments with me. 2.
Meditation.
In his meditation of them, which brings the Word to the mind: I will meditate
in thy precepts. 3. Consideration.
In his consideration; that which comes into the mind being never so good, if
it be not considered, goes as it came, whence he says, I will have respect to
thy ways; look back upon them, and consider them. 4. I will delight my self in
thy statutes, Delectation.
I will not forget thy Word. Having meditated, considered Gods statutes, he
will delight in them, he will never forget them.
The Prayer.
O Lord, Teach us, O Lord, thy statutes; and let us hide and remember thy words
in our hearts, that we may never sin against thee;

3. GIMEL.
IN this Octonary, The Contents. The impediments of obedience.
David reckons up the impediments that he might meet with, in the keeping of
Gods Law. 2. And prays to God to remove them.

1. A dead heart
of which he had lost the sense by his sin: Deal bounntifully with thy servant,
that I may live again the life of grace, and keep thy Word.

2. Blindness of understanding.
The second impediment was, the blindness of his understanding, and the vail
upon his heart, the perturbations and passions of his soul, love, fear, desire,
anger, with which being disquieted, he could not judge aright, and therefore he
prays, Open my eyes, that I may see the wonders, the wonderful equity, wisdom,
and profit of thy Law.

3. The third impediment was, his present condition; he was but yet Viator, Our
imperfect state.
and therefore he prays; I am a stranger upon earth, I am regenerate but in
part, and know the way but in part, therefore hide not thou t^y Commandments
from me. It must be conceived, that David was not such a stranger in Israel,
that he knew not the two Tables; that then he craves, is, That God by the power
of his Spirit would teach him the use, the necessity, the profit, the obedience
of these Commandments.

4. The fourth impediment was, his infirmity and imperfections. And will or
affections.
He found his desires to be too often cooled; he would, and he would not; he
desired, and he did not desire; not so heartily as he should, which made his
obedience imperfect, and the effect not to follow, and therefore he manifests
here a stronger desire against that imperfection: My soul breaks, for the
longing it has to thy judgments at all times. As if he had said, help me, that
I may perfectly and ardently desire, and that my desire may be brought to act;
for my soul breaks, is contrite, and vexed that it is not so.

5. A fifth impediment, is pride of heart, Pride of heart.
which impediment David does not acknowledge in himself, but yet uses it for
an Argument that he be obedient, because God hates, and curses them, who out
of pride and contempt violate his Law. Thou have rebuked the proud that are
cursed, which do err from thy Commandments: None with a high hand breaks them,
that escapes unpunished; not Lucifer, nor Adam.

6. A sixth impediment was, Scoffs and scorns from the profane
the mocks and scorns that were put upon him by Saul, and his Courtiers, which
he expresses in the seventh verse, which, because they might be a great
disheartning to him, Against all these he prays


1. Remove from me reproach and contempt; which is a grievous temptation to a
generous spirit, and therefore he desires of God to clear his innocence, adding
this Reason; For I have kept thy Testimonies: I cannot be then that seditious,
rebellious person, that troubler of Israel I am presented to be. 2. And yet
Princes did sit and speak against me; Saul, Abner, sat in their Councels, at
their Feasts, and laid to my charge things that I knew not. It is a hard
tentation, when the godly are troubled by any wicked man; but much harder, when
troubled by men in honor and authority: But yet David so assaulted by their
tongues, And shows his constancy in his obedience, and delight in Gods Word.
keeps still close with God: But thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. He
renders not reproach for reproach, nor contempt for contempt; this impediment
hindered him not to obey God. 3. About which he explains himself farther, 1.
Thy Testimonies also are my delight: In Adversity a Consolation. 2. And my
Counselors: In my doubts very faithful friends. Saul has his Council, and I
have mine; he his Nobles, but I no other of my Council, but the Commandments of
God; from which I receive pleasure to refresh me, and Council to govern me, and
all my Affairs and Business.

The Prayer.
O Lord, many are the impediments that are cast in our way, strangers on earth,
and know not the way to Heaven, O direct us, and hide not thy Commandments from
us. Desires we have to do thy Will, but they are cold and imperfect; this we
lament, and grieve for, it breaks our heart, that they are not more fervent,
longing desire to thy judgments at all times.

These discouragements we find within, but we are not without hindrances from
without; accursed proud men, that do err from thy Commandments, are become our
enemies, because we have kept thy testimonies. O remove from us that shame and
contempt they go about to cast upon us for thy sake: Thy Testimonies shall be
our delight and refreshment in all our adversities, Amen.

4. DALETH.
DAVID in this Octonary, The Contents.
first, sets down the state of an imperfect man; secondly, confesses it;
thirdly, asks grace and mercy; fourthly, which being granted, professes what
he would do.

1. David complains of his imperfection.
David confesses his imperfection, and petitions for grace.

1. He complains, My soul cleaves to the dust. Whereas, he should have set his
affections on things above, 2. And prays for grace to quicken him.
Then prays, Quicken thou me according to thy Word. Give me a life according
to thy Law; by cleaving to the earth, I am earthly; by cleaving to the flesh, I
am carnal; but if I shall live according to thy Law, which is spiritual, I
shall cleave unto God, and become one Spirit with him. Now the godly esteem of
life, not according to that they have in body, but in soul; when they want a
heavenly disposition to spiritual things, they lament over it, as a dead soul;
and therefore pray, quicken me.
2. Again he confesses them.
David goes on in confession of his imperfections, and petitions for grace.

1. I have declared my ways heretofore, showed unto thee my wanderings, wants,
doubts, griefs, I have not been ashamed to open them all, and declare them, I
have hid nothing. 2. And thou heardst me, sparedst me, and forgavest me out of
mere mercy. And prays again for grace.
3. Do the like now; and being reconciled to me, Teach me thy statutes, give me
light and grace to direct my ways. These two ought to be sought together,
mercy and grace; mercy for remission, and grace for renovation.
3. In which prayer he proceeds
David desires to proceed in the ways of God, and therefore he continues his
prayer for farther grace and illumination.

1. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts. Where the mind is darkened,
the heart can never be rightly ordered, therefore he prays more instantly and
diligently for the light of his mind; Teach me then how I shall walk in thy
Law. 2. He that asks good things of God, should ask them for a good end; so
does David, Make me to understand, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works.
Taught in thy School, I shall talk how wonderful are thy Laws. Diliges Deum
and proximum, etc. Or that thy works of Creation, Providence, Redemption, etc.
are mavelous.
4. And again he returns to speak of his imperfection and infirmity, Shows his
weakness.


1. My soul melts for heaviness, as a thing melts and consumes by distillation,
till nothing be left; so the life and strength of his soul was decaying by
grief, and tediousness of his spiritual Combat within, the flesh lusting
against the Spirit. 2. Therefore he prays for strength: Desires strength.
Strengthen thou me according to thy Word. Add the heat of grace as thou have
promised, and confirm me in this agony, and keep me from falling; which he more
clearly begs in the next verse. 3. Remove from me the way of lying. 1. Bring to
pass by thy grace, And power to avoid sin.
that I may far depart from every evil way to which in my heaviness I leaned
too much. 2. And grant me thy Law graciously: Which granted, the effects would
be:
Not so much the Book of the Law, as the matter of it printed in my heart, that
may abolish the Law of corruption, vanity, and sin; which I shall account a
gift graciously bestowed on me.

5. Thus by prayer having obtained grace and mercy, he tells us what the
effects of it were in him, which were three: Election of, Adhesion to, and
continuance in the way of truth.

1. I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have I laid before me.
Election of.
I have chosen the way of truth, i. e. the way of thy Commandments. 2. I have
cleaved to thy Testimonies. In my imperfect state, my ^oul cleaved to the dust;
but now having obtained mercy, Adhesion to.
I have stuck unto thy Testimonies. 3. Before my soul melted away for
heaviness, expeditely, cheerfully, with delight. 2. Continuance in the way of
truth.
When or since thou have enlarged my heart, and set it free to run by thy
Spirit of grace, which, has made my yoke easy, and my burden light.
The Prayer.
O Lord, with shame of face I must needs confess, O quicken me by thy grace,
according to thy Word; and reach me thy statutes: Englighten my mind, and make
me to understand the way of thy precepts; and strengthen me in thy Word, that I
slip and fall no more, nor no more adhere to the World,

Enrich and beautify my soul with thy grace, and so for the way of lying, I
shall cleave to the way of truth; as my soul has cleaved to the dust, so shall
it stick to thy Testimonies; and as in the Combat betwixt the flesh and the
Spirit, I yielded to the flesh, so now I will cheerfully and readily run the
way of thy Commandments, and so show my self thankful for thy grace that has
set my heart at liberty, for the merits of Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

5. H E.
THIS Octostich is wholly precatory. The Contents.


1. In which, he prays first for illumination in Gods Law, and desires it may
be practical.

2. That God would remove the impediments which may hinder him in doing his
duty. He prays for illumination, and desires it be practical.


1. His first Petition is, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I
shall keep it to the end.

2. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall keep it with
my whole heart.

In these two verses, the Prophet asks, 1. Institution and illumination in the
Word: Teach me, give me understanding. 2. Shows us to what end he asks it,
That he may keep the Law; he desires that his knowledge may be not only
speculative, but practical. 3. Promises perseverance, sincerity.
And for it, he promises perseverance and sincerity, he would be not
Temporizer, nor Hypocrite. 1. No Temporizer; For I shall keep it to the end. 2.
No Hypocrite; For I shall keep it with my whole heart. He would avoid those two
Vices, which are the bane of all true obedience, Hypocrisy and Inconstancy.



2. He prays for a good will.
As before he craves light to his mind, so in this verse he craves grace for
his heart; it is Gods Spirit that works the will and the deed: And therefore he
desires the governance and direction of his Spirit, without which he should be
nor sincere, nor constant; for he would ever and anon be too apt, redere ad
ingenium, and therefore he begs.

1. Make me to go, lead me, direct me. Naturally man is ignorant of the way to
eternal life, and if he have any light of knowledge, he is too apt to be
msicarried, and wander from it; whence David prays, that God would be his
Guide, and that he be not left to himself; for it was a narrow, strait way, a
path he was to go in. 2. That he may go in Gods way, which is a path, or strait
way.
Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments. 1. A path is (...), vita trita,
the old way, and not any new track, he would go in that way the servants of God
walked before him. 2. A path is a way out of the common Road, nor Beasts, nor
Horse, nor Cart go in it, it is a way for men; he would then go the way of
reasonable men, not the bestial way of the world and flesh. 3. A path is
narrow, short, right, clean way; the Highway is a broad, longer, crooked, foul
way; this way he declines, because it leads to Hell, and desires to go that
one, clean, strait, short way of Gods Commandments.
3. His affection to it.
Which Petition, that it may be the easilier granted, he shows his affection
and delight that he took to walk in it: For therein do I delight.
3. He prays to God to remove all impediments.
And now he prays to God to remove all impediments that might hinder him in
his walk.

1. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies. No doubt David found his heart evil
inclined, and tempted to a wrong way, averse and backward to obey; and that
therefore God would remove this averseness, and bend and incline his heart the
right way. 2. But especially that he would avert his heart from covetousness;
Covetousnes
for that is the root of all evil. The Word in the Original may signify profit,
Genesis 37.26. Psalm. 30.9. These profitable sins do take away the inclination of
the heart to Gods Law, David prays against them.
4. The next impediment, is the lust of the eyes: By the eyes, Eve saw the
apple fair to the eye; Lust of the eyes.
Achan the wedge of gold; David himself Bathsheba from the top of his Palace.
Vt vidi, ut perit; and therefore Job. makes a Covenant with his eyes not to
look upon a Maid; and David here prays: 1. Turn away mine eyes from beholding
vanity. The objects of which are vain
The objects are but vain and empty things, they have no solidity in them, O
turn my eyes from them. He that will keep his heart with diligence, must have a
care of his senses, especially his eyes; for, Qui exteriori oculo negligenter
utitur, interiori non injuste caecetur. Gregory in Job. 2. Quicken me in thy
Law. Man is quick enough to walk in his own way, He prays for quickening.
he can do it without a Teacher; but except God put life, and keep it in his
soul, he has nor knowledge, nor life, nor strength, nor pleasure to walk in
the ways of God, and therefore David prays, Quicken me, raise, enliven,
refresh, conserve me in life.


5. And here he inserts a Petition for perseverance, verses; but being
conscious to himself, And for perseverance.
how unable he was to perform it without Gods help, he prays: 1. Stablish thy
Word unto thy servant: Make good thy Word, give me grace to stand. 2. And his
Reason to persuade God to this, is, because he was his servant, and such a
servant that was devoted to his fear, wholly dedicated to serve and fear thee.
I observe the condition that thou requirest in any servant, Lord then make good
thy Word, and stablish me.


6. It will be a great reproach in the sight of God at the last day, For not to
have persevered, a reproach
and is now in the fight of Angels, not to have persevered in the keeping that
Law, which is so good, and therefore David having prayed for perseverance,
adds, 1. Turn away the reproach which I fear at the last day; 2. For thy
judgments are good. This Reason shows he feared Gods rebuke; Man's reproach
comes from a corrupt judgment, he condemns where God will absolve, I pass not
for it; but I know thy rebuke is always deserved: For thy judgments are good.


7. He concludes, desiring God to look upon his Petitions, He again prays for
grace.


1. Behold I have longed after thy precepts. It appears by these ejaculations,
that I desire them seriously. 2. Therefore quicken me in thy righteousness.
Increase, conserve me in this spiritual life; false conceptions vanish, and
come not to the birth; so the desires of man not quickened, nor conserved by the
grace of God: This whole Octonary being a prayer, there needs no other.
6. VAU.
THIS Octostich is (...), The Contents.
for he vows and promises in it to be thankful.

1. First, He prays for mercy at Gods hands, and the Petition being granted,
he promises to show his thankful heart two ways.

1. By a bold confession of Gods Law, and the defense of it before the greatest
Adversary. 2. By a holy Conversation toward God in obedience to the Law.
The whole Section then consists of two Petitions, and six Promises.

1. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation according to
thy Word. He prays for mercy.
In his first Petition, he joins these two, mercy and salvation, as the cause
and the effect; for the mercy of God ever brings salvation.

2. Which being granted.
This being granted, he would be thankful, and shows it by his boldness in
confession of Gods Name in the presence of the proudest Adversary; he would
fear nor malice, nor power of man, when he found God kind and merciful to him.

1. So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me. When thy mercy
shall be extended to me, He vows to confess Gods Law.
I shall not fear to answer any Adversary, hitting me in the teeth, That I fear
God in vain: For I shall give them a short answer, and a true one. 2. That I
trust in thy Word; I put my confidence in thee, who can make good thy
promises, because thou art Omnipotent; and wilt, because thou art Merciful.
2. Take not the Word of Truth out of my mouth: The Reason; And desires to
continue in this resolution.
For I have hoped in thy judgments.

1. Take not thy Word of Truth, in which I boast and glory before my
Adversaries. 2. Take not this Word out of my mouth, so that I dare not to
speak, and profess it openly. 3. Take it not utterly: If for a time I conceal
it, yet let it not be always so. 4. For I have hoped in thy judgments: For my
hope is in thy fidelity and justice, which thou will so execute upon the
desiders of thy Word, that I shall have no need to be ashamed, that I have
taken thy Word of Truth into my mouth.
3. To show himself thankful by a holy Conversation
in heart, in mind, in word, in deed.

1. In keeping Gods Law: So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and
ever. 2. Deo servire libertas. A liberty there is of the flesh, Serving God, 1.
With a free heart.
taken up by men, but not given by God; but the liberty that God gives, is,
That being freed from our lusts, we serve him with a willing mind, not out of
fear, but love; in joy, affection, and with peace of conscience; which David
professes to do in this place: For I seek thy precepts, as a thing much to be
desired and loved. 3. I will speak of thy Testimonies also, even before Kings,
Tongue.
and will not be ashamed. This is no small thing, especially if we consider,
that though no men are more bound to God, than Kings, yet to none is Gods Word
more unwelcom; well, yet even before them, David would speak of Gods
Testimonies, and not be ashamed to do it. 4. In the service of his affections:
And I will delight my self in thy Commandments, which I have loved. Affections.
It is no small progress in Piety to delight in it, and this follows upon our
love; for a man will delight in that he loves. This will make that which would
be other ways burdensome, a very light load; an easy yoke, and a light burden.
5. In the service of his actions: Actions.
My hands also I will lift up to thy Commandments, which I have loved. David
then says, He would lift up his hands; his meaning is, that he would labor to
express Gods Will in his Works. He knew well, that not the heart without the
mouth and hand, nor the mouth, nor the hand without the heart would please God,
but that these must be conjoined, and that with delight, in the study of true
Piety, and therefore he makes profession of all.
The Prayer.
WHILE we consider, O Omnipotent God, on one side, the absolute perfection of
thy Law, and on the other side, our own infirmities and disabilities, we easily
perceive, that our obedience must needs be very imperfect, except thou shall
assist us with thy grace, and extraordinary favor. Let then thy mercies come
unto us, O Lord, even thy salvation, that object unto us our slips and falls;
and be bold,

O take not thy Word of Truth utterly out of our mouths, nor let us be so
faint-hearted and dismayed, as for ever to conceal thy Word; for we rely upon
thy fidelity and justice, being assured, that thou will pour down thy
judgments upon those that deride thy Truth: Notwithstanding all their
opposition, assist us with thy Spirit, we will keep thy Law continually, for
ever and ever. We seek thy Commandments,

For then will we speak of thy Commandments, even before Kings, Then will we
delight our selves in thy Commandments, which we have loved. Then will we lift
up our hands to thy Commandments, which we have loved, and meditate in thy
statutes. Our heart being surprised with delight, we will express it with our
tongue, and our tongue shall call to our hands, and set them to work: Heart,
tongue and hand shall testify that we are thy servants, and that it is our
whole delight to meditate in, and keep thy Commandments in the Name of Jesus
Christ our Lord.

7. ZAIN.
IN this Octostich the Prophet first prays. The Contents.
2. Next shows his constancy to hope and trust in God, notwithstanding some
discouragements. 3. Commends the Word of God, showing what effects it wrought
in him.

1. He prays.
In the first verse, he begins with a prayer, Remember thy Word unto thy
servant, in which thou have caused me to hope.

1. Remember: Not as if God could forget his Promise, or change his Will, or
retract his Word; That God would remember his promise, for two reasons.
but God is then said to forget, when he defers to fulfill his promise. Remember
then, signifies nothing else, than accomplish and perfect thy promise made unto
me thy servant. And though he will fulfill what he has promised, yet he will be
asked to fulfill; and prayer is one, and a chief of those means that draws him
to fulfill it. 2. Because his servant.
Remember thy promise made to thy servant: Which he uses as an Argument to
persuade God to remember his Word; he was his servant, and had in some measure
done him sincere service, and so had performed his promise made to God; and
therefore desires, that God would remember his promise made to him. It is in
vain to desire God to remember his promises made to us, when we make no
conscience to perform our promises made to God. 3. For his Words sake.
Wherein thou have caused me to put my trust: This is another, and more
forcible Argument to move the Lord to perform his Word: As if he had said, it
now stands with the honor of thy Truth to do so; I hope not upon presumption,
but it was thou Lord, that have caused me to hope, and I know the true God can
no more beguile me, than fail in his Truth: Hope then I do.
2. Now out of this hope and confidence, he received comfort in his greatest
affliction, ver. 2. declined not from Gods Law, ver. 3. pitied and lamented the
case of Atheistical men, ver. 4.

1. In great afflictions and troubles he was, but this hope kept him fast to
God, he despaired not.

1. This made him constant.
This is my comfort in my affliction: This, thy Word and Promise, in which thou
have caused me to hope. 2. For thy Word, thy Promise has quickened me, brought
me life and spirit, strength and increase; the comforts of Gods Word to an
afflicted soul, are far beyond all Philosophical precepts or comforts.
2. Enemies he had, proud men and scoffers, that tempted me to let go my hope,
and forsake thy Word.

1. The proud have had me greatly in derision; which is a shrewd temptation to
a generous spirit. 2. Yet have I not declined from thy Law: Thy promise put
life and vigor into me.
3. For in my affliction, and their scorns and derisions: 1. I remembered thy
judgments of old, how thou casts down the proud, and exalt'st the humble, And
comfortable in his afflictions.
giving ample rewards to those that kept thy Law, as to Abraham, Job, etc. and
brought heavy punishments upon the Transgressors of it, as the old World,
Sodom, Pharaoh, etc. 2. And in those I have comforted my self, believing, quod
bonis been, quod malis male.


3. His assured hope of reward promised in Gods Word, made him to grieve for,
and commiserate the cause of those that forsook Gods Law wilfully and
stubbornly, because they should never be partakers of the Reward God had
promised.

1. Horror has taken hold upon me. Totus homo, contremisco. He was afraid, He
commiserates the case of the disobedient.
because the Law of God was contemned by them; not for the harm they suffered,
but for the harm they did thereby unto themselves. 2. For these men were
Desertores, Apostates, wicked men that forsook thy Law: And sure many of this
Age are guilty of it, though not in words, yet in deeds.
3. Nor his afflictions, nor the derision of profane men, no, Shows the
effects Gods Word wrought upon him.
nor the ill example of Apostates, could any way move him from his hope in Gods
Promise, constant he was to the Law of God still; and professes, that though
wicked men could find no savor nor sweetness in it, yet to him, that knew how
great a Reward was laid up for them that kept it, it was both a sweet and an
easy yoke.

1. He was as yet out of his Country, in the house of his Pilgrimage; for Gods
servants esteem themselves no better, they are but Pilgrims and strangers upon
earth. 2. And yet he took such delight in Gods Law, that they were his Music
and his Song: Delight.
Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. 3. Yea, which
was yet more, not in the daytime only he entertained his thoughts with them,
but in the night-season also. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night,
and have kept thy Law. When others snort,
4. And so he concludes with this comfortable Epiphonema, This I had: Obedience.
This Reward from thee, that nor the scoffs of mine enemies, nor mine own
afflictions, nor yet the lewd examples of wicked men have removed me from thy
Law: And over and above, that the hope I had in thee, has so comforted my
heart, That thy statutes have been my songs in this my Pilgrimage; my
meditations in the night-season, and that I have kept thy precepts.

The Prayer.
O most merciful God, I have not from any other means conceived hope of
salvation and deliverance in my afflictions, than from thy most faithful
promises; for from them it is, that I must fetch my sole comfort, Remember then
thy Word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. Nany are the
troubles of my soul, I have not declined from thy Law, put life into me, and
refreshed me; and lest I should dye, and pine away with grief, has kept me in
life.

O Lord, I have called to my memory thy most righteous judgments, which from
the beginning of the World thou have used toward just and impious men, that
they should so carelessly neglect their own salvation, and so maliciously
forsake thy Law.

They wilfully cast it aside, but I have born so ardent an affection to it,
that in the place of my Banishment,

9. CHETH.
IN this Octonary, The Contents.
we have David's Protestation, that God is his portion, and his Resolution upon
it, David's choice of God for his portion.
to keep Gods Law; to which, because he was unable of himself, he, 2. Prays
for grace. 3. Which being granted, he makes a profession of his Duty, and of a
holy life, showing in what it does consist. 4. And concludes with a prayer.

1. Thou art my portion, O Lord. Let other men choose as they please, make
choice of honors, riches, etc. Here abrenuncio, I renounce them all in
comparison of thee; Thou art my portion, my inheritance; Thou sufficient for
me, I require no more.

2. Vows himself his servant.
And upon it I resolve: Dixi, statui, decrevi; I have said, resolved, I have
said I would keep thy words. And prays God to enable him.


3. But, O Lord, Thou know how unable I am to do this without thy grace and
help, therefore I entreated thy favor with my whole heart; and I yet entreat
it, Be merciful to me according to thy Word.

Three helps there are of a godly life; Determination, Supplication,
Consideration; and here we meet with all three.

1. Determination; this makes a man begin well: This in the first verse, Dixi,
I have said. 2. Supplication; this makes a man to continue well: This in the
second verse, I entreated. 3. Consideration; this makes a man when he goes
wrong, to come to the way again, which is expressed in the third verse; for
David goes on.
4. I have thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies: It Is
not sufficient to pray to God, And is ready to cooperate with grace.
except we cooperate with his grace, which cooperation lies in two things; in
Aversion from evil, and Conversion to good, without which we can never be
sanctified persons, which David here aims at; both he did.

1. Take into consideration his ways; In Aversion from evil.
he sought not so much into other men's lives, as into his own; and examined his
actions, whether they were conformable to the Law of God or no; and where he
found them irregular, left them out of question. 2. But he stayed not there;
Conversion to good, which he declares.
for he conformed his life to the Law and Will of God, which was the only right
way: I turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.
5. And this his care of Sanctification, is declared many ways.

1. By his readiness and zeal in it, he delayed not: I made haste, By his zeal.
and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. 2. By his magnanimity and constancy,
notwithstanding all opposition: Constancy.
The bands of the wicked have robbed me, and plundered me for keeping thy Law;
but for all that, I have not forgotten thy Law. 3. By his fervor about it; he
would omit no time to perform his duty, Fervor.
no not the night; he would abate rather of his rest and sleep, than be
defective in this necessary. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee,
because of thy righteous judgments. He would observe his Vigils, and his nights
Psalmody. 4. And he would have a care of his company. Qui cum claudo habitat,
His company
claudicare discet: And therefore avoiding the society of lewd men, I am a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.
6. And lastly, he concludes with an Acclamation and Petition.

1. The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercies: Not a Creature, Concludes with a
prayer for mercy and instruction.
let me then have my share in it, and in this especially, that I may know and
obey thy Will; for, 2. Teach me thy statutes. I account it the greatest misery
not to know thy Law, let thy mercy remove this misery from me; for this is that
one thing I desire, of this I am ambitious, because I account thee my portion.
The Prayer.
O Lord, whereas the men of this World, choose their parts and inheritances in,
and of the earth, I despising these transitory good things, I have said, I have
decreed, and am fully resolved, that I would keep thy words: But, O merciful
God, I know, that without thy gracious assistance, be merciful unto me
according to thy Word, in which thou have promised to be present with those who
study to please thee, and call upon thee.

Give me grace, O Lord, seriously to think upon, and consider all my ways, to
turn my feet unto thy Testimonies; yea, and to do this cheerfully, without
murmuring; and readily, without delaying;

To this make me obedient in the day, to this in the night-season, for thy
righteous judgments, being fully persuaded, that thou do moderate all things
with a just hand, and art a just Judge, even in those things which I suffer.

Lord, a Companion of those that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.
Thou art a merciful God, Thou would teach me thy statutes; that in all things
I may know what I am to do, and by the power and persuasion of the same Spirit,
I may be ready to do it, to the honor of thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

9. TETH.
IN this Octonary, The Contents.
David being delivered from some Affliction:

1. Shows how graciously God dealt with him, both in bringing him into it, and
out of it.

2. Then he prays to God for a right judgment and knowledge.

3. And expresses his love to Gods Law.

1. verse David gives thanks for a mercy received, and acknowledges it.

1. David acknowledges Gods favor in performance of his Word to him.
Thou have dealt graciously with thy servant: Graciously in afflicting him, and
graciously in delivering him. 2. According to thy Word. Natural men will not
believe, that what God has said shall come to pass, with them, the Vision is
but wind; but godly men find, and confess every syllable true, and that it
shall take effect; of which David had experience.
2. Teach me good judgment and knowledge, Prays to be taught by God.
for I have believed thy Commandments.

1. Teach me a good judgment: For there is a judgment that is not good,
especially in this point that David now speaks of, viz. why Gods servants
should be under the Cross; for the World judges them for this miserable, and so
any man would think, till he goes into the Sanctuary of God; for then he shall
judge aright, and know the end why God suffers them to be afflicted; David then
desires that God would teach him a good judgment in this case. 2. He asks for
science and knowledge, that he may understand the mysteries of Gods Law; he
began to understand somewhat, but he desires to know more; he would have Tob
Tagnam, the goodness of taste, a true sense and feeling of what he knew, as
much as was allotted to this life; for here at most we know but in part. 3.
Protests his faith in God.
His Reason is; For I have believed thy Commandments. David brings the Reason
of his Petitions sometimes from the Attributes in God, his Mercy, Power,
Goodness, etc. Sometime from himself, as from his own love, his fear, his faith
in God, as here, I believe in thee. It is not sufficient to ask of God in
consideration what he is, but we must enquire what we are: For though he be
good and gracious, etc. yet what is that to us, if we believe not in him, love
him not, fear him not. 4. Observe how David asks here, first for a good
judgment, then for knowledge; for knowledge, without a good judgment, does much
mischief; knowledge puffs up: It Is the same that St. Paul asks for the
Philippians, cap. 1.9.
3. And having obtained by prayer a good judgment, He judges rightly of his
afflictions.
1. Before I was afflicted, I went wrong: Prosperity is the mother of Error.
2. But now I have kept thy Word. Schola Crucis, Schola Lucis: The Rod on his
back made him wiser; God then had graciously dealt with him, to afflict him;
bad men are the worse for afflictions, the good better; and this sanctifies
afflictions to them. 3. Upon which he acknowledges again what he said in the
first verse, Thou have dealt graciously; in this thou art good and gracious,
Teach me thy statutes; which is all one, Which proceeded from wicked men. These,
with teach me knowledge.


4. Now, a great part of his affliction proceeded from wicked men that were his
enemies, and oppugned him in his ways and service of God, in which yet he was
constant; these he describes in the two next verses.

1. That they were proud men, the proud. It is not without cause, Proud.
for pride is the mother of all Rebellion against God and man; Grace ever works
Humility; Pride, Contempt, Treason, etc. 2. How they warred against David, it
was with a lie. Liars.
Satan's two Arms by which he wrestles against the godly, are violence and lies;
where he cannot, or dare not use violence, there he will be sure not to fail to
fight with lies. 3. How they trimmed up their lies: Concinnarunt mendacia,
Tremell. Hypocrites.
Their lies were trimmed up with the coverings of Truth to make them more
plausible; their unrighteous dealings were covered over with appearances of
righteousness. 4. But I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart. David's
armor against them.
He would not fight against the wicked with their own Weapon, rendering a lie
for a lie, or rebuke for rebuke; but he takes himself to the Truth of Gods
Word, and obedience to him. 5. Their he art is as fat as grease: Either, 1.
Because they abounded in worldly wealth, Obdurate in prosperity.
which is well signified by grease. 2. Because they were senseless of their
condition: For the fat of all Creatures is the least sensitive; Needles thrust
into it will not be felt. 3. But I delight in thy Law.

5. But the condition of godly men is other; the godly are not proud, Good men
are tenderhearted
they are humble; afflictions make the ungodly rage, storm, and blaspheme; good
men kiss the Rod, and are ready to say with David; for their heart is not
senseless, as fat as grease; but they are tenderhearted, they melt at every
blow God gives them, and say, 1. It is good for me that I have been afflicted:
Before I was proud, Make a right use of afflictions.
now humble; before stubborn and disobedient, but now soft-hearted and
obedient. 2. That I might learn thy statutes: Learn them not by Rote, but by
experience; learn to keep them better, lest I be whipped again; learn to be more
wise, godly, religious, when the trouble is gone; and this is a sanctified
Cross. 3. And by this also I might learn to put an higher price and value upon
Gods Commands, than hitherto I have done, to which no earthly treasure is
comparable: The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, For by keeping of thy Law I
shall obtain eternal life, His estimate of Gods Law.
which gold and silver cannot purchase.


The Prayer.
O Most gracious God, though thou have brought upon us many troubles, and
afflicted us with heavy judgments, But now being put in mind of our sins, the
causes of our afflictions, we have been more attent and diligent to keep thy
Law. It is good for us then that we have been afflicted, that we might learn
thy statutes.

Go on then gracious God, That thou art a jealous God, that will visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth Generation
of them that hate thee, and show mercy unto thousands in them that love thee,
and keep thy Commandments.

And yet in these we cannot but complain unto thee of those injuries we suffer
from the hands of proud and rebellious men. Their heart is as fat as grease;
and there is nothing, but some heavy judgment from thy hand that can melt it: O
Lord, abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound them in their lies.

And confirm thy people in the Truth, that being no way withdrawn by their
delusions, nor affrighted with their malice, they may be constant, and live in
thy fear, O let the Law of thy mouth be more dear and better unto them, than
thousands of gold and silver. These cannot redeem a soul from hell, or from the
grave; but the observation of thy Law will deliver from eternal death, and
bring a man to that life which is everlasting, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our Lord.

10. JOD.
IN this Section, The Contents. 1. He prays for understanding. And persuades
it, because his creature.
David prays for understanding, comfort, mercy. 2. And uses many Arguments to
persuade God unto it.

1. In the first verse, he petitions for understanding, and labors to persuade
God unto it, because he was his Creature, made and fashioned by him.

1. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me; I am thy workmanship. etc. in my
mothers womb. 2. Therefore give me understanding: He means not the intellectual
faculty, for that every man has; but an understanding heart, a divine light,
that my mind may perfectly know, learn, approve, love thy Will. 3. Give me
understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments; learn the sense, and love the
meaning, and practice what he learned.
2. His next Argument to persuade God to this, is, Because others better for it.
the benefit that thereby would redound to others, that he ordering his life
according to that understanding that God should give him, others would thereby
be edified, and bettered in their lives by his example; for there is such a
communion and fellowship betwixt the members of Christ's Body, that they mourn,
and rejoice together; the grace given to one, is a joy to the rest.

They that fear thee, will be glad when they see me,

3. His third Argument is, his ingenous confession, Because his own fault, if
deserted.
that he himself was in the fault, and not God; if he were at any time deserted
and destitute of this divine light.

1. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, 2. And that thou, in
faithfulness, in thy justice, have afflicted me, because I have so deserved,
and therefore I complain not of thy justice, but fly to thy mercy, and say.
2. And this is his second Petition, Let, I pray thee, He prays for mercy to
comfort him. Upon Gods promise.
He had had experiment of Gods justice and equity in afflicting him for not
keeping his Law, and therefore to comfort him, he begs mercy; being destitute
of grace, he broke the Law, this disheartened him; but if again God would bestow
him so much grace, that he might keep it, this would comfort him; which, that
God might be moved more readily to bestow, he puts him in mind of his promise,
let it be according to thy Word.

2. And for this mercy he was so earnest and fervent, that he prays for it
again, Let thy tender mercies come unto me: But if we mark it, in this verse he
seeks for another kind of mercy than he sought before; then he sought for mercy
to comfort him in his troubles, now he seeks for mercy to live, and sin no more.

1. Let thy tender mercies come to me, that I may live, To live the life of
grace.
that I may live the life of grace, which is the ready way to the life of
glory, Matthew. 19.17. 2. For thy Law is my delight: To live according to thy
Will, is that I delight in.
3. A third Petition he puts up, not against, but for his enemies; He prays
for his enemies.
for shame is often the Corrector of sin; he that is ashamed of what he has
done, will not do it again; and therefore he prays in this Form.

1. Let the proud be ashamed; adding a Reason, 2. For they have dealt perversely
with me, without cause, no cause at all I gave them; but they have dealt
perversely, wittingly, and willingly; not by chance, nor out of ignorance, nor
upon inanimadvertence, but on full purpose of heart, they have wronged me, and
sought to withdraw me from the right way. 3. But I will meditate in thy
precepts. I will be constant in thy Truth still, and persevere in my integrity.
4. And that he may find comfort from the godly.
A fourth Petition he yet offers, that however he found trouble and discomfort
from the wicked, yet he might comfort from the godly: Let such as fear thee,
turn unto me, and those that have known thy Testimonies. Gods Church is a
Communion of Saints, and to them God has so distributed his graces, that one
stands in need of another; where one doubts, another light may resolve him;
one grieves, another may comfort him; one tempted, another may uphold or
restore him. David would have joined to him, and he to them, for these ends.

5. He prays for grace and sincerity.
Lastly, he petitions for that which he had often sought, grace and sincerity,
that he may nor in this, nor another life be ashamed to appear before his God.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not shamed. Hypocrisy and
rottenness of heart, will be the mother of shame; Sincerity and uprightness
will make a man bold before God and man. The righteous is as bold as a Lion.

This Section is a continued prayer, and therefore there needs no other.

11. CAPH.
IN this Section, The Contents.
David first laments, being grieved with some inward anguish. Secondly,
Complains to God of his enemies. Thirdly, Expresses his hope and constancy.
Fourthly, And prays to God for comfort and grace.

1. David complains of his heavy case.
David being in distress, and deferred of help, was sore dejected and cast
down, his soul fainted, his eyes failed, and his body pined, withered and
shrunk away, ver. 1, 2, 3. He begins in sad words.

1. Within.
My soul faints for thy salvation. As the body wanting natural helps to
refresh it, David's case. 2. Yet he despairs not.
Yet he despairs not: Yet I hope in thy Word. The delaying of thy salvation
makes me faint, but the assured hope I have in thy Word and Promise, keeps my
heart alive, and strengthens me, and comforts me. 3. My eyes fail for thy
Word. 1. My eyes especially, those of my mind are still looking up to Heaven
for help, and they are ready to fail, because the help comes not; as the eyes
do that long looks after any thing. 2. Saying, When will thou comfort me, how
long Lord? how long do thou delay me? when will the comfort come? God delays
the prayers of his servants, and his promises, that they should be the fitter
to receive.
4. I am become like a bottle in the smoke; That is dried up, extenuated, and
worn away to nothing, shrunk into wrinkles, being destitute of the comforts of
thy Spirit. 5. Yet do I not forget thy statutes. I mortify my flesh still, and
therefore being obedient, From without by enemies
I have reason to expect comfort and ease from thee.
2. And thinks the time long, till God take revenge on them.
of which he complains, asking first: 1. How long he should suffer under them?
How many are the days of thy servant? How long shall this affliction endure?
when shall the days of this tentation and misery be at an end, this
persecution be over? 2. When will thou execute judgment, he means temporal
punishments, on them that persecute me? O let me not dye comfortless, but let
me see, that thou art a God of judgment, and men behold, that there is a
reward for the righteous. 3. And in the next verse he describes them from their
qualities. 1. They were proud. Men that would endure no yoke of God, Who are,
1. Proud.
of man. 2. Subtle. They dug pits. For their advantage, Subtle.
submit to any base office, crouch and bow, Psa. 104.10. Absolon abased
himself. 3. Impious men, for the courses they took against him, Impious.
were not according to Gods Word, They dug pits for me, which were not after
thy Law. It Is some comfort yet, that we have those men our enemies, that are
enemies to God, and whose actions are displeasing to him. 4. For they are
contrary to thy Law. For all thy Commandments are true, and they a false
generation. 5. And yet these are the men that persecute me, He prays for
seasonable help.
but they do it wrongfully. 6. Therefore, O Lord, help me. Help me against
their treachery. 7. And it is but time. For their malicious cruelty is
unsatiable, but had almost consumed me upon earth. 8. The comfort yet is, that
it is not done, I forsook not thy precepts.



3. He shuts up all with a Petition that he makes often in this Psalm. He
petitions for strength.


1. Quicken me. And it may seem strange, that so often he should acknowledge
himself, as it were, a dead man, and desire God to put life into him. But to a
child of God every desertion and decay of strength, seems a death, so desirous
they are to live to God, that when they fail in it, and are dismabled, they
account themselves, as it were, dead, and pray the Lord for life. Quicken me.
And promises obedience.
2. Quicken me after thy loving kindness, he opposes Gods kindness to his
enemies malice, and it is comfortable, I am troubled with their malice for thy
sake; and therefore I crave to be refreshed by thy kindness. In that there is
comfort enough, Psa. 52.1. 3. So shall I keep the Testimonies of thy mouth. So,
that is, quickened by thee, for otherwise there was in him no strength to obey,
no more than a dead man does the actions of a natural life.
The Prayer.
O Merciful God, while that help and salvation,

Proud men, the sons of Belial, that have shaked off the yoke, They wrongfully
persecute us; when shall the days of this tentation and misery be at an end?
when will thou execute jugement on them that persecute us? Help us, O Lord, for
we hope in thy Word; arise and deliver us, this we have decreed, but to perform
this resolution of our selves we are not able, no more than a dead man is to
execute the actions of the living. Quicken us then with thy Grace according to
thy loving kindness, and infiniteness of thy mercy,

12. LAMECH.
THIS Octonary is an Encomium of the Word of God, The Contents.
and of the perfection thereof, which he commends from the immutability and
constancy thereof. 2. Then from the comfort he received from it in his trouble.

1. Gods Word immutable, both.
In the three first verses the Prophet shows, That Gods Word is immutable, by
an instance in the creatures.

1. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven: For the Heavens were made
by his Word, In heaven and earth.
and continue in the same frame, they were made by his Word to this day. 2. In
the Earth: Whose foundations are yet immovable. Thy faithfulness is unto all
Generations, 3. They, Heaven and Earth both continue this day according to thy
Ordinance. 4. The Reason is, For all things serve thee. Thy creatures they are,
and thou their Lord Creator, they then must be at thy Beck and Command.
2. It brought him comfort in his trouble.
Next he shows the excellent perfection of Gods Word, by a rare effect it had
upon himself, it gave him comfort, and kept him from despair in his trouble, he
collected it from the former instances; thus, if the Word of God sustained the
Heaven and the Earth, he saw no reason but it might also sustain him, and so
leaning upon it, he was delighted in it, and that delight held him up, he knew
it would be an Anchor of hope that would not fail him.

Unless thy Law had been my delight, This he knew he could not do, because God
had promised him the contrary; no such comfort in trouble, as Gods Word and
Promise; this will abide, when other fails.

3. Upon this comfort, he vows.
Upon which joy and comfort, first, he makes a promise of thankfulness; he had
found life in Gods Word, and he resolves never to forget it.

1. I will never forget thy precepts; that men forget them, is, because they
find no heart in them. 2. Never to let it slip out of his memory.
His Reason is, For with them thou have quickened me. He says not, the Word
quickened him, but God by his Word: For the Word quickens not, till Gods Spirit
come to it; Vitam gratiae augendo, and vitam gloria promittendo.
2. To be Gods servant.
Then next he devotes himself to be Gods servant, for the present, and for ever.

1. I am thine: And I do, and will serve no other Lord, no base pleasure, no
profit, nor the World, nor the flesh, nor the Devil; and therefore I can with a
good conscience ask, 2. O save me. It is for a Lord to protect, and save his
servant. 3. And that I am thine, is evident in this, that I am ready to do thy
Will: For I have sought thy precepts. I am thine, because I sought nothing but
that which is thine, and how I might please thee. O how few can say this, and
upon this account cry to God, O save me.
4. Which to do, David had very great reason at this time; This he had reason
to do, having many enemies, and those:
for he had bitter enemies, from whom he could not be safe, except God saved
him; two things he notes in them.

1. Diligence: Te wicked have waited for me, waited for an opportunity. 2.
Cruelty: Waited to destroy me. Their malice was so great, Diligent in mischief.
3. And here now in such an extremity, Cruel. Amidst which Gods promise
sustained him.
the comfort of Gods Word is very seasonable, the consideration of that is able
to stay a fainting soul, Psalm. 124. with which David comforts himself here: But
I will consider thy Testimonies; that thou have testified that thou art able,
and wilt deliver those that trust to thy Word, Dan. 6.16. and 22.
5. He has showed the perfection of Gods Word, in establishing and upholding
the frame of the World. 2. And then the excellency thereof, in bringing joy,
comfort, help to an afflicted soul; but in the close of this Section, he
compares it with all other things, which we esteem as excellent and perfect, be
they Riches, Honors, Scepters, Crowns, Kingdoms, etc. among which, the Word of
God has still the pre-eminence; they fail, but Gods Word endures.

1. I have seen an end of all perfection. 's Gourd is smitten with a worm; the
golden head had feet of clay, etc. The pre-eminence of Gods Word.
the fairest day is entered at night. 2. But thy Commandment is exceeding
broad: Exceeding broad indeed; for in it are contained all other National and
Municipal Laws, they being nothing else, if just, but extracts of it; or
exceeding broad, because all Laws of a good life, and the rewards of those
that keep the Law; and on the contrary, the prohibitions of all vices, and the
punishments of Transgressors are contained in it: Or, exceeding broad, because
it is the Commandment of love, which extends to God, Angels, men, enemies: Or,
exceeding broad, which is nearer David's purpose, because it extends to, and
refreshes all that are in distress and affliction, it abides by them in
tentations while they live, and forsakes them not in their death, but conveyes
them into their grave in peace, and the comfort of it abides with them for ever
when they are dissolved.
The Prayer.
O Omnipotent God, Thou have given us assurance of thy Faithfulness and Truth
in the performance of thy Word and Promise made unto thy servants, even by that
constant order and continuance which we behold in thy creatures: For why is it,
that those orbs above have been so long-lived? why are they not corrupted? why
do they continue in that excellent beauty, that thy faithfulness is to all
generations; they continue this day according to thy Ordinance; for they are
thy creatures, Thou their Lord,

We alone are thy disobedient creatures, and for this thou bring us justly
into trouble, and under these we should have fainted, and utterly perished, had
it not been from the comforts that we receive from thy Word,

I will never therefore forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened
me. I was ready even to expire and dye, till I meditated on, and called to mind
thy Law, which by the power of thy Spirit has increased grace in me, and by
the promise of glory brought me again to life: for I am environed with
malicious and cruel enemies, whom nothing can satisfy but my blood; they are
diligent, and wait for an opportunity to destroy me, and take away my life; but
thou, O Lord, have testified, that thou will deliver those that trust in thee,
and therefore I will consider in my troubles these thy testimonies.

I see an end of all perfection, Riches, Honors, Crowns, Kings, Friends fade
and fail, thy Commandment is exceeding broad, it extends to, and refreshes all
that are in affliction, it abides by them in tentations while they live, and
forsakes them not in their death; in life and death therefore I will adhere to
this: Take not then the comfort of thy Word out of my mouth while I live, and
never let it leave me, till it has brought me to eternal happiness, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

13. MEM.
DAVID in this Section shows his great affection to the Law of God. The
Contents. David's affection to Gods Word.
2. And the many benefits and fruits he reaped from it.

1. His affection is declared in the first verse, which he pathetically
expresses.

1. O how I love thy Law; wherein he calls God himself to be Judge of his love,
witnessing thereby, that it was no counterfeit love, but complete and sincere.
2. And he proves that which he says. The nature of true love is, to converse
with, and think on the thing beloved, and it uses all means to obtain it: So
David here proves his love to God, by the love he bears to his Law, and his
love to his Word, by the thoughts he had on it: All the day long is my
meditation in it. I think, speak, or do little else all the day.
2. The Encomium of it first.
And now he enters upon his Encomium, or praise of Gods Word, from the
admirable effects that it might have in them who will meditate in it, of which
he makes himself the instance. This he amplifies, by comparing himself with
three kinds of men, his Enemies, his Teachers, the Ancients, than all which he
grew wiser by this meditation.

1. Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies. The Law
of God being well thought on, It made him wiser than his enemies.
teaches a man what, how, where, and when to speak, or to be silent, to act,
or desist; which wisdom David's enemies wanted; he was then wiser than they. A
great controversy there is, who is the wise man, the godly man, or the
Machivilian; Gods Word will easily decide it. 2. His Reason, why he was wiser,
is: For they are ever with me, thy Commandments always by me, and at hand to
be my Counselors.
Again, I have more understanding than all my Teachers; for thy Testimonies are
my meditation: Than his Teachers.
Which though it may seem to be arrogantly spoken, yet it is not; for it is no
new thing for him that was sometimes a Scholar, to outgo and excel his Master;
yea, and there be many that will take upon them to be Masters to teach others,
that which they never learned themselves. It is of practical knowledge David
speaks, and in this it was no hard thing to exceed his Teachers.

And yet again thirdly, I understand more than the Ancients. Adam, Noah,
Abraham, etc. or any of those Ancient Worthies; Than the Ancients.
but those old men with whom he lived, who were but grandaevi pueri, being
grown in years, but not in knowledge and piety: He was wiser than their gray
hairs, because he kept Gods precepts, meditated in them, and daily practiced
them.

3. Another Encomium he gives to Gods Word, is, The second Encomium of Gods
Word.
That it is of power to keep from sin, and for that he gives an instance in
himself also.

1. I have refrained my feet. wisdom consisted not in a bare speculation, but
in practice, he refrained from evil; It keeps from sin.
he took no delight in walking in wicked ways. 2. I have refrained from every
evil way. He knows not what it is to resist sin, that resists not every sin;
that is, fights not against, and do his utmost endeavor to refrain it, and
take heed of it, and subdue it, if possible. 3. And this resistance makes us
stronger, and more able to keep Gods Word; whereas transgression diminishes
our spiritual light and strength, whence David says, I have refrained from
every evil way, that I might keep thy Word. Which he ascribes to Gods grace.

Now lest that any man should think that David ascribed this praise of
godliness to himself, or that it came from any goodness in him, that he did
refrain, he gives all the glory to God in the next verse; protesting, because
God did teach and enable him, therefore he declined not.

I have not declined, or departed from thy judgments,

4. A third Encomium of Gods Law is, The third Encomium of Gods Word.
That it brings great pleasure to those that keep it, of which David having
experience, cries out, O how sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea, sweeter
than honey unto my mouth. From the pleasure it brings to the
The words of God written in the heart, are more tasteful and pleasant to the
conscience, because they quiet it, than honey can be to the palate.

And in the last verse, he proves what he said, Conscience.
by two excellent benefits he reaped by it; the one was understanding in his
mind, Understanding.
the other sanctification of his affections.

1. Through thy precepts I get understanding; I am by them become learned,
Sanctification of the affections.
but he prefers this light. 2. Therefore; because I love thy Law, I hate every
false way; whether it be a false Religion, or evil manners; his affections were
sanctified by it, which begot in him a strong confidence, from which did arise
in his soul joy, peace, and tranquillity, which is to be preferred before all
treasures and pleasures.
The Prayer.
O Gracious God, O how sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea, and this is the
reason that those hours of the day which others mispend upon banities and
pleasures,

Through thy precepts it is, that I get understanding;

Be thou, O Lord, my Master, and perfect thy work, give me more knowledge,

14. NUN.
IN this Octonary, The Contents. The commendation of Gods Word.
David gives a commendation of Gods Law. 2. Obliges himself, and resolves to
keep it, notwithstanding all opposition.

1. The commendation he gives Gods Word, is, That it is a lamp, Thy Word is a
lamp to my feet, and a light to my ways: For the Law of the flesh and sin,
darkens the understanding; that which is the true good, is not discerned from
bad, till the Word of God is called for to be the light, to which, if men have
an eye, and follow it, they will avoid all precipices, and arrive safely at the
determinate end.

2. Of this David was assured, and therefore upon it he makes a protestation,
and binds it with an Oath:

I have sworn,

1. I have sworn, David ties himself by oath to keep it
It Is not sufficient to begin well, except we end well, and David knew our
humane frailty, and that we are apt to slip from our Duty, and therefore he
binds himself to it by a solemn Oath or Vow, viz. To follow the lamp, or light
of Gods Word. 2. Which he retracts not.
And secondly, It never repented him of it, he did not retract his Vow: I have
sworn, and I will perform it. 3. And I will keep; yea, but this was beyond
David's power: True, legally it is so; but to cooperate with Gods grace, and do
his best, it is not; and that is it which Davd vows. 4. I will keep thy
righteous judgments; for so they are in themselves, Rules of the greatest
equity, and David therefore resolves to keep them.
3. Not would, though discouraged by afflictions.
Yea, but calamities, afflictions, and many dangers accompany the profession of
Religion, and study of piety; for they that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. of this David had experience.

1. I am afflicted very much, outwardly, inwardly; and yet he was constant, and
resolved to keep his Oath and Vow. 2. So that God did enable him He desires
that God accept of his vow.
And of these two, the inward affliction was the greatest, and therefore he
prays, Quicken me, restore my decayed strength, as thou have promised.
This now was a free-will-offering, to swear and vow thus much, proceeded
freely from him, and he expects not to merit by it, but desires of God to
accept of it.

Two things he asks in this verse.

1. Accept, O Lord, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth: Let my
endeavors, vows, to keep thy Law; my invocation, giving of thanks, confession
of my sin, profession of thy Truth, patience under the Cross be accepted by
thee. 2. And teach me thy judgments. Without thy help I am not able to perform
my vow, give me therefore strength, that I may perform what I have vowed.
4. That I am resolved to keep my vow, and thy Law appears in this, that though
for it I am daily in danger of life, yet I forget it not, I erred not from thy
precepts.

1. My life is in thy hand: That is, I am exposed to a present danger of life;
And then no dangers shall affright him from his duty.
and lies upon the valiant use of his Weapon; for if he be a Coward, and resist
not stoutly his enemy, he is like to lose it; so Jeptha is said, Judge. 12.3.
and Job 13.14. 1 Samuel 28.21. 2. But yet, though death be always before my
eyes, yet do I not forget thy Law. 3. And he shows his danger by another
similitude: They have laid snares for me. What they cannot do by force and
violence, they seek to do by craft; they seek to take away my life by a snare,
as they do that hunt after wild Beasts; both which were verified in Saul that
fought against him, and hunted after his life, both by violence and subtilty he
would have slain him. 4. Yet I erred not from thy precepts: But he would not
lay violent hands on the Lords Anointed, and therefore erred not, 1 Samuel 23.
and 26.
5. He kept his resolution, and vows still; Yet constant he was.
and now he goes on to show his diligence and constancy in the study of piety,
and shows the Reason.

1. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever. Gods Law was his, 1.
Heritage.
when they compare the Word of God with other things, they account them of no
price. The honey, and the honeycomb has no sweetness; gold and silver are of
no worth in comparison of it: No, not all Canaan it self, Isreal's heritage, all
is but dung to it; they therefore David chose for his inheritance. He had but
one Patrimony or Legacy left him, which he esteems and loves beyond all. 2.
Yea, and delighted in above all: For they are the rejoicing of my heart. His
delight.
Riches and wealth bring care and fear, the Word of God joy to a pious soul;
for it is the Charter of salvation, sealed and confirmed by God; sealed by the
Sacraments, confirmed by the Oath of God, secured and delivered to us by his
Spirit, and subscribed by the blood of Christ, all which must upon necessity
bring joy of heart. 3. And upon it he concludes, And he therefore adheres to it.
That he would be a faithful keeper of this great Treasure, so long as he had a
day to live; he would cooperate with Gods Spirit. 1. I have applied my heart;
or, inclined my heart; that is, 2. To fulfill and perform. In purpose of heart
and resolution, he ever willed and desired it; in performance he might fail, To
the end.
but never in his intention. 3. Even unto the end. His motions were not taken
by starts, he was no Temporizer, whose goodness is like the morning dew; the
seed of Gods Word was rooted in his heart, and therefore as he begun well, so
he would end well.

The Prayer.
O Gracious God, in the night of this present life I am encompassed with
darkness, the Mists of ignorance do darken my understanding, and a thick cloud
arising from my affections, O let then thy Word be a lamp to my feet, and a
light to my path; that I may not wander, stumble, and fall, as it happens to
those, who adventure into dark places without a light, without a lanthorn.

And great tentations I have to fall; for they lay snares for me: And yet, O
Lord, Thou know the sincerity of my heart, nor their force, I do not forget
thy Law, yet I do not err from thy Precepts.

And that to them my resolution may be the more fixed, That I keep thy
righteous judgments. Accept, O Lord, I beseech thee, the freewill-offerings of
my mouth, those promises of obedience which I have made with a voluntary free
heart; and teach me to moderate all my actions by thy rule of equity; these I
prefer before gold and silver, these are sweeter unto me than the honey and the
honey comb; of these I esteem as my patrimony, and my heritage, Let me be nor
Hypocrite, nor Temporizer, whose goodness is like the morning dew; but grant
that the seed of thy Word may take such deep root in my heart, that it may
bring forth fruit to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

15. SAMECH.
IN this Section, The Contents.
David,

1. Declares his hatred to wickedness, his detestation of wicked men.

2. Expresses his love to Gods Law.

3. And prays for the grace of God to sustain him in it, that be may be
quickened according to Gods promise, nor frustrated of his hope, but persevere
unto the end.

Lastly, He insults over his enemies, and foretells their destruction.

1. David shows his hatred of wickedness.
David shows his dislike to all things contrary to Gods Law.

1. I hate vain inventions: Not only execution of evil, but the invention, even
the very beginnings of it. New inventions in his Worship, new glosses and
interpretations contrary to the Text, David hates; not dislikes only, His
Reasons.
His love to Gods Law.
but hates. 2. But thy Law do I love: And because I love thy Law, I hate vain
inventions. God a shield to him.
3. And there is great reason I should do so: For thou art my hiding place, and
my shield. 1. My hiding place, That public evils do not reach me. 2. My
shield, to keep off blows that are nearly made at me; in both my hope is in
thy Word.

2. To God then and his Law he would adhere in all extremities; And to ill men,
whom he avoids.
but as for all wicked men, he would be sure to sunder from them, he knew he
should get no good by their company, and therefore he turns to them, and bids
them avaunt.

1. D part from me ye evil doers; for ye are the pests of piety. 2. And your
course and mine are contrary; you go one way, and I another; you follow your
own inventions, I will keep the Commandments of my God.
3. Now David being fully persuaded that he had a peculiar interest in God, He
prays that God uphold him in this resolution.
turns himself to prayer, and not without reason; for our intentions and
resolutions are nothing, except God bless them; and therefore David prays.

1. Uphold me according to thy Word, that I may live, 2. Hold thou me up, and I
shall be safe, and I will have respect to thy statutes continually. There is in
Gods children an instability of love and obedience, apt they are to cool and
fall; necessary then it is, that they pray with David, that God uphold them in
life, He did well in hating them, by Gods example.
that they being conjoined to him in love, to hold them up when they slip and
stumble, that they fall not.
4. And that he did well in hating wicked men, he now proves it,

1. Thou, says he, have trodden down, trampled under thy feet, as vile
creatures, all that err from thy statutes. 2. For their deceit is falsehood:
They deceive themselves in their wickedness; for either they conceive, that
they need nor be subject to the Law of God, or that they look for a good in
sin, which sin promises, but they shall never find; or else they flatter
themselves with a vain hope to escape Gods judgment, which yet at last shall
certainly overtake them. 3. This last is certain, and David in the next verse
expresses so much: Thou have taken away all the wicked of the earth, as dross;
for no better they are in Gods account; they esteem Gods children for (...),
but they are so, and for such shall be dealt with, and scowred away. 4.
Therefore I love thy Testimonies; therefore, that I may avoid this judgment.
5. How by the judgments of God, he profited in the love of his Testimonies, he
showed in the end of the former verse; in this he shows how he profited in his
fear.

My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Happy is he, that by other men's harms, learns to be wise and godly. A ^on,
Whom he fears
when he sees a Slave whip't, may learn not to offend his father. The beginning
of wisdom, is the fear of the Lord; and we are to work out our salvation with
fear and trembling. Our love in this life is imperfect, and therefore it may,
nay, must consist with fear; nay, which is more, the love of God will never be
kept in our hearts, but by the fear of God; and therefore this verse is read,
Confige timore tuo carnes meas. Fasten, as with Nails, my lustful affections to
the Cross of Christ, that they have no liberty to move, to go loose, and wander
where they please, Gal. 5.24. It Is then, as if David had said, because I have
begun to be afraid of thy judgments that bring heavy punishments on wicked men,
therefore I desire to be established in this holy and filial fear, and never to
be severed from it. Overmuch familiarity breeds contempt; a true conception of
Gods Justice and Majesty begets Reverence.

The Prayer.
O most holy God, to keep thy Testimonies. Lord, I desire to be established in
this holy and filial fear, and to work out my salvation with fear and trembling.

Which, that I may bring to good effect, Lord, up^old me according to thy Word,
that I may live the life of grace. I hope in thy Word, let me not be ashamed of
my hope. stay me in all tentations, that I fall not; hide me under the shadow
of thy wings, to keep off those blows which Satan makes at me, I hate all vain
thoughts: Depart from me ye evil doers, By thy grace I stand, and by thy grace
I am what I am; O let thy grace continue with me, and accompany me through all
the changes and chances of this mortal life, till it has brought me to rest in
the bosom of my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

16. AIN.
DAVID in this Octonary, The Contents. David professes his integrity.
having made, 1. Profession of his Integrity. 2. Prays for protection against
his enemies. 3. And also for grace to know his way upon earth, and follow it.


1. He begins with a profession of his Integrity, where we may not think that
he is justifying himself before God, but only declaring how unjustly he was
oppressed by men: Defensio est, non arrogantia.

1. I have done judgment and justice. Judgment is the effect of justice, and by
the exact Rule of Justice, And prays that God leave him not to his enemies.
David had so proceeded in judging the people, that he had given to every one
his own, and yet he could not live free from the calumnies and slanders of
wicked men, and therefore he prays. 2. Leave me not to my Oppressors: And his
Petition has equity in it; for it is but equal, that he who had been so just to
others, should have justice done him: And by it, we may learn to commend a just
cause to God, if we look for his assistance.
Now in this Petition David proceeds, and uses many other Arguments to
persuade it.

1. Be surety, or undertake for thy servant for good. My enemies suspect me of
injustice and violence, but do thou interpose, and be surety for me, that it is
not true; neither that ever they shall find any such dealing at my hand; or
answer for me, when I am not by, for what they lay to my charge.
2. Let not the proud oppress me. His condition is miserable,

3. And this he does in an ardent manner, and the reason is, because he saw he
was destitute of all humane help, it was Gods help that only could secure him,
which he expected, and almost fainted in the expectation of it.

1. My eyes fail. The eyes of faith, and whole intention of my soul are fixed
on thee, and they are ready to fail, while thy help comes not. 2. My eyes fail
for thy salvation: Not only that which is temporal, in the deliverance from
mine enemies, though I vehemently desire that too; but for that salvation of
Gods people mentioned, Psalm. 106.4. and 4.6. 3. For the Word of thy
righteousness. The ground that I wait for thy salvation, is thy Promise, thy
righteous Word passed to me.
4. And he proceeds in this prayer, and desires God to deal with him, But deal
with him as an honest servant.
as with an honest servant; not which did his Will, but yet desired to do it;
and was displeased with himself, and sorrowful when he did it not; he pleads
not me^^, but mercy.

1. O deal with thy servant according to thy mercy. 2. And teach me thy
statutes, which he often asks, and is then obtained, when God infuseth so much
love into our hearts, that we know, and do his Will; for knowledge without
charity puffs up, but edifies not.
5. He asks the same again, renewes his Petition with a Reason, and this
frequent Petition of the same thing, shows his ardent desire to obtain it. I
am no stranger unto thee, but a domestic servant, and therefore bound to obey
thy Commands; let me want no grace that may enable me to serve thee. I am thy
servant, give me understanding, that I may know thy Testimonies. It is a gift
of thy donation only.

6. And now he enters his complaint, and uses that as a new Argument, He
complains of the ungodly, that destroyed Gods Law.
that God hear him.

1. It is time for thee Lord to work; to do judgment against the wicked. To us,
there is a time when God seems not to work, in that he executes not his wrath
against the wicked, David, That God would arise and work; for a time it is,
when his Church is in a public trouble; the sins of the Amorites full, and his
people brought low. 2. For they have destroyed thy Law: Not only broken it,
disgraced; but cast it aside, and destroyed it. A time then it is to work, and
execute now; made it void.
7. Which David was zealous to preserve.
But their malice and endeavors were not so great to evacuate and destroy Gods
Law, as David's zeal and affection was bent, and inflamed for the preservation
of it, which he uses as another Argument, that God would not leave him in the
hand of his Oppressors, ver. 1. Therefore I love.

1. Therefore. David was no Temporizer in Religion, therefore I love thy Law.
2. I love thy Law. He says not he fulfilled it, but only he loved it; it is a
good progress in godliness, when we come thus far, that we can say with David,
I love thy Law. 3. And shows his love to it.
And that he might show the greatness of his affection, he mentions those
things which are most loved; gold, fine gold, or jewels; to which his love was
not so great, as to Gods Commandments. I love thy Commandments above gold, yea,
above fine gold.
And he insists upon this point, his love to Gods Law. What, would they make it
void, and cast it aside? This makes me the more esteem it, and judge that there
is the more excellency in it.

1. And his estimate of it.
Therefore I esteem all thy precepts, concerning all things, to be right. He
had an high estimate of Gods precepts, he thought them just in all things;
just, because they prescribe nothing but that which is exactly just; and just,
because they bring a just punishment on the Transgressors, and a reward to the
righteous. 2. Therefore I hate every false way: Nor one way, but every way of
sin, and the flesh; many they are, but he hates them all; and his hatred arose
out of the justice and equity he perceived to be in Gods Law, therefore I hate.
The Prayer.
O Most Omnipotent God, I can no way excuse my self before thy Tribunal for my
manifold breaches of thy Law: For I have sinned against Heaven, and against
thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son; but to man I have done no harm,

It is time, O Lord, to work; thy Church is oppressed, thy people are brought
very low, the sins of the Amalekites are at the full; their impiety is grawn to
that height.

It is now then a time to show thy self; Arise, O Lord, and take a Just revenge
upon them, for this their audacious impiety and malice.

It must needs be good which they hate, their malice therefore has inflamed my
zeal: They would destroy, therefore I love thy Commandments: I love that Law
which I break, I love it above gold, yea than much fine gold. By it I learn to
do that which is just, by it I learn to hate every evil way, therefore I set an
high estimate upon every particular Command in it. Lord, increase this zeal,
this love, this esteem, this hatred in me, that I may direct my conversation
aright, so please thee in every one of thy Commands on earth, that after this
life is ended, I may live with thee in heaven for ever and ever. Amen.

17. PE.
IN this Octonary David praises Gods Word. 2. Shows his affection to it. The
Contents.
3. And prays for Grace to keep it.

1. The Elogy he gives Gods Word in this verse, David's Elogie of Gods word:
that it is wonderful.


1. Thy Testimonies are wonderful. For though the literal sense of them be
easy and plain, yet wonderful are the Mysteries contained in the two
Testaments. Great is the Mystery of Godliness. The whole Ceremonial Law is
wonderful, because under those Ceremonies were obscurely shadowed out to us,
the Mystery of our Redemption by the Blood of Christ. The Decalogue is
wonderful, written in so few words, in which yet are hid all the principles of
Justice and Charity, to which may and must be reduced all the just Laws that
have been, or shall be made. All these are but Conclusions and Determinations
of the Laws of the Decalogue. And must receive their trial by it. As for the
Mysteries of the New Testament, no man can say, but they are wonderful. 2.
Therefore does my soul keep them. Learn them, love them, That it illuminates.
practice them.
2. The next Elogy he gives Gods Law, is, that it is the Word of Illumination.
Yea, the very 1. Entrance into it such, the very first declaration of it, 2.
The entrance of thy Word gives light. It is a light shining in a dark place, 2
Pet. 1.19. without it then men walk in darkness. 3. It gives understanding unto
the simple. The Simple.
Not to such as are high-minded, and double in heart, that are so wise in their
own eyes, that they will examine the Mysteries of Godliness by the strength of
their own reason: but to such as deny themselves, and captivate their reason,
and submit it to the Word of God, and labor more to believe, than to reason.
These are the simple, to whom the Word of God gives understanding, of whom our
Savior speaks, Mat. 11.25. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.25, 26, etc. 4. And now,
says David, I being one of these simple ones, Opened my mouth, and panted. For
which David pants, and longs.
1. I opened my mouth, by prayer, as desirous of this good Spirit of light and
piety. 2. I panted after it, as men do that want breath, and defire fresh air.
3. For I longed for thy Commandments; had a vehement intention to understand,
to fulfill them.



3. From the praises of the Law, David turns himself to prayer. He said but
now, I opened my mouth, and here he acquaints us what he said after his mouth
was open. I said, 1. Look thou upon me, either as unjustly oppressed, or under
spiritual desertion. 2. 2 He prays for Mercy, to pardon sin.
And be merciful unto me: This is well subjoyned, for God looks upon some in
displeasure. Show me mercy, who labor under the burden of thy precepts, that
by my own strength I cannot fulfill. 3. As thou usest to do unto those that love
thy Name, show me at least so much mercy as thou affordest to others, let not
thy custom be broken in me, but do by me, as thou usest to do by thy friends,
which love thee in sincerity and truth.


2. And Grace to be kept from sin.
This was his first Petition for Mercy, and to it he subjoins a second for
Grace. Many seek for Mercy to forgive sin, that seek not for Grace to deliver
them from the power of sin; David prays, 1. Order my steps in thy Word, that
is, my whole conversation inwardly and outwardly let me be ordered by thee, for
as our director, such will be our actions. 2. And let not any iniquity have
dominion over me. Let me be no slave to sin and Satan, in captivity to them, so
that they domineer over me.
3. And deliverance from Calumnies.
And yet he makes a third Petition. Gods children have not only to wrestle
against the sin that dwells in them, but with enemies from without; Oppressors,
David prays, 1. Deliver me from the oppressions of men, that being nor
disturbed by their oppressions, nor yet dishearthed by their calumnies, I
decline from the right way. 2. So will I keep thy precepts. This favor
obtained, should not disoblige David, but bind him the more So will I keep.
It Is but an ill use of a benefit obtained by prayer, when we abuse it to
Licentiousness. How inexcusable are we?
4. And that he might have a sense of Gods favor.
A fourth Petition again he presents, that he might have a sense and feeling of
Gods favor. 1. Make thy face to shine upon thy Servant. For as the Sun by the
intetposition of a cloud is obscured, David having experience, prays, Make thy
face to shine, for then the contrary effects would follow, light and comfort of
soul. 2. And teach me thy statutes. Illuminate me.

4. David testify how he loved the Law, and now he witnesses the same by his
grief, He grieves for the wickedness of others.
his grief for the sins of others, to that use he put his tears. Rivers of
water run down from my eyes, because they keep not thy Law. The sins of other
men may become ours, if we mourn not for them, 1 Cor. 5.2. Ezekiel. 9.8.

The Prayer.
O Lord, wisdom. The proud and malicious thou do reject, and to them the Lamp
of thy Law gives no more light, than a Candle hid under a Bushel.

O make me then of an humble spirit, teach me to submit my natural and
corrupted reason to thy divine revelations, never let me think my self so wise
in my own eyes, that I need not the teaching of thy Spirit, so shall I hope to
understand the wonderful things of thy Law, in prayer, never did any man that
is anhelous and almost stified, more labor for breath, than I have panted for
this grace, for I have exceedingly longed and desired to come to a right
understanding of thy Commandments.

Behold I turn my prayer unto thee, be thou converted and look upon me, deal by
me, as thou art wont to deal with thy friends and dutiful servants, for I
desire to be in that number, though, O Lord, I must needs confess my self to be
an unprofitable servant. That I may be better hereafter, order my steps,
dispose and direct all my affections and actions according to the eract rule of
thy Word, and never permit any iniquity to have the dominion over me. Though to
my grief it will dwell, yet never let it reign in my mortal body, or so far
domineer, that I obey it in the lusts thereof. teach me thy most just Statutes,
without the knowledge of which I can expect neither protection from thee, nor
felicity.

To withold and deter me from my duty to thee, I find too many impediments,
tentations I have from men, who scoff and mock at me, because I keep thy Law,
that calumniate and detract from my good name, because I adhere to thy Truth,
that oppress and undo me, keep thy precepts. These are bitter enemies to thy
truth, and sons of Belial, they have broke the yoke, and cast often thy bonds, my
soul shall mourn in secret, Rivers of water shall run down my eyes, because
they keep not thy Law. Turn, Lord, even to these, if it be thy good pleasure,
and turn them to thee, for they are thy creatures, and bear thy Image; true it
is, that they have defaced it by rebellion, but thou can restore it by thy
Spirit, which if they shall go on to ver and grieve, to rebel and provoke
while he is at his work, then number them to the sword, and bow them down to
the slaughter, because when thou calledst, they would not answer, when thou
spakest, they would not hear, but continued to do evil before thy eyes, and did
choose that, wherein thou did not delight. Make them know that there is a God
in Israel, that will avenge his own cause, and protect his people, and get
himself glory upon his enemies. But let thy servants sing for joy of heart, and
rejoice in thy salvation for ever and ever.

18. TSADDI.
IN this Octonary David again commends the Law of God from the Author, The
Contents.
from the equity contained in it, from the purity, and perpetuity of it. 2. The
consideration of which wrought in him zeal and love to it, a care to remember
it, and a joy and delight in it. 3. Notwithstanding all opposition.

1. David being rempted to impatience and distrust at the prosperity of the
wicked, David in trouble comforts himself with Gods justice.
comforts himself with the consideration of Gods righteous Nature, Righteous
art thou, O Lord; Thou alterest not with times, thou changest not with persons,
thou art always unto all the one and the same Righteous God.

2. He commends Gods Law as just.
And just are thy Judgments, in giving rewards, and distributing punishments;
righteousness is so essential to thee, that thou can no more defraud the
godly of their promised comforts,

2. And from a righteous God has proceeded a righteous Law. For God forbid
that the Judge of all the world should do unjustice.

The Testimonies which thou have commanded, are exceeding righteous, and very
faithful. So that God is not only just in himself, and just in his
retributions, but that very Law which he has commanded us to keep, contains in
it exact justice. The Laws of men may be unequal, but Gods Law has in it
nothing but equity and Truth; it gives liberty to no injustice or iniquity.

3. Shows his zeal to it.
Now the first affection that this consideration wrought in David, was an
ardent zeal; it angered and grieved him, that so just a God should be
dishonored, and so just a Law forgotten.

1. My zeal has even consumed me. My zeal to thy Law, and he expresses the
cause. 2. Because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. I did even pine away
for grief and anger that men should be so profane to forget so just and useful
Laws.
4. Commends it as pure, like tried gold.
And now he returns to a another commendation of Gods Law, and shows another
affection that from thence arose in him, to wit, love.

1. Thy Word is very pure, or proved most pure. It Is like gold that is tried in
the fire, from which all dross is by melting purged, Psalm. 12.6. Upon trial
Gods law will be found to be far from all injustice. Unjust he is not, when he
chastises his children, for there is sin in them; nor unjust he is not, when
he suffers the wicked to flourish, for it is their portion. Luke 16.25.
Righteous are thy judgments. 2. And shows his love to it.
And this raised in David another affection, viz. Love. Therefore thy servant
loves it. Love in God is the fountain of all his benefits bestowed on us, and
love in man is the fountain of all our service and obedience to our God. Love
is such a duty, that it cannot be excused in any, without which, all that we
can do in his service, is nothing. He must love Gods Law, because it is his
Law, and a just Law, that means to keep it: for Love is the fulfilling of the
Law. 3. A third effect that this wrought in David, was, a careful remembrance
of it, yea albeit he was in a mean estate, and for it despised by his enemies.
1. I am small, the youngest and least among my brethren. 2. And his care not to
forget it no not in sad times.
And despised, and little set by, by my brethren, Saul, etc. 3. Yet do not I
forget thy precepts, nor my poverty, nor contempt can bring me to that pass,
that I forget my duty to thee. Many there are who will profess Religion as
long as they see peace and honor followit, but rather than they will endure
trouble and contempt, will utterly forsake it. Thus did not David, he kept in
memory Gods Law. And indeed the first step of defection is to forget what God
has commanded, for upon this the transgression easily follows.

5. He commends it from the perpetuity of it.
And here he interserts a fourth commendation of Gods Law, viz. The
immutability, perpetulty, and eternity of it. It is immutable, and may never be
dispensed with, it is a righteousness, and it is everlasting.

1. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness. No man may change it,
no man may dispense with it, so long as the world stands, so long it must be
ruled by it. 2. Thy Law is the Truth. The Truth (...), it has the priority of
all Laws in this; it contains no falsehood, the promises and threats in it
shall certainly be fulfilled.
6. Upon which he makes mention of a fourth effect that it produced in him,
Therefore he joys and delights in it, in his tribulation.
viz. joy and delight, yea, non obstante, all his troubles and sorrows.

1. Trouble and anguish has taken hold upon me. The righteous are often under
the cross, that sin may be subdued, 2. Yet thy Commandments are my delights:
Yet, even in this great tribulation, the meditation of thy truth contained in
thy Law does delight me; it is the remedy against all my afflictions to call to
mind what thou have promised, This is it that sanctifies all afflictions to me,
and makes me rejoice in them.
7. He repeats both. And desires understanding in it.
The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting, and adds only his
accustomed Petition unto it. 2. Give me understanding and I shall live. Live
and revive in all my troubles. It is no life that men have, who are destitute
of this knowledge, they live uncomfortably, and therefore the Word of God is
contemned by none, but such as know not the excellency thereof, and the comfort
it brings.

The Prayer.
O Lord thou art a righteous Judge, and thy justice is so essential to thee,
Thou art upright in thy judgments, even in those stripes thy children receive,
and in all those plagues the wicked receive at thy hands. O Lord we confess
that for our sins we justly have deserved to receive those blows, and yet we
comfort our selves in this, that these chastisements are to be but temporal,
whereas the stripes of the wicked are like to be eternal. They may escape thy
anger and flourish here, but they shall never fly from the wrath to come.

Now from this eternal justice which is in thee, has proceeded thy Law, which
is a Law of equity, for the testimonies which thou have commanded, a Law of
truth having no admi^tion of vanity or falsehood,

It is not unknown unto thee, how I have been consumed with grief, and inflamed
with anger, because ungodly men have forgotten thy words, and an inflamed soul
to thy truth, and so I shall live quietly in the midst of my calamities, and
cheerfully end my days in thy sear, and by thy favor be brought at last to a
safe harbor in heaven by Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

19. KOPH.
DAVID in this Octonary fervently petitions for Audience, The Contents. David's
prayer.
Deliverance, increase of grace.

2. The end he desires it, is, to keep, to observe, and meditate on Gods Word.

3. His main reason to persuade it, is, Gods mercy, and the danger he was in,
by mischievous enemies; from whom nothing could deliver him, but Gods goodness,
of which he had had former experience.

1. For his prayer, it was very well conditioned.

1. I cried; and again, ver. 2. I cried. 2. I cried with my whole heart: Toto
affectu, totis viribus. 3. Seasonable and continual, he did persevere in
prayer. 1. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried. 2. Mine eyes
prevent the night; morning and evening he prayed.

2. For audience, deliverance, increase of grace.
That which he prayed for, was, 1. Audience: Hear me, O Lord: And again, Hear
my voice, ver. 5. 2. Save me, ver. 2. 3. Quicken me, ver. 5.


3.

1. That he might keep Gods statutes.
First is, That he might keep Gods Statutes: Hear me, I will keep thy Statutes.
2. Save me, that I may keep thy Testimonies, ver. 2. 3. I prayed and watched,
that I might meditate in thy Word, ver. 4. 4. Quicken me according to thy Word,
for the self-same end, ver.
4. His arguments to persuade it.
The Arguments he especially uses, besides the former, to move God to hear and
grant his Petitions, are: 1. I cried, because I waited, and hoped in thy Word
and promises. His faith.
2. Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness. The common Argument to be
used by all Gods children; Gods goodness.
for were they never so righteous and just, yet in mercy they must desire to be
heard, and not for their merits. 3. The danger that he was now in by
persecuting enemies. 1. They draw nigh; they are at hand, the danger is near.
2. The danger he was now in. His comfort, that God was near him.
Yea, and great too; for they are mischievously bent, they follow after
mischief, hunted after all occasions to do evil. 3. Most impious men, they are
far from thy Law, they hate it, shun it, labor to make it odious in every eye.



5. But the comfort is, that they are not so near, but thou art as near; they
to do mischief, but thou to defend me; let then their number, power, malice, be
what it will, thy power and mercy is beyond it.

1. Thou art near, O Lord; let then these my enemies be far from thy Law, they
cannot be far from thee, And would not desert him.
and this is my comfort. 2. For all thy Commandments are Truth. Albeit the evil
of wicked men follow me, because I follow thee, yet I know thy Commandments are
true; and it is not possible, that thou should desert thy servants, who stand
to the maintenance of thy Word; their wickedness shall never escape thy hand of
punishment; they may punish my body, but they cannot deprive me of my Crown of
glory.
6. He concludes with an Epiphonema, Of which he is confident.
being assured upon his own experience of the stability and immutability of
Gods Word; I know thy Commandments are Truth; for, 1. Concerning thy
Testimonies, thy Will that thou have testified in thy Word. 2. I have known of
old, even ever since I began to look into them, study them, and practice them.
3. That thou have founded them for ever: They are of eternal Truth, immutable
and indispensable; and this is the Anchor of our souls, that we be not carried
away with the winds and waves of tentations.


The Prayer.
OVL of a vehement desire I have cried to the Lord for help, and that not only
with my tongue and voice, but with my whole heart; and according to that equity
by which thou usest to proceed with all those that love thee, and call upon thy
Name; quicken me with the sense of thy savor, and deliver me from this
imminent death and danger.

And the impiety of my enemies makes me be the more instant to obtain this
mercy; for they that persecute my soul, are set upon mischief,

20. RESH.
IN this Section David petitions to God for help in his affliction. The Contents


2. Complains of the multitude of his persecutors. 3. Laments their condition.
4. And shows his constancy and love to Gods Word.
1. David in his affliction prays to God.
David begins with a petition. In afflictions it is some comfort to us, to have
our case known, considered and examined, especially by those that love us,
therefore David desires: 1. Consider my afflictions; so much at least. To help
him.
2. Then that he would help him: Deliver me from my tempting enemies. 3. His
Reason to persuade both: For I do not forget thy Law; though I perfectly keep
it not, yet I have not cast it behind my back; I do not forget it, I desire to
keep it: This he could plead with a good conscience, if not what he had done,
yet what he would have done; therefore he could boldly make this request,
Deliver me. 4. To be his. Advocate.
But yet he goes further, and desires God to be his Advocate; to him he
appeals. 1. Plead my cause, and deliver me. At the bar of men, a just cause
oftentimes miscarries for want of a good Advocate, 2. And quicken him.
Quicken me according to thy Word: For thy promise made in thy Word concerning
the reward of good men, and punishment of bad, quicken me, put life into me, by
refreshing me by the life of grace, and comforting me with the hope of the life
of glory.



2. He beleves he shall be heard, because no wicked person.
Were I a wicked person, this I could not hope from thee, nor grace, nor glory,
nor help, nor deliverance; I could not be persuaded, that thou would either
consider, or plead my cause, or pass any judiciary sentence in my favor.

1. From whom salvation is far removed.
For salvation is far from the wicked. In the former Section, he said, They are
far from thy Law; of which the consequent is, That salvation is far from them.
Gods Law then must be kept by him that looks for salvarion: If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments, Mat. 19. Do this, and live. 2. And this
David's Reason confirms; For they seek not thy statutes: Saved they cannot be;
Because they seek not Gods Law.
for they do not so much as seek to know thy Will, the way of salvation; they
esteem it not, make no account of it, and therefore no wonder if they seek it
not; for men seek after that they esteem; this is a sin, of which a good man is
never guilty; transgress he may, and does, yet he is always seeking what is
the mind of God, and will find it if he can, and live thereafter.
3. And yet he desires mercies
In which, notwithstanding all his seeking and finding he still fails, and
comes short, therefore he flies to Gods mercies, with David in this place,
Great, or many, Two Epithites he bestows on Gods mercies, and we need both.
Which are great and many.


1. Great, or many; for our sins are great and many. Great they are in
continuance, they endure for ever; great in extension, for they they are above
all his works; and also many they are: There is his preventing mercy, his
sparing mercy, his pardoning mercy, his renewing mercy, his continuing mercy,
his crowning mercy; there is a multitude of them, Psalm. 51.1. 2. And as they
are great, so are they tender. Racham, loving mercies, Tender.
and easy to be entreated; they flow from his bowels and inward affection,
they are miserationes as well as misericordiae, pitiful mercies, tender, as is
the Matrix of the mother to the infant. 3. Quicken me according to thy
judgments. To quicken him.
David found the life of grace in him dulled, deaded, hindered, impugned,
therefore so often he desires that God would quicken him.
4. And now he begins to complain; it is not without reason, He complains of his
persecutors.
that I desire to be quickened, and to have new life put into me; for, 1. Many
are my persecutors, and mine enemies; many Devils, many men, many visible, more
invisible that go about to mortify me. 2. And yet I remain constant; yet I do
not decline to the right hand, But is yet constant to Gods Law.
nor to the left, I swarve not from thy Testimonies. It is no great matter to
cleave to the Law of God, when none pursues thee for it, when Authority allows
it, when honor and prosperity follows it. When the Lord gloried of his
servant Job, remember Satan's answer, Does Job serve God for naught? etc. But do
this and this to him, and he will blaspheme thee to thy face: But he was
deceived; for the more Job was cross't, the more he cleaved to the Lord; and so
must a good man endure the fiery trial, resist men to blood, never decline or
swarve. 3. And a second strein of his complaint is, The qualities of his
persecutors. For which he grieved And appeals to God for the Truth of it.
but they were injurious to his God. 1. They were Transgressors; not simple
sinners, but workers of iniquity. 2. Now this was it that went near his heart,
that his God should be dishonored by them, and his Word contemned. I beheld
the Transgressors, and was grieved; so before, ver. 139. 143. He took not so
heavily his own persecution, as the injury done to God. An admirable Argument
it is of love, when the Glory of God, and his Word, is dearer to us than our
lives. It was so in Eliah, in the Martyrs, in David, that melted away for grief
to see wickedness exalted, and Piety and true Religion trod under foot.



5. This was I say an evident Argument of his love, and for probation of it, he
appeals to God, desiring the Lord to consider it, whether it were so or no.

1. Consider: Vide. No man dare say to God, look upon me, And desires him to
consider it.
but he that is persuaded that God will like him, when he looks upon him; for
he that does evil, hates the light, and flies, as did Adam, that hid himself.
It is an Argument of a good conscience, when we dare present our heart to God.
2. Consider how I love: It is not consider how I perform; the comfort of a
Christian while he lives in this body of sin, is rather in sincerity, And the
love he bears to Gods Law.
and fervency of affection, than in the absolute perfection of his actions; for
though he may fail oftentimes in his actions, yet love in his affection still
remains. 3. And his love is to the precept. He loves the Law, because it is
Gods Law, from a just God, and just in it self. To love the promises of God, is
no such great matter; for every man out of that love he bears to himself, will
be in love with these; but to love Gods Law, which is contrary to, and
restrains our corrupt nature, is a great denial of himself, and a manifest of
true love, so it was in David, I love thy precepts. 4. Therefore he petitions
again for comfort.
And upon this he presses on his Petition: Quicken me, O Lord, according to
thy loving kindness: As if he said, Aequum est, it is but Reason thou be kind to
me, and quicken me, since I grieve for the Transgressors, and love thy Law.
6. The Encomium of Gods Law; viz.
Now for the confirmation of his constancy, he concludes with a commendation of
Gods Law and Truth: But these words are read, or may be translated two ways,
and they will have two senses; for if we read: 1. Thy Word is true from the
beginning, then the meaning is, That when in the beginning thou command
Adam, not to touch the forbiden fruit under pain of death, since thou have
verified thy Word, for all men are since mortal. 2. But if we read, The
beginning of thy Word is true. Caput verbi tui veritas. Vatab. The sense is,
Thy words proceed from Truth, as from their Principle and Fountain, and
therefore are most true; the very garland and head of them is verity.


Two things he attributes to the Word of God, Truth and Righteousness, and they
both serve very well to his present purpose, to confirm him in his Petitions
and constancy, notwithstanding his many persecutors.

1. Truth.
Thy Word is true from the beginning: Which persuasion is the mother of all
obedience and faith; Peter wishes us to rely, because it is a most sure Word,
2 Pet. 1.19. The sure mercies of David. God will not fail his people, but
according to his Word, so it shall be. 2. Eternal justice.
And every one of thy righteous judgments endure for ever. A reward remains for
the righteous, and a punishment for the wicked; and with this assurance also
David sustained himself against the delay of judgment against wicked men, viz.
A meditation of the eternal righteousness of Gods judgments; he collected, That
for the present they might be spared, but at length they would be punished,
seeing Gods judgments are everlasting.
The Prayer.
O Lord, our afflictions at this time are great, and our dangers are great, we
humbly therefore beseech thee to look down from thy holp Heaven, and to
consider our present trouble, deliver us, good Lord, from our enemies, for we
do not forget thy Law; though we cannot perform it, yet we have an especial
regard to it, and always keep it in memory, desiring that our performances
might be answerable to our destres. Thou which art a just Judge, and to whom
all judgment does belong, and to whom I have committed my cause, plead my cause
against mine Adversaries, according to thy promise, quicken and revive my
heart, that is very much cast down by their insolences.

Did my heart incline to any evil way, I durst not appear in thy presence, or
expect so great a favor from thee; As they are far from keeping thy Law, so
also is salvation far from them; when they seek not, nor esteem thy statutes,
they cannot expect to be partakers of those promises which thou have made to
them that do seek them: But thou, O Lord, know how I seek both them and
thee,

The discomforts I have are infinite, men and Devils, Consider then, O Lord,
how I love thy precepts, and according to thy loving kindness deal with me, and
assist me, and quicken me with thy grace, that no tentation prevail over me.
for whose transgressions my heart is grieved, because they keep not thy Word;
which is a Word of Truth and Righteousness. Never suffer me to decline from
this Truth, ever cause me to rely upon this Righteousness; let me not be
seduced by Errors, nor be discomforted with the prosperity of wicked men, whom,
though thou sparest for this present, yet will at last pour upon them thy full
Wols of vengeance, because thy righteous judgments endure for ever. O Lord, get
thy honor upon thy enemies, but let the sure mercies of David never fail thy
Church and people, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, our only Lord and Savior.
Amen.

21. SCHIN.
DAVID in this Section shows his love to the Law of God. 2. The Contents?
David shows his love to Gods Law.
And the perfection of his love.

1. The first sign of his love was, that notwithstanding he was persecuted for
Gods sake, yet he still was constant in his obedience to God.

1. Princes have persecuted me. Saul, Ishbosheth, Abner his son, The signs of
it 1. His constancy to it.
Absolon sought his life. It is a great tentation to sustain injuries from any
man, but if from Princes, a greater; to persist and be constant then, a notable
Argument of love and fortitude. 2. Without a cause. Causes indeed were
pretended, but none found: He spared Saul's life, when he might have slain; wept
over Abner, mourned for Absolon. 3. But my heart stands in awe of thy Word.
This was the sign of his love, this caused him to spare Gods Anointed, revenge
Ishbosheths death, etc. Though Princes degenerate, and become Tyrants, Touch
them not, let Gods Word awe thee.
2. The second sign of his love, is his joy and delight he took in Gods Law.
His joy and delight in it.
He tells us, that his joy in it, exceeded that of men, victorious in battle,
that returned laden with spoils, Isa. 9. David a Soldier and Conqueror,
could well tell, what joy that was, and yet he prefers this, because it brings
better tidings: I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoils.

3. A third sign of love to it, was his hatred of all iniquity, His hatred of
false ways.


I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I love.

It was no lite disliking of sin; for a cold hatred of evil in time will be
turned to liking, no simple refusing of evil, but an indignation against it, a
hatred, an abhorrence. Ye that love the Lord, hate that which is evil; for no
man can serve two Masters.

4. A fourth sign of his love, was his fervor, earnestness, His frequency to
praise God.
and frequency of praising God.

Seven times a day do I praise thee, The joy he took in Gods Saints, and their
peace and prosperity


5. A fifth sign of his love, is the content he took, that not only himself,
but others also were the better for loving of it: He loved Gods Saints, as well
as his Law; to these was, 1. Great peace have they that love thy Law, joy,
prosperity; no peace to the wicked. 2. And nothing shall offend them, or they
shall have no stumbling block. Scandalize they will not actively, nor be
scandalized passively; for that is offense taken by weak Christians, who upon
ignorance think that unlawful, which is lawful; or of Pharisees, who interpret
that to the worse part, which they ought to interpret to the better: But they
which love the Law of God, know why they love it; they are perfect in charity,
nor weakling, nor Pharisees, and therefore they shall have no stumbling block.


2. He shows the perfection of his love.
And now he shows the perfection of his love in the three last verses.

1. Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation. By his hope.
2. His obedience.
By his obedience, and done thy Commandments, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me, etc. 3. And
this he repeats in the next verse, My soul has kept thy Testimonies, Si amor
operari renuit, amor non est. 4. And yet again. 1. I have kept thy Precepts and
Testimonies. 2. But this is upon another Motive, which is proper to perfect
men, viz. Gods eye; for all my ways are before thee, coram te. Gods presence
over-awed him; whatever he did, he did as in Gods sight, well knowing, that he
saw all. Walk before me, says God to Abraham, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.

The Prayer.
O Omnipotent God,

Go on gracious God, and assist me with thy Spirit, that I may ever rejoice in
thy Word; Seven times a day, as often as I think of it, move my heart to praise
thee for all thy righteous judgments. In these thou have showed thy self a just
God, for there is no peace to the wicked; who, though they lay snares for me,
and cast stumbling blocks in my way, yet, good Lord, let me be so confirmed by
thy grace, that I be not offended at it;

O Lord, I have looked for thy salvation, and I know that I cannot be saved,
except I do my duty both to thee and my neighbor, Amen.

22. TAU.
IN this last Section David prays, gives thanks, confesses his errors, The
Contents.
and craves mercy, and promises obedience to Gods Commandments.

1. He first prays in the two first verses; in which, David prays,
1. He prays for his prayers, desiring God to accept them, For his prayers.
which is a very necessary duty. 1. Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord.
2. Let my supplication come before thee. Luke 11.
2. That which he prays for, is understanding: 2. And deliverance. 1. Give me
understanding; which he limits, according to thy Word, Understanding.
thy promise, Psalm. 32.8. That I may know, fulfill, and by my obedience, obtain
life eternal. 2. Deliver me according to thy Word. The end of understanding,
Deliverance.
is to be delivered from sin: John 8.36. If the Son shall make you free, you
shall be free indeed.



2. He gives thanks; he proceeds to the other part of prayer, He gives thanks.
Thanksgiving.

1. My lips shall utter praise: His thanks should not be smothered, 2. And his
lips should proclaim the equity of Gods commands; but yet so, that he were
first taught and helped by grace: My lips shall speak praise, when thou have
taught me thy statutes. 3. And yet again: My tongue shall speak, or entreat of
thy Word, to the edification of others; and the Reason, why he would speak in
their hearing, was, Because all thy Commandments are righteousness, and so most
forcible to reform all unrighteousness; there is corruption in Religion, and
confusion in manners, when Gods Word is not heard.
3. And now he sets to prayer again; for having made promises of thankfulness,
He prays again for help.
he seeks help of God to perform them: Our sufficiency is not of our selves, to
will and to do are of him; he therefore prays: 1. Let thy hand help me, thy
power, thy wisdom. 2. For I have chosen thy precepts: Optima ratio; without
which, His Reasons.
no help from God to be looked for. 3. And yet he adds two more, both his
desire and delight. 1. I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord: Obedience.
Gods children are not satisfied with the beginnings of mercy, still they wait
and seek, and long, His earnest desire.
and sigh, and thirst, and hunger, and long for more; salvation they have but
in promise, they long for the accomplishment. 2. His delight in Gods Law.
And thy Law is my delight; which well follows on his longing; for these two
are well conjoined, salvation and Gods Law: For all the hope we can have of
salvation, is the promise we find in Gods Word, and the delight we take in
performance of it. I have chosen thy precepts, longed for thy salvation,
delighted in thy Law, therefore let thy hand help me.



4. He prays again for prolongation of life.
And yet farther he proceeds in his Petition for prolongation of this life, say
some; for eternal life, say other; both may very well stand together.

1. Let my soul live; not only a natural, but a spiritual life; which is
properly the life of the soul, and the way to that life which is eternal. 2.
And it shall praise thee; which should be the especial work of the soul here,
and shall be the great employment in Heaven. 3. And let thy judgments help me:
Let thy judgments which I have kept, be a comfort unto me, and help me, when I
appear before thy Tribunal; For I know thou will judge every man according to
his works.
4. He relies not on his obedience.
And yet David relies not on these; he knew his works were not perfect, and
therefore in the last verse: 1. He confesses his Errors. 2. Desires mercy. 3.
And protests his obedience. 1. For he confesses his errors.
I have gone astray, like a sheep that is lost: Erravi, I learned it from Adam,
his corrupt nature adheres to me, has and does seduce me, and I yet to my
grief follow it; so much I confess against my self, notwithstanding all my
sincerity, all my diligence, my seeking, purpose, resolution to keep thy Law.
Erroris medicina est confessio. 1. But yet my error has been out of infirmity
and simplicity, I have erred as a sheep; not as the Devil, maliciously; nor as
a roaring Lion, malapertly and presumptuously, proudly. 2. But yet my errors
have carried far from the Fold, I am that lost sheep, Luke 15.
2. Asks mercy.
And upon it I petition for mercy: O seek thy servant. Thou which art the great
Pastor, that leftest the ninty nine feeding in the Wilderness, to seek that
sheep that wandered from thee; come thou Lord, and by thy grace bring me home
again; seek me, for by thy grace I seek thee. 3. Yet protests his service.
I seek thee, where by thy grace I hope to find thee, in a sincere obedidience
to thy Will: Seek me, who am thy servant; for I forget not thy Commandments.
Though I have fallen, yet there remains some grace in me; transgressed I
confess I have, yet I have not fallen into a full oblivion of thy Will; as
David was quickened by the Word, so by it he is conserved; when he fell, the
Word wakened him; when wounded, the Word cured him; if at any time he resisted,
the Word armed him; it went then well with him, so long as he did not forget
the Word.



The Prayer.
IT is thy Command, O Lord, that we ask, seek, and knock; and thy promise is to
give and open to such, Let my cry, O Lord, come near before thee, and my
supplication be admitted in thy sight;

O spare me a little before I go hence, and be no more seen; but throughout
that little remainder of my life, let my soul live the life of grace, then I
shall praise thee, then shall my lips utter and proclaim the equity of thy
commands, That thy Commandments are righteousness, and of force to those who
will take heed to them to reform all iniquity. When I shall appear before thy
Tribunal, let thy judgments help me;

This, Lord, I plead, but not for my justification; for many are my aberrations
from thy Law, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, my corrupt nature has
seduced me, and I have followed it. O miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Thou which art the great Shepherd, that
leftest the ninty nine in the Wilderness, to seek that sheep which wandered
from thy Fold; come Lord, and by thy grace bring me home again; seek me, for by
thy Spirit I seek unto thee; and however, in simplicity and (...) I shall still
err, yet by thy assistance, maliciously and presumptiously I will no^ offend.
O Lord, keep me in the right way, and write thy Law so (...) in (...) memory
and heart, that I may bear a great affection to, and (...) Commandments.
Reclaim me from sin, and make me obedient to thy Word, for thy mercy-sake,
which thou have freely made known, and freely given to the World in thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the fifteen following Psalms called Hammahaloth, (...), or Psalms of
Ascension or Degrees.
WHY the fifteen Psalms following bear this Title, it is not certainly known,
many conjectures there are; of which the most likely are these:

1. The first is of Rabbi, David, Kimchi, and it is most generally received,
that there were fifteen steps by which the Priests ascended into the Temple,
upon every one of which the Priests standing, sung one of these Psalms,
ascending by degrees from the lowest step to the highest, and for this Reason
these were called Psalms of Ascension or Degrees.

2. A second opinion, is that of Lyranus, which is near to the former; for he
speaks not of the steps of the Temple, but of a higher and more eminent place
of the Temple, where the Levites were wont to sing these fifteen Psalms daily;
and for this, he conceives, they were called Ascensions, or Psalms of Degrees,
because they ascended unto that place to sing them.

3. Rabbi Saadias conceives, That Mahuloth had reference to a kind of Music or
Melody; and when the word signifies an Ascent, he supposes that the Levites
were thereby admonished, that when they sang these Psalms, they should sing
with a full high voice, a degree higher than usual.

4. Abenezra refers not these to the intention of the voice in singing, but to
some Tune then commonly known, to which these Psalms were set.

5. Some say they were set to be sung by the Jews, when they came out of
Captivity from Babylon, and ascended to Jerusalem: But this is not likely, if
David was the Author of them, as is generally received. More likely it is that
they were composed to be sung by the way when they went up to the Temple
yearly. For they ascended with a Pipe.

Bellarmine has this Moral of it, that we ought still to ascend and be
mounting upward from virtue to virtue, or from one degree of virtue to another,
till we come to Jerusalem which is above, and this is Nazianzenes conceit.

Junius and Tremellius prefix before these Psalms this Title, Canticum
excellentissimum; it seems to me that their meaning was to affix this
commendation, that they excel the rest, and by some degrees were to be
preferred. For certain it is, that in qualities, the more intense the quality
is, the nearer to perfection, as we say, water that has seven or eight degrees
of heat, comes nearer to the true nature of heat, than that which has but two
or three; when then usually these Psalms were called Psalms of degrees, they
were pleased to translate it, a most excellent Psalm.

The first Psalm of Degrees, being the 120.
DAVID being oppressed by the Calumnies and flatteries of Sault Courtiers,
especially of Doeg, composed this Psalm. In which he first prays. 2. Then sets
forth the mischief of a foul, false tongue. 3. Complains of his banishment.

1. The first part. David flies to God
David being in distress, implores not the help of man, but of God.

1. When I was in distress I cried to the Lord. He took the best, Prays to be
delivered.
and the right way. 2. And he heard me. So he had in all his distresses before,
and therefore he did believe he would do so now. From a false tongue.

2. And the Prayer he offered was this. O Lord I beseech thee, deliver my soul.

1. From lying lips, for from these come detractions, calumnies defamations,
etc. false testimonies, which are all against the rules of justice, and he had
reason to pray against these, for he was accused for a seditious person, a
disturber of the peace, a traitor to Saul. 3. And from a deceitful tongue.
Which under the color of friendship coucheth deceit, such a one will make you
believe he is your friend, offer you his service, that he may search out your
secrets, to do a mischif. Flattering, dissembling, fraudulent words you shall
have from him. There be lying lips without a deceitful tongue. For a detractor
does his mischief openly, a flatterer secretly, so that when a deceitful tongue
is joined with lying lips, The second part.
the mischief is intolerable.
3. David well understanding, expostulates with a kind of indignation.

1. The miscief of it.
What shall be given unto thee? Or, What shall be done unto thee, O thou false
tongue? 2. To which he answers, sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of
Juniper.
They that read the words thus, conceive the Prophets meaning to be, that a
false tongue is such a mischief, that there cannot be a greater, nothing can be
added unto it. Lingua mali pars pessima servi. Which the Prophet amplifies by
two similitudes, the first is of an arrow, sharp, and shot by a strong man. 2.
The second of coals of Juniper.

1. Arrows, which wound a far off, and on such a sudden, that it is hard to
void them. 2. Sharp arrows prepared by the Artificer, and such as pierce deep.
3. Sharp arrows of the mighty shot by a strong hand, and so much the more
dangerous. 4. With coals, they are fiery, they burn and destroy as fire, as
lightning, especially when they are instruments of the Devil, who has his
fiery darts Ephesians. 6. 5. With coals of Juniper, which of all coals are hottest,
and keep fire longest, they say, that they glow within, or raked up in ashes
keep fire a whole year.
But these words may be otherwise read, and then the sense will be other.

What shall the decitful tongue give unto thee? or what shall it profit thee?
The vanity and revenge of it.
But detractors gain nothing by it but hatred, for they make themselves
suspected and contemned by wise men, nay, even odious to them to whom they tell
the tale. (...). What shall it profit thee? What? nothing. But this is not all,
for Gods vengeance will overtake thee. Thy reward is,

It is the sharp arrows of the mighty man, with coals of Juniper.

1. The mighty man is God, 2. And shall consume thee with eternal fire, (...),
more hot and lasting than coals of Juniper 3. And now David falls upon his
complaint, and laments his case. The third part. To this the best men subject.
A case to which honest men are subject, for the more pious any man is; the
more subject he is to ill tongues. 1. Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, that
I dwell in the tents of Kedar. 1. He laments his banishment, when he was forced
to fly from Saul, Sometimes banished to live with wicked people. Which was
David's case. This he laments.
and sojourn where he could get a place to abide, even among the Syrians,
Ammonites, Philishims, and in the Wilderness to lodge in Tents, as did those
of Kedar, the Arabians. 2. These men were inhumane, barbarous, impious, such as
were the posterity of Meshech, and Ishmael. It was then all one to him to live
among those he did, as to live among them. It was a Woe to him, to live among so
firece a people, enemies to piety, and civility. And amplifies, showing the
unquiet nature of his enemies

2. And he amplifies his complaint by the continuance of the evil, and expounds
in plainer words, what he said in the former verse. My soul has long dwelt
among them that are enemies to peace. David's disposition to peace.
and therefore they hated the very name of it; (...).

3. My disposition is quite contrary to theirs, it is not like then I live a
contented life among them. 1. I am for peace. I am a man of peace. Or, Pax
eram, even peace it self. 2. But when I speak unto them thereof, or, they are
for War. As Philip of Macedon said of his Macedonians, Illis pacem esse bellum,
and bellum pacem.


The Prayer out of the one hundred and twentieth Psalm.
MAny are the afflictions and distresses, into which for my sins, thou, I have
cried unto thee, and thou have delivered me: Of which having had experience,
and now being oppressed with a heavy misery, These are very swords that wound
near at hand, and these are as arrows that wound afar off, these are shot by
the mighty, and sharp they are, deliver then, O Lord, my soul from lying lips,
and from a deceitful tongue.

Let the power of thy Word, and those sharp arrows, by which all the craft and
subtility of Satan is wounded and pierced through, be sent forth against their
impiety, and the hot coals of thy anger burn up their malicious snares, as if I
sojourned in Mesech, and dwelt in the Tents of Kedar, even the Scythians would
be more mild to me, the Sarracens more merciful; Help me therefore with thy
powerful hand, or else my pilgrimage upon earth without end will be protracted
and sadned by these evils and miseries. For they are enemies to peace, and my
soul has too long dwelt among them. Thou know, I seek peace and ensue it,
they reject all treaties thereof, and make them ready for battle. Since then
they are for War, and I and the rest of thy Servants, must hold a continual War
against spiritual wickedness in high places; do not deny, O good Father, to
those who call upon thee, thy aid and assistance, and with patience let us
fight a good fight, being assured, that from henceforth is laid up for us an
immortal Crown of glory, which thou will give unto all those that resist till
death, for the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM. CXXI.
THE Scope of this Psalm is, The Sum of the Psalm, The Prophet in trouble
flies for help.
that other helps being overweak, we put our trust in God, and in his
providence, and gives diverse reasons for it.

1. In the first verse, as most Interpreters conceive, we hear Vocem hominis,
the voice of a man in danger, that as a watchman gets him to some high Mountain
in time of War, and looks about to see who comes to aid him; Not to man.
or to a Mountain to hide himself; or to a man, that being out of his way, gets
him up to some Mountain, and views what place is near where he may repose: It
shows, that when we are in distress, we too often fly to such things that
cannot help.

I will lift up mine eyes to the hills,

2. But God.
But in the next verse the Prophet checks this vain confidence, for in it we
find vocem fidei. The voice of a faithful soul, that rejecting all confidence
in auxiliary and secondary means, reposeth his trust in God alone.

My help comes from the Lord.

3. The reasons of his confidence. 1. Gods power.
And next he sets forth the reasons why he would trust in him.

1. The first is his Omnipotency declared in his work of Creation. He is the
Lord that made heaven and earth. Able then he is to help his creature. 2. The
second from his grace and goodness. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; i.
e. he will not suffer thee to fall and slide in the way, Goodness.
but strengthen thy feet, and make them stable. Thou shall persevere in thy
course. Willing to help. 3. From his vigilance over thee. He that keeps thee,
will not slumber, Care.
so vigilant he is, that he will give his eyes no rest. verse. Behold he that
keeps Israel, To protect his Church.
shall neither slumber nor sleep, never omit his care over thee: over Israel
his people. He is asleep, says Elijah of Baal, and must be awaked, God sleeps
not. Excubias agit. 4. From the end of this his care and vigilance, it is to
keep, to protect, Israel. 1. The Lord is thy Keeper. Israel in general, To it a
keeper.
and thy Keeper in particular. A fiery Wall about his Church, and it needs,
because his Church is continually exposed to dangers. 2. The Lord is thy shade,
umbraculum, A shadow.
a quitoso upon thy right hand. He may allude to the custom used in hot
Countries, in which men use to carry, or have carried Quittasols above their
heads, to keep off the heat of the Sun. Or else to the Israelites when
traveling in the Wilderness, they had a cloud by day to cover them. Paris in
Homer fighting with Menelaus, was by Venus covered with a cloud. 3. So that the
Sun shall not burn thee by day, as it did, Jonas head, nor the Moon by night,
To preserve from all evil.
no noxious influence from the Stars. The sense of these Metaphors is, nor the
day of prosperity, nor night of adversity, shall hurt thee, nor the heat of
persecution, nor the coldness of indevotion do thee wrong.
5. In a word, he shall keep thee not from this, or that, the Lord shall
preserve thee from all evil. From all, but not from all that which may light
upon the body, but from that which may destroy the soul. He shall preserve thy
soul, that shall not perish. 6. The Prophet concludes, adding this sweet
consolation. 1. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in. He is
with his in the entrance, progress, end of their actions.
Via est vita, and we are going out in it, or coming in in it perpetually,
beginning or ending some action, going abroad, or returning and resting at
home, either we enter upon, or perfect our work to begin it, is to go in to do
it, to perfect it, is to go out of it, but the Lord promises to preserve us in
both. Or else David speaks as a soldier, who goes out to battle, when he is to
fight, and goes in when he returns home, in this God promised to preserve him;
or else as a Magistrate, who goes in and out before the people. In all which
God promises to be his Conducter, and safeguard 2. From this time forth, for
evermore. And ever with them
And this defense of God is here promised to be perpetual. In all places, in
all times, in all actions. His help is present, and efficacious, verse 4, 5.
and constant, verse 6, 7, 8.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, because while we live in this valley of tears, for vain is the
help of man. This is our infirmity, this is our sin. And while we are compassed
with this tentation, our faith presents us thee alone, a God both able and
willing to help, diffident then of all other helps, we fly to thee, we cry co
thee, being fully persuaded, that our help must come from that Lord, not from
the arm of flesh,

Lord, Israel, seem not then any longer to these greedy wolves, to slumber and
sleep, in deferring to take vengeance upon them, Where is now your God? Return,
return, O Lord, to the ten thousands which mourn in Israel, and vouchsafe to
deal with us, not as we are a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, but
as thou art in thy self, immense goodness, and clemency inexhausted.

Make thy promise good to us, and be our Keeper, be a shadow to us on our right
hand,

Keep us, Lord, in all our actions, in all tentatious, in all places, at all
times be present with us, Amen.

The third Psalm of Degrees, CXXII.
THE Ark was a Testimony of Gods presence among his people, and a Type of the
Church; this was by David brought up, and fixed at Jerusalem, when the
Jebusites were by him driven out of the Fort of Zion. To the place where that
was fixed, the people of Israel were bound to ascend three times a year to
worship, and that with gladness of heart, to which end they went up thither
with a Pipe.

David then in the person of the people.

The sum of this Psalm. 1. Expresses his joy, that he might join with the
Church in Gods service, ver. 1, 2. 2. Commends the Church, under the name of
Jerusalem, for her Unity, ver. 3. Religious Worship, ver. 4. Policy Civil,
Ecclesiastical, ver. 5. 3. Exhorts all to pray for her Peace and Prosperity,
ver. 6. And puts the Form of Prayer into their mouths, ver. 7. 4. Shows his
own readiness, and professes to do it, or rather performs it, ver. 8, 9.


1. The first part. David congratulates, that the Ark, etc. was settled.
The Proposition of this Psalm is a Congratulation, in which he does express
his joy and thanks, that so happy a time was come, in which a certain place was
assigned, where he and the people might meet and worship God, in which the Ark
of the Covenant, which was a Testimony of Gods presence, might rest; which was
not done till his time. And he took it for an assurance, that the Jewish
Religion, and the Kingdom or Scepter should not depart from Judah, till Shilo
came; and for this he does congratulate with the people.

1. I was glad. First he expresses his own joy. 2. When they said unto me. 3,
We will go into the house of the Lord, the place of his worship, where we shall
hear his Word, call upon him, give him thanks; when I hear these words from
them, I am ravished with joy. 4. And I will gladly join, and bear a part with
them. Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem. Hitherto our feet have
not had a certain place to stand and worship thee; the Ark being carried from
place to place: But now it is fixed at Jerusalem, and we know whither from
henceforth to resort, our feet are quiet, and rest, stantes, or rather
constantes, we will go up to the house of the Lord, and constantly there serve
thee; it is a mercy to know where the Church is fixed, to which we ought to
resort.
2. And upon this he takes an occasion to commend Jerusalem three ways. The
second part.


1. For the unity of it, especially in Religion, He commends Jerusalem.
expressed under the Metaphor of a City, whose buildings were well compacted
together; till the Jebusites were thence expelled, it was two Cities, but now it
was but one; For her Unity.
in which there was a great and admirable consent among the Citizens.

Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is compacted together.

In such a City the Buildings are uniform, orderly disposed, handsomely erected
and seated; so in Jerusalem, all things in Gods worship are uniform, orderly,
beautiful, and there is a wonderful harmony of minds, and consent among the
Citizens.

2. He commends Jerusalem next, that it was the place constituted for Gods
worship.

1. For thither the Tribes go up; three times a year, as was ordained, Exodus
For Gods Service, to which all Israel resort unanimously.
23. to remember their Eduction from Egypt, the Law given, his preservation of
them in the Wilderness, and conservation ever since; for these were the ends of
the three Feasts, the Passover, Pentecost, that of Tabernacles. 2. The Tribes
of the Lord: An honorable Title bestowed on Gods people; holy men out of every
Tribe. 3. Unto the Testimony of Israel; to the Ark of the Testimony: Or, as it
was agreed by Covenant betwixt God and his people, concerning which he
testified his Will, Exodus 23. and 34. Dent. 16. 4. The end of their ascending
was, To give thanks unto the Name of the Lord; that was their work, and it must
be ours, Psalm. 84.4. Gods Will is, that nunquam cesset a laud, qui nunquam ab
amore.
3. He commends Jerusalem thirdly for the Civil Policy and Ecclesiastical;
Metropolis. For the Civil Policy, and Ecclesiastical.


1. For there do sit the Thrones of judgment; the Tribunals and Courts of
Justice are there. 2. The Thrones of the house of David. The Kings Court and
Seat was there, which was established in David; and therefore the Prophet uses
the word sitting, as if he had said, now settled there; which before this time
were not: Nor in the time of the Judges, when the Judicature was in diverse
places; nor yet in Saul's Reign. David seated his Throne at Jerusalem, and with
it the Courts of Justice, which lasted till the destruction of the City.
3. The commendation being ended, he turns his speech to the Tribes that ascend
thither, The third part. He exhorts the Tribes.
and exhorts them for their own good to pray for the happy estate of Jerusalem.

1. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. It is our Duty to pray for the Church and
Kingdom, To pray for her peace.
since it is the Seat of Gods Sanctuary, and the Kings. 2. They shall prosper
that love thee. If not then for their sakes, yet for our own, let us pray for
the peace of the King and Church; for in the destruction and disturbance of
these, Justice and Religion perish, King and Priest are ruined, and then our
ruin must follow; as we know by miserable experience; whereas if we love, and
pray for these, prosperity is promised us. 3. The prayer formed to our hands.
Peace be within thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. Peace and
prosperity, two things that are especially good, and joined ma^^ happy Cities;
for peace without prosperity, is but a secure possession of misery: And again,
prosperity without peace, is but a dubious and uncertain selicity. 1. For peace.
Peace be within thy Walls. In thy walls, in which consists the strength of any
City, in the multitude of people, in which consists the strength of any
Kingdom, in thy Armies, in which consists the strength of War. 2. For
prosperity.
And prosperity within thy Palaces. In the Kings house peace, for Factions
destroys it, and with it the Kingdom and Nation: Where the King prospers not,
the people can never prosper.
4. And what the Prophet exhorts others to do, he promises to do himself. This
prayer he commenceth.
1. I will now say, peace be within thy walls; a pious Prophet. 2. Of which he
gives two reasons.
I will seek to do thee good. It shall be my study to do it; a pious King.

And he adds his Reason to both: I will say peace be within thy Walls.

1. That they in Jerusalem, are his Brethren, Companions.
For my Brethren and Companions sake. The King calls his Subjects, because of
the same Church and Religion, his Brethren and Companions; and in his Vote,
regards not so much himself, as them, peace, prosperity, abundance be within
their walls; let Jerusalem flourish for their sakes. 2. That Religion was
established.
But a second Reason there was, which yet moved him more, the religious Service
of God there established: Because of the house of the Lord, I will stek to do
thee good. Jerusalem I know is the City in which the Truth of Religion is
established and professed, and in it is the house of God, where they that
profess this Truth, must tender their worship, and therefore I will with all my
endeavor seek out ways and means to do good to Jerusalem, knowing, that in
the flourishing of that City, Religion will flourish: Nothing then shall be
wanting in me for this Reason to advance Jerusalem: I wish more Kings were of
David's mind, therefore they wear Crowns.
The Prayer out of the One hundred and twenty second Psalm.
O Lord, it was the very joy of our hearts, and the delight of our souls, when
Neighbor called to his Neighbor, Come, let us go into the house of the Lord;
but now thou have turned our joy into mourning; debarred we are to offer up our
wonted and solemn supplications to our God in thy house of prayer; our solemn
Feasts are cast aside, in which we met to praise thy Name for those infinite
benefits of our Redemption, and receive the comfortable seals of our Salvation.

O Lord, at last turn away thy wrath from us, and bring us out of this
captivity, speak peace to thy people, that sigh after thy Ordinances, and long
to appear in thy Assemblies before thee,

Thou, O Lord, have adorned and beautified thy Church with most excellent
gifts, the unity thereof was far beyond that of any City, even the Tribes of
the Lord, that they might appear before thy presence, and give thanks to the
Name of their God: And while thou were thus served in the beauty of holiness,
in Jerusalem were set the Thrones of judgment, and from the Thrones of David
justice did run down as a River: But all is quite contrary, our unity is
dissolved, our solemn meetings are disturbed; for justice, we reap nothing but
wormwood and hemlock. Lord, restore to us our former unity, and knit all the
members of this Church together in perpetual concord: Restore our Judges as at
first, and our Counselors as at the beginning; set up the Thrones of
judgment, the Thrones of the house of David, to whom alone Kingly and Judiciary
Power does of Right belong.

In the profession of true Religion, we know our peace consists; in the
prosperity of Jerusalem, we know our prosperity is involved; Jerusalem we love,
we long for, let as many then as love Jerusalem, join with us in prayer, and
say, Peace be within thy Walls, and plenteousness within thy Palaces; for peace
without plenty, is but a secure possession of misery; and plenty without peace,
an unsecure felicity.

In Jerusalem I have many Brethren and Friends, professors of the same Faith
and Religion with me, for their sakes I will now say, the house of prayer set
apart to his Service; and for this cause also, I will seek as much as lies in
me, to do thee good. Lord, accept of my poor endeavors, for the re-edification
of these broken walls, and let me never farther prosper, Amen.

PSALM. CXXIII.
THIS Psalm is a prayer of a Church in distress, and a low condition, made unto
God to have mercy upon her, and to deliver her; in which she expresses these
three things.

1. Her confidence and hope in God, for to him she flies, ver. 1. illustrated
by two similitudes, ver. 2.

2. Her prayer for mercy, ver. 3.

3. A short Recapitulation of her distress, ver. 4.

1. The first part. The Church flies to God
The Church shows her trust in God, and in it, directs us to whom to fly in
distress.

1. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes: To thee, no other, and from thee I look for
help, 2. And depends on him, as servants to their Masters.
O thou that dwell in the Heavens; by which words she acknowledges his
inspection and power: Out of Heaven the Lord beholds the Earth, and by his
wisdom, goodness, power, governs all things; Thou can take me out of the hand
of the wicked and mighty, therefore to thee I lift mine eyes.
And this the Prophet illustrates by a double similitude, of servants and
handmaids; I look upon thy hand now heavy upon me, and beating me by wicked
men. Behold, 1. As the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters;
i.e. Menservants. 2. And as the eye of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress:
Both of both kinds may be beaten. Now as they are whip't, they cast back their
eyes, and look to the hand that strikes them; begging even with their very
heart, some favor, and an abatement of stripes. 3. When beaten by them.
So our eyes wait upon the Lord our God. Gods children always are expectants.
4. Until he have mercy upon us. Abate his stripes, and take off his hand.


2. The second part.
For which the Church prays in the next verse, and in ardency of spirit
ingeminates it.

Have mercy upon us, And desires God to take off his hand.
O Lord, have mercy upon us; before she lifts the eyes, but now cries.

3. The third part.


1. For we are exceedingly filled with contempt: And again, Our soul is filled.
To suffer contempt is much, Because she was in contempt: And filled with it.
to be filled with it more, it argues that she was long under it; but to be
exceedingly filled, intolerable, especially when it comes to scorn; as here, 2.
Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning: Subsannatione, geering
derision, which to a generous spirit is very heavy, it wounds his very soul; of
which Beasts and Fools have little or no sense; despised they may be, but of
reproach they are not capable.
And this the Prophet amplifies by the circumstances of the persons that
^^ntemned and scorned.

1. And that by Epicures.
They were such as were at ease in Zion, law no Changes, had all things
^^^ceeding ex voto, as they would have it; and no greater contemners and
scorners of men in misery than such. 2. And proud men.
And with the contempt of the proud: (...) Satiety breeds pride, and pride
makes men injurious, apt to heap up contumelies, disgraces, scoffs, scorns, and
geers, upon that man which is brought to a low (...). Again, proud men are for
the ^^^part empty, (...)-p^ted men; and contempt and scorn from such wounds,
very deep; especially if they rise, as they often do, from the Dunghill.
The Prayer out of the One hundred and twenty third Psalm.
O Lord, it has pleased thee to suffer thy people to be brought to great
distress, and their condition is so deplorable, that there is no comfort or
help to be expected, whom then should we flee for succor, but to thee?

Withdraw, good Lord, thy severe hand from us, and chastise us not to
destruction; say unto thy destroying Angel, It is enough, it is enough; spare
thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, Have mercy upon
us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for except thou be merciful unto us, we must
perish, since we can expect no mercy from men. It is not unknown unto thee,
with what contempt and scorn we are loaded, we are exceedingly filled with
contempt, our soul is pierced with the scoffs of proud insolent men, and such,
who for the abundance of spoil now live at ease. Good Lord, let not the pride
and contempt of these rebellious and treacherous wretches proceed any farther,
who by their successes are so pust'd up, that they think they cannot be
repressed by humane power. O Lord, look not upon our unworthiness, but consider
the dishonor and contumely that in us is cast upon thy Name; for while they
insult over us, the injury redounds to thee; while with arms and cruelty they
Lord it over us, they barbarously do suppress thy Worship, thy Religion, thy
Truth, thy Word.

We thy servants by them thus oppressed, contemned, derided and scorned, have
none to fly to, but to thee alone. O merciful Lord, do thou set an end to
these contumelies and injuries; we seek not our solves in this, but thee; the
desire of our soul is, That thou would vindicate the honor of thy Name, and
glory of thy Gospel, which these Miscreants have in contempt. O God, bring it
so to pass, that at last these enemies of thy Truth may seel and consess the
Truth of thy Word, and will they, nill they, acknowledge thee to be the only
God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXXIV.
THE people of God newly escaped from some great danger, The Sum.
both acknowledge it, and that God only was the Author of their safety and
victory, for which they thank him.

1. The Prophet begins abruptly, The Prophet gives the glory to God alone for
their deliverance.
as is usual to do in pathetical expressions, with much joy he expresses Gods
protection over his people, and how by his hand merely they were delivered by
some unexpected way, and he desires the people to acknowledge it with him.

1. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side: And again, (...), If it
had not been the Lord, who was on our side, that had stood and fought for us;
so that it was not our Swords, but his hand that delivered us. Nam qui
supponit* ponit. 2. Now may Israel say: Now after the victory, after the
deliverance; 3. On our side, when men rose up against us. Men, carnal, corrupt
men, that look after nothing, but to satisfy their own Ambition, Lust,
Avarice: Those arose seditiously, tumultuously, rebelliously; of such the
Proverb is true, Home homini lupus.
2. Which the Prophet verifies in the next verse, expressing the danger that
the Church was in from these men, or Beasts rather, by these two similitudes;
of Beasts of prey, of waters.

1. Then they had swallowed us up quick; that had been the consequent of their
rising, The danger the Church was in, before delivered.
like Wolves and Bears they had rushed upon us, and devoured us as poor sheep,
eaten us even alive: Though Bellarmine refers this Clause to waters also,
because Beasts tear before they devour, and so eat not their prey alive: But
the Metaphor may be proper enough the other way; for he shows what they would
do, if they could, and that in their fury, they spare not a living soul. By
cruel enemies.
2. The cause, their wrath.
Which fury of theirs, the Prophet conceals not, but illustrates it by a
Metaphor, This they had done to us, when their wrath was kindled against us. 3.
Then the proud waters had gone over our soul. And in the verse before, Then the
waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul. He compares the
Enemies Army to a swelling Torrent, that carries all before it.
3. He gives thanks for it.


Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us over as a prey into their teeth.

The deliverance was beyond expectation, which he illustrates by another
similitude; of a Bird taken in, but escaping out of a snare unexpectedly.

1. Our soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler; taken to be
killed. 2. The snare is broken, and we are delivered; the Fowler is deceived of
his prey.
4. Psalm with a gratulatory Epiphonema.

1. And relies on God.
Our help is in the Name of the Lord. The Church relies in all dangers upon
God, whether they be assaulted openly, as by Bears and Wolves; or secretly, as
the Fowler lays wait for the Bird, yet her help is in Gods protection and
tutelage. 2. Who made Heaven and Earth; i. e. The Creator, who has all things
in his hand and power, and therefore is able to deliver us.
The Prayer.
EXcept thou,

O Lord, avert thy anger from us, and take not vengeance upon us according to
our deserts; be not wanting to thy own Ordinances, to thy Name, thy Truth,
which with us is like to suffer: Bring to pass, that we may at last say,
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us over for a prey unto their teeth;
let their nets be broken, Amen.

PSALM CXXV. (...).
IT is the purpose of the Prophet to comfort the Church of God.

1. The Sum.
By an assurance of her perpetuity both from Gods presence and protection, ver.
1, 2. 2. That though God suffer them to be chastised by the wicked, yet he will
not leave them under the rod, ver. 3. 3. He prays for the good. 4. Sets down
the portion of the wicked, ver. 4, 5.
1. The first part.
In the beginning of the Psalm the Prophet sets down a general promise of the
perpetuity of the Church, because of Gods continual presence with her.

1. They that trust in the Lord. That trust in him, The Church shall continue.
not with a vain confidence and presumption, but that rely upon him by faith
not fained, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and aftervent love. 2.
These shall be as mount Zion which cannot be moved, secure and immovable, as is
Zion, not only immovable because a mountain, but because a holy mountain
consecrated, and dear to God. 3. Which the Prophet farther explains, and
assigns a perpetual duration to it, but abides for ever, which is a comfort to
the Church, Because God protects it.
of which Zion was the Type. No tempest, no storm, no persecution, no enemy
shall destroy it.
Of which the Prophet gives a reason in the next verse, by a Similitude, for
Zion which was in Jerusalem, has the mountains round about it for a wall of
defense, it is not easy for an enemy to approach Jerusalem, nor to take. It was
a Virgin-City never taken but twice, and then when God took away his protection
from it, and delivered it to the hand and will of the Babylonians, and Romans.
Which protection he will never take from his Church, and therefore the Church
is unexpugnable.

1. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem. 2. So the Lord is round about
his people. A wall of fire round about, Zach. 2. 3. From henceforth even for
ever. They that trust in the Lord shall be always safe, and secure, for though
they be temporally afflicted, yet all shall work for their good; He may take
from them their wealth, health, etc. yet he gives something better, patience,
comfort, with hope of eternal glory.
2. Which the Prophet confirms, preventing an objection. The second part.
What shall those that trust in the Lord be safe and secure? How comes it to
pass then that they are oppressed? to which the Prophet by way of prevention
answers. The power of the wicked shall never destroy it.
He grants it may be so; but the oppression is not to continue. The power of
the wicked shall be over the just for their probation, for their trial, and
correction, but it shall not rest upon them, it shall be transient, not
permanent, temporal, not eternal.

1. For the rod, i. e. Scepter and power of the wicked shall not rest, i. e.
Not prevail long.
portion of the righteous. 2. The reason is, Lest the righteous put forth his
hand to wickedness, That good fall not away.
i. e. Lest the righteous do faint, and being discouraged, lose their
perseverance in piety, justice, when they see the prosperity of wicked men to
be overlong, and join with them in their villainy.
3. And because he said there was some danger to pious men, be scandalized by
the oppression of the wicked, He prays for them.
and be seduced to fall by their prosperity, therefore he prays earnestly for
them.

1. Do good O Lord, send them patience, send them comfort and a speedy
deliverance. 2. I mean those who are upright in their hearts, conform their
hearts to thy will, do acquiesee in thee, wait upon thee, and expect thy
promises.
4. and shows the end of Apostatees.
and Apostates, and declares what will be the end of them.

1. As for such as turn aside to their crooked ways. That decline from their
uprighrnesse of heart, to some crooked way: and in persecution, and tribulation
let go their patience, and revolt from the Truth, and confidence; either
denying the faith, complain of God, and murmur at his providence. 2. The Lord
shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. A terrible Commination,
their portion shall be with their persecutors, the worst of men, Hypocrites,
Factors for mischief. 3. Whereas the good shall have peace.
But peace shall be upon Israel. The wicked being separated from the society of
good men, there shall remain an eternal peace to the people of God.
The Prayer out of the one hundred five and twentieth Psalm.
O Most gracious God, because all humane helps, are vain, uncertain, weak and
deceitful, therefore we are commanded, and according to thy command it is the
joy of our hearts, that we can repose our sols considence in thee. shall be as
mount Zion, that Mountain which thou have chosen before all the earth to set
thy name there, which nor storm, nor tempest, nor enemy, nor persecution shall
remove.

Be, Jerusalem for her defense, so Lord stand round about thy people in this
needful time of trouble, let not the gates of hell prevail against them, nor
the wicked approach to hurt them, but be a strong tower of defense unto them
from henceforth even for ever.

For our sins and heinous transgressions thou have justly suffered the wicked
to lay their severe rod upon the backs of the righteous people, but suffer not
this their power and scepter to rest, stay and continue overlong upon them:
Lest that they who are infirm and weak in the says saint and be discouraged,
and by the tentation of their and thy enemies prosperity deserting the way of
piety and justice, join with them in their villainy, and put forth their hands
unto iniquity. O Lord send to all thy good servants constancy, send them
patience,

But as for those, lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, and make them
seele and know the hottestot thy wrath, and indignation. But restore unto thy
people Israel, who serve thee with an honest heart, their former peace and
tranquillity, and make them partakers of thy mercy, which thou have promised to
thy Church for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The plainer sum of the CXXIV. Psalm, in which is described,
1. The subtilty of the adversaries of the Church in laying snares to entrap
it, as fowlers do to catch birds, verse. 7. 2. Their Cruelty, in seeking to tear
it in pieces, yea to swallow it up quick, as some cruel beasts of prey: or as
mighty inundations, that overflow all in their way, verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. 3. The
cause of their Subtilty and Cruelty. Wrath, Displeasure, verse. 3. 4. The
delivery of the Church from both, by the power and goodness of God, verse. 1, 2,
6, 7. 5. The Duty performed for this deliverance, Praise to God, verse. 6.


PSALM. CXXVI.
THIS Psalm seems to be penned about the end of the Captivity, when Cyrus gave
liberty to the Jews to return into their own Land, and to build again the
Temple, and Jerusalem. For it is the purpose of the Prophet in gratitude to
celebrate so great a mercy.

The Contents of it are, 1. An expression of joy for the strange liberty
granted them to return, which was wonderful both to Jews and Gentiles, verse. 1,
2, 3. 2. A prayer for the return of the remaining part, verse. 4. 3. An
excellent Corallary or Moral collected by the Prophet from it, that there is a
Vicissitude of things, that our mourning shall be turned to joy, verse. 5, 6.


1. The Prophet first celebrates their return from the Captivity, The first
part. The Prophet exults for the Jews return from Captivity.
and amplifies it three ways. 1. From the cause. 2. From the wonder of it. 3.
From the joy at it.

1. The cause was Jehovah. though Cyrus gave a Commission for it, The Author,
Jehovah.
yet it was the Lord that did it. 2. So strange and wonderful, and beyond
expectation it was, It was beyond imagination.
that the Jews were like them that dream. When they heard of it, for joy they
could scarce believe it, so that they thought, that they nor heard, nor saw it,
but did only dream of such a thing. That happened to them, which did to Jacob, at
the news of his son Joseph's exaltation in Egypto, he did scarce believe it. 3.
Their joy for this wonderful deliverance, is expressed verse. 2. Their joy for
it.
which they expressed by the joy of their countenance, and with the voice. 1.
Then was our month filled with laughter. We had a merry look. 2. And one tongue
with singing. Songs they sung to the praise of God. This God did for them,
witness


Now that God did this for them, he proves by a twofold attestation.

1. Of the Heathen. Then said they among the Heathen, The Heathen.
The Lord has done great things for them, i.e. the Jews. They saw that it was
done at the set time prefixed by Jeremy. That Cyrus named by Isaiah, did it;
that they were not only set free, but sent home with rich gifts: that a
Commission was given to rebuild the Temple, and the vessels of gold and silver
restored; all so far beyond expectation, that they could not choose but say,
This is Gods doing. The Lord has done great things for them. Yea, and Cyrus
himself acknowledges so much, Ezra 1, 2. 2. The Jews.
Of the Jews. It Is true, says the Jew, that you Heathen do acknowledge, 1. The
Lord has done great things for us. Far beyond our Merit, far beyond our Hope.
2. Whereof we are glad. Glad at heart, that we are freed from your yoke.

2. The second part.
But there were many of the Jews that stayed behind. They returned not all at
once. Many Jews stayed behind. For the return of these he prays.
Some of them went up with Ezra, some with Nehemiah, and some of them stayed in
those Countries still, having married strange Wives, and gotten possessions in
it, and for the return of these they pray to God, that there might be a plenary
and total reversion.

1. Turn our Captivity, O Lord. Put it into their hearts, that they may
speedily and fully return, and dwell with us, leaving the Heathen. 2. As the
streams in the South: Or as Junius reads it, Tanquam validissimas aquas
reducens in regionem siccam.
They that read it, Tanquam torrentes (...) in Austro, give this sense of it,
That God by his Spirit, which is in Scripture compared to a South Wind, Cant.
4.16. would so move the hearts of the Jews that still lingered, and loytered,
and remained among the Heathen, that they would unanimously and in great
companies return from thence. Come down as a torrent of water, some mighty
flood or stream from the hills, when the South Wind melts the Winter Snows,
which runs with such violence, that it carries all along with it: and the like
happens also, cum madidis Notus evolat alis. And such a reduction the Church
prays for here, universal, total, that by a mighty power God would work in
them, so to melt their hearts, that it should generally sweep them along before
it, and not leave a man behind, (...) when the wind sits in the South.

But they that read it: Tanquam valid as reducens aquas in regionem siccam, by
occasion of the Hebrew word Negheb, that signifies also Australem plagam:
conceive that the Prophet may allude to some desert and dry places; such as are
those deserts of Arabia a Southern Country. And they give this sense of it.
Turn our Captivity, O Lord, and let it be like those great rains that fall in
those desert and dry places, which refresh the earth, and bring joy to the
inhabitants. Make it to us a joyful day, as it is with those Southern people,
when the Rivers flow in dry places. Both senses are apt, but I prefer the
first, because it respects more properly the power of God in moving their
hearts to an universal reduction, and the manner of it, their confluence, and
coming together.

3. The third part. The benefit great they should receive by it.
Yea, but perhaps this their return might be grievous and troublesome to many
of them, such as married strange Wives, which they were to leave^ such as had
gotten possessions in Babylon; such as learned the manners and Religion of the
Heathen, etc. These liked not to alter their dwellings. Well, be it so, the
Prophet puts them in mind of an ample recompense, They that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy. They may mourn for their departure from thence, but when they
should cast up the income, benefit and increase that should come by it, that
would befall them, which happens to the poorest Husbandman, that sows his seed,
perhaps in a der year, or which he has bought, or in an ill season, with which
he should sustain his family, and therefore could ill spare it. This he commits
to the ground, and covers it with clods, not being sure whether ever he shall
see it again, or reap any benefit by it, which puts him into a dump of sorrow.
He sows in tears. But when once the harvest comes, and he finds the increase,
and that the earth returns him his seed with usury, then he reaps with joy. For
your comfort, the like upon your return shall happen to you. 'Twill be you^
joy, that you are returned to your own Land, where you shall enjoy your former
possessions, and over and above the Religion of your forefathers, and abundant
recompense for all losses you can sustain.

And this the Prophet amplifies or declares more fully in the next verse.

1. He that goes forth and weeps, viz. the poor husbandman, for the reasons
expressed, bearing precious seed. Semen acquisitionis: or Semen acquisitum.
Seed bought with a price, which augments his grief, being so poor, that he had
none of his own. Or else it may be read, the Seedbasket, but to the same-sense.
2. He shall doubtless come again with joy, with joy at time of harvest, and
bring his sheaves with him. For every grain he sowed, full ears of corn.
The general collection from this is, That no man shall be a loser in obeying
the voice of God; if he part with any thing for him, he shall be sure of an
ample recompense. There will be a turn, extrema luctus gaudium occupat. For the
Cross, they shall have a Crown.

Some refer these two last verses to the time of the Israelites carrying into
Captivity, and their return thence. Thus. Then when they were carried away
Captive, they sowed in tears, they went forth weeping. But at their return they
reaped in joy, they brought their sheaves with them, in that they were enriched
by many gifts and favors. But I conceive the former sense more coherent with
the Text, and closer to the Prophets purpose, being a strong argument to the
Jews, that were over-backward to return.

The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and twenty sixth Psalm.
O Lord our God, for our disobedience to thy holy Laws, Turn our Captivity, O
Lord, and bring back our banished, let it be so universal and unexpected, that
it may put all into admiration that behold it, yea, Yea, and we also in
thankfulness, and in a just acknowledgment of thy favor, will echo back unto
them, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we will be glad: So
great, that we even in the enjoyment of it could scarce believe it, our mouth
shall be filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.

O Lord, long it is that we have sowed in tears,

PSALM. CXXVII.
THE Jews were at this time very busy in building their Temple, their Houses,
and the Walls of their City, and that in all, they should be sure to take God
along with them; the Prophet teaches them, That without his assistance, all
their labor would be in vain; for that nothing can be gotten and conserved
without his blessing: That inheritances are from him, and children, the props
of Houses, are his blessing also.

This the Prophet shows by these words repeated, Nisi, nisi, frustra, frustra;
and proves it by an Induction.

1. Nothing can prosper without Gods help.
In Civil Affairs, whether in House or City.

1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. God
must be the chief Builder in the Family, his blessing and help by prayer called
for, In the family.
to the sustentation and nourishment of Wife, Children, 2. Or City.
Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman wakes but in vain: And it is so in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths also. The Jews had now a Trowel in one hand, and a
Sword in the other, watchful they were against their enemies: But the Prophet
tells them, that the Lord must be their Protector and Keeper, otherwise the
Watch would be to sittle purpose: Magistrates, Judges, Officers, their great
Council of little value.
And this he declares and illustrates, Without his blessing all labor, care is
in vain.
by an elegant Hypotyposis of an industrious man, that does all that may be to
be rich, great and safe; but not calling for Gods blessing upon his labors,
it is all in vain: Such a man omits nothing that may be thought on, or is to be
done, that he may thrive.

1. He rises early: No man up before him, he prevents the Sun. 2. He sits up
late: No man goes later to Bed, or takes less rest. 3. He eats the bread of
sorrows. He defrauds himself of necessary food, fares very hard; his mind is
so taken up with labor, care and fear, that a pleasant morsel comes not into
his mouth: But all this without God is in vain: It is in vain for you to rise
up early, etc.
Whereas with God it is far otherwise; With it all goes well.
for to what before he said briefly and obscurely, he subjoins this (...). For
so he gives his Beloved sleep: So in his blessing, in his help, he gives to all
those he loves, who call upon him for assistance after the honest labors, he
gives a quiet and contented mind, and sound sleep at night; nor cares, nor
fears distract them.

2. Children are a blessing from him.
After the Prophet had set down, that nor in the House, nor in the State, nor
in a man's private goods no man can prosper, except God be with him; he proceeds
to show,

1. For their Generation, Their Generation.
that from the Lord: Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of
the womb is his reward. He has the key of the womb, opens and shuts. Rachel
said to Jacob, Give me children, or else I dye. What, says he, am I in Gods
stead? Genesis 30.1, 2. Children are inheritances that come of God, and they are
rura relicta, non labor parta. 2. For their Education, being well brought up,
and in the fear of God, and virtue, they become to be of generous spirits,
Education.
which is a blessing of God also; for we see many that are brought up with
great care and cost, often degenerate: But with Gods blessing they become brave
men. As Arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of thy
youth, enabled to great Actions, to defend themselves and others. 3. And the
Benefit will redound to the father in his old age. 1. Happy is the man that
has his Quiver full of them, full of such arrows, From them the parents
receive comfort in their old age.
full of such children. 2. He shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with
the enemies in the Gate; able enough he shall be to defend himself, and keep
off all injuries, being fortified by his children; and if it happen, that he
has a Cause depending in the gate, and to be tried before the Judges, he shall
have the Patronage of his children, and not suffer in his plea for want of
Advocates; his sons will stand up in a just cause for him.

The Prayer out of the One hundred and twenty seventh Psalm.
O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; It is not in man that
walks, to direct his steps; Thou art our sirength, and all our sufficiency is
in thee; vouchsafe therefore so to preserve, Prosper thou the work of our
hands, O prosper thou our handiwork, build thou our Houses and Families for
us; let our wives, our children, our servants, our corn and Cattle be watered
with the dew of heaven. Watch thou upon the Walls of our Cities, and assist and
bless the Watchmen, our Princes, Prelates,

Prevent us then, O Lord, with thy gracious favor, and further us with thy
continual help, that in all our works, begun, continued, and ended in thee,

We know, O Lord, that children are the props of our Families, For children are
an heritage of the Lord, and the f^^it of the womb are thy Reward. Thou, O God,
have the Keys of Heaven and Hell, of Rain and Providence, of the Grave, and of
the womb; let not then thy servants feel the curse of dry breasts, and a barren
womb; but make us joyful parents of children, that may increase the number of
thy redeemed.

Give us thy grace and favor, that we may instruct them with diligence and
meekness, govern them with prudence and holiness, and bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord; provide for them such useful employments,
That they may be as Arrows in the hand of a mighty man, defenses and succors
to our old age. If it he thy blessed Will, let them live to a full age, and
make us happy, that we have our quivers full of them, from whose powerful arm
may be shot quick and sharp arrows into the very hearts of those,

PSALM. CXXVIII.
IN this Psalm, the Prophet persuades to fear God, upon the several Rewards
that attend upon Piety.

The Contents are these. 1. He describes the pious man, and pronounces him
blessed, ver. 1. 2. He proposes the particulars of his blessing, ver. 2, 3, 5,
6. 3. He gives his Acclamation to it, ver. 4.


1. The first part. That man that fears God.
He describes the man, who is to expect the blessing; two qualities be must
have.

1. He must fear the Lord: Fear to offend him, not decline from him. 2. Is
Blessed.
He must walk in his ways: For this is the true character of his fear. 3. This
man shall be blessed; yea, every such man, high or low, rich, or poor, there is
no exception, Blessed is every one. In a happy condition.
2. The second part.
And the blessedness and happiness consists in these particulars.

1. He shall enjoy those Goods which he has honestly gotten with the labor of
his hands: For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands. His happiness is not in
having much, In his goods.
but enjoying it, Eccles. 6.1, 2. 2. Happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee: So well, that he shall have enough for himself, and be able to
relieve others, and leave somewhat to his children. 3. In his wife.
Happy he shall be in his marriage; too often, (...). But he that fears the
Lord, and marries in the Lord, shall be happy in his match. 1. His wife shall
be as a fruitful Vine: Fatifera, non sterili^. 2. Upon the walls of thy house:
Domi porta, modest and shamefac't, staying at home, and caring for the things
of the house, while her Husband is taking care abroad: (...).
4. In his children.
Happy in his children. 1. Thy children like the Olive-branches: Fresh, green,
spredding, fruitful, and pledges of peace; not like sharp Thorns, and a
pricking Hedge. 2. Round about thy Table. It will be a comfort to see them, sit
with them, eat with them, and hear their pretty Discourse.

Now these temporal happinesses the Prophet concludes with an Acclamation: Lo,
(...) the man be blessed, that fears the Lord. Thus in his goods, The third part.


3. But there is a blessing attends him far beyond all this, The Acclamation.
the sum of which is, 1. Gods blessing: The Lord shall bless thee out of
Zion; God shallbless him.
by a federal blessing, a Church-blessing. 2. Thou shall see the good of
Jerusalem, With a Church-blessing.
the peace and prosperity of the Church, all thy days. 3. Yea, thou shall see
thy childrens children. Et natos natorum, and qui nascuntur ab illis. With
grandchildren.
4. And peace upon Israel: With a peaceable life.
And a flourishing Commonwealth and Kingdom; for by peace is understood all
prosperity.


The Prayer out of the One hundred and twenty eighth Psalm.
O Holy and just God, if no blessing or happiness can befall any,

O Lord, pardon our iniquities, and be merciful to our sins,

Good God, however thou please to deal with us, yet remember thy afflicted
Church, and bless her out of thy high and holy place of Zion; she is thy
Spouse, let her then flourish as a fruitful Vine, Jerusalem all the days of
our life, and behold thy people Israel, that are now divided by Factions and
Schisms, united in a Christian peace. O thou, who art the God of peace, grant
us this for his sake, who made our peace, thy only Son, our Savior, Jesus
Christ.

PSALM. CXXIX.
THE intent of the Prophet in this Psalm, is to comfort the Church in
affliction, and to stir her up to glorify God, for his Providence over her,
always over her for her good, and bringing her enemies to confusion, and a
sudden ruin.

The Contents are. 1. The indefatigable malice of the enemies of the Church,
ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. That their malice is in vain, for they p^^^ail not, from ver.
2. to 4. God saves them, 3. For they are accursed, and cut off, from ver. 4. to
8.


1. The first part.
God puts into the mouth of his people what they may comfortably say to their
enemies, The indefatigable malice of the enemies of the Church.
even in their greatest extremities, when their malice is at the highest.

1. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say. In
which observe: 1. Her afflictions many, etc.
That afflictions do attend Israel, and must be expected by all that will live
righteously in Christ Jesus. 2. That these afflictions are many; for sape, Many
a time have they afflicted me. 3. That this affliction began with the Church;
even from the righteous Abel, and has continued ever since the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs felt it. It is from my youth. 4. This affliction
was a fore affliction, which the Prophet by an elegant Metaphor illustrates,
The Plo^^^s plowed upon my back, and made long Furrows. They dealt
unmercifully with me, as the Husbandman does with his ground, tears it up with
his share, and spares not the green gundon, till be has turned it all up.


2. The second part.
But all this their malice, all their fighting is to no purpose; oppugn^runt,
non expugnaru^^.

1. They prevail not.
Yet they have not prevailed against us, they have not prevailed to extinguish
the Church; for the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. ^^^rabit ut
palma. 2. The Reason is, The Lord is righteous. A righteous, a good, a just
Lord; and out of his Justice he protects all those that he has under his
Tuition, and punishes their Adversaries. 3. For God delivers her.
For this righteous Lord has cut asunder the cords of the wicked, has cut
asunder their Tacklings, Chains, Repes, with which they plowed, and made their
Furrows. He has delivered Israel from their oppressors.
3. The third part.
In the following verses to the end, the Prophet either by way of in^^^^^ion or
prediction, And takes revenge on her enemies.
sets down the vengeance that God would bring upon the en^mies of his Church
for their malice, which has three degrees.

1. Let them all be confounded, ashamed, and turned back, that hate Zion; that
are Osores, Persecutors. 2. Let thou be as grass growing on the house-tops;
grass in a Meadow is good for somewhat, on house-tops for no use: It withers,
before it grows up. Mowed it is never: Wherewith the Mower fills not his
hand, nor he that binds up the sheaves, fills his bosom. 3. The last is a want
of a blessing from God or man: No man says so much as God speed, as is usual
to do to Workmen in Harvest: Neither do they which go by, say, Bendithy ch^y.
The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we bless you in the Name of the Lord.
The Prayer out of the one hundred and twenty ninth Psalm.
O Omnip^tent and merciful God, it is not unknown to thee, how that people whom
thou have chosen unto thee for thy heritage, has been in all Ages afflicted
and vered by cruel Tyrants,

But thou, whom we serve, have showed thy self unto us a good Master, Thou have
cut asunder all the cords of the wicked, in which they trusted, the snare is
broken, and we are delivered, their hopes and expectation is eluded, their
endeavors brought to naught: Though they had plotted our vestruction,

This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; especially when we
call to mind our ingratitude toward thee, and our unexcusable disobedience: But
now we humbly beseech thee, look not upon our merits, but upon the glory of thy
Name; for we deserve not only these, but far greater punishments: Zion; let
them quickly wither away as the grass, that grass that grows upon the
housetop,

O Lord, preserve thy people in their integrity, The blessing of the Lord be
upon you, we bless you in the Name of the Lord: But let thy blessing rest upon
thy people, and upon thine inheritance, whom thou have chosen; keep them from
all evil, increase them in all goodness, for the merits of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXXX. Being one of the Penitentials.
IN this Psalm the Spirit of God proposes to us the case of a person oppressed
with the wrath of God against sin, yet flies to God for mercy, and trusts to
receive from him comfort, remission and pardon.

The Contents are these. 1. Acknowledging his miserable condition, he prays to
be beard, ver. 1, 2. 2. He desires remission of sin, ver. 2, 4. 3. He makes
mention of his hope and confidence, ver. 5, 6. 4. He exhorts Gods people to
trust in him, ver. 7, 8.


1. The first part.
David begging with an ardent affection and desire, pathetically he prays that
he may be heard, David's cry to be heard.
he likens himself to a man in the bottom of a Pit or that must cry aloud to be
heard.

1. Out of the depths have I cried to thee, O Lord. De profundis, non de
profundo. Because a true penitent, cries out of two depths; the depth of his
misery, and the depth of his heart sensible of that misery. 2. Lord hear my
voice. Although I be in these depths, and thou dwell on high, yet thou can
hear me, and therefore I cry, O Lord hear. 3. Let thine ears be attentive to
the voice of my supplications. It Is to no purpose to cry for audience, except
he will be attentive to whom we cry. And therefore begs of God, that he would
vouchsafe to hear, to attend.
2. The second part.
Yea, but there was great reason, why God should nor hear, nor yet incline his
ear to his cry. He was a grievous sinner, and God hears not such. Well, be it
so, yet his case was but the same with other men. All men involved in sin, as
well as he, and therefore if this should be a sufficient impediment that he
should not be heard, the like lay against other men, and so God attentive to no
prayer. He desires therefore to remit his sin, and that this might not be
charged upon him.

1. If thou Lord should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? mirabilis
rhetorica, He cries for Remission of Sin.
I, nor no other man can bring into thy sight any thing else but filth, sin,
shame, and therefore if thou should deal with us in rigor of justice, and
execute thy anger, necessary it is that all be condemned, not a man stand in
thy sight. Acknowledging his own misery.
But it becomes not thy infinite goodness to destroy all men, and therefore I
need not seem overbold, if I cry out of my depths and ask a pardon. 2. But
there is m^rcy with thee, or forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.
Gods mercy.
True repentance requires two things, the recognition of our own misery, and
the persuasion of Gods mercy. Both are needful, for he that knows not his own
misery, seeks not for help, and he that knows not Gods mercy, despairs. In the
three former verses David acknowledges himself in a pitiful case for he was in
the depths, and cries from thence, that if God should deal with him in rigor
of justice he were undone, never able to abide it. In this verse he comforts
himself with Gods mercy, and that notwithstanding the greatness and multitude
of his sins, he hoped for pardon, as if he had said, Though no man can abide
it, if thou shall mark our iniquities, yet I know that by nature thou art
merciful, and forgivest fin. 2. The end of remission that God be feared.
That thou may be feared, not with a servile, but with a filial fear, which
comprehends, invocation, faith, hope, love, adoration, confession, giving of
thanks, and all the duties of the first Table. With this fear I fear thee, in
this I fly to the throne of grace, and because thou art a Merciful God, I hope
for pardon.

3. The third part.
The method of Gods Servants in their addresses to heaven is, that they
Believe, He hopes and expects favor.
Hope, Pray, Expect. This course David took, he prayed, believed, he hopes in
Gods mercy, and now he expects to find favor in the fifth and sixth verses:

1. I expect the Lord. Upon him only he relies, and prescribes nor time, nor
manner, leaves to him to succor him at what season he pleases. For his part
he would be still an Expectant. 2. For which he will wait.
My soul does wait. His expectation was not formal, but real, an expectation
that proceeded from the fervency of his heart. He hungered and thirsted after
righteousness. 3. His expectation was no presumption, Upon Gods word.
but well grounded upon Gods Word and Promises. Dent. 4.29, 30. And in his Word
is my hope. 4. And that we may know his expectation was earnest, My soul waits
for the Lord: He ingeminates his hope.
which he declares by a Similitude of men set upon a watch in the night, that
long for the morning. 5. I wait for the Lord, more than they that watch for the
morning; I say, more than they that watch for the morning. It was now night
with him, darkness and misery was upon his soul, the morning he expected was
remission, which must come from Gods mercy, for this he waited, this he
expected more greedily, than watchmen look for the morning light, that they may
be freed from their station. Which, though it be not in their power, yet they
expect it. He proposes his example to Gods people.

4. This his example he proposes to Gods people, and exhorts them to do the
like, and to animate and encourage them in it, adds his reasons.

1. Let Israel hope in the Lord. Take out my example, e profundis, expect upon
his word and promise, wait his leisure. For which God is mercy.
2. For with the Lord there is Mercy. Not only a Merciful God, but Mercy it
self. With him it is, and from him it flows to us. And our Misery is a fit
object for his Mercy. No other creature can help, because miserable. And
plentious redemption.
3. And with him is Redemption. That we needed, being sold under sin, and that
we found; a price given for us to redeem us, the precious blood of his dear
Son. 4. And this his Redemption was Copiosa redemptio, plentiful, abundant, for
by it he redeemed the whole world, 1 John 1.2. Romans 8.17. Which he will apply
to Israel only.
5. But this is to take effect upon Israel, his people only. For he shall
redeem Israel from all his sins. It is not as the Jews expect a temporal
redemption, but a spiritual, as the Angel told Joseph. His name shall be Jesus,
for he shall save his people from their sins, which is begun in this life, and
shall be perfected in the other, where we shall be delivered not only from sin,
but the punishment, and danger of sinning.
The Prayer out of the one hundred and thirtieth Psalm.
O Most just and holy God, whose eyes cannot approve iniquity, no not in thy
best and dearest servants, we must needs confess, that for our rebellion and
ingratitude against thee, we are justly brought to this abyss of troubles, from
which, without thy help, we cannot escape. O Lord, Lord, hear our voice, and
let thine ears be attentive to our supplications, lest if thou make as though
thou hear not, we become like them that descend into the pit.

Pity our infirmities, and remember thy mercy, for which our misery is a fit
object, be not unto us a severe Judge, but a merciful Father, and take not that
revenge upon us, which we deserve, for if thou shall observe and punish
according to the rigor of justice, Mercy is so genuine and natural unto thee,
that thou can no more be, than not be Merciful: Therefore out of this thy
inclination and facility to remit iniquities, and pass by transgressions, in
fear and reverence, in faith and hope, we opproach thy presence, and beg a
pardon.

It is at the gate of thy mercy we lie, more than they that watch for the
morning, yea, I say, more than they that wait for the morning.

Thou art the hope and fear of Israel, and with thee is plenteous redemption, a
price thou wast pleased to accept for our ransom, and thy beloved Son was
pleased to lay down the price, for the merit then of that price, being the
blood of thy dear Son,

PSALM. CXXXI.
DAvid being accused by Saul's servants, that he aspired to the Kingdom,
protests his innocence, his humble thoughts, and meek deportment. 2. That his
confidence was upon Gods promise, to that he trusted, and therefore was far
from any ambition. And by his example calls on Israel to trust in God, as he
did.

1. David protests his humility.
He professes he was far from pride, in his heart, in his carriage, in his
undertakings.

1. Far from pride.
No pride there was in heart, Lord, my heart is not haughty: and calls God to
witness of it. 2. Nor my eyes lofty. 3. Nor in his undertakings. Neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, which are too high for me. He kept himself
within his bounds, and vocation, attempted not to meddle with matters of State,
when out of his employment, and beyond his strength.
2. Humility, to which he brought down, Humble as a weined child.
and composed his soul, made it as submissive, as is a new weaned child.

1. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self. Calmed all high thoughts that
might arise in me. 2. As a child that is weaned of his mother; My soul is even
as a weaned child; which modestly expects what the mother will give it, depends
on her, and her care, and carves not for it self. Nor do or will I, for I
depend on God, and shall expect and receive gratefully what he shall bestow. 3.
Which he confirms by an Oath, as some conceive. For it is to be read, Si non
composui and seclavi animum. If I have not composed and quieted my soul as a
weaned child, then let this and this befall me. Which clause is to be supplied.
3. Israel to follow. Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth, He proposes
his example to Israel.
even for ever. The Prophets intention was not then to boast of himself, as did
the proud Pharisee, or to be puffed with pride because he was not proud, but to
admonish the people, how little they ought to presume of themselves, The they
trust not on themselves, but God.
and how much to repose their confidence in God. For if a King and a Prophet
dare neither boast of his wisdom and power, nor presume upon himself, but trust
upon God: fit it is that the people depose their high thoughts, that they think
not too well of themselves, and think themselves to be something, when they are
indeed nothing, that they trust not to their wit, strength, arms, but that they
trust in God, both for the present time, and hereafter also.

The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and thirty first Psalm.
O Almighty God, who gives grace to the humble, and resists the proud, suffer
not haughtiness and arrogance to puff up our rebellious hearts;

O God, so subdue our affections, that our soul may be as a weaned child, that
depends only upon the hand of the mother, and receives with thanks that
nourishment and nurture which she is pleased to give; Let Israel hope in the
Lord, from henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXXXII.
THE intention of this Psalm may easily be collected out of 2 Samuel 7. and 1 Chronicles. 17. For when David purposed in his heart to build a house to God, where
the Ark should rest, and God perpetually be served, he was commanded to forbear
the work by Nathan, and leave it to his son, the place being showed where the
Temple was to be erected; which pious intention of David was much approved by
God, so that he promises to him and his posterity a perpetuity in the Throne,
and very great prosperity; which promises are mentioned and inculcated in this
Psalm.

Either then Solomon composed this Psalm, when the Temple being built, he
brought the Ark of God, and settled it in the place prepared for it: Or else,
which is more likely, it was composed by David himself, and left to his son to
be sung at the Dedication of the Temple: That Solomon then made use of some
part of it, is apparent, 2 Chronicles. 6.16, 41, 42.

The parts of this Psalm are three. 1. A Petition, before which is expressed
David's care and vow to settle the Ark, mentioning the place where it was
before, and with what reverence they would settle it in the Temple; and then
sets down the solemn prayer then used, from ver. 1. to 11. 2. An Explication of
the promises made unto David for the continuance of his Kingdom in his
posterity, ver. 11, 12. and Gods love to his Church, ver. 13. 3. A Prophecy
spoken in the person of God for the stability of Christ's Church, and the
blessings upon the people, the Priests, and the house of David, from ver. 14.
to the end.


1. The first part. David reflects on Gods promise.
In all prayer a man must reflect upon Gods promise, otherwise he cannot pray
in faith; whether then it were David or Solomon that commenced this prayer,
they put God in mind of his promise; nor that he can forget it, but that till
it be performed to us, he seems not to remember it, and he loves to be called
upon for performance; and therefore the Prophet begins.

1. And upon it prays, remember David.
Lord remember David; that is, thy promises made to David. In this Psalm he
prays first for the King, then for the State Ecclesiastical, ver. 8, 9.
Lastly, for the Commonwealth and people, ver. 8. 2. And all his afflictions.
Many he had before, after he attained the Kingdom, and among these one, and
that an especial one was, the care he had of settling the Ark, and place of Gods
worship; he reckoned this among his afflictions, That it could not be brought
to pass according to his mind, which was a sign of his integrity, and this he
desires might be remembered also.
Now this his ardent and sincere desire, And remembers his Vow to build God a
house.
appeared by his oath and vow, which is expressed in the three following
verses: Remember, 1. How he swear unto the Lord, and vowed a vow unto the
mighty God of Jacob; Jacob, that erected Bethel: But when he made this vow, it
appears not; probable it is, that it was, when he opened his mind to Nathan, 2 Samuel 7. 2. The matter of his vow and oath follows: Surely I will not come into
the Tabernacle of my house, David came not into his, or went not into his bed,
or slept not, till he found out this place to build Gods house; in it he shows
only his great care and solicitude he had about it, that it was chiefly in his
head, always in his thoughts. 1. I swear that I will not enter into the
Tabernacle of my house, so that I forget to build Gods. 2. I will not climb up
to my bed, that I think not of Gods Temple, where the Ark may rest. 3. I will
not give sleep to my eyes, nor slumber to my eyelids, so that I cease from the
care of preparing Gods house; which oath and vow he as much as lay in him
fulfilled, as appears by his provision for building the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26.26,
27, etc. and 1 Chronicles. 29. from ver. 2. to 10.



2. He finds the place to build it, and to settle the Ark.
And here the Prophet interserts two verses by way of gratitude.

1. In the first he exults for the news they heard of the Ark.

Lo, we heard of it at Epratah, we found it in the fields of the wood.

This verse has much obscurity in it,

By Epratah some understood the land of Ephraim, in which the Ark remained at
Shilo in Samuels days, 1 Samuel 4. After this, being sent home by the
Philistines, it was found in the field of Joshua the Bethshemite, and thence
conveyed to the house of Aminadab that dwelt in Kirjath-jearim, that signifies
a woody City, where it abode twenty years; whence David might well say, We
heard of it at Epratah; that is, Shilo in Ephraim; and found it in the fields
of the wood; that is, in Kirjath-jearim, a City compassed about with woods.
From Kirjath-jearim David fetched it, and because Vzzah was smitten for his
rashness, he left it in the house of Obed-edom, whence after three months he
fetched it, brought it up to Jerusalem, and placed it in the City of David with
gladness, 2 Samuel 6.

By Epratah others understand David that was born at Bethlehem, Epratah, and
they sense it thus: We knew not the place where the Temple was to be built, and
the Ark to rest till this day, only we heard of the same in Epratah our City,
that it should come to pass, that a resting place should be chosen for it; for
nor Silo, nor Nob, nor Kirjath-jearim, were the places for it to rest; only we
heard out of the mouths of old men, that the place was yet to be revealed: And
behold, now we have found it in the fields of the wood; that is, in Jerusalem,
which is compassed about with Olive-yards; and the place is the threshing floor
of Araunah the Jebusite, on which ground the Temple was after built, and found
out by David, because God answered him there by fire from Heaven, that
descended upon the Altar of burnt-offering, 1 Chronicles. 21.26.

2. And the place being found, The form used at the Translation of the Ark.
suppose now that the Ark being to be translated thither, he calls to all
Israel, saying, 1. We will go into his Tabernacles, 2. Chron. 5. from 2. to 10.
As if they had said, Hitherto the Lord has, as it were a stranger, Zion will
we go. 2. And we will worship at his footstool. Not make rash approaches to
the Ark, as some before us have done, and suffered for it; but come with
reverence and bowing, into his presence. The Ark we will not worship, but him
who shows his presence by the Ark, Psalm. 99.5. And when Splomon brought it
into the Temple.



And now Solomon being about to bring the Ark into the Temple, uses this
solemn form of words, 2 Chronicles. 6.41.

1. He prays to God, and invites him to enter and dwell in the Temple. Arise,
O Lord, 2. Into thy rest; enter and rest here, and pass no more from place to
place, as hitherto. 3. Thou, and the Ark of thy strength: Thou with thy Throne,
Soloman prays
in which thou have showed thy strength at Jordan, Josh. 3. at Jericho, Josh.
6: in the Temple of Dagon, 1 Samuel 5. at Bethshemes upon Uzzah, 2 Samuel 6.
And the Ark being brought into the Temple, he prays, 1. For the Priests: Let
thy Priests be clothed with righteousness. For the Priests.
Inwardly in heart and soul, and outwardly in life, words and works, let them
be holy, adorned and beautified with it, as with a garment, that hides all
deformities. 2. For the people: Let thy Saints shout for joy, praise thee with
a cheerful voice, that the Ark has found a place to rest in. For the people.
Spare all thy people that appear before thee, and let not that happen to them,
that fell to the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6. 3. He prays for the King, that is,
himself: For thy servant David's sake, For the King.
turn not away the face of thine Auointed. 1. For thy servant David's sake.
David is not here to be taken absolutely for his person only, but as having the
Covenant and Promise made to him; and God could not be better put in mind of
the promise, than by mention of the person to whom it was made: He prays not
then to be heard for David's merits, but for the promise made to David. 2. Turn
not away the face of thine Anointed: That is, suffer me not, who am Anointed in
my fathers stead, and sit upon his Throne, to depart from thy presence ashamed
and confounded, rejecting my prayer. In this Form Bathsheba petitioned to
Solomon for Adonijah, 1 Kings 2.20. I desire one small Petition of thee, ne
avertas faciem meam; which we translate, Say me not nay: Or else this phrase
imports, That we turn our face from God when we sin, and he turns away his face
from us; and so long as we continue in that state, our faces are turned from
God: Solomon then might pray, That when at any time he turned his face from
God, that God would not continue his face from him, but look back upon him, as
Christ did on Peter, that so he might repent, and amend, and not always stand
with his face from God; for though we freely sin, and turn our face from God,
yet if God be pleased with a merciful eye to look upon us, and pity us, that so
by his mercy and pity we desire and endeavor to sin no more, then he does not
turn away our face, shame and confound us for ever. Solomon in this sense
prays, Suffer not my face to be turned from thee; which will be done, If thou
suffer not thy face to be turned from me.



2. The second part. Gods promise made to David.
The Prophet now proceeds to reckon up the promises made to his father David,
which were confirmed by an Oath from God, that these being remembered, he might
the easilier prevail in his Petitions, asking of God, as it were, a due debt;
in which we are to observe: 1. The Lord has sworn in truth to David, Confirmed
by oath.
having no greater to swear by, he swear by himsel, The matter of his oath.
2 Samuel 12.13. Isa. 55.3. Psalm. 89.34. It was mercy to promise, but greater for
assurance, to bind himself by a faithful Oath, and irreversible Oath: He will
not turn from it, he will not repent of it, Psalm. 110.4. 2. As it relates to
Christ absolute.
The matter of his Oath, expressed in the end of the eleventh, and in ver. 12,
13, 14. 1. For the seed of David, as it concerns Christ, is categorical and
absolute: Of the fruit of thy body I will set upon thy Seat; which words are
referred by St. Peter unto Christ, Acts 2.30. According to the flesh he was from
David's seed; De fructu ventris, not de fructu femoris; for by the mothers side
Christ was to be of David's seed, not by the fathers. 2. Again, I will set upon
thy Seat, Luke 1.32. David's Seat was Zion, and Zion typically, As it relates to
David's seed hypothetical.
Isa. 2. is the Church, over that Christ was to reign, as David in Zion. 2. For
the seed of David, as it relates to his poster^y, the Oath is hypotherical and
conditional: If thy children will keep my Covenant, and my Testimonies that I
shall teach them, their children shall (...) upon thy Throne for evermore, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Psalm. 89.28. to 37. Ezekiel. 21.26. For if his posterity observed not
the Law, And to Zion. i. e. the Church eternal.
but worshipped their own inventions, the promise was at an end.
3. As the external Kingdom was by this Oath annexed to one Family, so by the
same Oath and Covenant, 1. For the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it
for his habitation. 2. This my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
desired it. From the time of the promise performed, Zion was the Seat of the
Sanctuary, and so continued to the coming of the Messiah; so long Zion was
Civitas Regia and Sacerdotalis: But Zion was but a Type of Christ's Church, The
promise which God makes to his Church. The third part.
of which these words are more truly verified; for this Christ has truly
chosen, and it shall be his rest for ever; with it he will be for ever present,
efficacious in the hearts of Believers, and approve their works and worship to
the worlds end.



3. In the last part of the Psalm, the Prophet brings in God, promising to his
Church many good things.

1. I will abundantly bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread:
Godliness has the promise of this life, as well as that which is to come. 2.
That her Priests should be endued with holiness, and her Saints shout for joy;
which answers to the Petition in the ninth verse. 3. The third Benefit is, That
there the Kingdom of David to arise; viz. The Kingdom of the Messiah. There
will I make the horn of a David, to flourish, that is, the power, Luke 1.69. I
have ordained a Lamp for mine Anointed, 1 Kings 11.36. and 15.4. John 5.35. 4.
The fourth Benefit, is the confusion of their enemies,
His enemies will I cloth with shame; but upon himself shall his Crown
flourish.

The Prayer out of the One hundred and thirty second Psalm.
Lord, merciful and gracious, declare thy self mindful of the seed of our
David; be ^uindful, O Lord, of all his mildness, charity and patience, He gave
his eyes no sleep, nor slumber to his eye lids, that he might uphold the places
deckcated to the Lord, the habitations of the mighty God of Jacob.

These, O Lord, for our sins, Then will we go into thy Tabernacle, we will
worship at thy footstool.

Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, and come with us into that place that thou have
peculiarly chose unto thy self, and sanctified for thy honor and service, Let
thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, as with a garment, and let thy
Saints, whom thou have especially ponsecrated to thy service, exult and shout
for joy.

For thy servant David's sake, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, hear the sighs
and groans, and turn not away the face of thine Anointed; let him not for ever
suffer a repulse in his Petitions, and with shame avert his face from thee; But
grant him his hearts desire, and deny him not the request of his lips.

Thou swaredst unto David in thy Truth, and did never turn from it; Set once
more upon the Seat, the son of our David, and make his children keep thy
Testimonies which thou shall teach them; let his children also so upon thy
Throne for evermore.

Thy Throne is in Zion, and Zion is thy Church which thou have chos^ to thy
self, and destred for thy habitation. O Lord, let it be thy rest for ever,

In the midst of her make the horn and power of David to bu^, ordain a bearning
and a shining lamp out of the loins of thy Anointed; cloth his enemies with
shame and infamy, but upon his head let the Crown flourish, and in his
posterity to perpetual generations.

PSALM. CXXXIII.
IN this Psalm the amability of peace, and the blessings of unity are described
and commended, whether in the Church, Family and Commonwealth.

1. It is, says the Prophet, a good and pleasant thing, ver. 1. 2. He declares
both by similitudes.
1. The pleasantness, by the ointment with which the High Priest was anointed.

2. The goodness or profit of it, by the dew that falls upon the Mountains,
viz. Hermon and Zion.

3. But in plainer terms, from the blessing commanded by God, to fall upon the
head of the peaceful, ver. 3. It is probable this Psalm was written by David,
when all the Tribes were united, and agreed to anoint him King in Hebron; for
then all Factions were ceased, and it was a good and a pleasant thing to behold
their concord and unity under one King, and in one Religion.

1. An Elogy of peace, and concord.
The Prophet begins with a general Encomium of peace, unity, concord.

Behold, how gold and pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
unity.

1. Behold, take notice of it, for it is the speech of him who did now taste
it, and had the experience of the difference of dissension, and the profit of a
settled peace. 2. How good aid pleasant: He admires it, being not well able to
express it. 3. The Encomium it self in expressed by two Epithers: It is good
and pleasant. 1. It is good.
It is good, and brings much profit with it: Concordia parvae res crescunt. 2.
Pleasant.
It is pleasant, and brings much content with it: Vis virta fortior, and
amaenior.
4. The concord it self thus expressed, Brethren, either in a Family, Church,
or Commonwealth, to dwell together in unity, to be of one heart, one mind, one
soul, and intend the common good. This is a good and pleasant thing.
2. Like the perfume on Aarons head.
The pleasantness and content that is to be received from it, he opens by a
similitude, comparing it to the ointment which was very precious and sweet,
that was poured upon the head of the High Priest.

It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard,
even Aarons beard, concord was like this halm.

1. All sorts were the better for it, Princes, Nobles, people; the head, the
beard, the skirts. 2. It sends forth a sweet and pleasant savor, rejoices
all, as did that ointment. 3. It heals bruises, wounds, ulcers, made by War, as
that balsom did, 1 Cor. 13.
3. Profitable.
The profit and commodities that flow from unity, peace and concord, he
expresses,

It is as the dew of Hermon, Like the dew of Hermon of Zion; which is
accompanied with a blessing
and as the dew that descended on the Mountains of Zion, it gently descends,
and insensibly fructifies, and benefits the ground, and peace enricheth.

4. And this he sets down without any Metaphor, viz. That peace has a promise
of a blessing, a perpetual blessing from God; for there the Lord commanded his
blessing, even life for evermore. God declares by the abundance of all things,
which he gives to those that live in peace, how acceptable concord and unity of
Brethren is unto him.

1. He commands his blessing, commands all creatures to be useful unto them,
and serve them. 2. His blessing is prosperity, good success, etc. Benedicere
ejus est benefacere. 3. This he calls life; for non est vivere, sed valere
vita; with troubles, grief, etc. a man's life is non vitales, no life: A quiet
life those then that live in peace shall have, which is not interrupted with
grievances. On the contrary, where there are dissentions in Religion, or in the
Civil State, there is malediction and death.
The Prayer out of the One hundred and thirty third Psalm.
O God, who art the Author of peace, and lover of concord, and have adopted us
to be thy children in Christ Jesus,

After our long experience of the evils that arise from division and
dissension, command thy blessing of peace to lite upon us, so shall our life,
that has been hitherto full of troubles, be sweet and comfortable, prosperous
and happy, and we will always live in unity, peace and concord, and praise thy
Name for thy mercy in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXXXIV.
IN this Psalm the Prophet exhorts the Levites and Ministers of Religion to
attend to their appointed hours of prayers: 2. The Levites exhorted to bless
God.
Brings in the Ministers blessing the people, ver. 3.

1. Behold, bless ye the Lord. 2. Yea principally, and before all others; for
ye are the servants of the Lord, chose out of the people to this service. 3. Ye
are those which by night stand in the house of the Lord; ye are appointed,
Levit. 8. Numb. 18. and must therefore stand upon your watch. In the Temple you
ought not to be sleepy and idle, for you were set for another purpose.
Therefore, 4. Lift up your hands by prayer in the Sanctuary, And to bless the
people.
5. Bless the Lord, laud and magnify his Name.
The other part of your office is to bless the people, let not that be
forgotten neither, but say in this Form of words: 1. Which they do
The Lord bless thee. Let them know from whom the blessing comes. 2. Out of
Zion. So long as they remained in the unity of the Church, no blessing to be
expected, The form of blessing.
when Zion was left. 3. That Lord who has made heaven and earth. He that has
power to bless, and has given, and must give his blessing to all creatures,
without which, they will not be blessed to thee.


The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and thirty fourth Psalm.
O Merciful God, Levi, and taker us near unto thy self, give us grace and
abilities to perform our duties to thee. We are thy chosen servants, we are to
stand in the house of the Lord, cause us therefore night and day to stand
consciouably upon our watch, to lift up our hands in thy Sanctuary,

And moreover we entreat of thee dear Father, Zion, who fly unto thee for a
blessing. Thou art the Lord who have made heaven and earth, deliver us from our
present difficulties and dangers, and since thou have vouchsafed to call us to
the knowledge of thy truth, give us a hoart to land and praise thy holy Name
for ever and ever. Amen.

Here ends the Psalms of Degrees.
PSALM. CXXXV.
IN this Psalm the Prophet invites the servants of God to praise him, and
Ministers especially, verse. 1, 2. by arguments drawn, 1. From his goodness,
especially in his election of Israel, verse. 3, 4. 2. From his greatness and
power showed in his works, from verse. 5. to 8. 3. From his justice showed upon
the enemies of Israel, from verse. 8. to 13. 4. From his loving kindness
extended, and to be extended, to his servants, verse. 13, 14. 5. He invites the
Levites to praise God. The first part.
Having derided the vanity of Idols, from verse. 15. to 19. he returns to his
exhortation, calling upon all to bless God, from verse. 19. to 21.


1. He calls upon the Ministers of Religion especially to attend to the
recitation of divine praises, and in the same words of the former Psalm.

1. Praise ye the Lord, praise ye the Name of the Lord, praise Him, O ye
servants of the Lord. 2. Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the Courts
of the house of our God.
2. The second part. The reasons.
And now ingeminating his words again, he produces his reasons to persuade it.

1. Praise the Lord, for he is good. What is good is worthy of praise, Because
he is good.
what is bad worthy of dispraise. But God is absolutely good, not
comparatively, nor by participation, from himself good, not from any other, and
therefore praise the Lord, because he is good. 2. It is a pleasent work.
Sing praises to his Name, because it is pleasant, it is no troublesome work,
or laborious, but full of delight, sweetness, content. The Hebrew word Nahim,
may be referred to the Lord, to his Name, or to the praise, so that the sense
may be, sing unto the Lord, because the Lord is sweet, or sing to his name for
it is sweet, or sing unto the Lords Name, for it is a pleasant and an action of
content that delights the soul. 3. Praise the Lord for his love to Israel,
which imposes a debt and obligation to praise him. They tied to do it because
God chose Jacob.
1. For the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, to be his inheritance,
portion. 2. And Israel to be his peculiar treasure. Romans 9. Malach 1. I have
l^ved Jacob and hated Esau. And this obligation lies upon Christians now. The
third part.


3. The next Argument which the Prophet uses to persuade to the praise of God,
is from his greatness, of which he was assured.

For I know, first, that the Lord is great; secondly, Because God is great.


And first that the Lord is great, and of great power, he proves by many
instances.

1. From his Empire, and universal dominion, in heaven, the earth, the seas,
etc. 1. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that he did. In his works
Nothing is impossible to him. We would do many things, but cannot. He does all
by his free will, not out of any need: but we work for the most part, because
we want, necessity compels us. It Is but't fithen we give to him the praise, not
to our selves. 2. He does all things what he pleases in all places, in heaven,
earth, seas, hell.

And these last words the Prophet amplifies, by setting down some especial
places, in which his works are most apparent.

1. In the earth. In the earth.
He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth from all parts,
East, West, North, South, 2. In the air, and clouds above. He makes lightning
for the rain. Air.
A wonder, that fire should be mixed with water, and not distinguished. 3. In
the water. For he brings the winds out of his treasures. The water.
A third wonder, for nothing is more obscure than the generation of the winds,
out of his treasures they come, from his rich and secret power. John 3.
4. The third argument the Prophet uses to persuade us to praise God, The
fourth part.
is from his justice in taking vengeance of the enemies of his people: as,
Because just
1. Upon the Egyptians. 1. Who smote the firstborn of Egypt both of man and
beast, For instance on Egypt.
and it was evident that it was his hand, because the firstborn only were
smitten, and of the Egyptians only, and not of Israel. 2. Who sent tokens,
and wonders into the midst of thee O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and all his
servants, Exodus 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. in brief, he minds us of all the signs and
plagues of Egypt.
2. On the Amoritish Kings, Sihon and Og, On the Amoritish Kings.
and the thirty one Kings of Canaan.


He smote great Nations, and slew mighty Kings, as for example,

Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King of Bashan.

And gave away their land for an heritage; All which is evident out of the
books of Numb. Deuteronomy. Joshua.

5. The fifth part. For this he extols God.
To the commemoration of the revenge that God took upon the enemies of his
people, and the benefits he bestowed on them, he adds a conclusion formed into
an Epiphonima, in which he first extols Gods name, and then shows his mercy to
his people.

1. Thy Name O Lord endures for ever, i. e. for these thy wonderful works. 2.
And thy memorial throughout all generations. Thy memory, thy fame, the
remembrance of thy Acts shall flourish and remain to all posterity.
2. And the reason is drawn from his mercy, 1. And shows his mercy to his people
For the Lord will judge his people. The world judges them forsaken, but he is
their keeper and defender, and will judge their cause, and at last take revenge
on their persecutors, and deliver them. 2. And he will repent himself
concerning his servants, Though he punishes his dearest children, yet he will
be at last entreated, be propitious and kind, and remove his heavy hand, Psalm.
136.23.

6. The sixth part. 2. God above all gods.
The Prophet has proved that God is absolutely great in himself, which he
proposed verse. 5. And now he proves the second part of his proposition, that
our Lord is above all gods. For being compared to the Idols of the Heathen, he
far exceeds them. They were Devils, not gods, they the work of men's hands, made
of earthy materials, they could not infuse life, sense, reason into their
images, as God did into his image man, they nor saw, nor heard, nor moved. For
he shows their vanity diverse ways. And shows the vanity of Idols.


1. From their matter, whereof they were made. The Idols of the beathen are
silver and gold. 2. The work of men's bands. 3. They have mouths, but they speak
not, eyes they have, but they see not: They have ears, but they hear not,
neither is there any breath in their mouths. 4. From the sortishness and misery
of those that worship them. They that make them are like unto them, The makers
are blind, mute, deaf, understand nothing at all, who suppose, that they can
make gods. And they that trust in them more sotrish, that think a stone can
help them.
7. The seventh part.
In the last part he invites all the true worshippers of God to praise him,
because they are lively images of the living God, they see, they hear, they
speak, they understand, That therefore all praise God.
and therefore they praise that God, from whom they the faculty of living,
hearing, speaking, seeing, and understanding. To this he invites, 1. All
Israel. Bless the Lord O house of Israel. 2. Bless the Lord O house of Aaron.
3. Levites. Bless the Lord, O house of Levi. 4. Lastly, of all the Laity. Ye
that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.


To which he adds his own vote, concluding with this Epiphonima.

1. Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, where he shows his presence by the Ark. 2.
Which dwells at Jerusalem; who though he be every where by his Essence and
presence, yet peculiarly dwells in his Church by his inhabiting Spirit. Let the
Citizens of Zion and Jerusalem never cease to bless him.
The Hymn and Prayer collected from the One hundred and thirty fifth Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, all we thy servants now gathered together in thy Spirit to
bless thy name, and here met in the Courts of the house of our God to praise
thee, thou art great, and far above all Gods. Thy benefits are innumerable, not
only which thou have conferd upon thy chosen people, Israel, who is thy
pecultar treasure, but even which with a full hand, thou have poured forth upon
all mankind.

For in heaven, the earth, the seas, and in all deep places, thou have done
whatsoever thou pleasedst. hearts of all Kings and Princes, thou so bendest
them, as may make most for the good and saidation of thy people, Egypt, the
Amorites, and Canaanites felt thy power,

Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever, and therefore our hope, which is grounded
upon thy promises,

Which mercy if thou will grant us, then all that fear the Lord, both Priest
and people, the whole house of Aaron, of Levi, and all Israel shall have just
occasion to bless the Lord, and say, Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which
dwells at Jerusalem. Allelujah.

PSALM. CXXXVI.
THIS Psalm is of the same Argument that the former. For in it all men are
called upon to praise God for his greatness and goodness, his providence and
mercy in creating; governing, and ordering the world, but especially his love
showed to his people the Church. All which works, because they proceeded from
his Mercy, therefore that Attribute is made the burden of the Psalm, and the
close in every verse. And this was a Solemn form in use in the Jewish Church,
as is apparent, 2 Chronicles. 7.3, 6. and 20, 21.

The parts of this Psalm are, 1. A general exhortation to praise God for his
goodness, Majesty, verse. 1, 2, 3. 2. A declaration of his goodness and Majesty
by the effects. 1. Of his Creation, from verse. 4. to 10. 2. Of his Providence
especially in conserving his Church, and exercising his judging toward her
enemies, from verse. 10. to 25. 3. That his Providence extends to all creatures,
verse. 25.
3. A conclusion fit for the exordium, for it calls us up to praise God, verse.
26.


1. The first part. An invitation to praise God.
In the three first verses the Prophet invites to praise God for his goodness
and mercy.

1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; For his Mercy endures for
ever. 2. O give thanks to the God of Gods; For his Mercy endures for ever. 3.
O give thanks to the Lord of Lords. For his Mercy endures for ever.
In these verses Expositors find the Trinity.

1. In the first, Jehovah. God the Father, who is the fountain of Being. 2. In
the second, God the Son, who is the God of Gods, whether Angels or Princes, who
are called Gods, but he is over them. 3. In the third, the Holy Ghost, who is
Lord of Lords, who, as the wind, blows where, when, and on whom he will. Other
Lords have not Free Will, but, as Servants, must do his pleasure. Bellarmine.
His reasons are, The chief reason, because good, merciful for ever.
that we give thanks to him, because he is good, because merciful, and his
mercy endures for ever. For it is his mercy, that we shall live for ever; so
that his mercy is extended to us both while we live on earth, and when we live
with him in heaven. It is no improbable conjecture of Musculus, that this Psalm
was sung by the Quire, and that the people at the end of every Versicle, sung
this Responsory. For his Mercy endures for ever. Which was no Battology
neither, says Moller, for it follows and applies every particular benefit.

2. The second part.
The Prophet now begins to praise God for his great and wonderful works, which
he alone was able to do, such as was the work of Creation, in which he used not
the power of Angels, And farther, for his works.
but his own only. Give thanks to the Lord, 1. Who has done wonderful things.
His instance is presently in the Creation. Of Creation, in all which he shows
his mercy.
2. For his Mercy endures for ever. His Mercy was conspicuous in this work,
for he made not any thing of necessity, as if he needed the creature,


Of these wonderful things, Instance first.
the Prophet his 1. The heaven.
First instance in the heavens. To him, give thanks, that by wisdom made the
heavens. It was his first work, Genesis 1. For whether we look upon the magnitude,
the figure, the beauty, the motion, the order of the Orbs, the splendour, the
influence, the effects of the celestial bodies, there is a strange and
wonderful evidence of wisdom and power in them, not unitable by any creature.
2. For his mercy endures for ever, because it pleased him to create these
heavens out of nothing, to be an eternal habitation for Men and Angels. 2. In
the beginning God made heaven and earth; The earth.
Heaven to be the Palace of immortal Citizens: The Earth to be the Mansion of
Mortals. 1. Give thanks to him, that stretched out the earth above the waters:
So naturally it could not be, because it is the heavier element: but he
furrowed the earth, and let into the concavities thereof, the water, that men
and beasts might live upon it. 2. For his mercy endures for ever. In this
there was a threefold mercy. 1. In respect of the earth, to make it something
of nothing. 2. In respect of the water, to which he prepared a settled place. 3.
In respect of man, to whom he gave the earth uncovered, and safe from the
waters, yet watered with rivers, that he might live in it, till it, and reap
the fruit of it.

3. verses. The Sun and Moon.
1. Given thanks to him, who made great lihts. For his Mercy endures for ever.
The Sun to rule by day. The Moon and the Stars to rule the night. For his Mercy
endures for ever.




These do wonderfully adorn the heaven, and profit the earth. For these lights
especially, by illuminating the earth, do comfort us, and are over our works by
night and day. And he instanceth in these, rather than in other works of God,
because these shine to all the world, and therefore every man is unexcusable,
if by them they acknowledge not Gods wisdom.

3. From the wonderful works of Gods Creation, The third part. 2. Of providence
to Israel before.
he descends to speak of the works of his Providence, in preservation of his
Church, and instanceth in his people Israel, whom he delivered from Egypt with
a mighty hand, as if he had been a man of War; and this, in respect of Israel
was an act of mercy, though on the Egyptians an act of justice.

Give thanks to him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy
endures for ever.
And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.
With a strong hand, and stretched-out arm: for his mercy endures for ever.
To him which divided the red Sea: for his mercy, etc.
And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy, etc.
But overthrew Pharaoh and his Host in the red Sea: for his mercy, etc.
Give thanks to him which led his people through the Wilderness: for his mercy,
etc.
To him which smote great Kings: for his mercy, etc.
And slew famous Kings: for his mercy, etc.
Sihon King of the Amorites: for his mercy, etc.
And Og the King of Bashan: for his mercy endures for ever.
And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy, etc.
Even an heritage to Israel his servant: for his mercy, etc.
He performed unto them all the Offices of a good Captain, Guide, Leader, nay,
Father; for he took care for food for them, fed them with bread from Heaven,
brought for them waters out of the Rock, cured their sick, defended them, and
avenged them on their enemies, etc. But the whole History is so plain in Moses,
that it needs no explanation.

4. All this was done for them before they entered the land of Canaan; After
they entered Canaan.
the Prophet goes on to remember what was done for them after: They proved a
rebellious people, for which God humbled them, and brought the Philistines, and
the Babylonian Kings against them, who conquered them, and kept them under, and
in subjection: But God in this their oppression, when they cried and turned to
him, forsook them not, but raised up some Judge, King, or other, to deliver
them, as Gideon, Sampson, David, Cyrus, etc. which the Prophet mentions in
the next verses.

Who remembered us when we were in our low estate: for his mercy, etc.
And has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy, Psalm. 135.14.
5. Lastly, That this goodness is not extended only to his people, And his
providence to all creatures.
but even to all Creatures, is manifest, in that he provides for, nourishes and
conserves every living creature; for Caro, here signifies every thing that has
life, and bread, all kind of nourishment by which the life is sustained.

Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

6. He concludes as he begun, O give thanks unto the God of Heaven, The
conclusion that we praise him.
for his mercy endures for ever. And he calls him the God of Heaven, because
he only made the Heaven, and has his Throne in Heaven,

The Hymn collected out of the One hundred and thirty sixth Psalm.
O Omnipotent God, so great is thy goodness, so infinite is thy mercy to the
sons of men, that we are not able to express it, because we cannot comprehend
it: Whatever we enjoy is from thy mercy, whatever we hope to enjoy is thy
mercy; Thy mercy endures for ever, and therefore we will sing of thy mercies
from everlasting to everlasting. with great lights, the Sun to rule the day, or
the Moon and Stars to govern the night; or whether we look down upon the earth,
stretched out above the waters, that it might be the habitation, and yield food
for all creatures, in both these, nay, in all places they occur unto us ample
Testimonies of thy bounty and mercy; all which, should we consider with a pious
and serious mind, we must needs with an inflamed heart, and free tongue, never
cease to sing with the Prophet,

In the Creation of all things, From Ver. 10. To Ver. 22.
in giving food to all flesh, thy mercy has been wonderful: But in the
choosing, gathering, conserving, revenging the wrongs, and pardoning the sins
of thy people more wonderful; our hearts were as hard and as cold as a stone,
should we not consider what thou did for thy people Israel, which is an
engagement to us, what thou will do for thy Church: For thy mercy endures for
ever; Thou smotest Egypt, and slew mighty Kings for their sakes; Thou did
lead them as a Captain, and provide Manna and Quails, and waier for them, as a
father; defend them from their enemies, and never cease to prosecute them with
mercy, thou give them the heritage of the Heathen; yea,

Thou therefore who art rich in bounty, clemency and mercy, that never can have
an end, behold, we beseech thee, thy Church, and remember it now in a low
estate; remit our sins, pardon our transgressions, repent concerning thy
servants, and redeem us from our enemies: for thy mercy endures for ever. Thou
which give food to all flesh, feed our souls with the celestial Manna, thy
Word and thy Sacraments: for thy mercy endures for ever.

So shall we give thanks to thee, O Lord, because thou art good, and thy mercy
endures for ever.

PSALM. CXXXVII.
AT the composure of this Psalm, the Jews were in captivity at Babylon, under
the heavy yoke of the Assyrian Tyrant, far from their own Country, banished
from the Temple of God, deprived of all public Exercises of Religion, scoffed
and scorned by the pride and insultation of an enemy, and now they begin to
complain and pray; remember what they were, and what they are; what they
enjoyed, and what they want; that at Jerusalem they could sing songs of Zion,
but now at the Rivers of Babylon, they must sit down, and hang up their Harps.

The Psalm has two parts. 1. A complaint of Israel, because of the insultation
of the Babylonians, in which they deplore their sad condition, remember the
pleasures of Jerusalem, and the Religion of the Temple, and long to be there,
from ver. 1. to 7. 2. An imprecation, for they pray for Divine vengeance to
descend upon their Persecutors, ver. 7.8, 9. Isreal's complaint in their
captivity.



1. Their complaint arises from the sense of their captivity, which is
aggravated: The first part.
1. From the place, Babylon; By the waters of Babylon, From the place.
a place far from their own Country, where they served a cruel and barbarous
people; a people that were Aliens from the Covenant God made with Abraham, 2.
From the continuance of their captivity and misery: There we sat down, From
the continuance and misery.
took up the seats they allotted us, and durst not remove for seventy years,
exposed to wind and weather, and injuries of wild Beasts. 3. From the effect it
produced in them, tears, mourning; yea, The effect, tears.
we wept, so we spent our time; but our enemies cruelty was such, that our
tears wrought not any compassion on their hard hearts. 4. From the cause that
drew these tears from them; The cause, the remembrance of Zion.
not so much their present calamities, as the remembrance of what they enjoyed
before; but now were deprived of the Religion and Service of their God. We
wept, when we remembered thee, O Zion. Toties, quoties, so often as they
remembered the Temple, the Feasts, the Sacrifices, the Songs, the Hymns they
sung to God in Zion, so often they sat and wept. 5. From the intensiveness of
their grief; so great it was, Their grief intensive.
that they laid aside whatever should provoke mirth; they had more mind to
weep, than sing; their Harps were unstrung, As for our Harps, we hanged them
upon the Willows in the midst thereof: They now had no use of them, for their
soul within them refused to be comforted.


2. Now that which also increased their grief, was the (...), The insultation
of the Babylonians.
the joy of the enemy at this their grief, and the scoff and scorn they put
upon them, in an insulting manner they to us in our greatest sorrow.

1. There, in a strange land, in the land of our captivity. 2. They, that
carried us away captive, they that wasted us, they did it. 3. They required of
us a song, they required of us mirth, saying, 4. O thou Jew, our Captive, our
Slave, Come now, sing us one of the Songs of Zion. O they are sweet songs, your
God will be pleased with them, they, we know, will ease your grief, Come now,
The Jews answer to the Babylonians insulting request

3. To this Sarcasm of the insulting Babylonian, the captive Jew returns a
double answer.

1. A^ impossibili, This was a thing that could not be done, might not be done.
How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange land? The land is strange,
Impossible for them to sing.
the people Aliens, the Song the Lords, destined to his honor, to his service,
and therefore how can we sing it, without giving offense to our God, and to
you? Holy Hymns and Psalms were not composed to please carnal ears.
2. They are constant in their profession of Religion
Next they answer by a protestation of their hope and constancy in Religion,
and devote and accurse themselves, if they do not continue in it.

1. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem; forget the Feasts I kept there, the worship
I used to God, there, which would be done, if I should sing the Lords Song in a
strange land, as you desire: No, Jerusalem is the place we ought to worship:
Then let my right hand forget her cunning; let my right hand wither, dry up,
and never touch Harp more. 2. If I do not remember thee; if I do not make
mention of thee Jerusalem, And if not, devote themselves to a curse.
and prefer thee; make thee the beginning, middle, end of my mirth, then let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, never let me speak more, or have any use
of that excellent Organ of Gods glory: Let me never have use of hand or tongue,
if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy: Which I could not do, should I,
to please you, sing the Songs of Zion; for by that I should do what were
unworthy of my Religion, dishonor my God, Their faith, that God will deliver
them.
scandalize his people, satisfy and confirm you in your profaneness and
impiety: But I know the day will come, when exhilarb caput, I shall lift up my
head; and when that day comes, I will sing one of the Songs of Zion; for it
will be a merry day.
2. The second part.
This is the sense of the first part of this Psalm; the other is an imprecation
against Edom and Babylon both enemies and persecutors of Gods people: The
Babylonians carrive them away captive, An imprecation.
and overturned Jerusalem; and the Edomites did persecute his brother with the
Sword, and cast off all pity; read Amos 1.11. Obadiah, from ver. 10. to 17.
Ezekiel. 35.5. Against both the Prophet prays.

1. Against Edom.
Against Edom.

1. Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: Remember
how they carried themselves toward thy people on that day, when thy anger did
smoke against them, Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians. 2. Remember how
they helped on the affliction, and encouraged our enemies, crying, Raze it,
raze it even to the foundations; Root and Branch, down with it to the ground.
2. Against Babylon.
Against Babylon; to her he turns his speech by an Apostrophe, but foretells her
ruin.

1. O daughter of Babylon, which art to be destroyed. Thou seem to thy self
to be now most happy, Blesses the man that destroys it, or takes the revenge.
but thy ruin approaches, which shortly fell out by Cyrus and the Medes, whom
he blesses. 1. Blessed shall he be, that rewards thee, as thou have rewarded
us. (...). 2. Blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and thirty seventh Psalm.
O God, to whom the secrets of all hearts are open, Thou know it is the
desires of us thy poor servants to adore and praise thee, and with Hymns and
Songs of Zion to magnify thy holy Name: But for many years we have sat at the
waters of Babylon, we live with a strange people of a divided tongue, who have
banished us from thy Temple, and destroyed thy houses of prayer, and abolished
thy Service: So that hanging up our Harps,

They that carried us away captive, insult over us; they that have spoiled and
wasted us, deride us, as if they had been aliens and strangers, Zion with which
we were wont to praise thee.

But the melody of them is yet in our ears, and the efficacy of them is in our
hearts: If I forget thee, O Jerusalem; forget thy Solemnities, then let my
right hand forget her cunning, and never touch the strings of Instrument any
more; if I do not with sighs and groans remember thee, and the pleasure I took
in thy religious and pious Devotions, then let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth; yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chiefest joy.

Turn our captivity, O Lord, as the Rivers in the South, let not thy Church for
ever be deprived of her holy and spiritual joy; suffer not the mouths of those
that bring glad tidings of peace, to be stopped; let not this lawful and sincere
Worship always be laid aside; nor the Hymns, sung to thy praise and honor, for
ever be banished from thy house; remember those that have done it, Edom and
Babylon, take revenge on both for thy Name sake.

Remember our brother Edom that helped on the affliction, and in the day that
thou were angry with Jerusalem, encouraged and made strong the hand of the
Babylonian against us; when born of the same flesh, and regenerated by the same
Spirit, they should have been moved with pity; They, without mercy, hastened our
Ruin, cried to the Rooters, Root and Branch, Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundations.

And thou, O Babylon, which have done the work; as I doubt not, Edomites, so
also he will bring thee down. Thou art miserable, and thou shall be miserable.
Happy shall that King and people be, that rewards thee, as thou have served
us. Happy shall he be, that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones.

O merciful God, whatever wrath and indignation is due unto us for the breach
of thy Commandments, and dishonouring thee in thy Service, remove it, O Lord,
from thy people,

PSALM. CXXXVIII.
DAVID delivered from his enemies and troubles, and advanced to the Kingdom,
gives thanks to God, acknowledges Gods goodness in hearing his prayers;
foretells the conversion of Kings, shows that God regards the humble, rejects
the proud, puts his trust in God for the future, and prays that God would
continue and enlarge his mercy to him. More briefly.

1. In the three first verses he promises a grateful heart, and to sing forth
the praises of God, because God heard his cries and prayers, and in
tribulations sent him comfort. 2. In the three next, he shows what after Kings
would do, when the works and truth of God should be made known to them. 3. In
the two last verses he professes his confidence in God, shows what he hopes
for from him, and in assurance that God will perfect his work, prays him not
to desert and forsake him. David shows his thankfulness.

1. First, David shows his thankfulness, which he illustrates and amplifies.

1. The first part. And illustrates it, that,
From the manner of the doing of it, done it should be cordially, sincerely,
ardently, totally, I will praise thee with my whole heart. 2. From the
witnesses before whom it should be done, Before the Gods will I sing praise.
Not only privately, but publicly, before the Potentates, He would do it
heartily. 2 Before all men.
whether Angels or Kings of the earth, Psalm. 111.1. Psalm. 107.32. 3. From the
place, the Temple, then the Tabernacle, a symbol of Gods presence with his
people. In the Temple.
and therefore he would fall low, bow, worship, I will worship toward thy Holy
Temple. Which the Jews did when absent from Jerusalem, Dan. 6. 4. The causes
inducing him to it.
From the causes inwardly inducing him to it, I will praise thy Name for thy
loving kindness, and for thy truth. 1. Gods calling him to be King.
For thy loving kindness, in calling me from the sheepfold to the Kingdom. 2.
Performing his word.
And for thy Truth, in performing thy promise. In performing which
5. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name. This clause is diversely
read: Thou have magnified thy Name in thy Word, that is, in performing thy Word
above all things. Or, Thou hast-magnified thy Name and thy Word above all
things. Or, Magnificas cum to^o nomine tuo sermonem tuum. Jun. All these have
the same sense. But the vulgar reads it thus, Quoniam magnificasti super omne
nomen sanctum tuum. And Bellarmine by Sanctum tuum, understands Christ, who
Luc. 1. is (...), to whom he gave a Name above every Name. I suppose our
English Translation should be pointed thus. Thus have thou magnified thy Word
above all thy Name, or, and above all thy Name. For Musculus by and joins the
Substantives. For hearing and granting his petitions.
Magnificasti super omnia nomen tuum and eloquium. 6. From Gods facility in
hearing and granting his petitions, which he presented to his God in the time
of his banishment and affliction. In the day when I cried thou answeredst me,
and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. Infirm creatures we are, and
in temptations and afflictions must faint, except God strengthen us. Out of all
these motives David would praise God.
2. David having set down what God had done for him, The second part.
in mercy called him from following the Ewes great with young ones, anointed
him to be a King, heard his prayers, strengthened him in his affliction, and in
truth performed his promises; conceives it impossible, but that either the
Neighbor, or future Kings, should take this, when they heard of it, into their
consideration, and ^cknowledge the miracle, and praise God for it. This
certainly is the literal sense, This mercy to David, was like to move other
Kings to magnify God.
though it may have an eye to the conversion of Kings in future to the faith.

1. All the Kings of the earth; Hiram, Toe, etc. or the future Kings of Israel,
Judah shall praise thee, when they hear the words of thy mouth, what thou have
said of me, David, and of my seed. 2. Yea, They shall sing in the ways of the
Lord; that is, of the ways of the Lord: Muscul. of his mercy, truth, clemency:
For great is the glory of the Lord; he is very glorious in all his ways, his
works, his proceedings. 3. Of which this is one: Though the Lord be high, of
which, I David may be an instan^ce: But the proud he beholds afar off. He
removes far from him, he will not have to do with them, they are in remotis
agendis; of which Saul may be an example, and the Devil.
3. Because God, who is high, looks upon the lowly, The third part. With it so
moved he was, that he puts his affiance in God.
therefore David being conscious to himself of his own humility, promises
himself help from God in all his tribulation, even for the time to come.

1. If I walk in the midst of trouble, that is, on all sides exposed to
trouble. 2. Thou will revive me, make me live, and preserve me safe, and
untouched. 3. Thou shall stretch forth thy hand against the wrath of my
enemies: Thou, by thy power, shall restrain their fury, that would devour me;
and hinder their endeavors and enterprises. 4. And thy right hand shall save
me: Thy power, thy virtue, thy Christ, who in Isa. 53. is called the arm of the
Lord, shall do it.
The last verse depends on the former, because he knew, And that that God who
had, would yet deliver him.
that as yet many troubles and afflictions remained to be undergone, therefore
he was confident, that the same God who had hitherto delivered him, would be a
good God to him for the future, and deliver him in time to come, and so make
his work perfect.

1. The Lord will perfect that which concernt me; not for any merit, but mercy.
2. Of which he gives the Reason: Thy mercy, O Lord, endures (...) ^ver. For
his mercy.
but (...) is eternal, so is it eternal, and the resote I know that God will
pers^^ in me what he has begun. 3. And to that end he concludes with a prayer,
And for this he prays.
Forsake not the work of thy own hands. Thou which in mercy have begun this
work, conserve, increase, perfect it, because it is thine own work only, and
none of mine. If we desire that God should perfect any work in us, we must be
sure that it is his work. Absolons work had no blessing, for it was none of
Gods.
The Prayer out of the One hundred and thirty eighth Psalm.
O Lord, I will praise thee with my whole heart; neither will I do this
privately, and within the walls of my house, but in public, and in the
Assembly of thy Saints, even before Angels, and the greatest Princes, who are
Terrestrial gods; Psalms to the honor of thy Name; I will bow my self, and
fall low, and worship toward thy holy Temple, and there praise thy Name for
thy loving kindness, in making unto me many gracious promises; and for thy
Truth, in performing what thou have promised, in both which, Thou have
magnified thy Name, Thou have commanded me to call on thee in time of trouble,
and I, in obedience to thy Word, have called: And in the day when I cried, Thou
answer'dst me, by which, Thou have magnified thy Word; and in my weakest
estate, with strength and consolation in my soul, by which, Thou have magnified
thy Name.

So many have been thy mercies, so wonderful thy Providence, so strange thy
protection toward me through my whole life, so beyond expectation thy salvation
sent unto me in my greatest dangers, spoken of me, and fulfilled in me, will be
ready to praise thee, yea, of thy wisdom, thy power, thy justice, thy goodness,
and confess, upon the consideration of thy works, That great is the Majesty and
Glory of our God.

For though thou art high, most high in nature, most high in power, most high
in command and empire, have respect to the lowly; for whose sake thou humbledst
thy self in thy Son, did vouchsafe to descend from Heaven, and converse with
them: As for the proud, Thou beholdest them afar off, as no way approving their
haughty thoughts. O Lord, remove far from me all pride of heart, and create in
me an humble spirit, that thou may cast one, good look toward me, descend
into my heart by grace; and that I may from this low estate ascend unto thee.

Thou, O Lord, have hitherto been merciful unto me, and delivered me from many
troubles, Though then I walk in the midst of trouble, I know thou will revive
me; Thou shall stretch forth thy hand against the wrath of mine enemies, quell
their fury, and allay their rage, and thy right hand shall save me.

O Lord, perfect thy work in me that thou have begun; It proceeds not from my
mer^^ but thy mercy; but endures for ever; (...) vanishes not with one
benefit, but is eternal, as thou art eternal: And all the works that flow from
me, whether within me, or done upon me, are thy works; forsake not then, but
protect and cherish the works of thine own hands; nor leave me, who am thy
workmanship, created after thine own image. Good God, renew in me what is
decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or my own frailty; let thy grace
pursue me, and thy right hand uphold me, that I may attain to that perfection
of thy Saints in glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXXXIX.
IN this Psalm, David having aspersions laid upon him by his enemies, appeals
to God in justification of his innocence, and he desires of God to be his
Witness and Compurgator, ver. 23.

Now that this his Appeal be not thought unreasonable, he presents God in his
two especial Attributes, Omniscience, and Omnipresonce: Then he shows how free
he was like to be from the faults with which he was charged, in that he loved
goodness, and good men, and hated the ways of wickedness, and wicked men: This
is the Sum.

The parts are: 1. A Description of Gods Omniscience, from ver. 1. to 7. 2. The
Description of his Omnipresence, from ver. 7. to 18. 3. David's hatred of evil
and wicked men, from ver. 19. to 23. 4. The Protestation of his own innocence,
which he offers to the Test and Trial of God, ver. 23, 24.


1. He begins with Gods Omniscience, The first part. Gods Omniscience. He,
and takes upon him the person of mankind; for what he says of himself, is as
true of all men; for we are all known to God.

1. O Lord, Thou have searched me out, proved, examined, Knows:
tried me by an exact search or scrutiny; it needed not, but he would have us
know, that God most accurately searches into all our ways, not the least
thing we do is hid from him. Thou searchest me out, and know me: Now what he
said in general, he opens in particulars. 2. As first for our Actions, he
searches and knows them. Our actions.
1. Thou know my down-sitting, and my uprising; when, where, and for what
cause I sit down or rise. 2. For our thoughts, he searches them also: Our
thoughts.
Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, from all eternity; Thou know my
counsels, my cogitations, even before I began to think them. 3. The intents and
purposes of our thoughts and actions, Our intents.
the ends we aim at: Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art
acquainted with all my ways. 4. Yea, and our words too: There is not a word in
my tongue, but, Our words.


And of this, he gives this Reason, because God is our Maker, toti quanti
quanti sumus, we are his work: Thou have beset me behind and before, The Reason
is, because he is our Maker.
and laid thy hand upon me. The Vulgar reads this verse thus, Ecce Domine, tu
cognovisti omnia, novissima and antiqua mea, tu formasti me, and posuisti super
me manum tuam; where Bellarmine says, there be two Arguments to prove that God
knows all things that belong to us.

1. Because God knows all things past and future; antiqua, novissima, before,
behind us, and therefore no wonder, if he know all the actions of men. 2.
Because he has made man, he governs him: Thou, O Lord, made man, and after
have put thy hand upon him, to order him; Thou bear him, as it were, in thy
hands, and must therefore of necessity know his ways.
The Prophet concludes this Attribute of Gods Omniscience with an Epiphonema:
Such knowledge is not in man.
Such knowledge; to know the hearts, thoughts, actions, words of all men, is
too wonderful for me, it is a property that belongs to God alone; It is high,
it passes my Reach and Capacity.

2. The second part. His Omnipresence.
From Gods Omniscience, David descends to speak of his Omnipresence, and by it
shows, That no man can hide himself from the eye and knowledge of God, because
he is present in every place.

1. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? i.e. That I may be hid from thy
knowledge. No place can hide us from his presence.
2. Or whither shall I go from thy presence? i. e. From thy eye, face.
Say, I should think of some lurking place to hide my self in, it must be in
Heaven, Hell, the Sea, the utmost part of the earth; or else I must be hid from
thee by some dark night: But none of these will do it; For thou art present in
all these places, and beholdest in the thickest darkness.

1. If I ascend up to heaven thou art there. 2. If I make my bed in hest, thou
art there. 3. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost
parts of the Sea, ut custos captivum, and thy right hand shall hold, arrest me,
and keep me under restraint. 4. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me,
even the light shall be about me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but
the night shines as the day, the darkness and light are both alike to thee.
3. His instance to prove both, is man's formation in the womb,
And among many instances that might be given to declare Gods Omniscience and
Omnipresence, omitting other, he makes choice of one only, viz. the formation
of a child in the womb. God, says he, forms the child in the belly of the
mother, makes the seminal vessels, which are destined for generation, sees how
to work, and how to join all parts together, in that dark Cell; and therefore
night, day, darkness and light are all one to him: He is present in that
abstruse and secret place, and sees how to knit bones and sinews, and nerves
together; to form the vital parts, endue them with faculties, cause flesh to
come upon them, and till all be perfected, to wrap up the Embrio in it
Secundine. But to the words.

1. The excellency of the Author is commended. Thou have possessed my Reins:
Psalm. 26.2. The sense then is, Thou have undertaken wholly to frame me, as I
lay hid in the womb, and there have cherished me, being formed. 2. Thou have
covered me in my mothers womb, clothed me with flesh, skin, bones, and
enclosed me with a Secundine.
And here the Prophet, Which the Prophet admires.
before he proceeds in his description of the child's formation in the womb,
breaks off the course, and falls in admiration of Gods work, and sings praise
for it.

1. I will praise thee, and extol thee my Maker. 2. For I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. It is enough to strike any man into a reverential fear of
thee, and a wonder, that shall consider se^^ously this work. 3. Mavelous are
thy works, all are mavelous, and that my soul knows right well, but none
beyond this.
And now he goes on, He continues his Narration of a child's formation in the
womb.
and continues his Narration of the formation of the Embrio, and descends to
speak of some parts.

1. My substance, (Vis mea, robur meum, ossatio mea, ossium and artuum
compages, essentia mea; for Interpreters differ in the reading) is not hid from
thee. 2. When I was made in secret, in the dark and secret Cell of my mothers
womb. 3. And curiously wrought. The word in the Hebrew, as Moller observes,
signifies, aca pingere, vestes auro, and variis filis diversorum colorum
intexere. Man indeed is a curious piece, and the variety of faculties; Organs,
parts, show him to be so. 4. In the lowest parts of the earth. Not that man was
made in infinis terrae, but in his mothers belly, in which yet the work is as
secret and remote from us, as if God did it in the lower parts of the earth, 2
Maccab. 7.22, 23. 5. Thy eyes did see my substance being yet imperfect.
Embrio, in which there appeared no form, or distinction of parts. Thy eyes saw
what all would come to, that from that imperfection time would produce a
perfect child, and also caused it to be so. 6. And in thy book of prescience
and providence were all my Members written: The Idea of them was with thee. Vt
pictura in mente pictoris. 7. Which in continuance were fashioned, mora
tempores, He again admires Gods works.
when as yet there was none of them perfect.
He closes this part with an (...), in which he does admire the wisdom of God
in his counsels, and in his works. Two things he says of them.

1. That they are dear, and of esteem to him. How precious also are thy
thoughts to me, O God. Not only in the formation of man, but in other things.
2. That they are infinite, Species, the Individua's in the world. David might
well say, O how great is the Sum of them? If I should count them, For they
are indeed innumerable. 3. For this cause, When I awake, I am present with
thee. I never awake, and rise, but some new matter or other of thy providence,
wisdom, is offered to my mind to meditate on, which puts me into an admiration
of thy power, which should be the use that every man ought to make of Gods:
works, from the consideration of them arise to consider the Creator This is to
be present with God.
3. The third part. David purges himself from ambition and blood.
And so David having ended his These of the Omniscience and Omnipresence of
God, comes up closer to that, for which he said all this, which was to justify
himself before Gods Tribunal. It is objected against me, that I am a bloody
man, a man of Belial, and that out of ambition I have invaded the Kingdom. But
thou, Lord, art Omniscient, and know all things; thou art Omnipresent, and
at all my actions; if therefore I be such a man, execute justice upon me. For,
1. Surely thou will slay the wicked, I dare not then be of their society, Will
not have to do with such men.
or embrace their friendship. 2. Depart therefore from me, ye bloody men. Joab,
Doeg, Shimei, Saul, avaunt. 3. Besides, I desire none of their company and
acquaintance, For they speak against thee wickedly, and thy enemies take thy
name in vain.


4. And yet he deals more roundly with them, that he was so far from showing
them any love, and giving them the right hand of fellowship, that he hated
them, Which hatred arose from their hatred of God, their impiety was the cause
of it, and to that he opposes himself, even with a perfect hatred.

1. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? Such he hates.
and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? 2. And to himself
he returns this answer, Yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them my
enemies. I cannot then be the man they would make me: so far I am from the
imputed crimes, that no man condemns them more than my self.
4. The last part. And sets himself before Gods Tribunal
Lastly, for his more full purgation, and sets himself before Gods Tribunal. It
seems his conscience was very clear, and his heart sincere, that he durst abide
that Trial. If I be such as they say, I refuse no punishment, but if otherwise,
show some testimony of my innocence in this matter.

1. Search me, O God, and know my heart. What in the beginning of the Psalm, he
said, God did, now he entreats him to do, and to do it with effect. 2. Try me,
and know my thoughts; examine my heart, my ways, my thoughts, my progess, my
actions. 3. And see if there be any wicked way in me; i.e. any malicious,
bloody, presumptuous way. Prays for Gods direction.
4. And lead me in the way everlasting. This, this, was the end he proposed of
his trial, That if God saw any way of wickedness in him, that might seduce him,
he would withdraw him from that way, and lead him to think, desire, and do
those things which would bring him to eternal life.
The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and thirty ninth Psalm.
SO great is thy knowledge, Whither then shall I go from thy Spirit? Nor East,
nor West, nor Sea, nor Land, nor Night, nor Day, are able to conceal us from
thee; for thou know all, and art present at all our secrets: So awe us then,
O God, nay, overawe us by the presence of thy eye, that in fear and reverence
we may walk before thee, as wary to offend the eye of holiness, and to provoke
the ear of jealousy.

I never cast my eye seriously upon my self, but I find matter of wonder and
fear; Thou were present with those seminal vessels, in thy Book, were all my
members written, which in continuance were fashioned; from an imperfect Embrio,
Thou brought me to the shape of a perfect child, and gave me life and
being.

O how precious are all thy thoughts unto me, they pass my capacity; for they
are more in number than the Sand; and therefore so often as I take thy ways
and works into consideration, I awake out of the lethargy of a secure and
careless mind, and am present with thee in my thoughts and meditations, as
desirous only to live to thee, and to please thee alone.

Thy wisdom, that thou will slay the wicked, and all them that speak against
thee wickedly, and who take thy Name in vain: These thou countest for thy
enemies, and they never shall be esteemed for my friends: Depart therefore from
me you bloody men. Thou, Lord, which know all things, and searchest the
secrets of all hearts, That I hate them that hate thee, and that I am grieved
with those that rise up against thee; yea, I hate them with a perfect hatred;
because they are enemies to thee, therefore I count them my enemies.

They lay to my charge many grievous crimes, for I am a man of contentions,
they charge me as a pestilent Fellow, a son of Belial, a troubler of Israel:
But' Lord, Thou know my Innocence, and integrity of my heart; to thee there
fore I appeal, Search me then, O my God, and know my heart; try me, and examine
my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way, any action, or progress of any
wickedness in me: And if (as by the testimony of a good conscience I am firmly
persuaded) no such guilt can be found upon me, Amen.

PSALM. CXL.
DAVID being persecuted by Saul, Doeg, and the men of Ziph, prays to God for
his safety and defense from their evil tongues: But the Fathers apply it more
largely, and make it a prayer of the Church in persecution, against the Devil,
and wicked men, which are his instruments to persecute Gods people.

The parts of the Psalm are: 1. A Petition to be delivered from his enemies,
whom he describes, from ver. 1. to 6. 2. A Protestation of his confidence in
God, ver. 6, 7. 3. A prayer against them, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. 4. A manifestation
of his hope, that God will uphold him in a just Cause, ver. 12, 13.


1. He first summarily proposes his Petition.

1. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man; Doeg, or the Devil; The first part.
David prays for deliverance from wicked men.
qui inimious home, Mat. 13. 2. Preserve me from the violent man. Two qualities
he had, Malice and Violence.
And the effects were consonant to these qualities; of which, 1. The first was,
evil counsels, meditations of deceitfulness, Who plotted mischief.
and wicked stratagems. Which imagine mischief in their heart; it is their
study. Continually are they gathered together for War. There was no Truce with
them, no peace to be had without any intermission, they fought against me. The
Prince of darkness thus molests us continually, offering to us unchaste
desires, tentations to infidelity, scruples and perplexities, etc.
2. The second, was the evil of their words; And calumniated him.
for their words were correspondent to their thoughts. 1. They have sharpened
their tongues, with calumnies, de tractions, 2. Likea Serpent, Adders poison is
under their lips. They shoot out their Arrows, even bitter words, as the Viper
and Adder does his poison, which, without pain, extinguisheth life, which
causes a dead sleep to fall on the man, and the senses to fail. Sycophants
wound and kill insensibly. The tongues of Heretics do the like, distill, by
fair words poison, and so kill.



2. He repeats his petition and adds. To be delivered.
He repeats his petition, and desires a protection, as before from their
thoughts and words, so now from their actions also.

1. Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the violent
man. 2. From their hands. For 1. They supplant him in his ways.
1. They have purposed to overthrow my goings. They supplant, precipitate me,
which is the Devils work, who labors to supplant us in our ways, that we
should not walk at all, or walk slowly, or fall in the ways of God, or else
forsake, or turn back from them. 2. They lay snares.
The way they took to compass their ends. The proud have laid a snare for me,
and cords, they have spread a net by the way-side, they have set gins for me.
Selah. As hunters and fowlers do for birds and beasts. So the Devil shows the
bait, but conceals the hook. He shows us pleasure, or profit, but conceals the
bitterness of sin, and loss of Gods favor and eternal life. These are his
snares in our way.

2. The second part. He flies to God.
Against the evil and danger he protests his confidence in God, and implores
his aid.

1. Constant he is to his principles, notwithstanding all their malice,
violence, machinations, I said unto the Lord: Thou art my God. I do not cast
away my confidence, I fly to thee. Thou art my Lord, I am thy servant, and
therefore, 2. Hear the voice of my supplications, O God. 3. And that he might
the better show the ground of his Constancy, he shows, 1. Thou art the strength
of my salvation; the virtue, power, fortification, by which I may be safe from
my enemies. 2. What he had formerly done for him, and therefore he doubted not,
but he would do it again. Thou have covered my head in the day of battle;
(...). God always does good.

3. The third part. Prays against them.
This is the other part of his Petition. For as before he desired to be
delivered and defended from his enemies, so now he begins to pray, that their
plots and conspiracies might never have any good success, but both they and
their counsel^ perish together.

1. Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked, let them not have their
wishes. 2. Further not his wicked device. Give no prosperity to what they
undertake. 3. Lest they exalt themselves. Lest they triumph, glory, and exult,
that they have not conquered me, but with thy help. And so their fury, rage,
and blasphemy fall upon thy people, and prove destructive to them.
And after in plain terms he prays against them, He proceeds in his prayer.
and predicts their punishment. As for the head of those that compass me about,
1. Lege talionis, Let the mischief of their own lips cover them. Meo arbitratu
delatores linguis, auscultatores auribus pendeant. Let them perish by their own
counsels and lies. Let them be taken in their own Craftiness. 2. Let hot
burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire. Let them suffer
extreme punishment. Let them fall from above, from thy justice. Let them be
cast into the pits, that they never rise up again: without any hope of
recovery. 3. Let not an evil speaker, a liar, a flatterer, a detractor, be
established, in the earth. 4. Evil shall hunt, give no rest, but pursue till he
take, the violent man, those who write their counsels and decrees in blood, and
by force and arms persecute Gods Church: To overthrow him, to his utter ruin.
The last part. He promises safety to the righteous.



4. To the Commination of punishment to the wicked, he subjoyns by an
Antithesis the promise of God for the defense and safety of the righteous, and
so concludes.

1. I know, and am certainly persuaded, both my own experience, 2. That the
Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor; he
may defer his help, and their deliverance, but he will not take it from them.
For he is a just Judge, and therefore no doubt he will be an encouragement to
the good, and a terror to the evil doer; he will defend the poor afflicted
innocent, and will revenge their wrongs upon their persecutors. 3. And this he
confirms and amplifies from the final cause, which is double. 1. That they
praise him. The end of it. 1. That they praise him.
Surely the righteous shall give thanks to thy Name: being delivered, they
attribute the honor not to themselves, or their own innocence or merits, but
give the glory to his grace, love and good will. 2. That they remain before him
in his Church militant, and triumphant. That they dwell in his presence.
Delivered they shall be, that they may dwell in his presence, or, coram vultu
ejus, be in his favor, dwell in his house, walk before his face here, and
enjoy the beatifical vision hereafter. By the face a man is known fully, not so
by other parts; and vultus animi index, the favor a man bears to another, is
known by his countenance very often. In that then the upright shall dwell coram
facie, it is an argument they shall enjoy his favor in this life; and that
they shall fully enjoy his countenance, and know him, as they are known in the
life to come.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and fortieth Psalm.
O Merciful Father, it is not unknown to thee, with how many evils, tentations,
and pressures thy poor children are beset, by the malice of the Devil, the
pride and violence of men, and the impetuous incursions of their own carnal
hearts.

We therefore humbly beseech thee good Father, that enemy of our happiness,
and without intermission continually have and do yet gather themselves together
to oppose and make war against us. Flatterers, dissemblers, and detractors
these are; and as the Serpent by shooting out his tongue, whets it, that it may
the farther pierce and hurt, so their serpentine malice has sharpened their
tongues to speak most pernicious lies and falsehoods to our ruin. For with a
sharp sting they have sent forth poison, Adders poison out of their lips, by
which they might kill those that are true of heart.

Thou therefore, O Lord, who art a lover of truth and equity, keep me, Many are
the snares, fall in them, or turn back from them. Be therefore, O Lord, my
strength, and my salvation, and in that day when the assaults of tentation are
most furious, be my shield, my umbrage, and cover my head, that I take no harm.
O Lord, let them not be masters of their own wishes, lest they boast, glory,
and blasphemously triumph that they have not conquered thy Church, but thee
also which art the Protector of it.

O Lord, Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them, let the
hot burning coals of thy anger fall from heaven upon them, Let not a man, who
has a tongue prepared to detract, and issue forth lies against his neighbor
prosper, or be established on the earth: Let his own wickedness hunt and
pursue the violent man,

Which if thou shall do, in maintaining the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor, for which the righteous shall give thanks to thy Name, and
hereafter appear before thee, and enjoy the contemplation of thy face for ever
and ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXLI.
WHether this Psalm was composed by David in his flight from Saul, or else when
he was in the Court of Saul, and by flatterers traduced unto him, is not
certain. For that he desires his prayer might be set forth before God as
incense, and be accepted as the evening Sacrifice, gives occasion to think he
was in banishment, for otherwise he might have been present at it. But then
again that he prays against their detractions, and flatterings, may argue a
present danger, and that he was in the Court. But be either true, in it he
prays.

The Contents and Sum of the Psalm. 1. For his prayer, ver. 1, 2. 2. That God
would so restrain his tongue, and compose his mind, that through anger or
impatience he may not offend, ver. 3, 4. 3. He prays, that if he must be
reproved, that his censure may proceed from just, not from unjust men, ver. 5.
whose judgment he declines, ver. 5, 6. and will have no part or society with
them. 4. He shows the malice and hatred of the wicked to good men, ver. 6, 7.
5. He puts his trust in God, and prays to be delivered from their snares, ver.
8, 9, 10.


1. The first part. David prays that God.
This Psalm consists for the main, of petitions; of which, 1. The first is,
that his prayer may be accepted. Lord, I cry unto thee, make haste unto me,
speedily, now, Would accept his prayer.
and hereafter hear my prayer, which is fervent, affectionate, for it is a cry.
2. Let my prayer be set before thee at the incense, which was offered with the
sacrifice, and the lifting up of my hands, a gesture used in prayer, 1 Timothy
2.8. as the evening sacrifice, Exodus 30.7, 8. Revel. 5.8. The qualities of a
good prayer are very well set out by that incense. Prayer, and the incense,
compared.
1. The incense was made of four sweet Odours, Exodus 30.34. which insinuate the
four virtues requisite to sweeten our prayers, Faith, Assurance, Charity,
Humility. 2. This incense was offered in the inner part of the Temple,
Bellarmine.
where was the Tables of the Testimony, and the golden Altar. We are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, the inner part is the soul in which is the Law of
God written with his finger: The Will is the golden Altar, to wit, a clean
heart adorned with grace; from such the incense of prayer must come. 3. The
High Priest only was to offer this incense: The High Priest is Christ, and by
him, as our Advocate, we must have access to God, and conclude all our prayers,
per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. 4. The incense was put on the fire morning
and evening, and thence arose a smoke, which ascended upward directly: This
fire, which sends the sweet smoke and perfume of our prayers directly upward,
is the fervor of our desire: Moreover, in the right ascension, is to be noted
the right intention, and the careful attention in our prayers: If made to be
seen of men, the incense is distorted by some temporal respect, it ascends not
right upwards: If we wander in our devotions, it is not directed as it ought;
and because it is hard to avoid this evagation in prayer, David prays,
Dirigatur oration mea sicut incensum. 5. To this may be added, That the incense
was offered morning and evening, and so our prayers should be at least.


But why does David pray, That his prayer might be accepted rather as the
evening Sacrifice, and not as that of the morning?

Perhaps this might be, because the evening Sacrifice might be more noble, as a
figure of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, which was to be at the evening.

2. His second Petition is, The second part. His prayer for his tongue.
That God would restrain his tongue, that he might know when to speak, and when
to be silent; for he that offends not in his tongue, is perfect, James 3.2.
There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, Eccles. 3.7. He prays
therefore, Set a watch, O Lord, The Vulgar read it, Pone ostium circumstantiae
labiis meis. Circumstances v^ry things much, and therefore men ought to desire
of God to know when, where, how to speak, as well as what to speak.
Note here again, That the Metaphor is borrowed from the Watch and Gate of a
City, which, if it be safely kept, necessary it is, that it have both a Watch
and a Gate, that those be suffered to go our, who ought, and those be not
suffered to go out, that ought not: The Gate will not suffice to do this
without the Watch; for it will be always shut, or always open: And the Watch
without the Gate shall not easily do it; both together will keep all in safety.
and therefore David desires both; a watch to his gate, his mouth, that might
diligently observe what word went out, and with his words, what thoughts of
his heart, levt he be taken by them. Now this Watchman is Prudence; and also a
constant, strong, and continual gate for his watch, that might be shut and
opened at pleasure, or as occasion required; which gate, is Charity. Farther
yet, this watch and gate may signify the two faculties of the Soul, the
Understanding and Will: The understanding to be as the warch, that a man may
know when, and how, and what to speak, and also to be silent: The Will the
gate, that a man open, and be bold to speak what he ought, and fear to speak
what he ought not.

3. His third Petition is for his heart, because it is deceitful above all
things, For his heart


1. Incline not my heart; that is, suffer not my heart to be inclined, bent,
set to any evil thing; or as the Vulgar, In verba malitiae, to malicious
wickedness. 2. Let it not come however to practice: Incline not my heart to
practice wicked works, with men that work iniquity, being invited by their
example, familiarity and custom. The Vulgar reads it, Ad excusandas
excusationes in peccatis, to excuse, defend, or frame pretenses to sin. 3. And
let me not eat of their dainties: Let me not partake with them in their Feasts,
their Doctrines, their feigned Sanctity, their Hypocrisy, or Power, Dignities,
Riches, (...). Vulgar, Non communicabo cum electis little, with those things
which they make choice of, as they would of dainties.
4. The third part. He prays that he may meet with a true friend to reprove
him.
His fourth Petition is, That if occasion of Reproof, and brotherly Admonition
be given, that he may meet with a true friend, that may reprehend him out of
love, and in a charitable manner; not with flatterers, that may sooth him up in
his wicked way, and deceive him.

1. Let the Righteous smite me, smite with a Reproof, able to heal my sin. 2.
It shall be a kindness; I shall reckon it is an act of mercy and charity from
him, I know he will not do it in the gall of bitterness, to disgorge his
spleen, or revenge an injury; but to save a soul: Neither will I verify the
Proverb, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit; for I will love him for it; It
shall be a kindness to me: He verified it in Nathan. 3. And let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil: An excellent oil to heal my wounds of sin; and
the blow of Reproof he gave me, which shall not break my head, but being
broken, cures it.
5. The Preface to the next Petition.
His fifth Petition, is set down in the next verse, to which he premits this
Preface, Yet my prayer shall be in their calamities; and both the Petition and
Preface to it are very difficult; it is diversely read.

Vulgar, Quoniam adhuc and oration mea in beneplacitis little. And the sense
this, I am so far from communicating with them, that my prayer shall be to God,
in beneplacitis little; i. e. against those vices and wickedness in which they
please themselves. And Moller to the same purpose reads it, Quia adhuc oration
mea contra malitiam little. Hierom. Pro malitiis eorum. Faelix. Inter mala
little. Pagnin. Ut eruat me a malis little. Musculus. Nam adhuc oration mea
adversum eorum mala dirigitur. Junius. Quo amplius fecerit, eo amplius ratio
mea erit in malis eorum: And he expounds his meaning thus, What evil soever
they shall do me, it shall not imbitter my mind, but they shall rather cause me
that I commend them to God by grateful prayers.
The Petition, ver. 6. But it is read so many ways, He prays against their.
Magistrates.
that I know not well what to say of it.

Musculus reads it thus, Praecipites dentur velut de rupe judices little:
Audissent verba mea, si dulcia fuissent. And so it is a plain Petition. Let
their Nobles, great men, Magistrates be cast down headlong, and perish, as
Malefactors thrown off a Rock; for they would have heard my words and counsels
I gave them, had they been pleasing, flattering, smoothed them in their ways,
and sweet to them; but because they displeased, they would not hear; therefore
let them perish, as they deserve. Moller reads, Dejecti, or precipita sunt ad
manus pene. The Vulgar, Another sense of this verse.
Absorpti sunt juncti pene judices little, and audient sermones meos, quia
suaves sunt. The Vulgar, Andient verba, quoniam potuerunt: But it is probable
the Latin Translator reads, (...), for (...). Our English Version, When their
Judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words for they are
sweet. All these Translations will carry this sense; i.e. When their Judges,
that is, those to whom the chief Judicature is committed, shall be cast from
their Seats, Authority, Dignity, and punished, and split, and swallowed up, as
men are by the Sea, when the Ship is dashed against a Rock. They, says Moller,
that is, the people, who seduced by them, took part against David, being
terrified by their punishment, shall hereafter hearken to my words; leave Saul
and his party, and cleave to me in their hearts; for my words are sweet: or,
potuerunt, powerful, efficacious to convert their hearts, and pleasant and
delightful to the minds of them over whom they prevail. Junius reads the verse,
And yet a third.
At dimovent se per latera petrarum judi^^s islorum, quamvis intelligant
sermones meos amoenos esse: And makes this sense of it, Although that their own
conscience does sufficiently check these my persecutors, and teach them the
equity of my cause, yet they wait and beset all the sides of the Mountains, or
Rocks, in which I am forced to pitch my Tents, that they may lie in Ambush for
me; and that not only the Vulgar, the Ziphits, Mahanites, with others; but also
the chiefest of Saul's Followers and Captains; yea, although they know that my
words have been mild to them, Which the words following justify.
and I have not offended them in the least matter.
And this sense the verse following will justify: Our bones are scattered at
the Graves mouth, as when one cuts and cleaves wood upon the earth: That is,
The last part.
as Chips, except thou, O Lord, shall succor us, and send us present help; and
therefore he goes on, and presents,

6. A sixth Petition, which has two parts. The last petition for his own
safety.


1. But my eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord, in thee is my trust. 2. Leave
not my soul destitute. 1. For his own safety and deliverance: Leave not my soul
destitute; suffer me not to fall into then hands, to the loss of my life. 2.
Which is grounded upon his hope and confidence in God: My eyes are unto thee, I
depend on thee, I look for help from thee; O God, the Lord, in thee is my
trust. The other part of his Petition is, 3. Keep me from the snare which they
have laid for me, Keep me from their Frauds, Deceits, Ambushes, which as
Fowlers and Hunters they set for me. 4. And lastly, He imprecates confusion to
fall upon his enemies heads, and reiterates his Petition for his own safety. 1.
Let the wicked fall into their own Nets: Neque. n. And imprecates vengeance on
the wicked.
2. But let me ever escape them, pass by, or through them, unhurt.


A Prayer collected out of the One hundred and forty one Psalm.
O LORD, make haste to help me, O my God, and send me some speedy deliverance,
lest if thou make as if thou hear not; I become like them that go down into
the pit. Give ear therefore now unto my voice, when my soul being heavy unto
the death, with fervor and affectionate sighs I cry unto thee. O let my prayer
which I present to thee on the Altar of a sincere heart, by the intercession of
Jesus Christ my Lord,

And first of all, set a watch before my mouth, that I may observe what words
are fit to go forth, and what fit to be kept in, and keep the door of my lips,
that it may not open or shut but by prudence and charity. Suffer me not to
speak, but what I ought, and as I ought, and when I ought, and where I ought.
Let my words be ever gracious,

If at any time being overcome by the weakness and frailty of my flesh, and it
shall be as an excellent oil to cure my ulcerous soul. But never permit the
smooth balm and oily words of the wicked to fall on my head, nor their
flatteries and sothing applauses so please my heart, that thereby I be
cherished, and nuzzled up in my grossest sins. For so far I am from seeking the
favor of the wicked, that I shall always pray against their malice and
wickedness.

At this time they set and besiege the rocky hills, They hunt for my soul as a
Partridge upon the mountains. O Lord, let their chief conductors and leaders be
overthrown and dashed to pieces, as a ship against the rocks. So shall it come
to pass, that the people who have followed them in simplicity of heart, and
whom these Princes have seduced, shall hereafter give better heed to my words
which I sounded in their ears of piety and justice, and mine own innocence.
For these were and are in themselves able to work in them a penitent and
obedient heart, and to the penitent and obedient they will be very ^^eet and
delightful.

But O thou my Lord God, because my eyes are always intent on thee, and all my
hope and trust is placed in thee, not to fall into their hands, who seek to
take away my life. Amen.

PSALM. CXLII. The Title, a Maschil of David.
A Prayer when he was in the Cave.
THE Cave was that of Engaddi, or more probably, that of Odullam, when he was
more destitute. The occasion, the persecution of Saul, and his danger by Achish
king of Gath. The matter of it, an earnest Prayer to God, in which he begs
deliverance from danger.

The parts are 1. An Exordium, in which he 1. First shows what he did in his
trouble, took himself to prayer, ver. 1, 2. 2. Then his consternation and
anxiety of heart, which arose from the malice and craft of his enemies, and the
defect of help from his friends, ver. 3, 4.
2. His address to God, and Petition, ver. 5, 6, 7.


1. The two first verses show David's intention in this Psalm, viz. David in
trouble flies to prayer.
by Prayer in his trouble to make his Address to God. 1. I cried unto the Lord
with my voice, with my voice unto the Lord did I make my supplication. 2. I
poured out my supplication before him, and showed him all my trouble. The first
part:
This is amplified 1. From the vehemence, instance, fervor. I cried, I
supplicated, 2. From the Object, unto the Lord, him and no other I invocated.
The conditions of his prayer.
I poured out before him. 3. From the Instrument. With my voice. Which does not
exclude vocem cordis. For no question he understood, and attended what he said.
4. From the humility in Prayer. It was a supplication. 5. From his free and
full expression, fully and at large he opened his griefs and desires, he left
nothing behind, unsaid, that should be. I poured out my complaint, vented all
from my heart as water poured out of a vessel. Showed and declared my trouble.
6. From his sincerity and confidence in God. That he durst do this before him,
in his eye, in his sight, argues an honest heart. The cause anxiety of mind.



That which caused him to do this: was, 1. The consternation and anxiety of
mind in which he was. This I did, When my breath was as it were gone, and my
life, for ought I saw, almost at an end, and I in the confines of death. There
being then no sufficiency in me, I betook my self unto thee, who art
All-sufficient. 2. Then I addressed my self to thee. For thou knew my path,
my actions, my intentions, the secret of my ways, my path, The fly dealing of
his enemies.
and that without any just cause I suffer these things, being forced and hunted
into this Cave. 3. The craft and sly dealing of his enemies. Especially Saul.
2. In the way wherein I walked: In my Vocation, in that way wherein thou
set me. 2. Have they privily laid a snare for me. Saul gave him his
caughter Mical to be a snare to him; and a Dowry he must have of an hundred
fore-skins of the Philistines, that he might fall by their hands.


4. The desertion of his friends.


1. I looked on my right hand for the help of my friends, and behold, if any
man would be an assistant to me, and take my part, stand by me, as Soldiers in
War to their Captain; but there was no man that would know me; they were as
strange to me, as if they had never seen me: Not a man durst own me; the
miserable have few friends. 2. Refuge failed me: With Achish at Ziglag, I have
no place to fly for safety. 3. No man cared for my soul, regarded my life,
cared whither I perished or not.
2. The second part. He makes his address to God
david being excluded of all humane help, now makes his Address to God: I cried
unto thee, O Lord, and said, 1. Thou art my refuge, my stay, my hope, my Tower
of defense to fly to, my Sanctuary. 2. Thou art my portion, my inheritance in
the land of the living, while I live in this world.


And upon it he sends up his prayer to God, And prays as before.
fortified from a double Argument.

1. Because depressed.
From the lamentable condition to which he was brought. 2. From the fury,
malice, and power of his enemies. 1. His condition at this time was very
pitiful: Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, afflicted, depressed,
have none to help me. 2. And that by too strong enemies.
The power and malice of his enemies was very great: Deliver me from my
persecutors, for they are too strong for me.

He renews his prayer, and presses it from the final cause: Bring my soul out
of Prison; But if saved.
upon which follow two effects: 1. That I may praise thy Name. He thankful.
2. Others would fall to him.
The second in others, Assistance and encouragement to defend me, and my Cause:
The righteous shall compass me about, come and flow from all parts unto me. 3.
The Reason: For thou shall deal bountifully with me. Bestow favors upon me,
after thou have freed me from my former miseries; which men seeing, who are
commonly the friends of prosperity, will magnify me, and resort unto me.


The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and forty second Psalm.
WHEN, O Omnipotent and Merciful God, we are in this life besieged with
continual dangers, and impetuous enemies, to whom should we fly, because thou
art merciful, to deliver us? In my present distress therefore I file to thee,
and I cry unto thee with my voice, with my voice unto thee, O Lord, I make my
supplication; I open at large, and pour out before thee my just complaint,

My Spirit is overwhelmed within me, when I behold the present state of things,
my life, for ought I see, was in the confines of death; I looked on my right
hand, to see who would take my part, and stand up for me, and with me, but
behold, there was no man that would own me, or know me; I became as a stranger
to my brethren, and as an alien to my own mothers sons: I thought with my self
to take Sanctuary, but a place of refuge failed me; not a man there was that
cared, or regarded what became of me, or of my life.

In this distress and dereliction whither should I go, to whom should I fly?
To thee therefore, O Lord, I cry, and profess before the whole World, Thou art
my refuge, my stay, my hope, I have chosen thee for my shield and buckler, my
affections are to thee, and I will rely only on thee.

Therefore, good God, attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, weakened
and humbled, and depressed, and brought to a forlorn condition: with which I am
straightened, as in a Prison, and I will praise and magnify thy Name: Nay, the
righteous and sincere-hearted Israelites, that expect the performance of thy
promises, and long for it, upon this mercy extended to me, shall then compass
me about, adhere unto me, and congratulate my deliverance and restitution: Sing
they will in the house of the Lord, that thou have dealt bountifully with me.
Get thy self honor then upon Pharaoh and all his Army, deliver out of this
Egyptian bondage, thy poor afflicted Israel, bring them into the promised
Land; expel the Canaanites before them, and exalt the Kingdom of thy Son, Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory, Dominion
and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

PSALM. CXLIII. Being the last of the Penitentials.
DAVID being driven from Jerusalem by his son Absolon, wisely calls to mind his
sin, as being the cause of it; which, in this Psalm he deplores, and desires
grace and mercy of God.

The parts of this Psalm are. 1. A Prayer to God for remission of sin, grounded
upon Gods promise and goodness, ver. 1. not upon his own worthiness, ver. 2. 2.
A Narration of the sad state of his Affairs, ver. 3, 4. 3. The Comfort he
received in his sad condition, and whence, ver. 5, 6. 4. His Petition,
containing diverse particulars, to which are annexed particular Reasons, from
ver. 7. to the last.


1. The first part.
In the beginning he petitions for Audience; Hear my prayer, O Lord, give car
to my supplication; David begs on
for which he was thus punished; and this he begs of God to grant, both in
regard of his promise and mercy.

1. Gods promise.
In faithfulness answer me. Thou art a faithful God, that have promised pardon
to penitents; a penitent I am, make then thy Word good to me, and pardon me. 2.
And mercy, a pardon.
And in thy righteousness, which here signifies, mercy and loving kindness. In
thy mercy then answer me, and seal my pardon, justify me, because I confess my
iniquities, Isa. 43.26. Men call for confession from the guilty to condemn, God
to pardon.
And that this is the sense, appears more clearly by the next verse.

1. And enter not into judgment with thy servant. Call me not to a strict and
rigorous account at thy Bar of Justice. And not for his merit.
This he deprecates, so that justitia in the former verse could not be taken
for that justice which punishes sin, and rewards righteous deeds; for that he
pleads not here, but declines it, yea, and assigns the Reason. 2. For in thy
sight shall no man living be justified. Not I, nor any man that ever did, does,
or shall live: Let me then have my pardon upon thy promise and mercy, and not
for my merits. It is not then the most commendable work that can justify any
man at the Bar of God, but his mercy in Christ, which he has promised to
accept: Taught he has us daily to pray, Remitte debita.
2. The second part.
And now he enters upon the Narration of his sad condition, which he urges as
another Reason to persuade God to remit his offense, His sad condition to which
the enemy brought him.
and the consequent of it.

1. For the enemy has persecuted my soul. I look not so much upon my son
Absolon, that seeks my life, as upon the enemy of Mankind, Satan, who enticed
me to Adultery, and tempted me to Homicide. 2. He has smitten my life down to
the ground: He has humbled me, made me vile and contemptible in thy sight;
made me a lover of the earth, and earthly pleasures, who before had my
Conversation in Heaven. 3. He has made me dwell in darkness, as those that
have been long dead: For after that he had entangled my soul with earthly
pleasures, he made me dwell in spiritual darkness, that I saw not the way to
life, but was indeed dead in trespasses and sins; I knew no more of what
belonged to the life of the Spirit, than those that have been long dead, Ephesians.
4.18, 19. and 2.5.
And the effect that it wrought upon me, For which he was ready to faint and
despair.
was fear, consternation, and horror of mind out of the sense of thy wrath
against my sin.

1. Therefore my spirit was overwhelmed within me: I suffered a kind of (...)
in my soul, I was ready to faint, when I considered thy holiness, and my
impurity; thy severe justice, and my inability to satisfy it. 2. And my heart
within me is desolate, far from all comfort. Troubled I was not lightly, not
superficially, but seriously and inwardly; my soul was heavy to the death.
3. The third part. But recovers.
In this sadness I cast about what to do: Though I felt thy hand heavy upon me,
yet despair I durst not; even from this miserable state I began to fetch my
remedy, I found it was thy grace to bring me to this astonishment for my sin;
that my heart was not hardened in sin, but astonished for sin, mollified, when
it was thus troubled; and a dolor parturivi salutem. That then which came into
my head, were thy ways that thou had taken with penitent sinners before me.

1. I remember the days of old. The days of Adam, Noah, Abraham, who all
being thy servants, yet sinning grievously, Upon the remembrance of Gods
mercies to others.
and repenting, Thou admit'st to mercy, whose examples I applied, and they kept
me from despair, read Psalm. 77.5, 6, 7, etc. for all these were Testimonies of
thy (...), of thy love to man. And meditation of them.
2. I meditate on all thy works, I muse upon the works of thy hands. I did not
slightly run them over, but I meditate, I muse upon them; for in this combat
betwixt hope and despair, comfort is not obtained, but by a long and serious
meditation of Gods works; his works, in making a second Covenant with us, and
purchasing and applying Redemption. The profit admirable.
3. And the profit that came from this my meditation, was admirable: For, 1. I
stretch forth my hands unto thee. I began earnestly to pray, Prayer.
and to put forth my hand unto thee, as a child does to his father, from whom
he hopes to receive what he asks, and what he wants; some help, some Boon. 2.
My soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty Land. A thirst after grace.
A thirsty soul I have that hungers and thirsts after righteousness; and as the
earth in a drought chops and gapes till the rain falls, and closes it; so does
my soul open for want of thy dewes of grace, and nothing can close it till this
comfortable water descend. Farther, as the earth without rain has no
consistence, but is pulverized; neither is it clad with flowers, nor mantled
with grass, nor laden with fruits, but presents it self to the eye with a
burnt, withered, bare face: So the soul, not moistened with the grace of God,
becomes loose, and falls asunder on this and that side to vice and wickedness,
tossed it is by tentations, as dust by the wind; it wants the Robe of Justice to
cloth it, and the garment of wisdom to adorn it, it is unprofitable and
barren, and brings forth no fruit of good works; all which a penitent by
experience finds true in himself, and therefore he thirsts the more for grace,
the more sensible he is of the want of it.

4. The sad case in which David was, upon the sense of Gods indignation, The
fourth part.
makes him seek out speedily for a remedy, as the sick in haste seeks to the
Physician; and he that is thirsty, seeks for drink: Quiet he could not be, An
earnest desire of reconciliation.
nor his thirst be satisfied, before he had some assurance that God was
reconciled to him, which is an evident Argument of a true contrite soul, never
to be at rest, till he have an assurance that his peace is made, being
impatient of all delays of reconciliation: And to this purpose he puts up a
Petition, which consists of many parts, and many reasons.

1. His first petition is for speedy audience, Hear me speedily, O Lord: and
his reason for this, For this he petitions, and gives his reason.
is the sad condition in which he was, and was like to be, till he was assured,
that God was pacified for his sin. He said it before, but now repeats it. My
spirit fails, I am in extremity, I scarce can draw my breath. 2. This petition
he enforces in other words. Hide not thy face from me, He inforceth it on
another reason.
thy presence, thy favor, thy help. But not averse, inexorable, but look up
once more in mercy on me. His reason for this is, That if God hide his face
still from him, He be like unto a dead man; or which is worse, like to them
that go down into the pit of hell. For those whom God pardons not, not gives
the life of grace, they must perish for ever. 2. His next Petition is near the
same with the former, He sues yet again, and gives his reasons.
but enforced upon another reason. 1. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness.
Thy pardoning mercy, which must proceed out of mere clemency and pity. 2. In
the morning. Betime, speedily, quickly. Or in the morning, when the light of
grace shines. I have been long enough in the darkness, and night of sin, let
the day of grace at last rise upon me. 3. His reason. For in thee do I trust. I
let not my hold go in all this my extremity. In the spiritual combat then, we
must not look to the beginnings of it, as to the end. In the beginning is
nothing but matter of discomfort, horror, despair. But the end has comfort in
it, hope, and confidence. He that can say, in thee is my trust, despairs not.
3. He fears a relapse, and prays against it.
His third Petition. 1. Cause thou me to know the way in which I should walk.
David being a true penitent, and being now assured of pardon, is fearful of a
relapse, and therefore prays to God to work in his heart so powerfully, that
he might know his way, and hereafter walk in it, as it becomes a friend and a
son. 2. His reason.
His reason. For I lift up my soul unto thee. My course, the intent of my heart
is to that purpose. I have now bid adieu to all secular desires, and therefore
I desire the Lamp and light of thy Word to direct me in my walk.
4. He prays for deliverance from his enemies.
His fourth Petition. 1. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies. From the Devil,
and all his instruments; from ill concupiscences, and the effects, which fight
against the soul. 2. His reason.
His reason: For I fly unto thee to hide me; i. e. from them: I lie,
5. 1. He petitions for instruction in Gods Law.
Teach me to do thy Will, both by an active and passive obedience. Instruct me
to know thy good, perfect, and acceptable Will; and in adversity to submit to
it, and bear my Cross with patience; and in prosperity to do it, and not to be
proud, arrogant, secure, obstinate, and presumptuous. 2. His reason.
His reason: For thou art my God, who have promised me help, and whom I have
promised and bound my self to serve; Thou art the beginning and end of all my
good, from whom I have received my being, my soul, my body, and from whom I
expect beatitude and glory; to do thy Will, is the way to attain it; teach me
then to do it, as thou art my God.
6. He petitions to be guided by Gods Spirit
His sixth Petition, Thy Spirit is good: Not mine, not the evil spirit; it is
thy Spirit which is the Author of goodness, love, obedience, etc. Let this
Spirit then lead me in the right, plain way, that I may walk wisely, knowingly,
uprightly, constantly. 7. 1. A summary petition for all before.
Quicken me, O Lord; comfort, restore me to life, remit my sin, justify me,
free me from this fear. 2. For thy Names sake: Not for my merits, but for thy
mercy, and the glory that will thereby accrue to thy Name, in acquitting a
penitent, and restoring him to thy favor, and as it were, to life. Muscular
well observes, That they only can pray this prayer: 1. Who are brought into a
sad condition, and oppressed with the sense of death. 2. Who belong to God, and
whose life and quickening brings honor to his Name. 3. Who seek the honor of
Gods Name, and not their own honor.
2. He goes on: For thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble: And
that upon mercy.
Freedom he desires, but still upon mercy.
8. His last Petition, is for the destruction of Satan's Kingdom. 1. Of thy
mercies cut off my enemies, He petitions for the destruction of Satan's Kingdom.
His reason.
and destroy all them that afflict my soul. 2. His reason: For I am thy
servant; a Client, a Follower, one under thy Protection and Patronage; one of
thy Family, honored with the dignity of thy servant; and well contented to do
my Duty, and serve thee honestly, therefore defend me, and destroy my enemies;
for these, in being mine, are thy enemies.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and forty third Psalm, being
penitential.
O God, Thou God of mercy and compassion, for thy Names sake (...) thy own
goodness sake, and enter not into a severe account and reckoning with thy
servant; be not my adversary, contend not in judgment with me; for if thou
should call me to the Bar, in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

That enemy of Mankind has persecuted my soul, pursued me he has with a whole
storm of tentations, and by these he has smitten and wounded me, and made me
vile and contemptible in thy sight: He has so far prevailed, working
uncleanness with greediness; and this has brought me to the sad condition in
which I am: Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me, and my heart within
me is desolate; shame and sorrow is upon me, for so offending so gracious a
God; a stonishment and amazement possess my soul, because I am destitute of thy
comfort: I put my mouth in the dust, and my face in darkness, and hate my self,
because I have yielded to that sin which I am sure that thou hate; just cause
I have, but yet I will not despair; methinks, as in thy servants, from the
beginning of the World, Thou have set me a pattern of repentance, so thou have
prescribed me a remedy against desperation.

I remember then the days of old, that Adam transgressed, for the woman's Seed
to break the Serpents head; that Noah was dronken and incestuous, Moses
refractery and disobedient, Aaron ^^olatrous, and perverted by the people to
sin, to all which, with infinite others, when they turned unto thee by hearty
repentance, Thou gave a pardon; upon these monuments of thy mercy, I will
meditate upon these examples, of thy grace I will muse; and when I see thy
works of goodness in them, and upon them, encouraged I am to stretch forth my
hands unto thee, as hoping to receive the like savor; and as a thirsly Land
does gape for the latter rain,

Hear me then, gracious God, speedily, and without delay; for till thy grace
descend, like them that go down into the pit; cause me to hear of thy loving
kindness, and let the morning of thy grace comfortably shine upon me, who have
too long sat in the darkness of sorrow;

Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk;

Thou art my God, For thou art my Lord, my Patron,

The seven following Psalms are Eucharists, or Thanksgivings: Hymns properly
they are.

PSALM CXLIV. An ode of David.
THis Psalm is of a mixed kind, for in it is contained a thanksgiving. A prayer.
And doctrine. Interpreters are not agreed upon the occasion and time of the
writing of it. For some think, being moved thereto by the Title, that it was
composed by David upon his victory over Goliath: Others, upon his victories
after over the Philistines, Ammonites, etc. Some again, in the beginning of his
reign, before he was fully settled. But be it as it will,

The parts of the Psalm are, 1. A thanksgiving, from verse. 1. to 5. 2. A
petition, from verse. 5. to 12. 3. A discussion of happiness, and wherein it
consists, from verse. 12. to the end.


1. The first part. He gives thanks.
In the beginning the Prophet gives thanks, and praises God.

1. He gives him thanks. Blessed be the Lord. And he expresses his reason.
Which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. In general, For the
Art of War God taught him.
Who has taught me the Art of War. In particular, That taught my hands to use
the sling, and my fingers to choose the stones, and direct them to the forehead
of Goliath. For this was Artis opus, non virtutis. Skill, not strength, which he
taught me. 2. He is my strength, my goodness, Because his strength, his
goodness, etc.
and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I
trust, in which (...), there is an Incrementum, and a Gradation. As it is
before, Psalm 18.1, 2. To which Psalm this is very like, so that it is thought
to be made on the same occasion. 1. He is my Strength, or my Rock. The strength
I have, is from him. 2. My Goodness, benignity, or mercy. That is, original of
all my good. In mercy he called me from the sheepfold: And in mercy he has
hitherto prevented and sustained me. 3. He is my Fortress, to him I fly as to a
strong hold, Subdued the people under him.
or an high Tower of defense. 4. And when I fly to him, he deserts me not, he
is my deliverer from danger and captivity, and he is my shield to protect me,
and cover my head in the day of battle. Therefore I will Trust in him, and
rely upon him.
3. He praises God, that he had done more for him, than he could wish or
expect, for he had not only freed him from the hand of Goliath, but had subdued
the people unto him. He admires that God so great should do so much for man so
vile.
Put it unto their hearts to yield obedience to him, as their General, after
his victory over Goliath, 1 Samuel 18.5. or when they made a league with him in
Hebron, 2 Samuel 5. It is a favor of God, when the people are subdued, and yield
quiet obedience to their King.
Now out of the consideration of so many benefits, David breaks forth into an
admiration. He wonders that when God is so great, and man so vain, vile, and
base, that he should look upon him, esteem him at so high a rate, to love him,
to advance him. Of which he was an example above other men. Which
acknowledgement tends very much to the praise of God.

1. As amazed therefore and astonished, he asks, Lord, what is man? 2 Samuel
7.18. What is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man, that
thou make account of him? 2. To which (...) he returns this answer, which
tends to the exaltation of God, and debasement of man. 1. Man is like to
vanity. Capable indeed of great things, 2. His days are as a shadow that
passes away. God is always the same, he changes not, but man is but for a
moment, like a shadow that is always moving, and shifts the place, till the
night coming on, it vanishes. In comparison of God, this is the condition of
man, who otherwise is the glory of Gods creatures.

2. David, though he had the people subdued unto him, The second part. He
prays for Gods assistance to perfect his victories.
yet was not as yet freed from enemies, the Philistines, Ammonites, etc. did
molest him, and therefore he prays to God to assist him in the conquest of
these, and show some evident tokens from heaven, that he did assist him in
their Conquest. He speaks after the manner of men, as before, Psalm. 18. from
verse. 7. to 16.

Incline the heavens and come down, touch the Mountains and they shall smoke.
Cast forth lightnings and scatter them, shoot out arrows and consume them.
Send thine hand from above. Since the pride of man is such, that it will not
acknowledge thee, nor fear thee for thy mercies, show thy presence by dark
clouds, by fire sent from heaven, by thunder and lightniog, etc. that they may
be terrified, and forced to acknowledge thee. And makes his address for
himself.

This is the first part of his Petition against his enemies. 2. And now he
commenceth a second, and makes his Address to God for himself.

1. Rid me and deliver me out of great waters, i. e. from dangers of men. 2.
From the hands of strange Children. Moabites, Ammonites,
Upon whom he sets these two Characters.

1. Their mouth speaks vanity. Lies, no truth, flatteries, no sincere words. 2.
And their right hand, is a right hand of falsehood. etc. Interserting an Hymn.

But before he proceeds and ends his Petition, Intercerting an Hymn.
he breaks out, as it were, in an ecstasy, and falls back to that he began
with, the praise of God, interserting this short Hymn.

1. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God, upon a Psaltery, and an instrument
of ten strings, Psalm. 33.3. And this I will do, because Thou give victory
unto Kings. To Saul by my hand and service, but especially because, Thou have
delivered me David thy servant from the hurtful sword. From that sharp and
deadly sword of the great Goliath.
And then he returns, Repeats his petition.
repeats, and concludes his Petition in the same words he began.

Rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange children. Whose mouth speaks
vanity. 3. And their right hand, is a right hand of falsehood.

3. The third part. Who is a happy man.
His Benedictus and Petition being ended, he falls upon a discourse of the
Happy man, and shows that happiness is of two kinds; one in the eye of the
world, and that it arises from Temporal felicities. The other in the sight of
God, and it arises from Piety and Religion, where both these are conjoined,
the Man is happy, but the first without the last, will never make a happy man.
The first are the things that the greatest part of the world aim at. That their
sons may be as plants, etc. verse. 12, 13, 14. And David denies not, but the
people are happy that are in such a case, verse. 14. But always with this
condition and limitation, that God be not left out and forgotten. For, Happy is
that people, whose God is the Lord, verse. 14. The addition of Temporal
blessings will be a great comfort to our lives, and God promises them to the
obedient, Deuteronomy. 28. But there is another thing Necessary, the fear of God,
which will make a Man happy. Without which, men talk in vain, when they speak
of felicity, and therefore the old Translatour reads the words thus.

Quorum filij. etc. verse. 12. And then the Antecedent to Quorum must be. An
acute sense of these words.
They whose mouth speaks vanity. And then the sense will be. It is the desires
of vain men, that their sons may be as plants, their daughters beautiful, that
their sheep multiply, their Oxen strong, no decay of any thing. Upon which they
are apt to sing to themselves. Happy are the people that are in such estate.
But David checks this vanity, this false opinion. What, they happy? No, no.
They are happy, who have the Lord for their God.

This is an acute sense of this whole clause; But if I mistake not, David in
earnest intends it as a blessing, when men enjoy even Temporal blessings, so it
be with God. For Godliness has the promises of this life, as well as that
which is to come. And it may not be conceived, that God created so many
excellent things in this world only for fools and disobedient persons. Temporal
blessings the rewards of piety.
Besides, many of his best Servants have enjoyed the particulars here
mentioned, let no man think then, but they may be rewards of piety. David
therefore prays, 1. Vt, That our sons may be as plants grown in their youth.
Well planted, well rooted, green and flourishing. Which is the first happiness
of any family. For sons are the pillars of any house. They first desired, and
for them other things. 2. Vt, That our daughters may be as Corner-stones.
Antarij lapides. Stones that join and knit the buildings, Polished after the
similitude of a Palace, i. e. very beautiful, specious, hansome, for upon such
stones there is commonly most Art showed. 3. Ut, That our garners may be full,
affording all manner of store. Semper domus tota boni and assidui Domini
lccuples, abundat haedo, lacte, caseo, gallina, etc. Referta est cella vinaria,
olearea, mellarea, etc. It has in it newand old. 4. Ut, That our sheep may
bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets. Our flocks increase.
5. Ut, That our Oxen may be strong to labor. Healthy, not sickly. 6. Vt, That
there be no breaking, nor going out. No plundering among us, nor inroads made
upon us, as Job 1. But that we live in peace, and enjoy our own. 7. Vt, That
there be no complaining in our streets. No screetches of women, tumults of
people, cries, and clamours in our Cities, as is usual in insurrections, and
irruptions of enemies.


This is a part of David's prayer, and it has coherence with the tenth verse,
where he thanks God for delivering him from the sword. This he desires God to
continue, that under his reign his people might be happy, and enjoy the fruits
of peace, viz. that their sons might grow up as plants in their youth, etc.
Which if it happen, so they take in the last clause of the Psalm, They make
happy.
he pronounces them a Happy people. For he concludes all with this Epiphonema,
1. Happy is that people that are in such a case. 2. Yea, Happy is that people,
whose God is the Lord. With God.
That has for his God the True God: that is persuaded he is loved by him,
adopted to be his son, and that he takes care of him. For if they be happy, who
possess those outward blessings, They must needs be much more happy, who
possess the fountain of those blessings and all other.


The Prayer collected out of the one hundred and forty fourth Psalm.
O Lord God of hoasts, for thou teach our hands to War, and our fingers to
fight, thou art our strength in the battle, our fortress to fly to, to defend
us, the fountain and original of all our good, our deliverer from danger and
captivity, our shield to protect us, and keep off all blows, therefore we have
and will ever hereafter rely and trust on thee. The success which we have had
at this time, and the victory over our enemies, is from thee, and for it we
bless and praise thy Holy Name. Thou have put into the hearts of the whole Army
to be subdued and obedient to the conduct of their Leaders, and valiantly to
oppose themselves to the fury of the enemy, to thee therefore we attribute the
honor of this conquest, and not to our own arm: To thee, this ready obedience
and courage in this people, and not to our own wisdom or directions.

Amazed, Lord, and astonished I am, when I consider this mercy, for what is
man, that man should obey him? Or what is man in comparison of thy glory, that
thou should set him over others to be obeyed? Ma^^s like to vanity, capable
indeed of great things, but till thou fill him, like an empty vessel only full
of thin air, vain studies he follows, empty things he desires. He is of a
short life, and of no continuance, for his Days are as a shadow, which always
shifts the place, till night coming on, it passes away. And will thou open
thine eyes, and look upon such an one? and will thou take him from the
sheepco^e, from following the sheep, to be a Ruler over thy people, thy people
Israel? O Lord, establish this house, and confirm this throne for ever.

But thou see, O Lord, how thine own work is opposed, from these troubles,
and free me from the hand of them who are strangers to thy worship and true
piety, whose counsels are mischievous, and their works profane, for their mouth
speaks vanity, and their right hand,

Rid me, so will I sing a new song unto thee, O God; upon a Psaltery and
instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee. Experience has taught
me by my wonderful escape from an imminent death, that it is thou that give
salvation unto Kings, David thy servant from the hurtful and unjust sword.

Good God, as thou have hitherto protected and sustained me, so restore me
again to my people, and let my government over them be prosperous, successeful
and peaceable. well rooted, green and flourishing, full of strength, sap, and
youth, and let their daughters be as corner-stones, well composed and well
beautified, fair as the polished works of a Palace.

Lord, bless their substance, and make them to abound in riches, and plenty of
all good things, Suffer not any inrode from enemies abroad to be made upon
them, nor sequestrations at home to molest them, let there be no tumults or
complaints, lamentation or mourning heard in the streets of our Cities.

Give them, O Lord, these outward symbols of happiness, and the rewards of
godliness and obedience. But never suffer them to place their felicity in these
temporal blessings. Sanctify these unto them, and let these be used as
arguments to draw them nearer unto thee. For I know, that they only are truly
happy, whose God is the Lord; those whom he has chosen and adopted to be h^^
people, and they who have chosen him to be their God; they who rely upon him
to de their Protector, and they who acknowledge and worship him, that they may
be protected. For God alone is the chiefest good, he alone can give good
things, not only those which are external, but those which are internal and
eternal, even eternal life to those, who are his Servants through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

PSALM. CXLV. Hallelujah, or an Hymn.
THis Hymn contains excellent matter, and is penned after an excellent
manner. The matter of it is Gods holy praise, which is the Alpha and Omega of
all our actions. The manner of it, that of the Hebrew Alphabet, which is done
to help our memory, in recording those things which concerns our Makers praise.
Of which there be,

These three parts. 1. A Proem, or a protestation to praise God, ver. 1, 2. 2.
And a celebration of divine praises through the whole Psalm, and to that end,
he produces many arguments, which are reduced to these heads. 1. From the
greatness of God, ver. 3. 2. From his works of wonder, ver. 4. which works he
distinguishes into three kinds; 1. Glorious and beautiful, of Majesty, and
therefore wonderful, ver. 5. 2. Mavelous, and full of terror, ver. 6. 3.
Amiable, and full of goodness, ver. 7, 8, 9. But all wonderful.
3. From his Kingdom and government of it and in it, from ver. 10. to. 21.
3. A conclusion, ver. 21. In which be performs his protestation praising God


1. David's protestation to praise God. The first part.
In the two first verses David proposes what he will do through the whole
Psalm, acquaints us fully with his intention.

1. I will extol, I will bless, I will praise. 2. Thee my God, my King. A King
above me, I will bless, I will praise thy Name, all virtues by which thou art
known. 3. Every day will I praise thee: 4. For ever and ever will I do it: It
shall now begin and continue by a succession of men, who shall sing this and
the like Hymns made to thy honor, to the consummation of all things.
2. And so he sets upon the praise it self: The second part. He praises God
for his greatness.
And the first thing he praises God for, is for his Essense, set forth under
this word Great.

1. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: This follows on the other;
for if great, greatly to be praised. 2. And his greatness is unsearchable, Job
11.8, 9. Broador than the Sea, as measuring the waters thereof in his fist,
Isaiah 40.12. And longer than the earth, as having no end; there it no end of
his greatness. Or if Great, here to be referred to him as a King: Then a great
King he is in respect of extension, for all creatures, from the highest Angel
to the poorest worm are under him; great for length, for his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom. Great for depth; for he rules even in the hearts of Kings,
of all men, overrules their thoughts, affections, nothing is hid from him. And
great again for height, being a great King over other gods, ruling by his own
absolute Power and Authority; whereas all other have their Sword from him, and
Rule by a delegated and Vicarious power. 2. From the Essence of God, David
passes to his works and effects, For his works in general.
therefore David says, One Generation shall praise thy works unto another, and
shall declare thy mighty Acts. Every several Age is an eyewitness of several
acts of wonder, and therefore as one succeeds another in days, so shall they
succeed in duty. The father shall declare them to the son, and the son again to
his son, etc. So that no Generation that considers thy mighty Acts, but shall
have just occasion to admire them, and praise thee.
And so from the works in general, all which are mighty, he descends to the
particulars, which he ranks into three sorts. In particular. 1. His works of
glory.


1. The first are those which are mavelous, and full of glory, splendor, and
beauty, such as are his works in Heaven: For the Heavens declare his glory. The
Sun, Moon, Stars, their variety, multitude, splendor, David means in ver. 5.
2. A second kind of works there are of God, His works of justice and terror.
which are full of Terror and Justice, these are terrible Acts, and they speak
out his Might and Greatness; such were the universal Deluge in Noah's days, the
fire of Sodom, Pharaphs overthrow in the red Sea, Corah, Dathan, Abiram, etc.
And these he points at in ver. 6. 3. Other works are mavelous, as being full
of his abundant kindness, His works of love and mercy.
love, mercy: And because he would have us take more special notice of these,
as those which bring to us more comfort, and concern us more to know, therefore
he in more words insists upon these, spending three whole verses in the
explication of them; of which, page sequents. 1. They, i. e. Thy great works
shall abundantly utter. Eructabun. Vulgar, The memory of thy great goodness.
All Generations filled with the abundance of thy bounty, they shall be
eloquent, and without any intermission collect them in their memory, and commit
them to posterity to be remembered. 2. And sing of thy righteousness, in
exhibiting thy promised blessings. Of this kind are all temporal benefits,
night and day, the seasons of the year, fertility, abundance of Fish, Foul,
Cattle, Rivers, Seas, Orchards, Gardens, Groves, etc. But these are light, if
compared to the gifts of Grace. The incarnation, Death, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension of Christ, mission of the holy Ghost, calling of the Gentiles,
Justification, Sanctification, eternal life. All which being brought to memory
by a pious meditation, Eructubunt, scaturient, eloquentur, canent, men must
abundantly utter Gods goodness. And sing here with David in the next verse, 2.
The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of great
mercy; of which before, Psalm. 103.8. 3. The Lord is good to all. For he rains
upon the just and unjust. Slow to execute wrath upon the reprobates, 2 Timothy
2.4.2. Pet. 3.9. Prove. 1.21. Hos. 14.9. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. 4. His mercies are
over all his works. There is not any work of God but has mercy in it, Psalm.
1.36. For whenas in rigor of justice for their sins he might destroy the
world, out of mercy he gives time of repentance.

3. The third part. He praises God for a new mercy.
The Prophet hitherto has sung of the mavelous works of God, both of Glory,
Terror, and Mercy. And adds for the close, All thy works shall praise thee, O
Lord.

But now he begins to praise him for a New matter, viz. for the erection of his
peculiar Kingdom in his Church, viz. The choice of his Church.
in which he is to have for his Subjects a peculiar people, a holy nation, a
royal Priesthood, which he in this place calls Saints. Now be it that profane
and impious men of the world should neglect to praise God, and not admire his
works of Glory, Terror, and Mercy, yet these will not neglect their Duty. And
thy Saints shall bless thee. They shall bless thee for thy mavelous works
before mentioned, In which he erects his Kingdom.
but they shall not stay there, consider they shall thy Kingdom in thy Church,
and lay to heart the Quality of that Kingdom, and especially praise thee for
that.

They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power.
To make known to the sons of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty of
thy Kingdom.
Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures throughout
all generations.
Now the power and glory of Christ's Kingdom, The amplitude of it.
from the Kingdoms of men may be known by this fourfold difference.

1. That Kings on earth have but few subjects, and small wealth and treasure,
being Commanders perhaps but of one, or at most but of some few Provinces. But
God has for his subjects, Angels, Men, Devils, and the wealth of the whole
world is his. Independance.
2. Earthly Kings so reign over their subjects, that they must be servants to
their people, they depend upon them, and are forced to yield to them: yea,
though they abound in wealth, yet they want, and are forced to beg, or exact
Subsidies, Contributions, Tributes, Taxes, etc. from them, being often indebted
great sums. But God is so a Lord, that he serves none, he needs not their
help, so abounds, that in a moment he can create of nothing much more than he
has. 3. Earthly Kings glory indeed in their power, Security.
and rejoice in their dignity and honor, but their crown is but a crown of
thorns, for they are tormented with cares, anxiety, fear, sorrows: But God is
glorious without fear or care, he reigns in security, tranquillity, peace and
ease. 4. Earthly Kings reign but for a time. Christ for ever. Eternity.

All which differences are found in these verses.

1. The first in the eleventh verse. They shall speak of the glory of thy
Kingdom, etc. They shall speak of the power and glory of it, that in multitude
of subjects, in wealth and riches it exceeds all other Kingdoms. 2. The second
and third in the twelfth verse, They shall make known, etc. that they Acts are
far beyond theirs, and thy magnificence no dependency, no needy, no thorny
crown. 3. The fourth in the thirteenth verse. Thy Kingdom Everlasting, so not
theirs.
And so the Prophet having described the Kingdom of Christ, The qualities of
Christ the King.
begins to set down the excellent Qualities and Virtues of a good King, which
do most perfectly agree to Christ.

In this place after the thirteenth verse, it is very probable that there is a
verse omitted in the Hebrew Copies we now use, which yet anciently were in it.
For the Septuagint, the Arabique Copies, and the Vulgar out of them retain it:
and so does Kimhi. It is supposed it came to pass incuria librariorum. And
Bellarmine, Moller conceive it should be admitted, because when the Psalm is
disposed according to the order and number of the Hebrew Alphabet, it will be
imperfect without it. For the verse will be wanting, that begins with the
letter Nun. Musculus receives it into the Text. In it are set down two
excellent qualities of a good King,

1. Veracity, Veracity.
and 2. Probity. The verse is this. Holiness.
Faithful the Lord is in all his words, and holy in all his works. But I go on,
The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all those that be down.
Goodness.
3. This is another quality of a good King, which is Very regia and Pastoralis,
so to govern his Subjects, that they fall not, and to raise them if fallen.
This is Mercy, Goodness. And it is proper to Christ, who by his Grace sustains
and upholds his people that they fall not into sin, or if fallen, raises them
up again, by a new Grace, when they are down. This verified in David, Peter,
the Prodigal, etc. He sustains, raises them by his Gospel and Spirit. The eyes
of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season.
Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
4. This is Liberality and Bounty, and is an excellent virtue in a King,
Liberality. and Bounty.
whose care for his Subjects ought to be, that they want no necessaries.
Benefacere regjum est, and most properly may be attributed to Christ, who
provides for his Church all manner of things that are good. Temporal,
Spiritual. 1. They are expectants. Their eyes wait upon him. 2. And he gives.
It Is a gift, not a debt. 3. Their meat. Variety, to every one what is fit for
him. 4. In due season. Then when fit for them to eat. Wine oil, corn, etc. as
the season fits. He crowns the year, Psalm. 65.11. He gives when fit to eat: for
sometimes it is fit that the meat be taken away, when men are wanton, exceed and
riot in it. 5. Thou openest thy hand: He gives not sparingly, but bountifully.
6. Thou satisfiest: For a man may have, and not be satisfied; Avarui semper
eget. The content and satisfaction is from God. 7. The desire of every living
thing: Giving to every living thing such meat as is suitable to his appetite;
all which is much more true in spiritual blessings.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

5. Justice.
This is another virtue of a good King to be just, which is most true of
Christ; for just he is in distribution of punishments, and giving rewards.
The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in Truth. Easy to receive Petitions of those that call on him in Truth.


6. This is the sixth quality of a good King, to show himself easy to receive
Petitions, and to them that implore his aid, which God does, De^^r. 4.7.2. But
the Prophet corrects his works, and limits them; It Is to all that call upon him
in Truth; which word includes all the conditions of a good prayer. 1. Faith:
For he that prays without faith, prays to an Idol of his own brain. 2. Hope
and confidence: He prays not seriously, that hopes not to be heard. 3. Love:
For no man can call on him seriously, whom he hates, or to whom hateful. 4.
Desire: For no man prays heartily, that desires not to obtain. 5. Attention
and intention; without which, the prayer is babbling, no true prayer.

The Lord will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their
cry, and save them.

7. To grant Petitions.
This is the seventh quality of a good King, to grant Petitions, so that they
ask such Petitions as is fit for the King to grant; this will Christ do. 1. He
will fulfill the desires: But with this limitation, So they fear him. 2. He will
hear their cry: So it must be, a cry, vehement, earnest. 3. And will save them:
Hear he will, ad salutem semper, licet non ad voluntatem.

The Lord preserves all them that love him, but all the wicked will he destroy.
Clemency.


8. This is the last quality of a good King: Parcere Subjectis, and debellare
Superbos. Which Christ will do; The Conclusion, a Doxology
he preserves his Martyrs in patience, constancy, faith, Martyrs non eripuit,
sed nec deseruit.
4. The Conclusion is an Epiphonema, and answers to the beginning of the Psalm.

1. For all these things which I have said, My mouth shall speak the praise of
the Lord: This shall be my work while I live. 2. And I wish it may be done by
all others also. And let all flesh blessed his holy Name for ever and ever.
A Hymn collected out of the One hundred and forty fifth Psalm.
I will ertol thee, O my God, and King, and Governor of the whole World; not
that my words can make thee Higher, who art the most Highest; nor my praises
make thee more Excellent, That thy Name may be praised for ever and ever.

For thou, Lord, art truly great, great in Heaven, great on Earth, there is no
end of thy greatness, it is unsearchable, it is incomprehensible, and therefore
my desire is, That there may be no end of thy praise,

Glorious, O Lord, are thy works; terrible, and yet full of mercy; not any of
them but beget wonder in me. The Heavens above, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, speak
of the glorious honor of thy Majesty. Thy creation of them, Pharaoh with his
Egyptians; just, but full of indignation against that gainsaying Rabble, that
rose against the King and the Priest. At the consideration of these terrible
acts I tremble, upon the meditation of these works of power I am horribly
afraid.

That only which revives my heart, is thy mercy and goodness; for I know, Thou
art a gracious God, and full of compassion, slow to anger, which, abundantly
utter thy great goodness, that gives thy Word, and keeps it, that in justice
do administer all things, inflicting severe judgments upon the rebellious,
and sparing thy servants, do reward their weak endeavors with thy choicest
blessings.

For which, thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy
Kingdom, and talk of thy power: They shall make known to the sons of men thy
glorious Acts, and commend to the ignorant the excellency of thy power,

And since we are assured, That thy Church, in which thou reignest, shall
continue for ever, O Lord, stir up thy strength, and come amongst us, with thy
Word and Sacraments, in due season; open thine hand, with thy grace every
hungry and thirsty soul. Thou, Lord, Preserve, gracious God, with a singular
care, all them that love thee, from all evil; but for the wicked, which oppress
them, and seek to trample them under their feet, bring them to a speedy
destruction.

So shall my mouth speak forth the praise of the Lord; and I hope also, That
all flesh shall have just occasion to bless thy holy Name for ever and ever.
Amen.

PSALM. CXLVI. A Hymn, Hallelujah.
THE Subject of this Hymn is the same with the former, and it has,

These four parts. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, ver. 1. which David is
resolved to do, ver. 2. 2. A Dehortation from confidence in man, how great
soever, ver. 3, 4. 3. On the contrary, he pronounces them happy that trust in
God, ver. 5. 4. And to this confidence in God he persuades for many Reasons,
from ver. 6. to the last.


1. David exhorts to praise God. The first part.
He begins with a Dialogism.

1. He speaks to all, Praise ye the Lord. 2. Praise the Lord, O my soul. 3. And
his soul answers, While I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises to
my God while I have my being; while I am, and shall be.
2. The second part.
But because the foundation of this praise is the trust and confidence which
men have in God, Dehorts from confidence in Princes; for,
from which they are retarded, by admiring overmuch, and relying upon the
power and help of Kings and Princes; the Prophet therefore subjoins his
Dehortation, and gives his Reasons for it.

1. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man. 2. His Reasons for it
are: 1. Their impotency.
First, Their Impotency: There is no help in them. They may seem potent, but
they cannot save themselves, much less other men. 2. Mortality.
Their Fragility and Mortality: Their breath goes forth, they return to the
earth, in that very day their thoughts perish.

3. The third part. But happy he that relies on God.
Those men cannot be happy that trust to them; but now on the contrary. If a
man will be happy, the Prophet shows upon whom he must trust and rely, which
is on God; for, 1. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help; him to
whom Jacob trusted. 2. And whose hope is in the Lord his God: Not in impotent,
and short-lived men.


And this he confirms by diverse Reasons. The fourth part. Because he is,


1. Omnipotent
First, From his Omnipotence: He is God the Creator, he made Heaven and Earth,
the Sea, and all that is therein. Able then to protect. 2. Faithful.
From his Veracity: Who keeps Truth for ever. His word is passed for our
protection, and he will perform it. Potest and vult, quia promisit. 3. Just.
From his Justice: He executes judgment for the oppressed. He defends the
innocent, and punishes the unjust: Good trusting then to him. 4. Merciful.
From his Mercy. 1. He gives food to the hungry: Relieves men in their wants.
2. The Lord loses the Prisoners. Another Act of grace, and the rest follow.
3. The Lord opens the eyes of the blind: Whether spiritually, or corporally.
4. The Lord raises them that are bowed down: By sin, wrath, misery.
5. From his Love: The Lord loves the righteous. Loving.
Of which the effects are. 1. The Lord preserves the strangers. 2. He
relieveth the fatherless and widow. 3. But the ungodly find a quite contrary
effect, because they are no^^ons of love, but wrath: But the way of the wicked
he turns upside down. Their glory perishes, and with it the hope of those
fools that trusted to them.
6. From the Eternity of his Kingdom; therefore to be praised, Eternal.
and trusted to for ever. Kings dye and perish, but he is a King for ever in
Zion, i.e. The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all
Generations, Praise ye the Lord.
The Hymn and Prayer collected out of the One hundred and forty sixth Psalm.
O Omnipotent and most Merciful God, while I live,

Thou art my staff to trust to, my sole confidence, and my hape; as for the
greatest and most potent of the sons of men, I dare not rely on them; Their
breath goes forth, and they return to the earth whence they came; and in that
very day all their high thoughts, and proud attempts, perish, and vanish
together with them.

Who then can be happy, that relies upon such empty broken reeds? To thee will
I trust, who art the God of Jacob, the Lord of thy Church and people, being
assured, That he is only happy, whose hope is in the Lord his God.

Thou, O Lord, have made Heaven and Earth, the Se^, and all that is in it. Thou
do confirm the Truth of thy promises, by an exact performance; from their
bonds and chains, open the eyes, and illuminate the understandings of those who
are blinded in sin and error. Raise, O Lord, the hearts of such as are
contrite and bowed down, the plots, devices and frauds of wicked m^n; Turn, O
Lord,

An which, since we know to be thy wondrous w^^ks, and have experience of the
performance of them to thy faithful servants in all Ages, our faith is thereby
confirmed, Thou, O God, reignest in Zion; build then the decayed and ruined
walls of Jerusalem, and preserve and provide for this widow, and her fatherless
children, amidst the storms and fury of her merciless oppressors, for the
merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXLVII. A Hymn.
THE Scope and intent of the Prophet in this Psalm, is, to stir up men to
praise God, for which he produces many Arguments. The occasion of the
composing of it, was the reduction of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon,
and therefore it is supposed that Haggai and Zechariah the Prophets were the
Authors of it; and therefore some Interpreters put their names in the Title of
it.

The parts are. 1. An Exhortation to praise God, ver. 1. which is repeated,
ver. 7. and 12. 2. The Arguments to persuade to it, Gods bounty, wisdom, power,
providence, justice and mercy, through the whole Psalm.


1. He invites to praise God. The first part.
The Exhortation is briefly proposed, Praise the Lord, ver. 1. which the
Prophet, as the Chanter of the Quire, begins; and after some reasons given,
repeats in more words, Sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving, sing praises upon
the Harp unto our God, ver. 12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, where the
Arabique, Greek, and Latin Translators begin a new Psalm; but in the Hebrew
they are conjoined, and but one Hymn.

2. The second part.
Now the Prophet has no sooner ended his Exhortations, but to every one of
them singly he annexeth his Reasons.

To praise God, he exhorts upon two grounds.

1. Ab utili, jucundo, decoro, ver. 1. 2. For his bounty to Jerusalem, in
building it, and bringing back the dispersed, ver. 2. in comforting the sad and
contrite in soul, ver. 3. 2. For his wisdom, ver. 4. For his power, ver. 5. For
his mercy and justice, ver. 6.
His first Arguments are taken from the thing it self; His reasons to persuade
it, because it is,
for to praise God, is, 1. Good: For it is good to sing praises to our God:
Good, for diverse Reasons. Good, for four reasons.
1. That is good which God commands, Micah 6.8. So that Thanksgiving is no
indifferent Action, no Will Worship, but it is cultus institutus, not to be
neglected. 2. It raises the heart from Earth to Heaven; and being the work of
Angels and Saints in Heaven, joins us with that Quite above. 3. Good again,
because by it we pay a debt, in which is justice: Lift up your hearts unto the
Lord: Resp. It is meet and right so to do. 3. Good, because for it we are like
to receive a good and a great reward; for if he that prays to God is like to
be rewarded, Matthew. 6. much more that man that sings praises to him; for in
prayer we consult with our own necessities, in our praises we honor God, and
bless him for his gifts.
2. Pleasant in diverse respects.
To praise God is pleasant. 1. Because it proceeds out of love; for nothing is
more pleasant to him that loves, than to make Sonnets in the praise of that
party he loves. 2. Because it must needs please a man to perform that Duty for
which he was created; for to that end God created men and (...) that they
should praise him, Isa. 43.7. A check this is to that slowness and backwardness
we find in our selves to praise God; or when we feel it tedious unto us. 3.
Because God is delighted with it, as the sweetest Sacrifice: He that offers
me praise and thanks, he honors me, Psalm. 50. 4. It is pleasant to God,
because he is delighted with those virtues which are in us, Faith, Hope,
Charity, Religion, Devotion, Humility, etc. of all which, our praises are a
manifest.
3. It is comely: For there is no greater stain than Ingratitude; Comely and
decent.
it is made up of a lie and injustice; for either it insinuates and denies,
that the benefit is not received, or that if received, a man will not pay for
it, no not thanks. There is then all the decency in the World in it, that man
be thankful to his God, that freely gives him all things.


2. These are the first Arguments the Prophet uses, and they are drawn, For
his goodness to Jerusalem.
a natura rei. Those that follow are more particular, and as the case then
stood, respect Israel; but may well be applied in all Ages to the Church of God.

1. The first taken from the reduction of the people from Captivity, and the
building of Jerusalem, in which appeared the goodness of God to them; for it
was the mercies of God that they were not consumed.

1. The Lord does build up Jerusalem; his Church, 2. He gathers together the
outcasts, or dispersed of Israel, or banished; collected them which were
scattered; so he collected his Church of dispersed Gentiles, John 10.16. 3. He
heals the broken in heart, the sad, the calamitous, whether oppressed with
captivity or sin, Luke 4.18. 4. And binds up their wounds; as if he were a
good Chyrurgion, Luke 10.34.
2. The second Argument is taken from his Wisdom, His wisdom.
in numbering the stars.

1. He tells the number of the stars. A thing it seems impossible for man, Genesis
15.5. For there be many of them, immersae orbi, which then being showed to
Abraham, he could not number; but God has them upon account. 2. And calls them
all by their names: They are his Army, Isa. 40.26. He knows their power,
properties, efficacy of every one of them, and calls them forth by their names,
and they answer, Here we are, Baruch 3.
But by these stars some understand Gods Elect, The servants of God like stars.
whose number is to us without number, and whose names are written in his Book.
Now these are well-likened to the Stars.

1. The stars are infinite in number: So are his Elect to us, not to him. 2.
Among the stars some are Planets, Erratica: His Elect sometimes wander up and
down. 3. The stars shine by night clearest: His Elect in the darkness of
persecutions. 4. One star differs from another in glory: The Elect excel each
other in grace, in piety, etc. 5. The stars are above, far from impurity: The
Conversation of the Elect in Heaven. 6. The stars are obscured with clouds, but
they being dispersed, they shine again: So the Church is sometime obscured,
Matthew. 25. But at Christ's appearing, they shall appear in glory, 1 John 3.2.
For there is not one of these stars how obscure, how dark, how little, or
abject soever, but Christ will call him by his name; and this the Prophet
intends. What, shall God ever tell the number of his banished people, and
gather together the dispersed into one Church? why not? He that can tell the
number of the stars, and call them by their names; I hope it is no difficult
thing to him to tell the number of his Elect, and call them by nomination.
3. From his power.
His third Argument to praise God, is drawn from his power: Great is our Lord,
Let no man despair of his power, though the thing expected be great and
difficult; for his understanding is infinite: And though we cannot find out a
way, yet he knows how to bring his Will to pass.

4. From his Mercy, and
His fourth Argument to praise God, is taken from his Justice and Mercy.

1. The Lord lifts up the meek, His ways are not like men's ways, with whom
the meek are despised; but these are the men whom he sustains, defends, exalts.
2. Justice.
His Justice: He casts the wicked down to the ground. Wicked men shall not
reign for ever, God will laugh them to scorn, and cast them from the highest
step of dignity and power, to contempt and scorn to the ground.
2. The second part of the second Section. He repeats his Exhortation to praise
God.
But before the Prophet goes on, he repeats his Exhortation, as if he meant to
rub up our memories, and that we call to mind to what purpose he used the
former, and will yet use the following Arguments.

Sing unto the Lord with Thanksgiving: Do it in words.

Sing praises upon the Harp unto our God: Do it in works.

And presently he falls upon his Arguments, From his Providence.
of which he gives diverse instances.

1. Who covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth: When
he brings clouds over the face of heaven, The instances of it four.
it is not in his purpose to obscure or darken the beauty of it, but to water
and moisten the earth, without which it will not be fruitful, Psalm. 104.13, 14.
Jer. 14.22. 2. Who makes grass to grow on the Mountains, in the most barren
places, to which the rain will not suffice, except God cooperate with it. 3.
He gives to the Beast his food. He gives it them, they gather it. 4. And to
the young Ravens which cry. Naturalists tell us, That the Raven seeds not his
Chickens, till they be plumed, not owning them, till they be like them, all
which time, God sustains them: But others, that no Bird so soon suffers his
young to prey for themselves, as the Raven, being then deserted by the Dam,
cro^itant, invocant, and God hears and sends them meat, Job 38.41. Christ uses
this Argument, that we rely on Gods Providence, Mat. 6. Luke 12.
Yea, But how shall we be delivered, we see no means?
but here the infirm and distrustful Jew may argue, Alas, we see no means for
our deliverance, we have no Strength, no Ammunition, nor Horse, nor Armor for
War, no, nor yet hearts to fight: How shall we be delivered?

The Prophet prevents and answers this objection; viz. That God who is to
gather them, needs no help at all, he can do it without means, as well as means.

1. He delights not in the strength of an horse; which is a warlike creature.
Resp. God can do it without means and will
2. He takes not pleasure in the legs; i. e. nimbleness, agility, valor of a
man; that is, in any military preparation or power, so far forth, as if they
were necessary means, and he could not do his work without them; these he will
have in ordinary use, but not trusted to, he delights not in that.
But he places his delight in his servants, and those some way or other he
will deliver.

1. The Lord takes pleasure in those that fear him, not in the Majesty, rich,
noble, or superficial Pharisee, but in those that fear him, and trembles at his
words. 2. And in those that hope in his mercy. That put their confidence, that
out of mercy, love, goodness he will deliver them.
3. He again repeats this proposition, and calls to the Church to perform it,
The third part. of the second Section.
where in the Greek and Vulgar begins a new Psalm.

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Zion. He again exhorts to
praise God.
Though others be negligent to praise God, yet be not thou. Not Jerusalem, not
Zion.

And then recites four arguments for which he would have Zion sing praises. 1.
Security and defense. 2. Benediction. 3. Peace. 4. Jerusalem especially.
Sustenance or provision. 1. Jerusalem is a City secure, being defended by God.
For her Security.
For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates. Gates and bars do well to a
City, 2. Jerusalem is a happy City. For he has blessed thy children within
he, Benediction.
thy Kings, Princes, Magistrates, etc. with Wisdom, Religion, Piety, etc. 3.
Jerusalem is a peaceable City. He makes peace in thy borders. Peace.
The very name intimates so much. For Jerusalem interpreted, is Visio pacis. 4.
Jerusalem is a City provided by God with necessary food and provision. He
fills thee with the finest of the wheat. Abundance.




Now that it is God that does all this for Jerusalem, the Prophet makes good by
other things that he does for the whole world, The Prophet proves this by his
general providence.
for which he needs not any instruments and underofficers to do it by, but
only his word and his command: It Is but for him to say the word, and what he
will, is done. He sends forth his command upon earth, and his word runs very
swiftly, it pierces all things, Heb. 1.3. and Wisd. 7.22, 24. and 8.1. For
instance.

1. He gives snow like wool. He brings frost, snow, ice.
and keep it warm from the nipping of the cold winds, as is evident in Northern
Countries. 2. He scatters the hoar-frost like ashes. That thickens the air
as if ashes were cast into it. For I have observed, that with a hoar-frost
commonly there is a mist, which resolves into rain within twenty four hours. 3.
He casts forth his ice like morsels. That is, fragments of ice. 4. Who can
stand before his cold? That is, able to endure it, had not he provided clothes,
furrs, fire against the violence and rigor of it.
Described he has the vehemence of the cold in the snow, frost, ice; Annd
dissolves and melts it.
next he shows with what facility and celerity he dissolves and removes it.
Only by his Word.

1. He sends out his word and melts them. 2. He causes his wind to blow. His
South wind, and the waters flow, Ice and Snow are resolved into water.
But note here that the Prophet calls it His ice, His cold, His word, His wind,
that we may know that the constipation and resolution is from him, and
therefore we depend upon his providence for out food and raiment, etc.

4. This is an act of Gods providence in common to all Nations, The special Act
of his providence to his people.
and by it he teaches all Nations to acknowledge their Creator. But there is a
peculiar Act of his providence extended to his people in which other Nations
did not, nor do not yet communicate with them, viz. The knowledge of his word,
and manifestation of his Will, and this is a new argument by which he persuades
them to praise God. The knowledge of his word and will.
What Israel might, that now the Christian Church may say, and that with
advantage.

1. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel. To
them he spoke by Moses and the Prophets. To us by his own Son, his Apostles and
their successors. 2. He has not dealt so with any Nation, with none at that
time; And now to none, who belong not to the spiritual Jerusalem, which is the
Church. 3. For all these benefits praise the Lord.
And as for his judgments. The Evangelical Preceps, and Rules of life, and
salvation, they have not known them.
Now for all these benefits, and for all these reasons. Hallelujah. Praise ye
the Lord.

The Hymn or Prayer Collected out of the One hundred forty and seventh Psalm.
O Thou great Lord of heaven and earth, thy mercy above all thy works, when I
consider thy greatness, I tremble; when I look upon thy wisdom I admire, but
as often as I look back upon thy goodness and mercy I am animated to approach
thy throne, and to pay that debt of thankfulness unto thee for thy providence
over the whole world, and peculiarly thy care and love extended to thy poor
Church.

When the thirsty earth gasps for rain, thou coverest the heaven with clouds,
and preparest to moisten it, thou clothest the mountains with grass, and
blessest the valleys with plenty. There Is not a beast to which thou give not
food, the Snow descends like Wool, the waters cake into ice, and the rivers
become stiff and run not. But thou again no sooner sends forth thy word in the
Spring, but their hardness is dissolved, thou causest thy wind to blow,

Who,

Gracious God consider their afflictions, and how that at this time a principal
member groans under the Cross, thy Temples are cast down, thy houses of prayer
destroyed, thy people scattered on the mountains as sheep that have no
shepherd. Jerusalem, and gather together unto her the outcasts of Israel. Heal
those that are broken in heart, and bind up, as a good Physician the merciless
wounds they have received;

Take pleasure, bring back thy banished, and build them a sure house, provide
for them a City to dwell in, and strengthen the bars of the gates thereof, fill
her with the finest of the wheat.

But above all, show thy word unto Jacob, And where thou have not dealt so with
other Nations, For so shall Jerusalem praise thee,

PSALM. CXLVIII. A Hymn. Or Hallelujah.
THE Prophet in this Psalm calls upon the whole Creation to be instrumental in
the praises of God. By which he shows, David calls upon all creatures to praise
God.
1. His ardent desire that God be praised in that, as if Creatures endued with
reason, were too few to praise God, he calls even to inanimate things, that
they would join with him, and be (...). Naz. 2. His intention, what he would
have done, then what could be done. 3. That what could be, should be done: that
they by our mouths praise God; That is, we seeing in them God power, wisdom,
goodness, be ready to praise. 4. That in their kinds they really do praise him,
because being made in a wonderful beauty and order, which they transgress,
proclaim to the world, and testify of God even without a voice, that he must
needs be a wise, intelligent understanding, that so made them.


The Psalm is disposed by an excellent Distribution.

1. He calls to the celestial creatures in General. 2. In special.

1. The Angels. Praise ye the Lord. 1. The Angels.
Praise ye the Lord from the heavens; Ye. Of the celestial Order. Or ut caeles,
i. e. de habitaculo vestro; and this is no command, (...) exhortation, as if
the Angels were negligent in their duty, but an invitation to continue in doing
what they do already. 2. Praise him in the heights, i. e. the heavens above. 3.
And yet more plainly. For the second verse is but an (...), or declaration of
the first. 1. Praise him all his Angels. 2. Praise him all his hosts. Which in
St. Luke are Militia caeli. 2. The Sun and Moon, Stars. Praise ye him Sun and
Moon. Sun, Moon, stars.
Praise him all ye Stars of light. Though not with voice, which ye want, yet
praise him by your greatness, motion, beauty, light, efficacy. 3. He comes to
the body of the heaven, the Orbs. The Orbs.
1. Praise him ye heaven of heavens, that is, the Coelum Empyraum. 2. And ye
waters that be above the heavens, that is, all the Orbs above the air, which
in the Scripture is called heaven; as volucres coeli nubes coeli, etc. For he
established them.


And in the two next verses he gives the reason, why the heavens praise God.

1. He commanded, and they were created. They are his creatures; 2. He has
established them for ever, They are incorruptible, they must keep the Order he
made.
2. From heaven he descends to the earth, and all sublunary bodies, as the
earth, All sublunary Bodies.
Air, water, and creatures that live in these, or are in these. Praise the Lord
from the earth. All that are from the earth, 1. Ye Dragons. Ye Whales. Muse.
Greater fishes. Bellar. 2. All Deeps. All kind of waters. Lakes, Ponds, Rivers,
Seas. 3. Fire and hail, snow and vapors, stormy wind fulfilling his word.
Meteors. 4. Mountains and all hills. Campi patentes and Valles. 5. Fruitful
trees and all Cedars. All trees fit to build with. 6. Beasts and all Cattle,
both wild and tame. 7. Greeping things. Worms, Serpents. 8. And all flying
fowls.


3. All mankind.
In the last place he cites all mankind to praise God.

1. Of all degrees.
The Highest Kings and all people. They who command, who obey. 2. Sexes.
Princes and all Judges of the earth. All inferior Magistrates. 3. Ages.
Of all Sexes. Both young men and maidens. 4. Of all Ages. Old men and
children.
Let them praise the Name of the Lord. 1. For his Name is excellent.
For his Name is excellent alone. There is no Name so sublime, so high, and
worthy of all praise. For all created things, although great, if compared to
Gods greatness, are nothing, for what excellency soever they have, they have
from him, whose Name is alone excellent. 2. His glory above.
His Glory is above the earth and heaven. Their glory being from him.


4. He concludes the Psalm with his goodness to his Church; which is another
reason.

1. He also exalts the horn, that is, the power and glory of his people. 2. He
is good to his Church.
He is the Praise of his Saints. The Pride of Israel, viz. 3. Even of the
children of Israel, a people near to him, a people dedicated, consecrated to
God. And near unto him in true knowledge, faith, true worship, adoration,
Trust, and filial love.
All which is to be understood not of Israel according to the flesh, but of
Israel according to the Spirit. For all are not Israel, that are of Israel,
Romans 9. There were among them Generations of Vipers, Mat. 3. and such as
resisted the (...) ^host, Act. 7.

Now those that are true Israelites, And therefore praise him.
and those especially he excites to sing Hallelujah.

The Prayer out of the one hundred and forty eighth Psalm.
O Omnipotent Lord,

All which when we consider, we must needs lament our own backwardness in
setting forth thy glory. Lamentable it is to think that man alone, for whom all
these things were made, thy Name is excellent, and thy glory above heaven and
earth.

O Lord, we humbly beseeth thee, exalt the horn, the power and glory of thy
people, those whom thou have taken near unto thee, and who worship thee in
Spirit and Truth, let not the gares of hell ever prevail against them, and
though Satan sift them like wheat, yet let it be the praise of all thy Saints,
that still they adhere unto thee, and come nearer unto thee, by the merits of
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM. CXLIX. Hallelujah. A Hymn.
IN this Psalm the Saints of God are excited to give him due thanks, The
Prophes excites Gods Saints to praise him. The first part.
for For two reasons: 1. For the Grace and Favor received from him, from verse.
1. to 5. 2. For the Glory and Privileges they shall receive, verse. 5. to 9.


1. The Prophet first excites the Saints to a return of thanks. And amplifies
it diverse ways.
Let Israel rejoice, let the children of Zion praise. Which is amplified 1.
From the persons who are to perform it, Saints, called here Israel, the
children of Zion. For praise is not comely in the mouth of sinners. 2. From the
Quality of the Song, it must be Canticum novum, a New Song, it was an old Song
the Creatures sung in the former Psalm for their Creation. It must be a New
Song the Saints must sing for their Renovation and Glorification. A new matter
to be sung by new men. 3. From the place, in which it is to be sung, not in
private, but in public in the Church, in a full Congregation of the Saints. 4.
From the manner in which it is to be done, in all allacrity, with all the
affection that may be, with a Song, with joy, with praise. Cantate, And, as if
all we could do were too little, to take the help of all Musical instruments.
Let us praise his Name in the dance, let us sing praises unto him with Timbrel
and Harp. 5. From the object, God, who was their Creator, and their King. Let
Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the children of Zion be joyful in
their King.


And this part he concludes, with a strong reason for a New Song. For his love
and favor to them.


1. For the Lord takes pleasure in his people. He loved them from everlasting,
and that out of mere good will, and this his (...) is the root and foundation
of all our good, therefore he predestined, therefore he called, therefore he
justified, therefore he sanctified, glorify, because it was his good-pleasure
so to do, he takes pleasure in his people, Luke 12.32. 2. He will beautify the
meek with Salvation. What was his good-pleasure, he will fulfill. That people,
who has learned of him to be meek and humble, he will exalt, he will save, he
will honor with beauty and glory.
2. And now he begins to describe the future glory, The second part.
with which he will beautify them.

1. Let the Saints be joyful in glory. To which they shall never come, He
describes their future glory.
except Saints. 2. Let them rejoice in their beds, i. e. Rev. 14. But not from
their praising God, that is no labor. They sing aloud, they sleep not then.
Their work there is twofold, Their work in heaven for present, to praise God.
one for the present, the other for the future.

1. For the present. The high praises, the greatest and highest that can be
thought on, let these be in their mouths. Exaltant Deum, and exultant. 2.
Hereafter to exercise judiciary power.
For the future; when Christ shall come to judgment; Let a two-edged sword be
in their hand. The sword is in a Judges hand, for he is an avenger of all that
do ill. By the sword then, Judiciary power may well be understood, Deuteronomy. 32.41.
Romans 13.4. And the Saints at the last day are to be Judges, 1 Cor. 6.2. Mat.
19.28.
Then the exercise of this judiciary power shall be, The end of that power.
1. To execute vengeance upon the heathen, to reprove them, and to pronounce a
condemnatory sentence against them, to exprobate to them their former life,
Wisd. 5.1, etc. and to pronounce punishment on the people. To judge them to
punishment. 2. To bind even the greatest, their Kings in chains, and their
Nobles with fetters of iron. The phrase is Metaphorical, as is that of the
Gospel, Mat. 22. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness. The
meaning of it is, that at the day of Judgment, the Saints shall approve the
sentence passed by Christ against all Nero's, Diocletians, Herod's, Julians,
when they shall be bound in chains of darkness, and crushed by Christ's iron
Scepter. 3. To execute upon them the judgment written. The judgment against
wicked doers, and persecutors of Gods Church, written in Gods Book, and as
certain, as if engraven in a pillar. His immutable judgment.


3. This is the glory of all his Saints.
He concludes with an Epiphonema. This glory of sitting with Christ in the
clouds, and judging the world, is the Glory of all his Saints. Allelujah.

An Appendix to the four last Verses in this Psalm.
BEcause these last verses have, according to men's fancies, been applied to
several purposes, as they might suit best with their interests, therefore I
thought good to say a little more of them.

1. The Jews first applied them to the time succeeding their Captivity, and
fancied to themselves, that the promise was made to them, that they should have
a two-edged sword in their hand, that is, power, to execute vengeance on the
heathen, etc. But he that shall read the story of the Maccabees, and Josephus,
shall find, that such a time never came, that so far they were from binding
Kings in chains, that Kings held them in bondage, as Antiochus, Seleucus,
Tryphon, Pompey, etc. This sense then can have no foundation in these words.

2. Which the Jews that now live, perceiving, tell us, that these words shall
have the accomplishment at the coming of their yet expected Messiah, for then
they shall be Lords of the world, and bind all Kings they please in chains, and
Nobles with f^tters of Iron, etc. But never any such temporal Messiah shall
come, and therefore this is but a fiction of their own brain.

3. The Anabaptists, Millenaries, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, dream also of such a
golden age, they tell us of a thousand years, that Christ shall come, and with
his Apostles reign upon the earth, in which time his Laws only must take place,
and that his Saints shall have a two-edged sword in their hands, execute
vengeance, and punish who they please, binds Kings and Nobles in chains, punish
who they please, and execute the judgment written. And the consequent of this
Doctrine is destructive and dangerous, as experience has taught us in Muncer,
John of L^yden, our new Sectaries, who upon it labor to unroot all Monarchies,
and destroy all that wear a Crown. But this is but an illusion, for of Christ
it is said, That him the Heavens must contain, till the consummation of all
things, when Christ will come, and take his Elect to him, that where he is,
they may be also; and that is into Heaven, not on Earth. Here then we may not
expect to reign with him.

4. A fourth opinion there is, which is the most received, and by very
judicious Divines, that these words are to be taken in a spiritual sense, That
by the Saints, are to be understood Christ, his Apostles and Successors; that
by the two edged Sword, is to be understood the Word of God; by Chains and
Fetters, the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel; by punishments, the sharp
rebukes used by the Ministers of the Word to stubborn sinners, by the revenge
taken on them, Repentance, which is a revenge taken for a former sin, 2 Cor.
7.11. which being admitted, the sense will run thus:

Let the hi^gh praises of God be in the mouth of his Ministers, and the
two-edged Sword of the Gospel, Hebr. 4.12. in their hand, to execute vengeance
upon the Heathen, to bring them to repentance, and make them take revenge upon
themsel^es, for their former ways and punishments, to utter sharp rebukes upon
the people; to bind, not the people only, and Plebians, but even the most
mighty Kings and Princes, Nobles and great men with the Laws of Christ, and
Precepts of the Gospel, as fast, as if they were bound with Chains of Brass,
and Fetters of Iron: And it is known how the greatest Princes have submitted
their necks to the yoke and Doctrine of Christ. To execute upon them the
judgment written: Not that any of Christ's Ministers usurp Authority over Kings
and Princes in temporal matters; for they are only to proceed according to the
letter of their Commission: Go and teach all Nations, and acquaint the greatest
Princes, That if they obey and believe the Gospel, they shall be saved; but if
they believe not, they shall be damned: This is the judgment written; and it is
executed, when proclaimed and preached to them; which, if it take no place, it
is beyond their Commission to raise Arms against them: This is no where written.

Now this is the honor of all his Saints, of all those whom he has entrusted
with his Commission. And indeed an honor it is unto them to be his Ambassadors
and Heralds.

5. The fifth interpretation, is that which I mentioned before in the Analysis,
who apply the Text to the Judiciary power, that the Saints receive at the last
day, and I rather embrace it than the former: But I leave every one to his
choice.

The Prayer collected out of the One hundred and forty ninth Psalm.
THOU art worthy, O Lord God of Heaven and Earth, Praise thee we will with
Timbrel and Harp.

There is no merit at all in us, why thou should look upon us, a mass of
corruption and sin we find in our selves, but nothing to deserve thy love;

In thy good time, O Lord, bring us to glory, Allelujahs: let us sing the Song
of Moses, and the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, Thou King of Saints, Who shall not fear
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy?

We do not doubt, That thou can bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles
with Links of Iron. Therefore we pray thee, that either by the two-edged Sword
of thy Word thou would convert them, or else execute thy judgment written
upon them; Thy Kingdom of Grace, by which thou do reign in the hearts of all
thy Elect: Thy Kingdom of power, by which thou will subdue all thy enemies; and
thy Kingdom of glory, when thy Saints shall be called to sit upon their
Thrones, and with thee, judge the World, When vengeance shall be executed on
the Heathen, that have not known thy Name; and an inheritance given to the
Saints, whom thou will honor for ever and ever.

PSALM. CL. A Hymn.
THIS Psalm is of the same Subject that the former. In the 148. All creatures
are invited to praise God. In the 149. Men especially, and those that are in
the Church: But in this, that they praise him, and that with all kind of
Instruments.

The parts are. 1. An Invitation to praise God, which word is ingeminated
thirteen times, according to the number of the thirteen Attributes of God, as
the Rabbis reckon them. 2. That this be done with all sorts of Instruments,
intending thereby that it be performed with all the zeal, care, alacrity,
ardency of affections that may be.


1. The first part.
In the beginning, and all along the Psalm, he calls on men to praise God.

1. He invites to praise God.
Praise, praise, praise, praise. 2. Praise God in his Sanctuary: In his Temple;
or in your hearts, which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost: Or praise him, that
dwells in Sanctis; that is, in his holy Heaven. 3. Praise him in the firmament
of his power: For his power, magnificence, which is firm: Or, who shows his
power in the Firmament, when he sits as in his Throne or Palace. Some
understand the Church by it, in which his Saints shine as Stats in the
Firmament. 4. Praise him for his mighty Acts; the works of power he does. 5.
Praise him according to his excellent greatness. That greatness whereby he
excels all other things; he being absolutely great, they only comparatively.
2. The second part
He desires that no kind of way be omitted, by which we may show our zeal,
alacrity and ardency in praising him, With zeal, and all kind of Music.
and to that end he makes mention of all sorts of Instruments, which either
make Music, being touched with the hand, or forced to sound with wind.

1. Praise him with the sound of Trumpet: An Instrument then used in their
solemn Feasts. Tuba flatu sonitum reddet. 2. Praise him with the Psaltery and
Harp: Pulsu chordarum resonant: 3. Praise him with the Tymbrel, and dance.
Tympano and Choro. Vulg. 4. Praise him with stringed Instruments; Lutes, Viols,
etc. and Organs. 5. Praise him upon the loud Cymbals. They are round, and being
shaken, make a tinkling noise. 6. Praise him upon the high sounding Cymbals: An
Instrument that yielded a great sound, as Bells do amongst Christians. Bellar.
That he be praised by all.

His Conclusion is universal: Let every thing that has breath, praise the
Lord. Praise ye the Lord. Allelujah.

1. Every thing that breaths; whatever has strength or faculty to do it. 2.
Every thing that has life; whether spiritual, as Angels, or animal, as Beasts,
or both as men: Or Metaphorically, all other things; which, though they be
inanimate, yet may be said to live to God, because they obey his Order and
Decree. The Prophets intent may be, that all things praise God, because all
things that have life or being, have it from him.
A Thanksgiving occasioned by the last Psalm.
O Eternal God, Lord and Creator,

Thy wisdom is infinite, thy mercies are glorious, and we are not worthy, O
Lord, to appear before that presence at which the Angels cover their faces; yet
since thou, O Lord, art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power, because
thou have made, preserved, and redeemed us. We unworthy wretches do in all
humility and obedience offer thee all possible land and honor; while we have
breath, we will praise the Lord.

And that we do it with the greater alacrity, and more attentive zeal,
Hallelujah after Hallelujah, and call for Hymn after Hymn, with Psalms and
spiritual Songs, voices and instruments of Music, we will praise the Lord;
praise thy power, praise thy wisdom, praise thy goodness, praise thy mercy, thy
bounty, thy love to us for ever and ever.

And here I in particular thank thee for thy assistance in this work, which I
wholly attribute to thy Grace, and dedicate to thy Honor.

And if I have done well, and truly expressed the sense of the Spirit of God,
who inspired into the Prophet these Psalms and Hymns, it is that I desired: But
if slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could attain to.

Analyticam hanc Psalmorum explicationem per gratiam Dei absolvi, and
devotiones inde collectas Anno. 1658. October. 22. Hallelujah.
FINIS.

