A LAPIDARY OR, THE HISTORY OF PRECIOUS STONES: With cautions for the
undeceiving of all those that deal with Precious Stones.

By THOMAS NICOLS, sometimes of Jesus-Colledge in CAMBRIDGE.

Inest sua gratia parvis. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by THOMAS BUCK, Printer to the
Universitie of Cambridge. 1652

To the Right Worshipful the Heads of the University of CAMBRIDGE.
Right Worshipful;
EVery thing according to its perfection is valuable, and the more glorious the
more estimable. It is not the greatness of any thing that ought to purchase it
esteem; nor must the smalnesse or littleness of a virtuous created substance
decrease its worth: But great things as joined with the glory of their
perfection, are so and no otherwise of great and high esteem: and little things
are no otherwise valuable, then according to the glorious beauty of their
perfection. Here, Right Worshipful, I present you with things great and small,
but with none without their virtues. They are created substances of the most
enduring nature, which this our part of the subcelestiall world does contain:
The glory of those which shall here find beautified with external grace, will
feed your eyes with much pleasure in beholding: and their internal virtues,
and the symboles whereby by them are discovered to us the glorious excellency
of super-celestiall things, will in the right consideration of them no less
feed your spirit with delight, then does their external beauty and perfection
please your eye, when it does behold their glory. Every one out of their common
apprehensions of worth, and out of that mean perception which they have of
things dignified above others with beauty and with glory, esteem them valuable:
Gemms and Jewels are thus dignified with external glory, and enricht with
internal symbolical virtues. For this cause with those that have but mean and
common apprehensions of their worth, they are esteemed. And for their
symbolical resemblances of super-celestiall things, amongst the wisest of
ancient times they have had upon them an high estimate of value and of worth.
Surely, we live not in the most unknowing times of the world; nay, never was
this part of the world fuller of knowledge then now it is, wherein many are
blessed with excellent gifts and endowments by which they are enabled to enquire
more thoroughly into the nature and causes of things, then ever. Amongst these
who know the true nature of things, surely, nor gemms, nor jewels, nor any
other virtuous thing shall want their due esteem. Nor with you, Right
Worshipful, I am sure, can that which is truly virtuous want its value.

It is a Philosophic axiom, Inest sua gratia parvis; I have here taken the
pains to open the small cabinets of this excellency, that I may discover the
true virtues which are contained in many small things and little creatures. This
I have done, first, by a search and diligent enquiry into the causes and
natures of Gemms, and into such qualities as may possibly from thence in them
arise: Then by partly acquainting Anselmus Boethius with the English tongue: In
the doing of which, I have endeavored, according to what I find in Scripture,
and according to what I find in other Authors, to take away that confusion
about the species of gemms, which does cause them to be hardly and difficultly
known of what species and kinds they are. And withal, I have not only
labored with Boethius, but also with diverse other Lapidists, to show the true
way of discerning factitious and artificial stones or gemms, from those that
are really and truly the works of nature, that so the fallacies and
sophistications of Artists, being clearly and perspicuously manifested and
discovered, nature may not be belied in the glory of her own natural workings
and actions.

This is the sum of that pains which I have here taken, which together with
my whole endeavors in this kind, Right Worshipful, with general good
intentions, I dedicate to you, that under your protection it may in the light
detect falsehood, and discover truth to many.

Your Worships humble servant, THO. NICOLS.

To the courteous Reader.
COURTEOUS READER;
THat, that may be thy profit and pleasure I present thee with, though it has
been my labor and pains. I acknowledge it, as mine it is not a labor worthy
thy commendations: Nevertheless, as thou reapest profit by it, or conceivest
pleasure in it; so commend the pains of him that has here labored, and this
labor of his painful endeavors to thy friends.

Farewell. T. N.

The Contents of the Lapidary, or Book of cautions.
In the general Treatise are
1. The general definition of Stones. 2. General division. 3. Manner of their
generation. 4. Original of Gemms according to Hermes and Plato. 5. The places
of their births in general. 6. The causes of perspicuity and diaphanitie. 7.
The material cause of Transparency. 8. Cause of the color in stones. 9. The
cause of hardness. 10. Cause of the ponderousness of them. 11. Of the
adulteration, and the way of its discovery. 12. The way of making precious
stones in their enclosures appear fairer and larger then they truly are. 13.
The use of foyls, tinctures, and bracteae. 14. To help the softness of Gemms.
15. To color Crystal, that it may resemble gemms with color. 16. The manner
of taking away the colors of gemms naturally colored. 17. Artificial stones,
the matter of them. 18. The way of polishing and engraving precious stones. 19.
The faculties of gemms and precious stones. 20. Effects attributed to precious
stones which their natures are not capable of effecting. 21. Langius his
opinion concerning the generation of gemms and precious stones. 22.
Supernatural effects of stones improperly so called. 23. The causes of all
effects. 24. Rules to discern them. 25. Conditions to make effects truly
natural.
In the Book of Particulars, are contained these things:
1. The description of the stone in the front of every Chapter. 2. The
tinctures, foyls, and Bracteae by which natural gemms and precious stones,
that are either diaphanous or thoroughly transparent, are helped in their glory,
and set out in their luster. 3. The adulterations of precious stones and gemms.
4. The names of them, by which they are diversely known in several countries by
several Nations. 5. The species of every gemme and precious stone, accordingly
as diverse Authors do render the discovery of them, that they may be known. 6.
The places of the births of every kind and species of gemme and precious stone.
7. The dignities and value of every precious stone and gemme, according to
diverse Authors. 8. The properties of precious stones and gemms. 9. The Physic
uses of them according as diverse Authors have delivered them in their several
writings.
An Admonition or Advertisement to the Reader.
Reader,
IF thou would be free from many superstitions in the use of precious
stones, and undeceive thy self as concerning the strange virtues, powers, and
faculties which by diverse Authors in the end of every Chapter they are
reported and related to be endued withal, though contrary to what their own
natures are or can be capable of: First, read the General part of this
History, for in it is a discovery of Satanick subtilties, and of the
superstitious use of stones, whereby at unawares many good men have been, and
are still ensnared. Take therefore this well-wisht caution to thee for thy
security.

STONES are either Small, are either Rare, are either Hard, are either fair,
are either shadowed, wholly, as the Turkey Chameus
partly, as the Sardonyx Astroites Leucosapphirus Opalus

transparent, with color, as the Sapphire Emerauld Gemma Solis Almandine
Jacinth Beryll Ruby Prassius Rubicell Chrysoprasse Spinel Granat Almandine
Chrysolite Balasse Carbuncle
without color, as the Diamond


evil colored, are the Pantarbe Brontia Chelidonius Ombria Ovum Anguinu^
Dracontia Aetite Lapis Palumbellus

Soft, are either fair, in color, as the Pearl Bezoar Molochite.
in figure, as the Oculus Cati Glossopetra Umbilicus Marinus Lapis Judaicus
Trochite

evil colored, as the Morochite Lapis Caymaus Enorchis Lapis Cevar Lapis
Manualis L. Porcinus L. Anguium Enhydros Callimus L. Malacensis Manetus
Hysterius L. Tubero^um L. Bugola. L. Bufonis


Common, are either Hard, as the Diamond of Bristoll Pseudo-Diamond of Hungary
Soft, as the Lapis Felis Lapis Spongiae L. Limacis L. Carpionum Lapis Percae


Great, are either Rare, are either Hard, are either fair, are either shadowed,
as the Porphyrite Heliotrope Smaragdite Lapis Lazuli Agate Coral Ophite Cornu
Ammonis
transparent, as the Amethyst Topaz Smaragde Prassius Crystal Bohemian Diamond

evil colored, as Magnes Geodes Steatite Eneost Stalagmite Onyx Ceraunia
Basaltes Smiris Dactylus Idaeus Ossifragus L. Nephriticus Stalactite L. Lydius
Haematite Hephestite Hystera Petra

Soft, are either Fair, In color, as the Alabaster Specularis Amber L. Armenus
In figure, as the Amites Stellaris

Evil colored, as the Asius Samius Ageratus Meletite Gagate Porus Schystus
Thyites Hematite Calamita Alba Fungifer


Common, are either Hard, are either Fair, as the Marble
Evil colored, as the Whet-stone Pyrite Common-stones Flints.

Soft, as the Scissilis Gypsum Pumise Lythantrax Talcum.




Of Precious stones or Gemms in general.
A Stone is an hard, mixed, Definition of a Stone.
inanimate, solid, inductile body, which cannot be dissolved in water, concrete
by nature of simple earth, without many alterations, as of its chief and most
conspicuous matter. Stones generally are solid ornaments ordained of God for
the bedecking of the fabric of the world. The celestial houses have the
Cornerstone of heaven for their support: and here on earth also our sumptuous
edifices and glorious temples have their corner stones, without the which they
cannot be upheld. Stones are the Almighties blessings, they are members of the
world which do add perfection to it, and were these solid members wanting, the
world would be dismembered. They do as it were poize or balance the center of
the world, and to the whole they do equally proportion all its parts. As the
wise disposer of all things had well mixed them with their fellow creatures, so
they made up the worlds center: But no sooner are they forced from this good
order, but straight appears another Babel, they do produce confusion. They
are no sooner forced to contradict their own natures in the ascents of their
graduall irregularities to heaven, but straight they do cause their
preposterous builders to be smitten in their tongues, to be confounded in their
languages, and to be dispersed abroad as strange nations, who cannot understand
the one the others speech. They are the rock on which the earths tabernacles,
domicils, and temples are all founded, firmed, and steadied; and the firmament
of it, and them, of all, is the Rock of heaven, who has so laid the
foundations of the earth that it shall never be moved. Their life according to
the opinion of some Authors, what it is.
They (as the opinion of some is) have vegetative souls, or lapidifick spirits
infused into them from above, by which they live and draw the likeness of
their substance, their lapidifick juice, their proper nourishment, for their
sustentation, for the preservation of their being, and for their further growth
and increase of their own proper substantial moles, mass, or lump. Herbs draw
their fructifying juice from the circumjacent earth by thready roots, thereby
to sap their bodies and their branches, that so in their due season they may
send forth buds, blossoms, leaves, and fruits; and as these are diversely
differenced according to their magnitude, fruits, forms, colors, qualities,
and place wherein they grow: so also stones have their several divisions,
according to their magnitude, matter, forms, colors, transparency, opacity,
semitransparency, and mixed forms. Other divisions they do admit of in respect
of their native soyls, and the things to which they do adhere, and in which
they grow. Nevertheless, there are two general heads to which all the
divisions may be reduced; which are as follow.

The general division of stones.
STones are either 1. Common stones; or 2. Stones of esteem.


The Common stones are either very great, bigg, and formlesse lumps; or else
they are in very great plenty; The most of these kinds are generally well
known. The stones of esteem are very precious and stones of great value, being
commended to us in Holy Writ as the emblems of glory, integrity, and purity.
Of these some are of greater esteem, some of less: those of less esteem
receive their denominations from the creatures in which they are generated; as
Chelidonius is so called of chelidon a swallow; Lapis Palumbellarum, and
Alectorius of the birds in which they are found. Lapis Percae from the fish
called a perch, in which it is generated. The Margarite from the fish in which
it is generated: and Unions are so called, because they are found separatim or
single. The Bezar from the creature in which it is found. There are some stones
of less esteem like unto plants, as Coral and Coralline. Others of a
combustible substance, and easily set on fire, as Succinum, and the Gagate.
Others have a Mathematick form, and are round like an egg, as ovum Anguinum,
Geodes, Aetites. Others have a Mathematick angular form, as Crystallus,
Basaltes, Iris. And others have a Mathematick hemispherick form as Ombria,
Crepaudina.

Those of great esteem are very precious, and of great value: of which sort are
these: The Ruby, the Carbuncle, so called from their fiery red color. The
Jacinct, a transparent stone like a flame of fire. The Chrysolite, a
transparent stone of a gold color. The Crysoprassius, a transparent stone of
the splendor of gold with the greenness of a leek. The Smaragde and the
Prassius, two transparent green stones. The Sapphire a transparent stone of a
sky color. The Beryll, a transparent stone of a seagreen. The Amethyst, a
transparent stone of a peach-bloom color. The Diamond, a diaphanous gemm. The
Sardius, Sardonix, Chalcedonie, and Leucosapphirus, which are all precious
stones partly transparent. The Turkey stone, a gemm void of all transparencie,
of a beautiful skie-colour. The Chamehuia, the Agate, the Heliotrope, very
fair non-transparent stones.

All which in the manner of their generation differ much from other
vegetatives, and from other creatures which are endued with sensitive souls, in
the manner of their generation. As for other vegetatives, such as are plants,
they are produced by the sowing of seed; which being cast into the ground,
first dies, then receives a new body, and so grows in its perfection by
degrees, shooting it self forth in a large proportion, and in altitude above
the superficies of the earth. As for creatures endued with sensitive souls,
they generate by copulation, coition, or mixture of seed: but far otherwise
is the manner of the generation of precious stones; as in this appears.

The manner of the generation of stones.
THese creatures are generated of an humor which contains in it self purest
terrestrial portions resolved in minimas parts by the operation and
elaboration of intelligences, as Langius and others think, or by the powerful
working of lapidifick spirits, as appears by what Boethius speaks of their
generation, in his book de naturis Gemmarum in genere. Being thus generated,
they are usually by degrees augmented by the addition of new matter, and by the
acquisition of new humor, as will appear in the generation of those stones
which have their original out of an humor called a Radix, or out of a
confused matter which is in lieu of a Radix as the Crystal and Amethist.
Others are generated by elaborations after the same manner, but have their
originals in a Theca or Matrix, as the Rubinus in Palatio. Generation of Unions.
The Margarites and Unions differ in the manner of their generation, from the
generating of other Gemms or precious stones, for these are generated of the
pearly drops of crystal morning dew, drunk in by the shellfish called
Scallops, and Cheripo: and indurated after the same manner that the Bezar is
generated in the beast Bezar, or that stones are generated in the kidneys of
men: and as these stones by the addition of new matter, are increased; so
likewise the Unions are increast by the new addition of fresh draughts of
purest crystal dew, even by fresh supplies of that purest restorative
liquour, taken in as the mornings draughts to serene and cheerful days.
Transparent Diaphanous Gemmes are all generated of a humor which contains in
its self most pure subtle earth, and by reason of its exquisite subtility, it
can by no means hinder the diaphanity of the water. So Anselmus Boethius.

The use of the knowledge of Gemms.
The knowledge of Gemms is an ornament to Princes; a mean by which Divines are
oft-times instructed in the knowledge of spiritual things; for by these, He
that has the key of David and opens and no man shuts, does often unlock
the intricate sense, hidden meaning, and deep mysteries of the sacred truths of
his holy word; for this cause in sacred writ often times we have many heavenly
things emblematized unto us, under the types and figures of Gemms or precious
stones; in this kind we may find very frequent mention made of them both in the
old and new Testament, by Moses in the Law, by St. John in the Revelation: the
depths also of the mysteries of other writers, who under the titles and figures
of Gemms have comprehended many excellent allegories, by the true knowledge of
precious stones will easily be found out: so that these blessings which we do
enjoy by the true knowledge of them; through the goodness of the Almighty, are
none of the least blessings which we do receive at his hands. What creatures
here on earth, have we, that are endued with so much sincerity, purity,
claritie and splendor, that are so fit to resemble heavenly things by as
these? so great are their sparkling glory, as that we may well compare them to
the expanse which divides the upper and the neither waters, and is bespangled
with multitudes of glorious twinkling stars. Aaron being clad in his
pectorall and guarded with files of these, had on his breast the emblems of
purity, and of glory, of light, of perfection, of truth, of justice. Josephus
lib. 3. Antiq. Judaic. c. 12.

Original of Gemms according to Hermes and Plato.
HErmes Trismegistus and Plato have determined of the original of Gemms and of
other things after this manner: Both say that there is a certain common virtue
and vivifying spirit, infused from heaven and from the stars into the whole
world, and every part of it, which some call, animam mundi; but Plato mentem
divinam, which does perpetually long by its natural power nova forma vestiri;
and which does so continually dispose its power in the matter of all things, ut
materiam quantumvis vilem and putridam, been tamen dispositam in actum
perfectissimae etiam formae reducat. Others say, that as there are varieties of
matter in the world, some more pure some less pure, some more noble some less
noble, some more excellent some less excellent; so also there are variety of
spirits which do inhabit the world, some more glorious, some less, some
delighting in this color some in that; some in much transparency, others in
opake dark and shady matters; and according to the various matter of their
delight, they will form to themselves habitacles or domicils, which shall
receive their tincture from themselves, as from their inhabitants; and probably
by reason of this opinion of Langius and others concerning the inhabitation of
intelligences in precious stones, there may be some ri'st for those wonderful
faculties and powers that many Authors say Gemms are endued withal, though
contrary to what creatures naturally can possibly be capable of. Many are of
the like opinion concerning the generation of metals: and there are that say by
reason of the great affinity that there is betwixt metallic spirits and Gemms,
or betwixt the spirits that inhabit Gemms and the Gemms they inhabit, there
is often or may be made a transmutation of metals into Gemms; stibium enim and
plumbum in Jacinthi formam, and minium in formam Smaragdi transmutatur; quod
profecto non fieret, nisi magna cognatio spiritus metallici cum Gemmis esset.
So Boethius l. 1. p. 15.

Of the places of the birth of Gemms in general.
THe climates fittest for the production of stones of excellent beauty are
such, says Boethius, as do lie nearest the Tropicks; and therefore have the
sun ever near them. They may be produced in any climate, but the more noble
kind of gemms, and precious stones, are in their excellency plentifully to be
found in the Regions of the oriental Indies, and that without doubt, because
it lies nearest the Tropic, and so has the sun ever near it, illiusque
aestu fruantur, sine quo e terra exhalationes quae ad gemmarum nobilium
propagationem, and generationem copiose requiruntur, produci non possunt.
Boethius p. 13.

The causes of Perspicuitie and Diaphanitie in them.
IT is the opinion of learned enquirers into the secrets of nature, that the
plenty of crystal succulencies in the matter of Gemms, are the only causes
of their perspicuity and diaphanitie, as that without which they do suppose
there can be no perspicuous or diaphanous bodies at all. But Boethius is of a
far different opinion, as appears by this which he says. l. 1. p. 21. Hi
maxim falluntur, quia non solum aqua, sed and aer diaphanus est, licet atomis
sit plenissimus, that is, These are much deceived; for not only the water, but
also the air is diaphanous, though it be full of atoms, and the fire does
much excel them both in diaphanitie; hence he says copia aquae non est
diaphanitatis causa, sed aliud quiddam, to wit, the exact union of the earth,
resolved in minimas particulas, and so plainly and exquisitely continued, that
the body constituted of it, can by no means be discerned to have any pores or
atoms in it. Continuitie alone he says is the cause of all diaphanitie, and
that because the sight can in no wise be terminated in it, unless it has some
contingent accident in its averse part from the light or sun; as some shadow,
which so hinders this part from being enlightened by the circumferent light,
that the contingent or accidental obscurity cannot but be perceived; this may
be experienced in a looking-glass. Flaws, cracks, or fissures in glass or
chrystalls, do much hinder their perspicuitie and diaphanity, whether they be
internal or external; because they having every one their distinct
superficies, do every one of them cause a diverse reflection of the light, which
diversity of reflections procures a certain kind of confusion, by which the
diaphanitie of the body, otherwise diaphanous, is hindered.

The Material cause of transparencie.
THe material cause of this transparencie in gemms, is a species of salt,
which is a transparent terrestrial matter diluted with water, which
transparent salinous substance, does by its acrimony penetrate, pierce, and cut
the earth into most exquisite, subtle, smallest portions. Thus it does make the
earth fit for diaphanitie, and works out the water, which is as it were its
vehiculum, and at the same time by degrees uniting it self to these exqisite
portions of earth, it does grow together with them into a diaphanous gemme. So
Boethius.

Those gemms which do contain most salinous matter in them, are softer and more
diaphanous, then other gemms, as the Crystal, Beryll, Iris, Citrinus, and the
like.

The hardest gemms have least salt in them, and are less diaphanous, as the
Diamond, qui plus micat quam transparet.

The cause of the color in precious stones.
AS there are diverse opinions concerning the diaphanity of gemms, so there are
likewise concerning the tincture and color of gemms, as will appear by what
follows. The color which may be perceived in gemms, is either diaphanous, I
mean transparent, or an opake, obscure, and shadowed color. This does receive
in the light, and not again transmit it; the other does again transmit (says
Boethius) or send forth the light that it does receive in: but absolute or
perfect diaphanity and transparencie, admits of no color at all: for
wheresoever there is but any tincture of color, the transparencie or
diaphanitie must needs be imperfect, because the light seems to be affected
and altered by the color, and therefore cannot be terminated in its own proper
color, or rather perspicuity of the gemm, but is terminated in some strange,
opake, dark color. Ansel. Boet. l. 1. 23.

In gemms or precious stones there is to be found a real color, and an
apparent color. The real color always remains though the light be absent.
The diversity of apparent colors do remain no longer then whilst the light
is present.

In perfectly transparent or perspicuous gemms or stones, colors have their
original from the refraction or reflection of the light, which diversity of
reflection in Crystalls, is caused by the multiplicitie of their superficies.
This will appear in a triangular, or an hexagonall Crystal, which is
absolutely diaphanous, has no color at all in it, and receives the light
rectis lineis, and does again transmit it rectis lineis; yet by reason of the
refraction and reflection of the light upon the multiplicitie of superficies,
it does represent to our view various colors: This we find true by experience,
says Boethius, Licet intellectus id non capiat, therefore a sensu recedendum
non est: that is, though we can give no reason why pure, simple, immixt light,
in a diaphanous exactly transparent body, deprived of all color, and the least
tincture of any color, should yet notwithstanding beget diverse colors.

There are diverse opinions concerning the originalls of the colors in gemms,
stones, earths, trees, plants, and flowers. Some think the species salis to be
the causa coloris; and will have the salem armoniacum naturae, which is very
plentiful in mineralls, metalls, and in the earth, to produce the various
colors in plants, flowers, gemms, and stones, and in all other things. Sal
armoniacum naturae quid.
And that which they call salem armoniacum naturae, est sal quoddam spirituale
vivificum, quod vino sublimato junctum illo prius ascendit. This is thought by
some to be the primum movens in the generation of things; and the conserving
balsame of every thing, and that which does adorn them with the beauty of their
various colors. The plenty of this salt which is found in every thing, and may
be extracted out of every thing, does cause this opinion concerning the colors
in gemms and stones. Various opinions concerning the original of colors in
things.
Another reason which is given for this, is this: because it being collected
and distilled, does of it self produce all kinds of colors. Some are of
opinion that the various exhalations are the cause of colors. Others say that
they are produced by the various commixtion of the elements, and by their
concoction. Others, that Colores a primis qualitatibus in materiam derivantur.
Others say that all colors do arise from the various commixtion of the two
extreme colors, that is, of white and black, lucis and umbrae, as appears in
the iris or rainbow, wherein out of light and darkness mixed, various colors
do arise. Boethius is of opinion that these are no causes of colors in things;
but that all colors are certain extrinsecall ornaments given of God to the
creatures for distinction, and that they are produced out of their own proper
seminary, out of which also he thinks that their extrinsecall form arises.
And that sal armoniacum which Quercetan calls balsamum naturae, he says is
their vehiculum.

For the most part all those stones and gemms which have a peculiar and proper
form, have a seminarium and principium coloris in materia ex qua formantur.
Boethius. p. 25. l. 1.

Variety of colors are produced by the mixture of colors.
The stones which have no determined form or figure he says have their
tinctures from exhalations as their remote cause; and from the mineral
spirits, and Sal Armoniack as their propinque and nearest cause. The primarii
colores, or especial colors which arise not from the commixtion of other
colors are these.

Boethius de naturis gemmarum in genere.
White, black, blue or sky color, yellow, red, miniatus color, or vermilion or
fiery red. Almost all kinds of colors are caused by the various mixture of
these colors. But in their own originalls they are not mixed with others.
Boethius.

By the Mixture of white and black is produced the color of ashes; the more
white there is, the more bright the color is; the less, the more obscure.

Mix sky color and yellow and it will produce a green color.

Mix red and sky color and you will have a violet color.

Mix a miniated color or a fiery red, and a red together, and you will have a
purple color.

Mix a white and a red and you will have a rose color.

Mix a white and sky color and you will have a milkie color.

Mix a miniated color, or a fiery red and yellow red together with a white,
and you shall have a helvus or gilvus, that is, a carnation or flesh color.

Mix yellow and green and you will have an orange or straw color.

Mix a miniated color, or a simple red, or a vermilion, and a yellow, and a
red, and a white together, and you will have an orange color, straw color, or
a wax color.

Mix white and orange, or straw color, and you will have a pale color.

Mix vermilion and yellow and you will have a yelk color.

Mix green yellow and white, and you will have a box color, or pale color.

Mix red yellow and vermilion, and you will have a saffron or gold color; or a
brown or swarth color, or a puke color, sad russet or tawney, according to
the various proportion of every color.

Thus have we seen the various judgments of diverse Authors, concerning the
original of diverse colors, in gemms or precious stones, and in plants and
other creatures: some imputing the original of the variety of beauty in
color to the balsamum naturae, or to the Sal armoniacum contained in the
substantial matter of all things: others making mineral exhalations the cause
of colors in them: others the elaboration of the first qualities upon the
matter of their substance. Some imputing it to the various commixtion of two
extremities, to wit of black and white, of darkness and light; But how can
this be, seeing darkness is no color, but a privation of color; and a very
forgetfulness of all those colors which by light we may discover; for in its
presence we are deprived of the remarkable views of those visible qualities of
various colors, by which we do on earth distinguish things. Then as for light
we see that it is guilty of no tincture in it self, and by how much it has
more or less of color accidental, so much it does fall short of the
perfection of its light. Light and darkness are at continual strife, the
presence of the one causes the absence of the other. No sooner did that
blessed Spirit of light move upon the face of the waters of the great deep, but
straight darkness affrighted with the all-awfull presence of its glory fled
away. No sooner does the sun arise to run its course, gloriously setting
forth from under its pavilion, but straight the amazed shades of darkest nights
flee all away. No sooner does the Sun of Righteousness begin to dart his
beams of glory into the horrid darkness of man's sinful heart, but straight
this powerful word, moving on the surface of this center, begets a new
creation, and sets up there a glory, by which through the qualities of earthly
colors we may discover the excellency of heavenly virtues. But the darkness
of the heart all amazed at this sudden powerful motion in this center,
straight forsakes its station, and fearfully fleeing leaves its habitation to
the light. If then there be such a distance betwixt light and darkness, that
nothing may interpose for agreement, how shall we think they should ever join
by mixture in substantial matters to produce variety of colors. Since
therefore there can be no agreement betwixt these two extremes, to make for the
effecting of such distinguishing qualities as are colors; then if from them
they do proceed, they must be the sad effects of their contrary operations: sad
I say, because light being oppressed by darkness wains; and which is our
grief, darkness can nothing be impaired, there being nothing worse then it. As
it is darkness it cannot be impaired, but as it is darkness extended, it may
be, and is, and shall be coarctated.

The cause of hardness in gemms.
THe durities and hardness in gemms is caused by the exact and perfect union
of their pure well compacted matter, which is freed of its moisture by the
power of heat, exhaling or extracting it; or of cold, compelling it by
compression. Air makes gemms friable, and subject to be broken with every
touch: water does possess them with a mollities, softness and thinness of
texture, and a tenderness of parts,

The hardest of all other gemms is the Adamant, then the Topaz, then the
oriental Chryssolite; next the Sapphire, Granate, Jacinth, then the Smiris,
then the Jasper, Achate, Basaltes.

The softest of all other gemms is the Opalus.

Perspicuitie in gemms is a sign of their excellent union, and of the well
compactednesse of their matter; and from their well compactednesse and
exquisite union proceeds their durities or hardness; which hardness does
beget in all stones a fitness for politure, and an irresistible power against
fire; As does appear by the Adamant, which because of its hardness can scarce
be injured by the power of the fiercest fire; and for this cause it may be used
symbolically as a signification of constancy. The Bohemian Granate by reason of
its exquisite durities does likewise suffer little injury by fire.

The cause of the ponderousness of Gemms.
AS hardness in gemms is said to proceed from their exact union, so likewise
this is some cause of their heaviness and weightinesse: for those gemms which
are not well compacted and united, are light, porous, and full of levitie.
Another cause of the ponderositie of gemms, is a Mercuriall substance which is
contained in them; of these sorts of gemms are all those that do consist of a
mineral matter. And for this cause factitious gemms which are made of metalls,
are heavier then any natural gemms.

Of the adulteration of Gemms, and their discovery.
ANy thoroughly transparent tinctured gemm what ever, may be adulterated by two
Saphires, or with two Crystalls, having a foyl betwixt them. But such
duplicated gemms, which are tinctured either with a foyl of Mastick, or with
other colored foyls in their intermediate space, are thus ordinarily and
usually discerned by Jewellers: They will take the gemm and put it upon their
thumb nail, and then direct their sight betwixt the plain of the gemm and of
their nail; and if the upper part of the gemm be white, and no color be added
(which lying hid under the sides of the cistae can there be perceived) then the
upper part of the gemm will plainly appear white as it is, and so it will
discover it self to be an adulterated gemm in stead of the natural one. This
is a very easy way to discover factitious gemms from natural ones. But those
factitious gemms which consist of many angles fitted for this purpose, by
various sections, hollowings, and excavations, cannot so easily be perceived,
because the reflections from the angles, do give tincture from the foyl in
every part of the superficies of the gemm. Another kind of ingenious fraud
there is, by which gemms are adulterated, and that is when as cunning Artists
do excavate a gemm, as a white Sapphire, or a Crystal, in the lower part of it
with a very small foramen, and then infuse into it a drop of some transparent
liquour, which being artificially done, will very excellently diffuse its
color through the body of the whole gemm: Thus the idea's of true Rubies,
Saphires, Smaragdes are produced. There is another kind of way of subtle fraud
in gemms, when as cunning sophisticatours do macerate gemms in colored or
tinctured waters, or so tincture them in fire, or by any other means, that the
tincture or color may enter the body of the gemm. These frauds can no
otherwise be discovered, but by taking the gemms out of their cistis,
enclosures, or settings, and so taking a naked view of them with full sight. As
for other gemms which are dissembled with tinctured glass, these for the most
part seem to have a pellicula or little film in their superficies, as if they
were anointed with oil, which is never to be found in true gemms. There are
factitious gemms made of Crystal, and of flints, and lead, which will be
harder then the common glass, and transparent as Crystal; in the making of
which, to tincture them, cunning artists are wont to add metalls to it, or
tinctures, or colors of metalls, and thus they being committed to the fire, by
the operation of the heat upon them, will be produced a gemme scarcely to be
discerned from the true gemm, save only by the atoms in the middle of their
body, and by those small bullae which are often caused in them by the unequal
working of the fire upon their matter, or by the extreme vehemency of its
heat. Use of the file in the trial of gemms.
Of these kinds of factitious gemms there are some so perfect, and free from
the small bullae and atoms, as that they can no ways be discerned from the
true gemms but by the use of the file; for these may be filed, the true ones
cannot, except only the Topaz and Smaragde: and by their gravitie, weight, and
ponderosity; for these factitious stones are much heavier then the true, as
consisting of lead and metalls, which are very ponderous and weighty: and by
their pining, dead, fading look, which if they be long beheld, do afford no
pleasure to the eye by feeding it; whereas in true gemms there is always a
lively splendor, which by reason of the reflection of the several tables or
sides of the superficies, gives it self forth with the more sparkling delight.
Another way of adulteration of gemms there is, very subtle, and more excellent
then any of the former, which is this, Cunning Chemists will make a lapidifick
water of mineralls, and then pour of it into waxen forms, which forms they
will immerge for some time in an indurative water, and thus produce a gemm not
unlike to the true. Vide Anselm. Boetium lib. 1. c. de adulter. gem.

The way of making precious stones in their enclosures appear fairer and larger
then they truly are.
THere are other subtle frauds about gemms, by which Jewellers can make them
seem much larger then they are: As if the inferior part of the gemm which is
included in the cistus or setting, does consist of many superficies, they will
render the gemm greater to sight then really and truly it is, by reason of
their manifold reflections. Again, if there be any intermediate air betwixt
the superficies of the gemm, and its bractea or foyl, it will according to its
proportion, render the gemm greater then otherwise it is; if it be much, it
will render it much bigger, because (says Boethius) here the air does subire
vices corporis, ac gemmas tanto crassiores, quanto ipse est, videri facit.
Again, if pure untinctured glass or Crystal, without any glutinosity, be
placed in such an intermediate space, it will even as the intermediate air,
render the gemm much greater then it is. If also color be added in the
conjunction of stones, with a lacryma or guttula, or a drop of mastick, it will
do the same: or if the glass or Crystal be tinctured or colored with the
color of the gemm, it will not only render it greater, but with more tincture
also.

Of the foyls tinctures or bracteae.
Use of foyls tinctures and bracteae.
THe use of foyls tinctures and bracteae are to administer beauty to the gemme;
for this purpose Jewellers are wont to illine or anoint the inferior
superficies of the gemm with a perspicuous color; at other times to place
under them a bractea or foyl; or a splendent tincture, which is made after this
manner. Take one guttula or grain of mastick upon the point of an iron, heat it
in the fire till it begin to melt, then separate the dark obscure part of it
from its perspicuous part, by the pressure of your finger; then cast away that,
and use this. To add beauty and luster of tincture to stones, some are wont to
use this penetrating water.

Aqua gemmas penetrans.
Aqua gemmas penetrans fit ex Terebinthina and aquae vitae, quibus add colorem
ex metallis extractum; dissolvatur in aqua urinae stillatitia, and color
perspicuus extrahatur per alembicum; and sic fit color. In this water macerate
your crystal for some hours, and if the water be first warmed, the crystal
will because of its softness easily receive in the tincture. For the making of
this water to produce a red color, crocus Martis must be used: to produce a
green color, aerugo: to produce a sky color, Luna, Sal armoniack, and aqua
fortis: to produce a blue color aerugo, and lapis lazuli. Boethius p. 32.

To help the softness of gemms.
THe mollities of gemms, or their softness, which is contracted by continuance
of time, may be thus helped. Make a cista, or a setting of paste made of fine
flower, then infold the gemm in two or three papers; and then cover it over
with its papers on every side, in the setting of paste, with crocus Martis;
then close up the setting with paste, and set it into an oven with bread, and
so let it stand for six hours after the bread is drawn, and it will recover
its pristine durities, or hardness. For the coloring of crystal Baptista
Porta does advise this.

To color crystal that it may resemble gemms with color.
R. Parts stibii sex, auripigmenti parts quatuor, arsenici and crystalli
parts tres, sulphuris parts tres, tutiae parts duas, fiat pulvis tenuissimus
ac ollae indatur, suspende in hoc frustulam crystalli, vel in aeneis pilis
inclusam, vel nudam immerge in hoc pulvere, and ita opponantur igni ut
quaternis vel quinis horis excandescant, sed sine follium flatu, ne liquescant,
vel in parts dissiliant: you may at your pleasure take a little bit out and
put it in again, till it does answer your expectation: in taking this from the
fire, you must beware of over sudden cooling of it, lest it cleave and break.
If you would have the color of a Jacinth, you must remove them sooner from the
fire: if a purple color you must let them remain longer on the fire.

The manner of taking away the colors of gemms naturally colored.
THe Jewellers have also ways to take away the colors of gemms naturally
colored; as of the Amethyst, Granate, and Topaz. and this they can do, either
wholly or in part, wholly, by illining or anointing it over with creta, or
chalk, and then committing it to the fire; In part, by anointing only that
part from which you would take the tincture or color, and then exposing it to
the fire; so you may make a gemm partly a Diamond, or partly a Sapphire: or of a
Ruby, partly a Ruby, and partly a Diamond.

For the making of factitious gemms with their perfect tincture, Artists are
wont to do this; they will calcine silices and topatius even as crystal; then
they will add a color, and so make pastam ad gemmas: thus for the making of a
Smaragde, they will calcine silices and topatius, and for the color add
minium and also verdegreace, and so make a paste for a Smaragde. And for a
Jacinth they will add cerusse and crocus Martis: for a Chrysolite, minium and
cerusse. For a Sapphire, Zaphura, or Lapis lazuli, or else Sal Armoniacum and
Argentum: and for a Diamond, Stannum: for a Ruby in like manner. Boethius l. 1.
p. 33.

Artificial stones.
ARtificers are wont to make artificial marbles after this manner, R. gypsum,
calcem, salem, sanguinem bovinum, pulverem lapidum, frustulas marmorum vel
Jaspidum, cum aceto, vino, cervisia vel lacte, vel ejus sero misce been, and in
pultem redigantur, ut in mensam vel in columnas fundi possint. The various
color being added, this substance must be agitated and stirred up and down
with a rod, that the veins may the better be disposed for a marble or statue;
and when this is thoroughly dry cum smegmate vel oleo, it will receive an
excellent politure.

Foyls and Bracteae.
BEsides this tincturing of the substance of the gemm, there is an use of foyls
and bracteae, which Jewellers have for the setting off of the beauty of
diaphanous and transparent stones; and the use of these is very necessary; for
whatsoever diaphanous gemms are included in their cystis, or settings and
enclosures of gold, as in rings or ouches, they send forth no rays, or
splendor, unless they have under them a bractea, leaf, or foyl, which may
instar speculi repercusse and reverberate the light, and by this means delight
the eye with rays and sparklings. For this purpose it is that bracteae and
metallic foyls were invented, which together with the repercussion of the
light which they make; do also augment the tincture of the gemm; and by their
various colors, by which for this purpose they are tinctured, they do quicken
and revive the fading diluted color of the gemm. These bracteae or foyls, are
made either ex foliis aeris, auri, vel argenti; then they are wont to prepare
these by hanging them in threads in a furnace made for the same purpose; that
so they may be tinctured with the vapor of that which being burned in the
lower part of the furnace, does ascend for that purpose; thus for a green foyl
they are wont to burn green feathers in the lower part of the furnace, which by
their vapor will tincture the foyl with a green color: for to tincture the
foyl with a blue color, they are wont to burn blue feathers: for an emerauld
color, they are wont to burn the leaves of box after the same manner: and for
a Ruby color scarlet wool, or scarlet flocks. So Baptista Porta lib. 6. Mag.
Not.

The way of polishing and engraving precious stones.
THe engraving and polishing of precious stones, does require, that it may be
aptly done, a fitness, and preparedness in the stones; for this purpose, a
Jasper, Agate, or Marble may be fitted by a whetstone or grindstone, on which
they are first to be whetted or ground, and then that they may be brought into
a more exact form, they must be rubbed or ground with the gross powder of a
Smiris upon an orbem stanneum, after which they do give them a splendor by
polishing them creta tenuissima or Argilla, that is, with terra Tripolitana.

The Diamond alone because of its hardness can only by its own powder be
formed by grinding. Which powder is also used for the more speedy excavating
and forming of other gemms by grinding them with it: for this purpose, there
must be a little orb of iron which may easily be turned up and down, which iron
orb by its swift motion and continual rotation or turning, does forceably rub
the powder of the Smiris or Diamond against the gemm for the engraving of it,
and so does by little and little excavate it. Marbles and other stones may by
this iron or steel orb, alone without either of the powders, be without fear
and danger of breaking excavated; but gemmes cannot. Boethius lib. 1. page 35,
36.

A stone for hardness next to the Diamond is the Smiris, the powder of which
is used as the powder of the Diamond in the forming and fitting of stones for
politure and engraving; which being formed and polished, may be thus engraven,
either with letters or forms. Cover the polished stone with Sevo or with thin
wax, then take an iron pencill and engrave in the wax, even to the very stone,
what letters or forms you please, which being done, pour aqua stygia, or aqua
regia, or aqua fortis, into those places where by engraving you have taken away
the wax with your pencil, thus let the stone rest for a day, and the aqua
stygia by eating into the stone will engrave that part of the stone from whence
the wax was taken away, and the rest of the gemme which is covered with the wax
will remain whole and untoucht.

Faculties of Gemms.
SOme there are that do deny gemms the proper grace of their natural
faculties, but surely this possession does dispossess them of their
intellectual guide of reason, or else by the only elementary constitution
they would have been informed, that such pure matter could not be without their
virtues, nor these forms more then others want their vires; since that there
are virtuall forms, reason by experience every day confirmed does convince us:
Nor this elementary union sympathizingly concording to beget a glorious beauty,
be without its quinta qualitas, the result of the union of its elements
wonderfully altered and diversely inter se mixtorum. Surely men of such opinions
never dreamed of gratia parvis; but we know that God has given every thing its
proper grace: for Inest sua gratia parvis, Inest sua gloria gemmis, and Inest
sua singulis propria virtus. Now as these who do deny the elements inter se
mixtis, their peculiar qualities, and their essence or quinta qualitas, which
does arise of their coalescencie, as the result of the union of their matter,
do a scopo nimis aberrare: so on the other side those do keep at no less a
distance from the truth, who do attribute to gemms that are natural things,
powers supernatural or above nature, as will appear in what follows.

Effects attributed to precious stones, which their nature is not capable of
effecting.
SOme do impute such vires to produce such effects to them, as these creatures
cannot possibly be capable of: It is impossible that by the power of the
natural faculties, or elementary qualities of gemms or precious stones, any
man should be made to walk or be invisible; though Albertus Magnus and other
Lapidists do attribute such a faculty as this to the stone called Opthalmius.
Opthalmius lapis.
And as impossible it is that any stone should be so prevalent, by the power of
any virtues which naturally it can be capable of, as to obscure the Sun, or
darken his beams, which faculty Pliny and others do attribute to the
Heliotrope, of which they say, Heliotrope.
that if you put it into water in a vessel opposed to the Sun, it will mutare
fulgorem solis accedentem percussu sanguineo, and for this cause they call it
(...), that is, solis versionem. But such have been the errors of the great
searchers out of the secrets of nature, as that they have attributed to
inanimate creatures which are of the lowest orders of all natures productions,
powers supernatural, and vires which their natures are not capable of knowing,
and therefore they cannot possibly produce such effects as they report of them:
Such as are the making of men eloquent, Extraordinary effects of gemms.
or making of men poor; or the making of men acceptable, or to be favored, or
rich, or fortunate, or safe, or secure. Yet are the strange transportations of
some men even at this day such, as that they will not let to affirm these
things to be true in their experience; affirming that to be done by the
natural faculties of precious stones, in making men either favored or
accepted, or to be invisible, or to be suddenly enricht, which being contrary
to the workings of God with men, must necessarily be the work of the devil, to
delude, and ensnare, and enthrall men by.

Strange things are reported of Lapidists concerning the virtues of gemms, and
of their strange changes upon several occasions: Of the Diamond which the high
priest wore in the breast plate of Judgment upon the Ephod, when he went into
the sanctum Sanctorum, it is said, That if the Jews had sinned against God, the
Diamond would turn black.

Of an Emerauld Lapidists say, That it does discover adultery, and that where
it accidentally meets with such persons, it does suffer very strange changes
and alterations.

Of the Turkey-stone they say, That it does participate with all its masters
dangers, perils, and evils; and that it does receive his injuries, and the harm
of his blows, falls, and contusions into it self. But those that think that any
gemms or precious stones are sensible of injuries, or affected with strange
alterations, by a natural discord which is betwixt them and unclean persons,
think much amiss: for all gemms are material, mixed, natural things, and
therefore by their own proper qualities they can effect nothing else but
natural things: now to the effecting of all natural things, whether the thing
be effected by a gemm, or by any other thing, it is necessary that there should
be a connection, or some kind of knitting of its cause with the effect; but in
the discovering of sin by gemms, or in the gemms receiving its masters
injuries into it self, there can be no such probable connection of the cause
with the effect found: therefore such admirable effects cannot truly be said to
be the natural effects of gemms. Nevertheless, though gemms as being
material mixed bodies, cannot by their own proper power and faculties produce
such admirable and supernatural things, as that we may say that they are truly
and absolutely causes of such effects; yet they may be said to be continent
causes, if we grant that which some affirm, namely, that oft-times they are the
habitacles of daemones and intelligences, which Johannes Langius in his
epistles calls syderum and orbium motores: and if we grant that gemms are
habitacles for these, we need not doubt but these are those occult properties,
which do produce so many strange effects as are imputed either to the
interposition, wearing, or carrying of gemms, to the deluding of the senses of
men in the right understanding of the truth of the nature of gemms and precious
stones.

Langius his opinion of the generating of gemms.
THese intelligences, (...), or motores orbium, inhabiting under this concave
orb of the Moon, and cooperating aethereo syderum calore and spiritu, do (says
Johannes Langius, epistolis medicinalibus) without a semen, both by sea and
land produce various effigies in rocks, in Conchyliis; and likewise they do often
in their sporting frolicks, transform by the power of their own elaborations,
sticks, boughs, trees, and plants, into stones; and by a like admired
Metamorphosis, they do procreate many strange births, some of them to be
admired for their original, others for their shape. These are those that do
possess men with the strange effects of gemms, as if they were the true causes
of such effects; when indeed they are the unespyed, and secret productions of
the hidden workings of these intelligences. Though Cardan, Albertus, Rueus and
others do affirm that gemms are the causes of such effects, yet their
affirmation in this kind must not be received as truth, because there is no
kind of affinity, similitude, or proportion at all betwixt this kind of
complexion, or betwixt this cause and this effect: for the effects of this kind
are often times more perfect then the cause. And yet the axiom is, perfectionem
effectus contineri in causa. But it cannot truly be so spoken of gemms and
precious stones, the effects of which, by Lapidists are said to be,
Extraordinary effects of gemms.
the making of men rich and eloquent, to preserve men from thunder and
lightning, from plagues and diseases, to move dreams, to procure sleep, to
foretell things to come, to make men wise, to strengthen memory, to procure
honors, to hinder fascinations and witchcrafts, to hinder slothfulness, to
put courage into men, to keep men chaste, to increase friendship, to hinder
difference and dissension, and to make men invisible, as is feigned by the Poet
concerning Gyges ring, and affirmed by Albertus and others concerning the
ophthalmius lapis, and many other strange things there are affirmed of them,
and ascribed to them, which are contrary to the nature of gemms, and which they
as they are material, mixed, inanimate bodies neither know nor can effect, by
the proprieties and faculties of their own constitutions: because they being
natural causes, can produce none other but natural effects, such as are all
the ordinary effects of gemms: that is, such effects as flow from their
elementary matter, from their temper, form, and essence; such as are the
operations of hot and cold, and of all the first qualities, and all such
accidents as do arise from the commixtion of the first qualities: such as are
hardness, heaviness, thickness, color, and taste. These all are the natural
faculties of gemms, and these are the known effects of the union of their
matter, and of the operation of the first qualities one upon another.

Supernatural effects of stones.
THere may no doubt supernatural effects be wrought by gemms, and stones, but
not such as can properly be said to be the effects of gemms or stones; or of
which gemms or stones can be truly and absolutely said to be the causes, but
only isntrumental causes. Such effects as these are wrought either by the
power of God, or of the devil. What the strange effects wrought by stones in
the power of Satan are, will appear by the survey of the extraordinary effects
of gemms and precious stones before mentioned.

The supernatural effects of stones ascribed to God in holy writ, are such as
the Lord God produced in the wilderness to manifest his power, and to make his
name great in the sight of his people Israel; such was his bringing water out
of the rock by the stroke of Moses rod upon it, Deuteronomy. 32.13. The rock here was
the instrument by which this supernatural effect was wrought, but not the
cause of the effect of the flowing forth of water for the quenching of the
thirst of Israel, for in truth none other effectual efficient cause there was
of this effect, but only Gods holy Spirit working in and by the rock, as by
its instrument, conduit, or emissary, that so it might wonderfully send forth
waters of its own springing up, as from a fountain to refresh the drought of
Israel in a dry and barren wilderness.

That we may not be mistaken in the effects of creatures, it is necessary that
these things should be known.
1. What are the causes of effects.

2. How to judge of these causes, whether they be true or false, whether they
be supernatural or natural causes, divine or diabolick causes.

3. How many kinds of effects from all causes may be found in the whole
Universe.

The causes of all effects.

I. The causes of all effects are either supernatural or natural; they are
such causes as are either truly and absolutely causes, or causes falsely so
called; or else they are manifest divine causes, or diabolick seeming divine
causes: all which may be comprehended under the two first heads of
supernatural and natural causes.

II. That we may judge of these causes whether they be supernatural or
natural, divine or diabolick, true or false: these following rules must be
observed.

Rules.
Supernatural causes they may be taken to be,

1. If it be manifest that the effect does never follow the cause, or that it
follows it by accident.

2. If wise understanding judicious men, who have the use and experience of
things, do upon the supposition of ordinary effects, deny that which is thought
to be the cause, to be truly the cause.

3. If by comparing the thing with other causes which are known, the manner of
applying of it be very different, involved, and intricate.

4. If the thing have no affinity with its effect, as here, when Arbor dicitur
producere bovem.

5. If the cause does produce the effect separatim, and without any conjunction
of other causes, which have in them a power of producing.

6. If the cause does produce an effect to some end to which properly the
effect does not belong.

7. If such an effect from such a cause do never again happen, notwithstanding
the remaining or existing of some or of all the same conditions.

Rules e regione.
Natural causes they are taken to be,

1. If it be manifest that the effect does really follow the cause, and not by
accident.

2. If prudent pious men do upon the suppositions of ordinary effects according
to their experience, in the use of things, not deny that which is taken to be
the cause, to be truly the cause.

3. If the thing effected by such a cause, being compared with known causes,
does not in its manner of applying differ, or is not involved, or intricate.

4. If the cause have affinity with its effect, that is, if it do produce such
an effect as is meet for such a cause to produce.

5. If the cause does produce the effect not separatim, but by the conjunction
of other ordinary causes, which are endued with power and do usually join
together for the producing of such or such an effect.

6. If the cause does produce an effect for the same end to which properly the
effect does belong.

7. If that the same conditions existing, the same cause does produce the same
effects.

Whether the cause be Divine or Diabolick, true or false, it will thus appear.
WHat ever things there are that are truly called natural, if they undergo or
suffer an impulsion into various and diverse parts, indeterminately and
confusedly, they cannot be said to be otherwise moved, then by an extrinsick
power of impulsion; which power if it be not open and manifest, must of
necessity have an occult and secret spiritual mover, which can be none other
but either God or the devil, either good or bad angels.

Upon these grounds it may be concluded, that the motion of the ring in which
the Turkey-stone is set, by the pulsation of which (it being hung by a thread
perpendicularly in the midst of a glass) against the sides of the glass, the
hours are spontaneously indicated; it may (I say) be concluded, that if this
pulsation by which the hours are indicated or showed, be not caused by the
motion of the hand of the person that holds the string, to which the ring is
fastened ( quod puto, says Boethius,) then that this motion has its perfection
from the power and help of the devil.

Gemms and precious stones are only natural causes of their effects, and for
this cause the effects of them can be only natural, and such as are always
real effects, and never intentionall; and material effects and seldom
spiritual (viz.) then only when such effects are effected by some mean or
other, which may more truly be determined to be a cause then the gemm it self.

What we have determined concerning the Turchoyse, the same (upon the same
ground) we may determine and conclude concerning those gemms, which are said to
work strange effects by the power of celestial figures engraven on them: for
all such celestial figures are nothing else but fictitious and imaginary
things, and no real entities at all; and therefore cannot be capable of any
power to do any such strange effects: neither have such figures, or can they
have, any conveniencie or agreement at all with things here below, for the
producing of any effects in them, or by them.

Whether the cause of this or that effect be the true cause of it or no, will
appear by these things. Rules.
1. If the cause be such as does in no kind repugne or contradict the effect.
Such causes as these are all those that have in themselves the perfection of
the effect, either virtually or formally.

2. If the cause do act within the certain limits or bounds alicujus spatii,
together with all such things as are necessary to produce such an effect. And
the effect does upon this working of the cause, without any prejudices to the
contrary, or interceding impediments, follow in its determined time, according
as the cause within the determined bounds of its space is applied, to produce
this or that effect sooner or later.

3. If the cause applied have always the same power and force, and be free
from all superstition, and every suspicion thereof.

4. If that the cause being taken away, the effect (notwithstanding all other
things and circumstances remain) does not, or cannot follow.

III. That we may not be mistaken in the effects of creatures, it is necessary
to be known, How many kinds of effects from all causes may be found in the
whole universe.

Such effects as are to be found in the world are these:

First, Effects which are in their perfection above all the power of natural
causes: For example sake, 1. No natural cause can separate the heat from the
fire; nor can any natural cause make fire to burn without heat. 2. It is above
the power of a natural cause to make a man invisible: no natural cause can
effect this, because man is an opake or an obscure body, and such a body as
has no perspicuity or transparency at all in it: and therefore it cannot
possibly be, that it should be made inconspicuous or disapparent without some
present impediment. Boet.

Secondly, Effects which do not exceed the power of natural causes, but yet
are above the mean which natural causes do use, to produce such effects
according to the prescript rule, and order of nature. Such an effect is this
which follows: The Savior of the world was born of the Virgin Mary, as it is
natural for a man to be born of a woman: but here, the mean and manner of
begetting, and of conception is supernatural, and above all the power of
natural causes: for here the conception and manner of begetting was altogether
without the coition and congression of man, which effect could be no otherwise
caused then by a supernatural power; namely by the power of God, who did
wonderfully effect the conception and birth of Christ in the womb of the
Virgin, by the power of his Holy Spirit. These two first kinds of effects which
have been and may be found in the world, Boethius ( l. 1. p. 45.) says, cannot
possibly be brought to pass, but by the power of God, or of the devil, God
permitting.

Thirdly, Effects which do not exceed the power of natural causes, but yet the
causes applied for the producing of these effects do not keep the ordinary mean
for the producing of them. Such an effect is this of Chemistry, when as by
chymicall art gold is made of silver: And such an effect is this which is so
often practiced in natures orchards and gardens; where when as nature by her own
work does produce the several species of fruits from their own proper and
peculiar originalls; art does as it were force and violate her to contradict
her law, rule, and order, by insitions and inoculations: and by this means we
may often times see the fruitfullest and best trees, bearing fruits of other
stocks then their own.

Fourthly, Effects which do depend upon natural causes, which observe and keep
the ordinary mean which are to be applied for the producing of such and such
effects. Such an effect as this it is, when as the rain is generated by the
ascending up of vapors; and when ice is dissolved into water by the power of
the heat of the Sun; and when man is generated of man and woman, which is
natures ordinary way for generation.

These are the effects which are found in the world, the fourth and last kind
of which are purely natural; which that they may be really so, they do require
diverse conditions.

Conditions to make effects truly natural.
1. That an effect may be truly natural, it is required, that there should be
some subject present, which may receive the effect from its efficient cause.

2. It is required, that there should be a certain latitude or distance betwixt
the efficient cause, and the subject out of which the effect is to be produced,
beyond which distance or limit, the effect cannot at all be produced; this will
appear by this solary example. The sun whilst it has its residence in
Tropico Australi, or in the Tropic of Capricorn, cannot so warm the regions
and countries that are situate about the Artick pole, as it does warm them when
it has its residence in the Tropic of Cancer.

3. That an effect may be natural, it is required, that the efficient cause or
immediate agent be not hindered in its action upon its subject, and penetration
of its subject, by some other interposing or intermediating body.

4. It is required, that there should be a full space betwixt the cause and the
effect, that is, spatium continuum and conjunctum; that so natural things may
in se mutuo agere, and thus obtain their perfection.

5. That an effect may be natural it is required, that the medium or mean
which is betwixt the cause and the subject, be aptly and fitly disposed to
receive the virtue of the agent or efficient, for else it is impossible,
notwithstanding the concurrency of all other things together, that any natural
effects should universally follow.

This for the present as concerning the nature and virtues of gemms and
precious stones in general. It follows that we should make progress in our
inquiries and discoveries of every gemme and precious stone in particular.

Of the division of Gemms.
IN the former treatise we have spoken concerning the causes, natures, and
effects of gemms in general. In what follows, we shall according to Anselmus
Boethius show how they are divided, and how particularly distinguished according
to their several species. The division which he makes of gemms or stones is
this.

Division of stones or gemms.
Stones or gemms are either 1. Small. or, 2. Great.

Small ones are either 1. Rare. or, 2. Common.

The Rare and excellent ones are either 1. Hard. or, 2. Soft.

1. The small hard ones are either 1. Fair. or, 2. of an evil Color.

The Fair ones, are either 1. wholly shaddowed as the Turkey stone, and the
Chameus. or, 2. partly shaddowed, as the Sardonyx, the Astroites, the
Leucosapphirus, and the Opalus.

Again, the Fair ones are transparent either 1. with Color. or, 2. without
Color.

1. The Fair ones transparent with Color are the Jacinth, Beryll, Ruby,
Prassius, Rubicell, Chrysoprassus, Spinell, Granat, Amandine, Chrysolite,
Ballasse, Carbuncle, Sapphire, Emerauld, Gemma Solis, Almandine.

2. Fair ones transparent without Color are Diamonds.

The small hard stones, which are rare and precious though of an evil Color,
are these, the Pantarbe, Brontia, Umbria, Dracontia, Aetite, Lapis palumbellus,
Chelidonius, and the Snake-stone, or Egg.

Secondly, The precious, small, rare and soft stones are either 1. Fair. or, 2.
of an evil Color.

1. Fair; first in Color, as the Pearl, Bezoar, Molochite.

2. In Figure, as the Oculus Cati, Glossopetra, Umbilicus Marinus, Lapis
Judaicus and the Trochite.

Secondly, The small, rare and soft stones of an evil Color, are the
Morochthus, and the Lapis Caymaus, Enorchis, Lapis Cevar, Lapis Manualis, Lapis
Renalis, Lapis Porcinus, Lapis Anguium, Enhydros, Callimus, Lapis Malacensis,
Lapis Manatus, Lapis Hystericus, Lapis Tuberonum, Lapis Bugolda, and the
Toad-stone.

The small common stones are either 1. Hard. or, 2. Soft.

Hard first, as the Bristol diamonds, or the Pseudo-diamond of Hungary.

Or Soft secondly, as the Lapis fellis, Oculi Cancri, Lapis Spongiae, Lapis
Limacis, Lapis Carpionum, and Lapis Percae.

The Great stones are likewise 1. either Rare, Hard, Fair and shaddowed. or, 2.
Rare, Hard, Fair and transparent.

1. Of the first kind are the Porphyrite, Heliotrope, Smaragdite, Lapis Lazuli,
Agate, Coral, Ophyte, Cornu Ammonis.

2. Of the other kind are the Amethyst, Topaz, and the Smaragde-prassius, which
do all partake of tincture or color; and the Crystal, and the Bohemian
Diamond, which are diaphanous without color.

Again, the rare hard stones are, 1. Some of them of an evil color, as the
Steatite, Eneost, Stalagmite, Onyx, Ceraunia, Basaltes, Smiris, Dactylus Ideus,
Ossifragus, Stalactite, Lydius, Lapis Nephriticus, Bloudstone, Geodes,
Loadstone, Hephestite, Hysterapetra.

2. Again, of the great and rare stones, some are 1. soft, and fair (1. either
in color, 2. or figure,) or 2. soft and evil colored.

In color, first; as the Specularis, Alabaster, Amber, Lapis Armenus.

In figure, secondly; as Amites, and Stellaris.

Those that are soft and evil colored, are the Asius, Samius, Ageratus,
Melitites, Gagate, Porus, Schystus, Thyites, Amiantus, Galactites,
Magargenteus, Hematite, Phrygius, Calamita Alba, Fungifer.

Again, there are common great stones which are 1. either hard, fair, and
beautiful; or, 2. hard, and evil colored.

First, the hard, fair, and beautiful stones of magnitude are the Marble.
Secondly, common, hard, evil colored stones, are the Whetstone, Pyrite, the
common stone, the Flint.

Soft stones of magnitude are Gypsum, Pumeise, Lythanthrax, Talcum, Scissilis.

This is the general division of gemms and stones, according to Boethius. Now
of stones in particular, and of their general species.

The first part of the Lapidarie.
Of Gemms in particular. Of diaphanous and whole transparent Gemms.

CHAP. I. Of the Diamond.
Diamond is a hard, diaphanous, perfectly transparent stone, which does sparkle
forth its glory much like the twinkling of a glorious star.

The true Diamond is the hardest of all other stones, without color, like unto
pure water transparent: and if it have any yellowness or blackness, it is a
fault in it. This property it has, that it will snatch color and apply it and
unite it to it self; and thus will it cast forth at a great distance its lively
shining rays, so that no other jewel can sparkle as it will. By this
excellent emission of its rays or beams, or by this generous sparkling forth
of its glory, do the most judicious Jewellers distinguish the true Diamond,
from those of bastard kinds.

Of its tincture or foyl.
THe tincture, foyl, or color for a true Diamond is thus made: R. pure mastick
and a small quantity of ivory, burnt black, and finely powdered; mix it
according to art, then distend a small portion of it, and fitly dispose of it
for your foyl or tincture.

Of the adulteration of the Diamond.
A True Diamond may be adulterated or counterfeited with a Sapphire, or with an
oriental Amethyst, or with a Topaze, or with a Chrysolite, and by all stones
that are hard and transparent, and which may be deprived of color. The color
of those gemms which are fit for this use, may by the heat of fire be thus
taken away: R. calx viva, and the filings of steel; bury the stone in them, or
in either of them, then overwhelm them with a fire at some distance from them,
that the stone by degrees may grow hot; then increase the fire, and the color
will vanish. Jewellers and judicious artists well know in what space of time,
by the continuance of this great heat, any such excellent gemms may be deprived
of all their color; which color of the gemm, so soon as they do conceive it
is vanished by the power of the heat, then do they extinguish the fire by
degrees, till there be no more heat left. And if by this first operation it be
not perfectly deprived of all its color, then the same work must again be
begun, and carried on as before by several degrees of heat: and if need be, it
may be iterated: ever observing this, that as it must be heated by a graduall
increase of the fire, so likewise by a graduall decrease of the heat the fire
must be extinguished: in it, and so rob the stone of the glory of its beauty
and value, and the artist of his hopes by frustrating him of his endeavors.

Anselmus Boethius says, that he saw a Topaz in this manner changed, (which is
better then an other stone for this purpose because of its hardness) and it
was in weight seven Ceratia, that is, twenty eight grains, which was valued at
three hundred Florens, or Crowns.

Of the names of it.
In Hebrew (...) jahalom, that is, Adamas: as Exodus 28.18. it is the third
stone of the second row of stones that was set in the Ephod. (...) comes of
the vetb (...), that is, domo, to tame; hence by the exposition of S. Hierome
adamas does signify indomitum. And well may it so do, for neither fire nor
iron can destroy its glory, or lessen its virtue. In Arabic it is called Hagar
subedhig, and Almatz. In Dutch ein Dhemuth, Demanth, and Adamant-stein, and
Adamant. In Italian and Spanish Diamante. In French Diamant. Of the natives
where it is found Iraa. In the Malayan language it is called Itam.

The kinds of it.
There are seven kinds of Diamonds.

1. An Indian one, which has some affinity with Crystal. This is turbinated
into an edge with a smoothness of six sides, and it is sometimes found in the
bigness of a filberd; but this is not found growing in gold.

2. An Arabian one: this also does not grow in gold: this is somewhat less,
but like unto the former. Plin. cap. 4. lib. ult.
Neither of these (says Pliny) can be hurt by anvile and hammer, because of
their irresistibility; for being smote they fly away unhurt.

3. A Chencrean one, which is found in the bigness of Millet seed.

4. A Macedonian one, which is found in gold like unto a Cucumer seed.

5. A Cyprian one, enclining to an aerie color, very efficacious in Physic.

6. The sixth is called Sideritis, from the splendour of steel: it is of greater
weight then the rest, but unlike in nature: This may be broken like the Cyprian
one, and cut with an other Diamond. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 4.
Of these we may read in Pliny.

7. The seventh kind are either round or six-cornered. Of these some are harder
then others, and some softer. These have their names from the places in which
they are found: hence some of them are called Bohemian ones, some Armenian
ones, some English, Scottish, and Hungarian Diamonds. Of these kinds the
cornered ones are the softest, and not much better then Crystal: The round
ones are like unto flints, but far harder, and these have the splendor of
the oriental ones: But these, as says Boethius, can no wise be taken for the
true ones, because they do not receive into themselves the tincture. To these
we may refer the Cyprian ones, and Macedonian ones.

The oriental ones are distinguished from the place where they are found.

Of the places where they are found.
The places in which they are found are these.

In Bisnager a Province of the East Indies there are two or three rocks which
bring forth Diamonds, sometimes exceeding the weight of two drachmes a scruple
and eight grains.

In Decan a Province of India there is another rock which is called The old
Rock: the Diamonds which are here found are called Diamonds of the old Rock:
they are small, but very good, naturally polisht, and of great price.

In Tanian in Malacca there is a rock which brings forth Diamonds, which are
also called Diamonds of the old Rock: these are small, but of great esteem, and
more ponderous then the others.

Monardus writes, that he saw Diamonds in Bisnager that weighed 140 ceratia;
and every ceratium is four grains. The greater ones are found in the lower
part of the rock, the smaller ones in the upper part of the rock: when the
upper part of the mine is exhausted, after two years, new Diamonds are brought
forth and perfected; so says Boethius. These are never found in Crystal, as
Pliny thought.

Of the properties, qualities, and faculties of the Diamond.
A True Diamond is so far from being hurt by being in the fire some days,
that it will grow better for it, and the more fair. Pliny says, that a true
Diamond cannot be hurt by the force of hammer and anvil: other Diamonds
experience teaches us may be brought into broken pieces, and into a fine
impalpable powder, by the frequent strokes of an hammer.

The Ancients have had a very high esteem of this stone, Andreas Baccius, c.
15. de Not. gemmar.
insomuch as they have thought it to be endued with divine virtues; and such,
as that if it were but worn included in a ring, or carried about a body near
his heart; it could assuage the fury of his enemies, and expel vain fears from
his heart, preserve from swooning, drive away the vanity of dreams, and the
terrors of the night, and frustrate all the malign contagious power of
poisons. It is reported of it that it is endued with such a faculty, as that if
it be in place with a Lodestone, it binds up all its power, and hinders
all its attractive virtue.

If a true Diamond be put upon the head of a woman without her knowledge, it
will make her in her sleep, if she be faithful to her husband, to cast her
self into his embraces; but if she be an adulteress, to turn away from him. It
has been by the Ancients esteemed powerful for the driving away of Lemures,
Incubos, and Succubos; and for the hindering of contentions, and to beget in men
courage, magnanimity, and stout-heartednesse, as appears by Serapius,
Serapius, l. agree. c. hagar. Subedhig.
and by Evaces in his Lapidary. Rulandus, Cardanus, Garcias have all written
very much concerning these virtues, to which Authors I refer the courteous
Readers for their further satisfaction, till better opportunities shall give me
leave to make a further discovery of what may be spoken concerning it.

Of the dignities and value of it.
IT is of esteem for that it has been of sacred use; what was the sacred use
of it may be read in the book of Exodus, Exodus 28.18.
where we find it to be one of those excellent stones which was to have a place
in one of those four rows of ouches of gold set in their several orders upon
the breast plate of Judgment, upon the Ephod of the High Priest. It is of
esteem for its own irresistible hardness, and for the purity of its perfect
glory, in which it does excel all other gemms of price, and stones of worth.

A well polisht Diamond without fault, of the weight of a pepper-corn, is worth
ten Florens or Crowns, Boethius page 63. If a pointed Diamond be fitly fastened
in any convenient thing that a man may hold it withal, he may not only cut
glass with it, but also penetrate arms with it, as says the same Author.

There is a proverbiall use of it, which is taken from its hardness, and
applied either to animate or inanimate things: Statius lib. 1. Hesiod. l. 1.
Horat. 1. and 3. carm.
of this use we may read in Statius, Hesiode, and Horace. A main use of it
there is in the way of Symboles and Emblems: for by it is figured innocence,
constancy, and fortitude.

The forms into which most commonly it is cut, is a Tablet, which consists of
one plain upper Table, and four latterall Tables, two of which are wont to be
longer then the other two, that they may make the just proportion of the upper
Table; and such a Tablet as this, Boethius says, is of form most perfect: a
Diamond thus cut weighing one Ceratium or four grains, is worth fifty Ducats
or Crowns. Boethius page 64.

They are also cut in Pyramidall forms, with Quadrangles, but these are of
less value then the Tablets. The smallest of these best Diamonds are valued at
very high prices, the biggest are of infinite value.

Cardanus in his book de subtilitatibus, Cardan. de subtle. lib. 7. page 345.
makes mention of a Diamond that is at Antwerp, which wants one scruple of
the weight of an ounce, and is valued at the worth of an hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns.

The shivers and dust of a good, perfect, true Diamond are of admirable virtue,
and of very great worth, esteem and value: for by their hardness they do
divide all gemms: in the engravings of all other gemms they are not only
profitable but necessary; for whatever precious stones have an excellent
hardness joined with their glory, purity, and beauty, they will want the
help of these, or they will not easily be either cut, graven, or polisht.

CHAP. II. Of the Carbuncle or Ruby.
Carbuncle is a precious stone or gemme, which for its innate glory contains
within it self the resemblance of a flame of fire.

The true Carbuncle or Ruby is a transparent jewel of the color of pure
vermilion or crimson; by how much the more fiery it does appear in its
extremity, so much the better it is; if it have any yellowness in it, it is of
the kinds of Granates, or Hyacinths: from its excellent flame it is
distinguished from other gemms which have like representations and
resemblances; a Carbuncle is nothing else but a great Rubine, and a great
Rubine is thought worthy of the name of a Carbuncle; if a Rubine be found so
big as that it may weigh twenty Ceratia, that is a drachme and a scruple,
then may it worthily be called by the name of a Carbuncle. Ludovicus
Vartomannus a Roman, reports that the king of Pege a city in India, had a
Carbuncle of so great a magnitude and splendor, that by the clear light of it,
he might in a dark place be seen, even as if the room or place had been
illustrated by the sun beams.

Of its tincture or foyl.
THis though it be a very glorious stone and of excellent beauty, yet a foyl is
used to it, as to all other gemms of transparency and perspicuity. The foyl is
either made of tinctured Mastick, or of a dyed vitreous substance, or else a
red gold foyl is used about it.

Of its Adulteration.
IT may be adulterated by a Rubine of a very dilute redness, by putting a red
gold foyl tincture, or color under it, or by putting some splendent glass
dyed with a red color under it; And thus without diligent caution it may be
taken for a true jewel, and the rather because all are helped with a foyl.
Another way of its adulteration is by a white Sapphire, or a Crystal, or a
Topaz, or an ordinary Diamond, with a red gold foyl placed under it, in its
enclosing, either in ouch or ring. Another way they have of adulterating of it,
and that is, by glewing two fair Crystals together with a little mastick
tinctured with a red or crimson color: In this manner I have seen two pieces
of Crystal so glewed together, as that they being once set with a foyl, they
could hardly be discerned from a true Ruby.

The adulteration of this gemm may be thus discovered, First by the want of
sparkling and sending forth of lively rays. Then by bringing the gemm to the
trial of the file. A true Rubie will endure the file; but a factitious stone,
or a soft counterfeited adulterated stone will not. Another way of discerning
the falsehood will be this: take the jewel you suspect, and direct your eye
from the verge or margin of its enclosure, through the gemm unto the opposite
side of its enclosure; and if it consist of two parts with a tinctured foyl
betwixt, you will easily perceive the upper part to be void of color, from
whence you may gather that it does receive its glory from the foyl. Such
Artificial angles and corners will jewellers cut and excavate in the bottom
of soft transparent stones (as I have seen) that by the manifold reflection of
these lower superficies, into every part of the uppermost superficies of the
jewel, a skillful jeweller shall hardly perceive their craft.

There is an adulteration of the Ruby with boiled orpement, but these are fit
for nothing else but statues, of this mention is made in Baptista Porta in his
Magia. lib. de gem.

Of its Names.
IN Hebrew (...) Barakath, that is, Carbunculus, vel Pyropus, the Hebrew word
comes of the verb (...) barak, which signifies fulgurare, and indeed this
stone does cast forth the glory of its splendor and its sparklings like
lightning. Of the Greeks it is called (...) from the splendor which it has in
its self like unto a fire-coal: hence also in Latin it is called Carbunculus:
it is also called Pyropus, from the Greek word (...) which signifies fire, and
Apyrausta, quod ignem sentire non videatur. In Latin, Carbunculus. In Germane,
ein Rubyn. In Italian, Un Rubino, Carbunculo. In French, escar boucle. In
Spanish, el carvoncol piedra. In English, Carbuncle.

The kinds of it.
THere are diverse kinds of it as the Rubine, Granat, Almandine, Red Hyacinth,
which all are to be showed in order as follows.

Of the places wherein they are found.
THe best of these are found in the Isleland called Zeilan, some small ones are
found in Coria, Calecut, Cambaya, Bisnager; there are excellent ones found in
the River Pegu, the inhabitants there try them with their mouths and tongues:
the colder and harder they are, the better they are; they grow in a certain
stony matrix of a rosy color, which if it be transparent is called Balassium
Rubinum; Hoc est, Pallatium.
for the most part it is found in the same mine where the Sapphire is found: and
according to the variety of its nourishment it is found of a mixed color.

Boethius says that Rodolphus the second the Emperor had one of the bigness
of a small hens egg. Anselm. Boethius. p. 72.


Of its properties.
THis gemm which Aristotle calls Gnomonem, Sigillum, and Gemmarum regulam, if
it be great and very excellent, it does emulate the bright shining of a flame
of fire. It is of so great luster and of so excellent a splendor, that S.
Epiphanius says of it that if it be worn, whatever garments it be covered
withal it cannot be hid; this speaks Andreas Baccius of S. Epiphanius in his
book de natura gemmarum, in the chapter of the Carbuncle. It is reported of it
by Baccius, Boethius, and others, that if it be worn in an Amulet, or drunk, it
is good against poison, and against the plague, and to drive away sadness,
evil thoughts, terrible dreams, and evil spirits. It is also said of it, that
it cheareth the mind, and keeps the body in safety, and that if any danger be
toward it, it will grow black and obscure, and that being past, return to its
former color again.

Of its value and dignity.
THis is a gemme that in former times has been esteemed of very great worth
and value for its sacred use, in that it was commanded of God to be set in the
ouches of the Breastplate of Judgment, as Exodus 28.17. If it weigh two
scruples which is the greatest, (for seldom any of the excellent ones are
found of greater magnitude then a filberd) because of its grateful color with
which it feeds the sight; and because of those glorious beams which it
seems to dart forth of it self, it is esteemed of as great worth as the most
excellent Diamond. If it be found in the weight of four Ceratia, that is, of
sixteen grains, it is of the same value with a Diamond which weighs so many
Ceratia.

The round ones which are of no exact form, are of the least value.

Those that are so big that they may be brought into Tablets, are of the
greatest value; according to the value and worth of the best Diamonds, so are
these to be esteemed and valued, if of equal proportion and weight.

CHAP. III. Of the Balassius or Palatius.
Balasse or Palatius is a stone of a more dilute redness and fierynesse then
the Carbuncle: it is a stone which Martinius Rulandus says flameth with a
purple or rosy color.

It is called Balassius or rather Palatius, because it is the matrix, domicile,
or palace in which the Carbuncle or true Ruby is begotten, and resideth; it is
of a much paler and a more dilute color then the true Ruby, but of sufficient
splendor, and very grateful to the eye. It is often found in veins of
Sapphire, by the ceruleous tincture of which, its redness is diluted and
tempered. As concerning the manner of the formation, and nutrition, and
augmentation of precious stones, Baccius thus speaks. Every gemm, says he,
has a matrix formed out of some stone or other, in which matrix, by the
distilling of a certain nutritive juice it is nourished, even as is the infant
sanguine materno, in the mothers womb; after this manner is the Carbuncle or
Rubine generated, nourished, and augmented in the gemm Palatius as in its
matrix.

Aelianus in lib. 8. de hist. animal. says, of that favor which it had
received from her in the cure of its harm.

The foyls of it.
THe foyls that are used for the help of this, are such as must have respect to
the diluted color wherewith it is tinctured. The adulterations of this stone
are like those of the Ruby.

The place.
THe place in which it is found is the same with those.

The kinds of it.
THere are diverse kinds of it, some as perfect as Rubies; and there are some of
them called Rubies of the old rock, but they have the color of Rubasses. Some
of these stones are enclining to the color of a Hyacinth, and it is not yet
determined whether they be Spinels or no: expert jewellers do not take them for
Spinels, but for Rubasses, or Rubicels, or Hyacinths, yet some of them are so
good, as that they are compared to Spinels, and sold for them.

Of its virtues and properties.
THe Balassius or Pallatius, is supposed to be of like virtue with the true
Rubie, but of a more remiss power. Boethius reports of it, that it does
restrain fury, wrath, and lust. Rulandus reports this of it, as a wonderful
thing; that if the four corners of a house, arbor, or vineyard be covered with
this stone, it will preserve it from lightning, tempests, and worms.

Of its worth and value.
IT is of much less value then the Ruby. Linshortanus says, that one of the
weight of one Ceratium, or of four grains, is worth ten ducats.

A Spinel of the old rock, of the weight of one Ceratium, or four grains, cut
into a tablet, is worth half so much as a Diamond of the same weight: if in its
own glory and rosy luster it be found, and free from blemishes.

CHAP. IV. Of the Rubaces and Rubacells.
IT is doubted whether the Rubaces and Rubacells belong to the Spinels or
Hyacinths, for they seem to have a mixed color of both. The Bohemian Granats
are very like, and they are tried by the fire whether they be Granats or no.
They will endure the fire without any loss of color, and with little or no
harm; but the other will loose their color, and so change, that you shall not
know whether they be Granats or no, and for the most part they have in their
extremities a yellowish color with them.

Their value.
If they be without any fault, they are not above half so much in value as the
Balasses.

CHAP. V. Of Granats.
THe Granats are kinds of Carbuncles: It is a pellucide, red, precious gemm,
like unto the flowers of Pomegranats, of a rosy color, somewhat darker and
more obscure then a Carbuncle. Boethius says that it looks like a flame of
fire, or like unto pure vermilion.

Its tincture or foyl.
The foyls for the help of these, by which they are made quick, vivid, and
lively, are small reddish bracteae, or silver foyls tinctured with a crimson,
which being substrated, and fitly and aptly placed in the enclosure under the
gemme, stir up in it a certain cheerful discovery of luster.

Of its adulteration.
Impostours have many frauds and deceits for the adulterating of this gemme;
which frauds and deceits in the adulteration, together with the great
difference of its several species, make this gemme, says Andreas Baccius, of
greater difficulty then any other to be known. So will impostours adulterate
this gemme with their bracteae and crimson foyls, as that it is not an easy
thing to discover a true Granate from their spurious Rubine. They have a way
also of calcining Orpment with a slow fire in any convenient vessel, or a
vessel called Carafetta, till such time as the vessel seems to be covered
with certain red drops, like Rubies.

Of its names.
It is called in Hebrew (...), Adem, that is, Rubinus, as Ezekiel. 28.13. the
Hebrew word (...) Puk, is also taken sometimes for the Rubine: but that which
for the most part Interpreters do interpret it to be, is Stibium, or gemma
Antimonii, which indeed in color has some resemblance with the Rubine. In
Latin it is called Granatus, Rubinus, and Granetus. In Dutch Granatlin, and
ein Granat. In English a Granate or Rubine. In Italian Rubino de Rocha, and
Granato.

Of it kinds.
There are three kinds of it; the best of which is tinctured with the excellent
rednes of a Pomegranate flower. The second has a redness enclining to the
color of a Jacinth. The third kind is red, tending to a violet color, which
by the Italians is esteemed the most perfect of all others, and hence they call
it Rubinum de Rocha.

Plinies history concerning the Ethiopians ways of recovering the glory of
these stones.
Pliny relates of the Ethiopians that they have a way of quickening obscure and
dull Rubines, so as that they will make them to discover their splendor and
nitour for fourteen months together, even like a flaming coal; and that is by
macerating of them for fourteen days in vinegar: But by this means, though
their glory be increased for a time, they are made softer, and more subject to
a brittle and fragile condition.

The places where they are found.
They are brought from India, Calecut, Cananor, Cambaia, from Balaguar, and
from Ethiopia, and Bohemia.

Of its properties.
Andr. Baccius, cap. 6. de not. Gem.
S. Hieroms opinion concerning this is, that it does illuminate the heart to
contemplate true and divine things. Its declining from glory to obscurity,
does prognosticate some misfortune; as appears by this which Andreas Baccius
speaks of a Rubine of his enclosed in a gold ring. On the fifth of December
1600, to Studgard, and in his travel he observed his Rubine to change its
glory into obscurity, whereupon he told his wife, and prognosticated that evil
thereupon would ensue either to himself, or her, which accordingly did: for not
many days after his wife was taken with a mortal disease, and died: after
which he says his Rubine of its own accord did again recover its former
luster, glory, beauty, and splendor.

The value, dignity, and worth of them.
The Bohemian ones are worth twenty shillings a piece: and if they be found
bigger then ordinary, the price of them is increased.

It is reported of Rodolphus the Emperor, that he had one of the bigness of a
filberd.

The best oriental ones of the weight of four grains, are worth two crowns;
and by how many times soever they are found to be double in weight, so many
times double will their value and worth amount, and raise their price; as if
they weigh eight grains, they are worth four crowns, and so proportionably
according to their greater weight, great will be the increase of their value
and worth, but with this proviso, that their color for their glory, be always
the perfect color of a Rubine: for it is the pure excellency of its color
and tincture that determines its price.

The Rubine de la' Rocha, is of the same price with the Spinels.

CHAP. VI. Of the Almandine.
Almandine is betwixt a Granate and a Rubine: so that the Rubines seem to be
tinctured with a more black color; they are of less value then Rubines, and
of less esteem, and of less virtues. In times past they were called
Alabandicks.

They are of the value of oriental Granats.

These are those stones that Pliny calls Troezenii. They are red, with diverse
colors severed with white spots. This jewel is known to very few, and
therefore scarce of any price.

CHAP. VII. Of the Hyacinth.
Jacinth or Hyacinth is a stone (as says Boethius and Rulandus) which is red,
with a certain yellowness, or rufescit in auro, that is, it is red in a
yellow. It does resemble a flame of fire, and may be referred to the kinds of
Carbuncles. This appears to be a true discovery of the perfect Jacinth, by
this testimony of holy Writ, which describing the breast-plates of the Locusts
or horsemen which destroyed the third part of men, does in plain terms say,
that their breast-plates were of fire, of Jacinth, of brimstone, which in
color are all one and the same. Rev. 9.17. Pliny says that these are seldom
found bigger then a pease. Boethius says that he saw one a great deal bigger,
of a very excellent luster.

Wurtzung in his second table of his general practice, says, that the Jacinth
is a precious stone of a light violet color, and this he says from Pliny,
who makes the Jacinth to be like the Amethyst.

Of its foyl or tincture.
The foyl or tincture of this may be either of leaf gold, or silver fitly
tinctured, and aptly placed to commend its luster.

Of its adulteration.
Impostours do adulterate it by a kind of glass made of lead; but this will be
easily known upon trial with a true Jacinth: for it will be softer and lighter
then the true jewel is. But of so low a price are ordinary Jacinths, that very
few will attempt the adulterating of this jewel.

Of its names.
It is called in Hebrew (...) Techeleth, as Exodus 26.36. it does appear, where
the hangings for the door of the tent, are commanded to be made of the color
of a Hyacinth, as there it does appear by the translation of the Hebrew word
Techeleth, Hyacinthinum. In Greek this stone is called (...), in Latin
Hyacinthus, in English both Hyacinth and Jacinth, in Dutch ein Hyacinth, and
ein brennender Jacinth; in French Jacinth la' belle.

Of its kinds.
Albertus Magnus makes two kinds of it, one kind which does albescere in
flavo, or which is white in a yellow; the other kind which does aquescere in
rubeo, or appears waterish in a red.

Boethius speaks of these kinds of it:

1. There are some that flame like fire, or are like in color to crimson, or
to natural Vermilion, these the French jewellers call Jacincte la' belle.
These they esteem the best, and they may be referred to the kinds of Carbuncles.

2. Such as are like to Stibium, with a yellow red color.

3. Others which are like unto Amber, so that they can hardly be distinguished
from it, but by their hardness. Such an one Anselmus Boethius says he had.
These are of no great value, by reason of the atoms which they do contain, and
the multiplicitie of small bodies which are in them, which do hinder their
transparencie and diaphanity. Card. de subtle. l. 7. page 339.
One of these Cardanus says he was wont to wear about him, to the intent of
procuring sleep; to which purpose he says it did seem somewhat to confer,
but not much. This has been by some taken for the Amber: but Boethius says,
that he thinks these rather to be the Lyncurius of the Ancients, then
Succinum or Amber: for says he, it is scarce credible that the Ancients should
take Succinum, a thing so subject to the injuries of the fire, by reason of its
softness, for a precious stone.

4. There is a fourth kind which have no redness at all in them, which are
like to white pellucid Amber, and these are of least value.

Those stones which Pliny called the Hyacinth, are in these days taken for
kinds of Amethysts; as now also the Amethyst of the Ancients is called a
Granate.

Martinus Rulandus makes five kinds of it: 1. Hyacinthus qui in auro rufescit.
2. Hyacinthus aurei coloris. 3. Hyacinthus ad Electri colorem declinans. 4.
Hyacinthus scaber. and 5. Hyacinthus adulterinus, factitius, tinctura adhibita.


Of the places where they are found.
They are found in Ethiopia, India, Arabia. The Arabs make three kinds of it;
as 1. Rubri coloris. 2. Citrini coloris. 3. Antimonii coloris.

The worst of the kinds is found in the river Isera, which is upon the confines
of Silesia, and Bohemia.

The best and most excellent ones are brought from Cananor, Calecut, and
Cambaia.

Of its properties.
It is of a cold and dry nature, says Renodeus, in lib. de re Medica. Cardanus
in his book de lapidibus pretiosis, says, that it is endued with a power and
faculty of procuring sleep, of chearing the heart, of driving away plagues, of
securing from thunder, and of increasing riches, honor, and wisdom, etc.
being worn in a ring on the finger, or about the neck as an amulet.

The last kinds are of no great value.

Of the dignities and value.
The first, second, and third of these kinds of Jacinths are of great value,
worth, and dignity; because they have been of sacred use, as appears by the
twenty eighth chapter of Exodus, and because many things by them are discovered
to us in holy writ, as appears in the book of the Revelations, chap. 9. and
chap. 21.

The fourth kind, by reason of the many atoms and small bodies which they do
contain, though they be big enough for sculpture and engraving, yet are of
little value, and will scarce quit the cost of engraving; whereas the glory and
luster of the other, together with the sacred use which has been made of them,
make them of great value, high price, and much worth.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Amethyst.
Amethyst is a gemm of a peach-bloom color: which pleasing delightful color,
proceeds from a mixture of red and blew, which is a dilute dark color. Pliny
sporting in his natural History about this stone, says that it does draw nigh
to the color of wine, but it durst not taste it, that is, it takes but very
little of it: for before it does thoroughly relish it, its glory does end in a
very delightful pleasing sparkling violet color: the most excellent of them
have in them a glorious fiery brightness, which does most excellently and
pleasingly dart its self forth (as I have observed in one which I was once
master of) through the transparent cloud of a sky color; from the mixture of
its redness, brightness, or fiery splendor with this sky color, arises
all the glorious delight of its pleasing tincture.

Of its foyl or tincture.
Its foyl is a foyl of mastick, or a silver foyl dilutely tinctured, and then
fitly substrate under the gemm, in either ouch or ring.

Of its adulteration.
The excellent Amethysts are of very high value, and of great worth and
dignity, comparable to oriental Diamonds of the same proportion, weight, or
bigness; and therefore no doubt need to be made of it, but that impostours
will very much study and labor to counterfeit and adulterate this stone. Some
will adulterate it with a violet color mixed with mastick, or with a foyl thus
tinctured, and placed betwixt two Crystals, or betwixt two of any other
transparent, perspicuous, diaphanous stones.

Of its names.
In Hebrew (...) Ahlamah, as Exodus 28.19. It is called Ahlamah, of (...)
somniare, because it is said inducere somnia gestantibus; as Rabbi Aben Ezra
does write of it: and in the Caldean tongue Enegla. In Greek (...), quasi
ebrietatem arceret, as if it had a power and faculty of driving away
drunkenness. In Latin, it is called Amethystus. In English, Amethyst. In
Dutch, ein Amethyst. Diverse other names it has from the places in which it is
found.

Of its kinds.
There are diverse kinds of it: the best of which, are those that have a rosy
color shining in a purple. These are glorious as a Carbuncle, in respect of
their beauty, and of their excellent hardness, and because they being thus
hard, may be converted into a Diamond of the greatest value, and as truly worth
esteem, and high price, being of equal bigness, as the best oriental Diamond
in the whole world.

Anselmus Boethius says, that he saw one of these oriental Amethysts so
converted into an excellent Diamond, as that it being set in a gold ring it was
comparable without any difference, to a Diamond which he saw that was sold for
18000 Aureos or crowns: it being of the same bigness and form, and after the
same manner enclosed in a gold ring. The waters (which it has that are very
like to those of the Diamond) as the jewellers call them, which it does cast
forth of it self in pleasing rays and glorious sparkles, makes this stone to
be of so great value, and of so incomparable esteem and worth, as is the best
oriental Diamond of the same bigness, weight and form.

The way that jewellers have to whiten these excellent gemms, is the same with
that of the Sapphire.

1. The best kind is called an Indian one.

2. Kind the Indians call Socodion.

3. Kind which is more dilute, is called Sapinor and Paranitor.

4. Kind is of the color of wine.

5. Kind have some vicinity with Crystal, some of which are called Pederotas,
others Anterotas.

Martinus Rulandus reckons six kinds of Amethysts.

1. One kind which is found in the mine of Undehenstein, and is called in
Dutch, ein Misinscher Amethyst, der in bergen bricht.

2. A Misnian, one which is found in the river of Misnia near Stolpen, and in
the river Trebisa near Misen.

3. Bohemian ones, which are found in the mountains of Bohemia.

4. A fourth kind which descends to the form of Crystal.

5. A kind which is distinguished with Crystal lines.

6. And a sixth kind of a Quadrangular and sexangular form.

Of the places where it is found.
It is found in India, Arabia, Armenia, Aethiopia, in Galatia, Thaso, and
Cyprus. The oriental ones are the best of all others.

There are also Amethysts found in Germany, in Bohemia, in Misnia, also in
Wolkenstein, and Hohenstein very fair ones, but soft like Crystal; and
therefore not of so great worth, value, and esteem as the others which are
oriental ones.

Of its properties.
It is reported to be good to drive away ebriety, which the etymology of the
Greek word (...) does also seem to import. Aristotle says of it, that it being
applied to the navell, or worn about the navell, it will hinder the ascension
of vapors: the reason of it he gives to be this, viz. That it draws the
vapors to it self and does then discuss them.

Andreas Baccius in his eleventh chapter de Natura gemmarum says, that it
sharpeneth the wit, and diminishes sleep; and that it is also thought good for
the resisting of poison. With those that have a vicinity with Crystal, the
Turkish women are wont to adorn themselves, they being first polished at
Venice, and brought thence to them to Constantinople.

Of its dignity, worth and value.
It is of great esteem and dignity. First, because it has been of sacred use;
This was one of the stones of the breast plate of Judgment, as appears Exodus
chap. 28.

Secondly, as in the book of the Revelations, some of the glory of the
foundations of the walls of the new Jerusalem is discovered to us by it, Rev.
21.

Thirdly, as it is of excellent glory and beauty in it self, and so very
delightful to the eye.

The oriental ones, if they be hard without clouds and blemishes, though they
weigh but four grains a piece, they are worth many pounds a piece; and as often
as these are double in weight, so often is their price to be doubled: others are
not so valuable.

The best are worth as much as the best oriental Diamond of the same weight.

CHAP. IX. Of the Margarites and Unions, or Pearl.
Margarite or Union is nothing else but the excellent geniture of a shellfish
called Margaritifer, congealed into a very fair, transparent, diaphanous,
beautiful stone, which is the partus and birth of this fish.

As concerning their original and conception, there is some difference amongst
Authors, as betwixt Pliny and Anselmus Boethius, and betwixt them and Cardanus.

Pliny says that they are conceived in oysters of a certain maritime dew which
these fish (and so likewise Scallops) do at time of the year much thirst
after; and according as the heavens are more cloudy or clear in the time of
their taking in of this dew, so they are generated, more fair, or more obscure,
as may be read in his book, where he speaks of the nature of those Pearls
which are called Unions, and of the shellfish in which they are found; as lib.
9. c. 28. But this opinion of Pliny concerning their conception, is by Anselmus
Boethius thought not to be consentaneous to the truth; for says he, I have
taken out of these shellfish many Margarites, and they are generated in the
body of the creature, of the same humor of which the shell is formed; which
viscuous humor is expelled sometimes, not always, for the fabric of another
shell: for when ever this little creature is sick or ill, and has not strength
enough to belch up, or to expel this humor which sticks in its body, it
becomes the rudiments or beginnings of Margarites; to which, new humor being
often added and assimulated into the nature of Margarites, of this new addition
of humor, by concretion and congelation, is begotten a new film or skin to
the first rudiments of Margarites, of which at length by further additions of
humor, is generated an Union or Pearl: even as stones are generated in the
gall, or bladder of a man, and after the same manner that the Bezar stone is
generated in the Indian Goat.

Cardanus lib. 7. de lapidibus says, it is a fabulous thing that Pearls should
be generated of the dew of heaven, seeing that the shell-fishes in which they
are conceived, have their residence in the very bottom of the depths of the
sea. That which is reported of them that they are soft in the waters, and grow
hard like Coral as soon as they are taken out of it, is not true, says
Boethius p. 84.

Of its Adulteration.
Unions are so much the more esteemed, because they cannot easily be
adulterated. There are factitious jewels made of double glass which being set
in gold, jewellers cannot discern from Pearl, except they take them out.

Some will adulterate them with the powder of the shell of the Margarite; and
others with chalk covered over with leaves of silver, and then anointed with
the white of an egg.

Some adulterate them with the powder of Margarites, mixed with the white of an
egg, and dried, and then polished, but these will easily be discovered from
the true by the weight and color.

Of its Names.
The Union is in Hebrew called, (...) as Job 28.28. and so the word Gabish is
interpreted by Rabbi Levi Gerson. It is also taken for Margarita. (...) is by
some taken for Margaritae, but in the Proverbs it is interpreted by Junius,
Carbunculi; as Proverbs 8.11. If they be great, they are called Unions, because
they are then found single in a shell. If they be small, they are called
Margarites, many of which may be found in one shell together. In Greek, they
are called (...) and (...). In Latin, the great Pearls are called Uniones, and
Margaritae simpliciter: Lucian calls the Pearl, Lapis Erythreus: Arrianus,
Lapis Indicus: Statius, Erythreus lapillus: Virgil, bacca and bacca Conchea:
Pliny, Unio: Cicero, Margarita: S. Jerome, Granum Maris Rubri: and others call
it Perla. The Germans call it Perlin. In Italian, Perle. In Arabic and
Persian, Lulu. The Indians call them Moti. In Malavar it is called Mutu. The
Lusitanians call it Aliofar, which in Arabic sounds as much as de Lulfar,
that is, portus in mare Persico, where the most excellent Pearls are generated.

Of the Kinds of Pearl.
The kinds of Pearl are no otherwise distinguished, but either first from their
greatness, or littleness; that is, either as they are Unions, or as they are
Margarits, or seed Pearl: or secondly, as they are of excellent beauty, purity,
and glory; or cloudy, reddish, and so less beautiful.

The Places.
The best are found in the Persian Gulf, betwixt the island of Ormus and the
Bassoram, that is, about Baroyn, Catyfa, Julfa, and Camaron, and are thence
brought into the Island of Ormus. For the excellent beauty of these it may very
well be said of them, that If all the world were but one ring,
Ormus should the Union bring.


They are also found betwixt the Promontory of Comorin and the island of
Zeilan; but these are not to be compared with the Persian ones. There are of
them in the island of Taprobane, now called Sumatra. Betwixt the greater Javan
and India there are very many. In Palane and Caralco a Promontory of India,
there are many, but very small. In Borneo and Ainon here are great ones. The
Occidentall ones are of a milkish color, and of a silver-like splendor, and
therefore not so commendable as the Oriental ones. It is reported by some,
that by how much in the more deep seas the shellfish reside, so much the less
Margarits they do produce.

The Indians call the lighter, candid, or splendid shel-fish Cheripo, which is
a kind of Oyster, of which they do make spoons and little cups. These little
fishes do generate excellent Margarites or seed Pearl. There are others which
they call Chanquo, the shells of these are the mother of Pearl: These generate
not so fair pearl as the other; because their shells are very smooth and fair
within, they are used to adorn tables and other things with them. These are
brought to Bengala for bracelets and other uses. The custom there was, to have
the virgins arms adorned with bracelets of this kind, lest they should be
corrupted.

They are also found in many places of Europe; As in Scotland and Ireland there
have been very excellent ones found in Scallops, and common oysters; And in
Silesia, Frisia, and Bohemia.

About the Promontory of Comorin, they are found of the weight of an hundred
grains of wheat. And near the Island of Borneo in the weight of 160 corns of
wheat, though not so fair as the other.

It is reported of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, that she drank one dissolved at a
supper, of which draught she boasted, that she had a more costly supper then
ever Antonius had: The value of which draught must then amount (according to
the computation of Budeus) to an hundred and fifty thousand aureos; Thus much
did one supper of Antonius stand in, as Pliny, lib. 9 c. 35. and Macrob. 3.
Saturnal. c. 27. The same Budeus does commemorate an Union of the bigness of a
filberd, which was bought in France for three thousand aureos, and another for
four thousand.

Of its properties.
Solinus c. 56. Serap. lib. aggreg. c. Hager. Albalo; say that these stones are
cold and dry in the second degree; and that they are good against Syncopes, and
cardiacall passions, that they do comfort the spirits, stop fluxes of blood,
cure Lienteries, and Diarrheas, and that they are good for the sight: The same
say Cardanus, Rulandus, and Baccius in their books de Gemmis.

Of their dignity and value.
They are of great worth for their sacred use. S. Augustine in his explication
of the Psalms, speaking of the twelve stones mentioned in the book of the
Revelations (Revel. 21.21.) and of the gates of the New Jerusalem which were
every one of one pearl, says, that the twelve Apostles are signified by the
twelve stones; and Christ, the spotless lamb, by the pearls.

Their own glory, beauty, and excellency amount their worth: If they be of the
weight of four grains a piece, fair, and round, they are worth three crowns a
piece, Boethius p. 88. So according to their bigness, weight, roundnesse, and
fairness, their price is raised, doubled, and trebled.

CHAP. X, Of the Sapphire.
Sapphire is a transparent stone, of a sky-colour, precious, and very
delightful to the eye. The herb Pilosella or Mouse-eare in its flower, and the
herb Scorpoides in its flower, have some resemblance of its beauty. Card. de
lap. lib. 7.
Cardanus makes this stone to be the fifth in order of the most noble gemms,
in his book de subtilitatibus; where he likewise says, that it is a stone of
an excellent hardness, of a ceruleous color, and if not dilute or vicious,
very pleasing to the eye; in so much as he says, that nothing does so much
recreate the sight, as the Smaragde and the Sapphire.

Of its foyl or tincture.
The foyl for this is either a silver foyl tinctured for this purpose; or thin
glass or icthyocolla, that is, yseing-glasse, brought into the form of a very
thin foyl, and then being tinctured accordingly, it is placed in the enclosure
under this gemme to set off its beauty.

Of its adulteration.
Impostours are wont to adulterate it with two Bohemian Diamonds, and a thin
sky-colored glass betwixt them: and sometimes after this manner;

R. two drachms of Zaphura, or of lapis Lazuli, put it to a pound of the
glassie substance which is made of Crystal and Flint-stones; and they being
molten together in a strong calcining pot, stir them well with an iron hook;
then take out a little of this molten substance, and see whether it does not
want more of the Zaphurae or lapidis Lazuli; or whether there be any need to
add more of the glassie substance: If there be no need of either of them, but
that it has its perfect color, then let it be set into a furnace of fire for
six hours, and afterward take forth the mass, and let it be well polisht;
and if this lump be well ordered, this factitious gemme will hardly be
distinguished from a true Sapphire. But these factitious gemms are usually full
of little bubbles and atoms, by reason of the inequality of the fire working
upon the matter; and thus may they be distinguished from the true Saphires.

Of its names.
The Sapphire is known almost to all nations by this one name Sapphirus. In
Hebrew it is called (...), as Exodus 28.18. and not only in Hebrew, but in
Greek (...), and in Latin it is called Sapphirus; in English Sapphire; and in
Germane ein Sapphire; in Italian Zaffiro; in French Sapphyr; in Spanish el
Zuffir piedra pretiosa; in Indian language and Arabic Nilaa; and from the
place where it grows Podia. Marbodeus does call it Syrtites.

Of its kinds.
There are four kinds of Saphires spoken of by some writers. The first of
which is the best. Of all others of the kinds this does only truly deserve the
name of a Sapphire to distinguish this from all other Saphires it is called
Sapphirus caeruleus: Dionysius Afer calls it for this purpose Cyaneus
Sapphirus, as says Wurtzung, in 2, tab. of his general practice of Physic.
The best Sapphire Andreas Baccius ( lib. de not. gem. c. 7.) does thus describe;
If it have an excellent tenor in it self, that is, if it be neither too obtuse
or dull, by reason of the grossnesse of that Succus, juice, or nourishment of
which it was generated; nor too much dejected with a propense perspicuitie; but
does pleasantly discover from it self, by reason of the mixture of light and
purple, the delightful flower of a sky-colour. This is the excellent Sapphire,
which in the order of noble gemms Cardanus does rank in the fifth place.

2. The second kind declineth from the blue to a green, and is in Greek called
Prasitis, and Sapphirus Prassitis, and Sapphirus viridis, Wurtz. tab. 2. gener.
pract.
by this name it is known to the Druggists.

3. The third kind declineth from the blue to the yellow, and is called in
Greek Chrysitis, and Sapphirus Chrysitis. The Simplicists do call it Sapphirus
Aureus: In English this is called the yellow Sapphire. This is a gemme that does
shine with golden specks and spots, as says Dioscorides, and Pliny lib. 37.
c. 9.

4. The fourth kind is between blue and white, it is in color like skimmed
milk, very perspicuous and clear; and this is that gemm which is called
Sapphirus candidus, or the white Sapphire.

These are many times substituted for Diamonds: and they are called the female
Saphires, the other the male. That stone which Pliny does in some place call
the Sapphire, is the Cyanus or Lapis Lazuli.

The places.
They are found in Calecut, Cananor, and in the kingdom of Bisnager; in
Zeilan, in the kingdom of Pegu, and in the Eastern Countries: there are also
of these stones found in the Western Countries, as in Bohemia; and very good
ones in Silesia: in these parts there are of these stones found very
transparent, but soft, of a milkish color mixed with a blew, and they are
called Leucosaphirus, these are subject to many harms.

The best are so hard that they cannot be filed, the color of these Saphires
may so be taken away, as that they may be converted into a very excellent
Diamond.

Of its faculties and properties.
The Sapphire is of a cold and dry faculty, even as are most precious stones:
it is reported of it, that it is good against feverish distempers, hence this
old distick. Corporis ardorem refrigerat interiorem
Sapphirus, and Cypriae languida vota facit.
The best of these are very comfortable to the eyes, if they be often looked
one. It is reported of it, that if it be worn by an adulterer, by loosing its
splendor it will discover his adultery: and that the wearing of it, does
hinder the erections that are caused by Venus. But surely, as either lustful
thoughts, or this wicked spirit Asmodeus moving them, or stirring up such
disorders and irregularities without them, in the body, are the causes of such
undue erections of the flesh: so when he withdraws himself, this stone has
power to hinder them, and not before. Many have written of the faculties of
this stone; as Galen, Dioscorides, Cardanus, Garcias, and Macer the Poet, lib.
5. c. 5.

It is reported of it, that it is of so contrary a nature to poisons, that if
it be put into a glass with a Spider, or laid upon the mouth of the glass
where the Spider is, the Spider will quickly die. And that it keeps men
chaste, and therefore is worn of Priests.

Anselmus Boethius says, that S. Jerome affirms in his exposition of the 19.
chap. of Isaiah, that the Sapphire being worn of any man, procures him favor
with Princes, and with all men; pacifieth his enemies, freeth him from
enchantments, and from bonds, and imprisonments, and that it loses men out of
prison, and asswageth the wrath of God. (Anselmus Boethius p. 49.)

Of its dignity and value.
For its sacred use it has been esteemed of great worth, as Exodus 28.18. And
for its superstitions, take this caution, use it with much circumspection.
Amongst the Ancients, and with the Heathen, this gemm has been of very great
authority, because they thought it did not a little prevail with God. Andr.
Bacc. cap. 7. de gem. not.
The Gentiles consecrated this gemm to Apollo, because in their enquiries at
his oracle, Vide Andrae. Bacc. c. 7. de Not. Gem.
if they had the presence of this gemm with them, they imagined they had their
answer the sooner.

It is desired of many for its excellent beauty; for it is fair like unto a
serene sky: No better a description of its excellent beauty can you find, then
that which is given of it, Exodus 24.9, 10. Where it is spoken after the manner
of men (not as if the children of Israel saw any appearance of God in the form
of man) That the children of Israel saw the God of Israel: and there was under
his feet, as it were a paved work of Sapphire stone, and as it were the body of
heaven in its clearness.

This stone is valued according to the excellency of its color, beauty,
purity, and greatness: one of the weight of four grains is worth many crowns.
The best of these are as much worth as a Diamond of the same bigness.

CHAP. XI. Of the Opalus.
Opalus is a precious stone which has in it the bright fiery flame of a
Carbuncle, the pure refulgent purple of an Amethyst, and a whole sea of the
Emeraulds spring glory, or virescency, and every one of them shining with an
incredible mixture, and very much pleasure: so that this cannot easily be
counterfeited or adulterated as other jewels may. Boethius says of it, that it
is the fairest and most pleasing of all other jewels, by reason of its various
colors. Cardanus says that he bought one for 15 crowns, Cardan. de Subt. l. 7.
that he took as much pleasure in, as he could do in a Diamond of 500 aureos.

In many of these stones do appear Skie-colour, Purple, Green, Yellow, Red, and
sometimes a Black and White or Milkish color: but we must not think that all
these colors are severally in the jewel, for break but the Opalus, and all
the variety of colors do perish; by which it does appear that the variety of
colors in the Opalus, arises from the reflection of one or more colors; as
sometimes is seen in the Rainbow, and may be experienced in a triangular
Crystal, where the alone reflection of the light upon the angles, or corners
of the Crystal, do in the Crystal produce various colors, which otherwise is
diaphanous, perfectly transparent, clear, and without color.

Of its foyl or tincture.
Though the gemm be a transparent gemm, yet there can be no foyl for the
setting of it off, for the variety of colors in the foyl, would cause a
confusion in the various colors of the Opalus.

Of its adulteration.
Though a foyl can hardly be useful in the setting off of the true jewel; yet
by other stones it cannot be counterfeited, imitated, or adulterated, but by
the help of a foyl; Impostours can adulterate it with a double glass
tinctured, or colored, or with a convenient tinctured foyl betwixt them, or
with two Crystals, or other diaphanous stones joined together with a convenient
foyl.

Baptista Porta says, that if the Calx of tin be cast into molten Crystal
glass, it will cloud it, and color it like an Opalus. Quercitanus says, that
the spirit of Nitrum will color a glass alembick with variety of colors,
like unto an Opalus; as appears by his book called Priscorum Philosophorum
vera medicina.

Of its names.
It is known of jewellers that are most expert, by the name of Opalus. In
English it is so called. The Italians call it Girasole and Scambaia.

The kinds of it.
There are four kinds of it, The first kind of it, does imitate red, green,
skie-colour, and purple; and sometimes purple with a yellow color, and these
are the best of all other: These are known by their Carbuncle flame, by their
Amethyst splendor, and by their Emerauld viridity, all shining together with
an incredible mixture, and by their admirable and wonderful ponderosity: for
this is a gemm that though it be seldom found bigger for magnitude then a
bean, and for the most part of less bigness, yet its weight will be
incredible, as appears by this of Cardanus, Card. de subtle. l. 7. page 349.
who speaks of one of these stones that was shorter then a bean and not
thicker, that weighed duos denarios, that is says he, almost fifty grains of
wheat; the best are hardest, the other are softer: the cause of its wonderful
propriety, and of its various delightful colors, Cardanus says is this,
because the stone is crisp, and of some pervious parts: by those parts which
are not pervious or porous it does receive the light, and returns it; and by
this means it comes to pass that it has a white snowy brightness and
splendor: contrariwise, by a contrary conversion it does receive the light,
but not return it: and hence it is that the stone appears dark, obscure, and
of a brown color. Vide Card. lib. de lap.

2. The second kind is black, and does out of its blackness send forth as it
were a flame. This is very pleasant, very rare, and very precious. Boethius
says, that he has seen of this kind of the bigness of the greater sort of
pease.

The third kind has various colors, but in a yellow body, and they seem to be
quiet, lie still, and not to range; and therefore they do not so exactly feed
the eyes with the reflection of their rays. These three kinds are brought out
of Hungaria.

To this last kind there is another with a milkish color that may be referred,
and the Italians do call it Occhio del garto, oculus cati, or the cats eye: and
of some it is called Pseudopalus, or the Bastard Opalus.

4. The fourth kind is also called Pseudopalus: it is notably diaphanous like
unto fish eyes, and it has in it a little milkish sky-colour, or somewhat of a
yellow color. The Germans call this Wehse, the Italians Girasole: some call
it Astroites and Asteria, because it does include within itself a light,
walking like a star.

The places.
India is the mother of these gemms: they are found also in Cyprus, Egypt,
Arabia, Galatia, Thaso, Hungary, Pontus. The Hungarian ones are found in a soft
stone, distinguished with black, yellow, and brown veins, and the body of the
stone is whitish, yellowish, and blackish, and sometimes perspicuous with
diverse colors. Many of these are so soft that they will not endure polishing,
no not upon tin or lead, but only upon a soft Tripolitan earth. Boethius 98.

Its virtues.
It is reported of this stone, that it sharpeneth the sight of the possessours
of it, and cloudeth the eyes of those that stand about him, so that they can
either not see, or not mind what is done before them: for this cause it is
asserted to be a safe patron of thieves and thefts; as it is related in
Lapidario.

Its value.
Opalus which he had from Antonius. This Opalus of Nonius was of the bigness
of a filberd, and esteemed at twenty thousand aureos. Boethius says, he saw one
of the bigness of a walnut, perspicuous, with various colors, and milkish,
which was valued at 200 crowns. Their price and esteem is not great in these
days: for one of four grains weight of the first and best kind, is scarce
worth three crowns: the other have their value according to their bigness and
beauty.

CHAP. XII. Of the Emerauld or Smaragde.
Emerauld is a precious stone or gemme of so excellent a viridity, or
spring-colour, as that if a man shall look upon an Emerauld by a pleasant green
meadow, it will be more amiable then the meadow, and overcome the meadows
glory, by the glory of that spring of viriditie which it has in its self: The
largeness of the meadow it will overcome with the amplitude of its glory,
wherewith far above its greatness it does feed the eye: and the virescencie
of the meadow it will overcome with the brightness of its glory, which in it
self seems to embrace the glorious viridity of many springs. This stone is
known by its apparent coldness in the mouth, by its gravity being weighed: and
in this, that being cast into a fire, it will not burn, nor send forth any
flame; and that in the brightness of the Sun, it will keep its excellent
viridity and greenness.

Of its foyl or tincture.
The Emerauld is a transparent stone, and therefore may be substrate with a
convenient foyl.

Of its adulteration.
There are many ways which impostours use to adulterate this gemm; as with
Crystal, glass, and flints calcined and melted together; and then a small
quantity of minium or red lead being added.

Others take aes ustum finely powdered, and half so much crocus Martis; these
they set in a furnace of fire for the space of six hours, that they may be
melted together; then they let the vessel cool, and afterward they take out
the jewel and polish it. And if this be rightly done, this jewel will be very
like to the American Emeraulds.

Of its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...), that is, Topazius Aethiopicus, Job. 28.19. and
(...) and (...) that is, Topazius or Smaragdus, as Exodus 28.19. which is
rendered by Caldeus lapidem viridem, and known amongst us by the name of the
Emerauld. In Greek (...), Isiodor. lib. 16. c. 7. de Etymolog. nomin.
and in Latin it is called Smaragdus, by which name Isiodorus in his book of
etymoligies of names, says it is called from its viridity, and excellent
greenness: or it may be so called from its splendencie and luster. Is is also
in Greek called Prassinus, because of the resemblance of the greenness of
leeks which is in it. Epiphanius says it is called Neronianus and Domitianus.
It is supposed to have the name Neronianus, from him that invented the use of
it, who was called by that name. Horace calls it lapis viridis. In Dutch, ein
Smaragde: in Italian, Smeraldo: in Spanish, Esmeralda: in French, Esmeraud. The
Persians and Indians call it Pachee. The Arabians Zamarut. Serapio and
Pandectarius call it Tabarget. In English it is called the Green stone,
Emerauld, and Smaragde.

Of its kinds.
Amongst the precious green stones, there are none so pleasant and so excellent
as the Emerauld: it is pellucide, and does much delight the eye with its
color. It has no mixture of blue, as in the Turkey-stone; nor of yellow, as
in the Topaze of the Ancients, which is now called the Chrysolite. The best
Oriental ones are very hard, and of a very fair, pleasant, green color, like
unto a green field in the Spring. They do much sharpen and acuate the dullness
of the fight, and therefore engravers will most willingly be employed about
them. They are very transparent, and do very excellently dart forth their rays
like lightning; and therefore they are of great esteem and price. Martinus
Rulandus says of an excellent Emerauld, that it does excel in its verdure the
watered grass, the neighboring herbs, the virescencie of green boughs; and,
as I may so say, even all the glory of the Spring. There is a Smaragde which
Pliny lib. 37. cap. 10. calls Lymoniates. Pliny l. 37. c. 5. and Solinus
lib. 20. make twelve kinds of Emeraulds.

1. Scythicus or a Scythian one, which is the most noble of all others, because
of its excellent hardness, and it is not subject to any injury. This is found
in gold mines, and cannot be obtained without a great deal of danger: For it is
reported, that the Gryphines take charge of this, Arimaspi, or Monoculi, who
hunger much after the gold, and Emeraulds, are forced to arm themselves for a
battle with these birds, before they can obtain their prize.

2. The second kind is called a Bactrianus Smaragdus, and is found in the
clifts of rocks.

3. An Egyptian Emerauld, and is found about Thebes.

4. A Cyprian one.

5. Is called Atticus, and is there found in silver mines.

6. The sixth is called an Ethiopian one.

7. The seventh is called Medicus, this is of very much excellent viridity or
verdure; and sometimes this its virescency does appear as out of a Sapphire.

8. The eighth kind is a Carchedonian, or Calcedonian one, and is called
Smaragdites.

9. The ninth a Tanian one, and is brought from Persia.

10. The tenth is a Cilician one.

11. The eleventh is a Laconick one, and is like to that which is called
Medicus.

12. The twelfth is called Chalco-smaragdus, and is found in Cyprus, in veins
of brass.

Of the places.
The several kinds of Emeraulds are found in the places specified by the names
of their kinds: There are Oriental ones, and there are Occidentall ones. The
best are brought from the East Indies. There are also excellent ones found in
the Occidentall or Western parts, and in the parts of Europe. There are found
in Peru, which have a pleasant green color, but send forth no rays, these are
softer then the Oriental ones, and often times full of green clouds: there are
excellent ones found in Cyprus, and in the Island of great Britane, which are
small; but for their bigness comparable to the best Oriental ones, of the
same bigness. The Oriental ones are seldom found bigger then a filberd. The
Occidentall ones, are sometimes found as broad as the palm of the hand.

Emerauld, as by a speculum, or optick-glasse; and for this cause this jewel
is called gemma Neronis. Andreas Baccius in his book de Natura Gemmarum, makes
mention of a large Emerauld-vessell that is at Genoa, very fair, and of
infinite value, insomuch as it cannot be prized.

Of its properties.
It is a stone which in former times was by ancient Astrologians dedicated to
Mercury; Cardanus attributes much power and virtue to it in the point of
divination, as does appear in his seventh book de lapidibus pretiosis.

This stone is good to recreate the sight; Andreas Baccius, Agricola, Cardanus,
and Anselmus Boethius say, that there is such an enmity betwixt it, and
illegitimate venery, or the uncleanness of the flesh, as that if it do but
touch the skin of an adulterer, it will break: and that it does bridle the
reins of lasciviousness, and much temper it; Insomuch as Albertus Magnus does
not doubt to affirm that the king of Hungariae Belae having carnal knowledge
of his wife, Emerauld set in gold on his finger, the Emerauld brake into three
parts.

Avenzoar says it is good against poisons, and that six grains of its powder
in a convenient water is an excellent Cordial; if so, then a drop or two of
its tincture, described by Boethius, must needs be of admirable faculties.

Of its value and dignity.
Exodus 28.18.
For its sacred use this stone has been of great esteem. This was one of the
stones enclosed in one of the ouches of gold in the breast plate of judgment.
The rainbow that S. John saw in his Revelations round about the Throne, was
like in sight to an Emerauld, Revel. 4.3. This is one of those stones by which
the glory of one of the foundations of the wall of the New Jerusalem is
discovered to us, as Revel. 21.19.

This stone has been always of great esteem, insomuch as in times past they
were forbidden to grave any thing upon it. The Oriental ones, have been
esteemed worth a quarter so much as a Diamond of the same weight.

Linshortanus does esteem them of greater worth then the Diamond, and valueth
an Emerauld, as big as a Diamond of four grains, well worth 80 ducats; whereas
he esteems the Diamond of that bigness not more worth then 70 ducats. A
perfect glorious excellent Emerauld is of very much worth and value, as
appears by this of Aloysius Mundella a Physician, who testifies that his
brother who was a jeweller, received of Franciscus Maria Prince of Urbine, the
sum of 113 aureos to buy him an Emerauld of the weight of eight grains of
wheat, most pure, and Oriental, that by it he might receive alleviation in an
infirmity which he was troubled withal.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Prassius, Smaragdite, and Chrysoprassius.
Prassius, Smaragdite, or Chrysoprassius is a transparent green gemm imitating
the color of green Leeks. The beauty of this stone arises of the mixture of a
yellow and green; the transparency of it is through a cloud: it is sometimes
found to have some reddish, whitish, or blackish specks or color, by reason of
its growing to a Jasper, or Crystal, or to some other jewel, from which it
receives various small bodies, and various colors. This gemm, as says
Baccius, is by some thought to be the house, Domicile, or Palace of the
Smaragde, and that because the Emerauld or Smaragde is found either in it, or
affixt to it.

Of its Adulteration.
This stone, says Anselmus Boethius lib. 2. c. 57. p. 103. is seldom
adulterated by reason of its small value.

Of its kinds.
Baccius says this gemm is a very fair gemm, and by some it is referred to the
kinds of Achates, by others, to the kinds of Beryls. It is by Boethius reckoned
among the kinds of Emeraulds, who does make a discovery of three kinds of this
stone.

1. A kind of an exact green color like Leeks, or the succus porrorum, as
says Baccius.

2. The second kind has very much yellowness: and if these be of a golden
splendor, then are they the Chrysopteri of the Ancients.

3. The third kind are whitish, with a little greenness and a greater
yellowness.

Cardan. l. 7. de lap. pret. p. 346.
Cardanus says, that all green jewels are subject to the fire, by reason of the
abundance of semiconcocted humor which they do contain in them.

The place.
They are found both in the East and West Indies, and in Europe, and in
Germany, and these are fairer then the Oriental ones, but somewhat softer:
they are found in Bohemia, and in the neighboring countries thereabouts.

Of its properties.
It is said to be of the nature of the Smaragde, or Emerauld, but of somewhat
more remiss power and faculties.

Of its dignity and value.
They are valued according to their beauty; their prices will not very much
amount (though for their Emerauld beauty they may be of some had in very great
esteem) because they are soft stones. It is reported of the Prassius, that it
will suddenly loose its viriditie, if there be any poison or venom in place
where it is, and again recover its luster if it be washed. It is also said of
it, that it is a great cordial, much comforting the heart; and that it does
confer much to the dispelling of the darkness and cloudinesse of the sight.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Chrysoprassus.
Chrysoprassus is a transparent green stone, with the splendor of gold.

The Ancients used to call all those jewels which had the splendor of gold
Chrysolites, of the Greek word (...) and hence the Prassius, Topaz, and Beryll,
which shine with golden rays: and the Chrysoprassius, Chrysopa^ius, and
Chrysoberyllus, which are found to have the same bright, golden luster joined
with their viriditie or greenness, are so likewise called.

The Chrysoprassius has the splendor of gold with the greenness of a leek:
It is very pleasing to the sight, and of more esteem then the Prassius.

Its names.
In Hebrew (...) Nopech: as Exodus 28.18. which according to Onkelos is the
Smaragde or Emerauld: in Latin Chrysoprassus: in English the Chrysoprasse.

Of its properties.
It is thought to be endowed with the same faculties and vires that the
Prassius is.

Of its dignities and value.
This stone is of esteem because of the sacred use it has been of; by it we
have the glory of one of the twelve foundations of the wall of the New Jerusalem
discovered to us in the 21 chap. and the 20 verse of the Revelation of S. John;
where it is said, that the tenth foundation of the wall, which was of a Jasper
structure, was a Chrysoprassus, by which foundation S. Augustine does signify
S. Thomas, in his explication of the book of Psalms. The city says he was
pure gold like to clear glass, whose foundations was adorned with twelve
precious stones.

The first foundation was 1. Jasper, that is, S. Petrus. 2. Sapphirus, that is,
S. Paulus. 3. Chalcedonius, that is, S. Johannes. 4. Smaragdus, that is, S.
Jacobus major. 5. Sardonyz, that is, S. Jacobus minor. 6. Sardius, that is, S.
Andreas. 7. Chrysolithus, that is, S. Matthaeus. 8. Beryllus, that is, S.
Simon. 9. Topazius, that is, S. Bartholomaeus. 10. Chrysoprassus, that is, S.
Thomas. 11. Hyacinthus, that is, S. Philippus. 12. Amethystus, that is, S.
Judas, Simonis frater.


Then speaking of the twelve gates of this city, which are every one of one
entire pearl, he says, that by these gates are meant Christ the immaculate
Lamb of God; who in the Gospel of S. John, chap. 10.9. calls himself the
door of the sheep, saying, I am the door of the sheep, if any man enter in by
me, he shall be safe, and go in and out, and find feeding.

CHAP. XV. Of the Smaragdo-Prassius.
Smaragdo-Prassius is a transparent green gemme, of a mixed beauty: it is
betwixt a Prassius and an Emerauld: it being compared with the Prassius, has
the greenness of grass without yellowness; and if it be compared to the
Emerauld, it has in it a yellowish greenness more then is in the Emerauld. It
is seldom perfectly perspicuous, because it does partake of some cloudinesse.

Of the kinds of it.
Boethius takes it for a kind of Emerauld, or a bastard Smaragde. There are two
kinds of it.

1. Bohemian ones, which are transparent through a fine thin cloud.

2. American ones, which are half transparent, like unto Vitriol.

Of its faculties, properties, dignities and value.
It is reported of it, that if it be applied to the arm, it will by a Diuretic
faculty procure urine in a Dysury; and expel gravel, and hinder the
generation of the stone, assuage the pains of the reins, and the extreme
dolours of the gout. And if in the manner of an amulet it be hung about the
neck, it is reported of it, that it will effect the same cures; and not only
so, but in children free them from fears and frights. This stone is known but
to very few, therefore its worth, value, and price cannot well be discovered.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Chrysolite, or rather of the true Topaze, which in ancient
times was called a Chrysolite commonly and vulgarly; and of the Chrysopatius.
Topaze of the ancients which commonly and vulgarly in former times has been
taken for a Chrysolite, is a transparent gemme, of a diluted green color,
which seems (as says Boethius) to have some yellowness added to it. Andr.
Baccius says, it is a stone egregiously glorious, and in its kind excelling in
viridity, and being found it is preferred before other gemms. When this gemme
is found of a yellow greenness, it is not (says Boethius) then properly called
Topazius, but Chrysopatius, and the mother of the Smaragde. In a Chrysopatius
there is a golden splendor, which does shine through a verd, or green color.
In a true Chrysolite, which is commonly and vulgarly called Topaz (of which in
the next chapter) there is nothing else but a perfect, excellent, glorious
sunshine, or a delightful golden splendor; and in a perfect Topaz there is
found an excellent, glorious, dilute, green color, which is very delightful
to the eye; and without any touch or tincture of any other color whatever.
Thus are these three precious gemms truly and perfectly distinguished, which
Pliny does speak so confusedly of, that nothing of truth can be gathered from
him concerning them. Vide Boet. page 104.

Of its foyl or tincture.
This gemm being an excellent transparent gemm, of a dilute green color, may
admit of a silver foyl conveniently tinctured, or of some other foyl fitted for
this purpose, and then placed in the enclosure under this gemme.

Of its adulteration.
And as this gemme may admit of a foyl, so no doubt but it may likewise be
subject to adulteration: for it is very glorious and excellently precious; and
what will sophisticatours and impostours not attempt to do for value and for
price? This they will attempt by double Crystals or diaphanous stones with a
convenient green-foyl interposed, and they being thus set in their enclosures
with a like foyl substrate, the fallacies will the more uneasily be discovered.

Of its names.
By the Hebrew words (...) and (...) some do understand the Topaz of the
Ancients; (of which Hebrew words we have before spoken in the chapter of the
Emerauld or Smaragde) and that because this stone is green like the Emerauld.
It is called in Greek (...) of Hesych. it is thus called in Greek (...), quod
multo studio quaeritur. It is also called Topazion, from a cloudy island of the
red sea, which is often sought for by Navigatours, for which frequent search it
is called Topazion, and the gemme is so named because it is found in this
island; Topazin from whence this name Topazion comes, is a Trogloditish word,
which in the language of the Troglodites, signifies quaerere, or to seek. The
Troglodites are Ethiopians, which are extended to Arabia and the red sea, who
have this name from their frequenting of caverns and caves of the earth: hence
in Greek they are called Troglodites, (...), hoc est, a specu and caverna, quod
in specubus and cavernis degant. Pliny l. 37. c. 8. says, that this gemme was
first brought out of the Island of the Troglodites, called Topazion a
quaerendo, to Berenice Queen of Egypt, and from thence was called Topazion. It
is called in English, Topaz; in Italian Topazzio; in French, Topasse; in
Spanish, Topazzie; in Germane, ein Topass.

Of its kinds.
Pliny makes two kinds of it: 1. Prasoin, or 2. Chrysopteron: but neither of
these have the true luster of the Topaze. Albertus magnus and Evax do likewise
make two kinds of this stone, the one of an aureus color, the other of a
saffron color: but both these are free, as well as the former two, from the
delightful glory of an excellent perfect Topaze described by me, according to
the best discoveries, in the first part of this chapter, to be a pleasing green
gemm, of a dilute verdure and very delightful to the eye.

Of the places.
The places in which the true Topaze is found, is the Island of Chitis, in
Arabia felix: there is a certain rock in an Island of the red sea, near Arabia
felix, in which the Topaze is found: it is also found in the Island called
Topazion, which is inhabited by the Troglodytes; and as Pliny says, it is
found in the mines of Alabaster near Thebes a city of Egypt.

Of its properties, nature, and qualities.
It is of such excellent faculties, as that it is said of it, that it freeth
men from passions, and from sadness of the mind. And that if it be cast into
scalding hot or boiling water, it does so assuage in a wonderful manner, and
so in an instant, and of a sudden astonish and stupifie its heat and fervor,
as that it straight takes away all its boiling, and its heat, and a man may in
that very instant in which it was put in, put his hand without any hurt or
danger into that water which even now with the fervency of heat boiled up. (See
Epiphanius and Albertus.) For this cause it is thought to be a very excellent
remedy for the mitigating of choler and of choleric passions. It is reported
of it that it does drive away nocturnall fears; and that it is a very
effectual Amulet against choleric distempers o the brain.

Authors do say of it, that if it be put upon a table where poison is or
venom is left, it will straightway fail of its splendor, and loose its
glory, and so soon as the poison or venom is taken away, it will recover all
its glory again; wonderful is this also which is reported of this stone,
namely, that it does increase and decrease in its strength of powers and
faculties, according to the increase and decrease of the Moon.

This stone is so hard that it will endure the file, and it grows into so
great a mass, that often times statues have been made of it. Juba king of
Mauritania writes concerning this precious gemm, that there was a statue of
four cubits made of it for Arsinoe the wife of Ptolemeus Philadelphus, which
was consecrated to the gods.

It is reported of Hadrianus Gulielmus, that at Naples he had a Topaz engraven
with these ancient Roman letters.

Natura deficit.
Fortuna mutatur.
Deus omnia cernit.
In English thus.

Nature by frailty does daily wast away.
Fortune is turned and changed every day.
In all, There is an eye know's no decay.
Jah see's for aye.
Of its dignity and value.
The excellent Topaz in the glory of its viridity has been esteemed a stone of
great value, and that not only for its innate inbred excellency whereby it is
very pleasant to the eye: but because it has been of sacred use, as both old
and new Testament do affirm. It was one of those gemms which had a place in one
of those four rows of stones engraven with the names of the tribes of Israel,
and set in ouches of gold upon the breast plate of Judgment, as Exodus 28.17.
where it was said of God concerning the order of the precious stones in the
breast plate of Judgment, The first row shall be a Sardius and a Topaz, and a
Carbuncle, this shall be the first row. It is also one of those stones whereby
the glory of the ninth foundation of the wall of the New Jerusalem is
discovered to us, as Revel. 21.20.

Those that are excellent Topazes, do sparkle forth their glory, and beam forth
their delightful rays: these are of much esteem, and of very great worth,
price and value.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Topaze, or rather of the true Chrysolite, and of the
Chryselectrum and Melichrysus.
IN former times that has been vulgarly and commonly called a Chrysolite,
which truly is a Topaze, and that a Topaze, which is indeed a Chrysolite, as
appears by Cardanus his book which he has writ de Lapidibus Pretiosis.

Chrysolite is a gemm translucide, perspicuous or transparent, with an
excellent aureus or golden splendor, or as I may so say, with a pleasing
sunshine splendor: Boethius says, that a water colored with Rhubarb or with
Saffron does make a representation of the tincture of a Chrysolite.

Of its foyl or tincture.
This being a transparent gemm does without all question admit of a foyl, such
as may be a gold foyl, or some other tinctured accordingly.

Of its adulteration.
The Chrysolites for the elegancy of their aureus color are diverse ways
adulterated; the best of such sophistications, is in this following manner. R.
of powder of Crystal, or of glass lb. put two drachmes of Crocus Martis to
it, and a little Minium: this must be put to it as it is molten upon the fire,
or in the furnace. Baptista Porta in his Magia says, that the Minium must
first be put in, and after that the Crocus.

Or put to calcined Crystal thrice so much Minium, and let it stand for one
whole day in a furnace, and it will be a Chrysolite.

Or R. aes ustum finely powdered, and Minium and Crystal finely powdered, and
four times so much burnt Tinn; put it into a strong calcining pot and set it
into a furnace for a day; this powder is easily melted; therefore the fire must
not be very vehement, and it must be kept always at the same stay.

Of its Names.
In Greek it is called (...), quasi aureus lapis; and from hence also in Latin
it is called Chrysolithus, from the Greek word (...), quia est lapis qui aureo
color translucet, that is, because it has with it a Golden translucency,
says Martinus Rulandus. Solinus cap. 33. calls it Chrysolampon. In English
it is called the Chrysolite.

The kinds of it.
There are three kinds of Chrysolites.

The first, which is the true Chrysolite, is a very hard glorious sunshine
gemm; which Albertus Magnus says does discover the greatest of its beauty in
the mornings, and at other times of the day is less beautiful then then.

The other two kinds of this gemm are less glorious then the former; the one
of these kinds is called Chryselectrum; the other Melichrysus: both these names
import something of a golden color, but these stones are less glorious and
softer then the former.

Of the places.
There are Oriental Chrysolites, and Occidentall Chrysolites; the best of the
Oriental ones are found in Aethiopia: these are like unto most pure gold with
an excellent splendor; they are the hardest of all other jewels but the
Diamond. There are also Chrysolites found in Arabia, but these sometimes have
too much yellowness, and sometimes too little, sometimes they have various
colors, and sometimes they are clouded; but these fall much short of the glory
of an excellent Chrysolite, whose sunshine beauty will easily make it known
from all the soft troubled clouded kinds thereof. There are also European
Chrysolites, which are frequently found in Bohemia, of as great glory and
excellency as the Oriental ones, and they differ only in this, in that these
are somewhat softer then the Oriental ones. There are very excellent ones
found in India, and Bactria, and those in very great weight but soft, sometimes
of the weight of twelve pound. Anselmus Boethius says that he saw a Bohemian
Chrysolite that was given to Rodolphus the second, Emperor of Rome, that was
two else long, and half an ell broad.

Of its nature, properties and qualities.
It is of the nature of the Solaris, or Sun-stone. Cardanus in his book of
admirable cures, does relate wonders concerning the virtues of the Chrysolite;
he says that with the alone powder of it drunk in wine, he cured Caesar
Palavicinus of a fever that he had been troubled withal fifteen days, and
another Nobleman of Melancholy, and of the falling sickness with the same
remedy, after that he had long in vain been tormented with the somniferous
lotions of Physicians. The powder of it, is said to be good in Asthmatick
passions, and in the orthopnoea if it be drunk in a convenient liquour. If in
fevers it be held under the tongue it is said to quench thirst.

It is cold and dry as all other precious stones are.

Of its value and dignity.
It is of esteem, not only for its sunshine glory; but for that also it has
been of sacred use. This is one of those stones by which the glory of the
seventh foundation of the wall of the New-Jerusalem is discovered to us, as
Revel. 21.20.

It is for its grateful aspect of very great esteem. It is so perfectly hard,
as that by the heat of fire it may be made diaphanous and void of all color,
and thus like the best Sapphire, changed into an admirable Diamond; in so much
as it being thus dealt withal, no other stone whatever can better resemble an
Oriental Diamond then it will.

A Chrysolite of the weight of eight grains is worth four crowns; one of these
excellent ones of twelve grains weight is worth nine crowns; and one of these
glorious ones of the weight of two scruples is worth one hundred crowns.

Anselmus Boethius says, that he saw one of these that weighed scarce two
scruples, and it was sold for two hundred crowns. The color of which (he
says) being separated from it, it was so exactly set in a ring, that a
skillful jeweller could not know it from a true Diamond.

It is whitened after the same manner that the Saphires are; of which has been
before spoken.

Ovid. lib. 2. Metamorph. does very splendidly feign a chariot of the Sun
made of a Chrysolite, in that he says, Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea
summae
Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo:
Per juga Chrysolithi, positaeque ex ordine gemmae
Clara repercusso reddebant lumina Phoebo.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the Beryll.
Beryll is a transparent precious gemme, of a pale green color; such as is
most truly resembled by a seawater green: which color is caused by the
mixture of a blue and green: in so much as this gemme is blue out of a green;
that is, it does discover its blue through the color of green.

Epiphanius says of this gemme, that it is glauca gemma, of the color of a
quiet sea. All Berylls are transparent says Boethius, and have an allayed
color, that is, not a full color: for if they have a full color, they are
taken for other common jewels. If you would see the perfect color of the
Beryll, put a little Indico into fair water, and with it a tenth part of green
color, and you shall have the perfect resemblance and true color of the
Beryll. Pliny says that the Beryll is in fashion six-quare, and in color
like oil or water in the sea.

Of its foyl or tincture.
This being a transparent gemme, may without all peradventure admit of a foyl
to quicken it, in the discovery of its glory and luster.

Of its adulteration.
Sophisticatours are wont, lucri causa, to adulterate this gemme thus: R. aes
ustum finely powdered, and mingle it with crystal and glass powdered, or with
calcined crystal and glass, and set it in a furnace for a day, and you shall
have a Beryll. One drachme of the aes ustum is sufficient for a pound of the
other vitreous mass.

Of its names.
The Hebrews call this stone (...) Tarshish, as Exodus 28.20. It seems to have
its name, as it does appear by Buxtorff, from the maritime city Tarshish: It
is a whole transparent stone, of a seawater green. The word (...) is by S. See
Biblioth. Reg. Hisp. l. Exodus c. 28. verse. 20.
Hierome interpreted Chrysolithus, but indeed the Chrysolite which is vere
Chrysolithus, is much different from it, as being of a golden color, whereas
the ^arshish is green. Anselmus Boethius says, that the Hebrews call this stone
Jashpech; but thus it has no resembance at all with the Tarshish, as it is by
S. Hierome interpreted Chrysolithus; but it seems rather to have some kind of
affinity with the species of the Jasper, some of the kinds of which are of a
green color like the Tarshish. What the true Chrysolite is, will appear by
the former chapter, where a true discovery is made of it as it does differ from
the true Topaz, which was vulgarly by those of ancient time called
Chrysolithus, and the Chrysolithus was by them called Topazius, but how
improperly will appear in the etymology of the word Chrysolithus, which
rendereth the Chrysolite to be of a golden color, whereas the true Topaz is of
a diluted green. This mistake has arisen in the Chrysolite and Topaz, from the
custom of them in ancient time, who were wont to call a Chrysolite a Topaz,
and a Topaz a Chrysolite; whom in this their mistake many Lapidists have too
too superciliously followed. Now because the Beryll (being a green pellucid
stone) may sometimes be taken for a Topaz, which is likewise green and
pellucid; it may be S. Hierome, according to that custom, has interpreted the
(...), which in its own proper signification is verus Beryllus, to be
Chrysolithus. In Latin Beryllus, and Beryllus Thalassius sive marinus. It is
called Beryll of the nation where it is generated. The Italians call it aqua
marina; and in English we call it a Beryll: when they have any golden rays,
they are called Chrysoberylls.

Of its kinds.
There are many kinds of Berylls, amongst which that is the true Beryll which
has the viriditie of a calm and pure sea; a blue out of a green is discovered
in these, and these are the true Berylls.

2. The second kind are paler, and are called Chrysoberylls, from the splendor
of gold.

3. The third kind are called Chrysoprassus, and these are paler then the
former.

4. The fourth kind are called Hyacinthizontes, from the color of a Jacinth.

5. The fifth kind are called Aeroides, from the word aere, and these are
greener then the former.

6. The sixth kind are called Cerinae from cera.

7. The seventh kind Oleaginei ab oleo. There is another kind which are said to
be like to Crystalls.

The Beryll of the ancients comprehended under it, all other jewels which are
like unto a Crystal, with somewhat a diluted color; as the Topazes, and the
Leucosapphiri. The Italians do until this day call Crystalls which have some
colors in themselves by reason of the reflection of the angles, Berylls.

The places.
The Berylls are found at the root of the mountain Taurus, and in the river
Euphrates, and in India, and these are the best. The other kinds are found in
diverse countries, as in Germania, and in Bohemia.

Of its properties.
A Beryll in a spherick form has the same power of begetting fire from the
Sun by its beams, that a Crystal glass has. It is said of a Beryll, that
if it be wrapped in a linen cloth, and put into water, or put into water without
it, the water will seem to be moved. Baccius de not. gem. in annotat. in cap.
13.

Wurtzung in his general practice says, that the Beryll is used in all
distempers of the heart. But take this caution by the way; A caution in the
medicinal use of this gemme.
Beware of the use of gemms (unless you are sure they be true) in Physic, by
reason they are so frequently adulterated.

Of its dignity and value.
The Beryll is of esteem not only for its beauty, but for its sacred use: for
it was one of those stones that was set in the Ephod; as Exodus 28.20. and one
of those stones by which the glory of one of the foundations of the wall of the
New Jerusalem is discovered unto us; namely the eighth foundation, as Revel.
21.20.

Ingenuous artificers do engrave the Beryll with many angles, that by the
repercussion of them, they may be made the more lively, and the more to sparkle.

The price of the Beryll is augmented or diminisht according to the elegancie
of its color. And this rule is to be observed in the price of all jewels.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Crystal and Pseudo-diamond.
Crystal is a well known diaphanous gemm, like unto most pure water congealed
into a transparent perfectly perspicuous body of six sides, which in its
extremity does seem to intend them all to one point. Well may it deserve the
name of a precious Jewel for its own glorious diaphanity and untinctured
perspicuity; and not only in regard of its own proper and peculiar beauty, but
also for that by it, in Holy writ we have the glory of many sacred things
discovered to us by Emblemes. Had this gemm as much in duritie or hardness, as
it has in the purity, excellency, and illustriousnesse of its beauty, no other
gemm under the heavens would be comparable to the best Crystal for glory. What
the manner of the generation of Crystal is, that the derivation of the word
Crystallus will show plainly to us. Crystallus comes of the Greek words (...)
which signifies frigus, vel gelu; and (...) which signifies contraho. So that
Crystallus is nothing else then gelu concretum, that is, then congealed ice, of
this opinion is Gregorius in his comment upon the first chapter of the
Prophecy of Ezechiel. There is great difference betwixt the ice and Crystal;
the ice will swim in the water, but the Crystal as being more weighty, does
straight reside: Diodorus Siculus does very clearly dissolve this difference in
the latter end of his third book; where he says, that Crystal is a stone
which has its original of pure water congealed, not by the power of cold.
(Though in Ecclesiastes it be said, flavit ventus aquilo, and congelavit
crystallum) But by a certain divine power, of an enlivening quickening heat
which causes it to keep its durities, and often times to discover so many
various delightful colors to the eye.

Anselmus Boethius says, that Crystal is the purest part of the earth
dissolved by water, which in the absence of the water is congealed into
Crystal; it is not, he says, as is supposed, congealed water, for then like
unto ice it would be dissolved with heat, and consumed by fire: but it is so
far from consuming in the fire as that it being long molten or burned
therein, it does become a Calx, and pure earth, or a salt, by the benefit of
whose spirit it is coagulated.

This gemm admits of no foyl to set off its glory. Nor is it often
adulterated, because great proportions of it are found in many places. Bowls
and cups of Crystal are of great esteem with Princes; one of these of a foot
in bigness has been sold for 100 crowns; Boethius 111.

Of its names.
In Hebrew (...) (as Job 28.17.) that is, gemma nitidissima, which is
interpreted Crystal. Aben Ezra rendereth it lapis pretiosus nitidus. The
Rabbis take it for vitrum, a puritate. It is called in Greek (...). In Latin
Crystallus. In Italian Crystallo. In Germane Crystal. In Spanish and French
Crystal. And in English Crystal.

The kinds of it.
The name of Crystal may be given to all gemms that are soft, diaphanous, and
void of color. Boethius makes four kinds of it.

First, Crystallus Montanus, which is excellently pure, fair, and beautiful,
and is found sometimes six cornered; and sometimes round and globous like
flints, which are harder then others, and like unto Diamonds.

2. The second kind is called Iris.

3. Citrinus.

4. Pseudoadamas.

Of the places.
The cornered ones are found in diverse parts of Europe, as in the Alps, in
Germany, in Bohemia, in Hungary, in Cyprus, in Lusitania, and in the fields of
Pisania. The round ones or Pseudoadamas, are found near unto Arnemhius a Town
of Geldria, and near unto Bruxels, and in France, Bohemia, and Silesia. These
sometimes are so hard and do so excellently sparkle, that they can scarce be
distinguished from the Oriental Diamonds.

Of its nature and faculties.
It is cold and dry: being held under the tongue in fevers it does quench
thirst; and so likewise in these cases it does much recreate if it be held in
the hand, and as it grows warm, cooled in fair water; the powder of it either
calcined or crude being drunk in wine, is good against Dysenteries and the
whites, a drachme of its powder taken in the oil of sweet Almonds, cures those
that have taken sublimate. It is used either in powder, or the salt of it, or
the oil of it, against all obstructions of the bowels, against gouts,
swoonings, and all cephalic diseases; says Boethius, Andr. Baccius, and others.

Of its dignities and value.
For its dignity, the Rev. 21.11. and 22.1.
sacred use that has been made of it makes it of very great esteem: and its
own glory and beauty does commend its worth, and accordingly it is valued and
esteemed of Princes and great men; and of those who know how judiciously to
judge of things according to their excellency and intrinsic glory.

CHAP. XX. Of the Asteria, or Gemma Solis.
THe Asteria, or Gemma solis, is a kind of Opalus, which does sparkle forth its
beams like a star; it is a hard transparent stone. It is called Gemma Solis,
because if it be held against the Sun, and turned, it seems to show the
Sun as it were walking in it, or the likeness of a moving star: and being
held against the light, it does the same.

Its names.
It is called of Pliny Astroites, and Ceraunia. It is also called Asteria.
Michael Mercatus calls it Astrobolus. It is also called Oculus felis.

The place.
It is found in Carmania and India. Anselmus Boethius says, that he supposes
that to be the Asteria or the Gemma Solis, which like a milkish Crystal having
a round light included in it, does send it forth walking with a certain
inclination: and that to be the Astroiten, which has in the middle of it as it
were small stars shining. This is a kind of Opalus.

Of its nature and properties.
It is reported of it, that it does procure sleep, and drive away terrors of
the night, and troublesome dreams.

Its dignity and value.
The Oriental ones are very beautiful, and so hard that they can hardly be
engraven: it is esteemed in value worth twice the price of the engraving.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Oculus Cati.
THe Oculus Cati is the various colored Astroiten of Pliny.

Its names.
It is called of some Oculus Solis: of the Persians Mithrax, that is, the
Sun. Cardanus calls it the Pseudopalus; but the colors are not so distinct
in this; and this also is far harder.

Places.
They are found in Zealand, and in Pegu; they are said to be brought from the
country of Bramaa thither.

Its dignity and value.
This stone is greatly esteemed amongst the Indians, because they are persuaded
of the devil, that he that wears it cannot want riches: and for this cause
that which in Lusitania is sold for 90 aurei; is amongst the Indians esteemed
worth 600 aurei. It is usually of the same price and esteem with the Opalus,
Hitherto has been spoken of transparent gemms.

The second part of the Lapidarie.
Of semi-transparent or half-transparent Gemms.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Sardius or Cornelian.
HItherto have been discovered the species of diaphanous or perfectly
transparent gemms, in their immixt glory, or with their beautiful tinctures;
together with their foyls, adulterations, names, kinds, the places in which
they have their original, their properties, natures, faculties, dignities, and
values. It follows that I should make a like discovery of semi-transparent or
half-transparent gemms: which that I may do; together with what I find in
Anselmus Boethius, I will join the verity of other Simplicists or Lapidists,
that so we may come to a perfect discovery of these gemms in their own proper
excellency and glory, and in the beauty of their species. Amongst the half
transparent stones or gemms, Anselmus Boethius gives the first place to the
Sardius or Cornelian. It being heretofore dignified by sacred use both in the
Old and New Testament (as will afterward appear in the dignity and value
thereof) it shall here likewise be dignified with the first place, in the
consideration of half transparent stones.

The Sardius or Sarda is a stone or precious gemme of a red color, which
Pliny says is best resembled by the color of a pickled Sardine fish, or
Anchovis, which color if it be more remiss or dilute, then is it called
Carneolus, or Corneolus, from the resemblance of flesh.

Half-transparent gemms admit of no foyls or tinctures; the reason of it is
clear in the sight of every eye: for whatever foyl may be substrate in an
enclosure of gold, under an half-transparent gemme, cannot for want of greater
transparencie, render it more glorious then naturally it is in it self.

And as it admits of no foyl, so there is no adulteration of it to be found
in Anselmus Boethius: what may be done by artificial sophistications in this
kind, I shall let alone, till further opportunity, greater helps, and better
informations. Only this Boethius says, that it is adulterated with glass of
the same color: but this is very unlike, as every knowing eye will easily
discover.

Of its names.
In Hebrew (...) as Job 28.16. Buxtorff does interpret it to be the Onyx: and
others to be the Sardonyx, as Junius in Exodus 25.7. (...) that is, Lapides
Sardoniches and lapides insitivi pro amiculo and pro pectorali sacro. In Greek,
(...). In Latin it is called Sardius, Sarda, and Carneolus, and Corneolus, and
Cornelius. The Italians and French call it Carneolus. The Germans ein Corneol.
It has also been called Darneolus, says Pliny lib. 37. cap. 7. In English a
Sardius or Cornelian.

Of the kinds of it.
There are three kinds of this gemm, as says Boethius. 1. A red Corneolus,
which is the best and most excellent of all other, est ruber instar sanguinis:
but pellucid with its redness.

2. The second is of a more dilute and remiss redness.

3. Is somewhat yellowish out of a redness.

Martinus Rulandus reckons up no less then two and twenty kinds of this
gemm. Of which we may have occasion in a further addition to speak hereafter.

Of the place, and of its nature, properties, and faculties.
This gemm is found in Sardinia, and about Babylon, in the heart of a rock,
very excellent. There are also very good found in Epirus, now called Albania,
and in Egypt, and in India, Arabia; in the Rhine, and in Bohemia, and in
Silesia there are very excellent ones found growing to stones.

As concerning the faculties of this stone, Epiphanius asserteth of it, that it
causes him that wears it to be of a cheerful heart, free from fear, and
noblely audacious, and that it is a good protection for him against witchcrafts
and fascinations, and putrefactions of humors. Andr. Bacc. de not. Gem. c. 3.
Baccius in his Annotations says, that the powder of it taken in austere wine
stops the menses, and hinders abortion.

Its dignity and value.
For its own beauty it is of value and worth: But the sacred use of it, is that
that has made it of greatest dignity, and highest esteem: in the law we find
it was set in the enclosures of gold of the breast plate of Judgment, Exodus
28.17. in the book of the Revelations we find the glory of the sixth foundation
of the wall of the new-Jerusalem discovered to us by the glory of its
resemblance, Revel. 21.20. This stone has been of great esteem amongst the
Romans, but now the knowledge of more excellent jewels makes it not so much
regarded. Its use is chiefly in seals, and ornaments for the necks, wrests, and
hair of women; one not engraved, of the bigness of the walnut, is worth twenty
shillings. Cardanus says that he had one, Cardan. l. de lap. pret.
that was in its upper part a Sardius, and in its lower part an Onyx. In seals
these gemms are much used of great men. I have had one of the best kinds of
these fitted for a seal, without any engraving, with a small black line, on the
side of it.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Sardonyx or Cameus.
Sardonyx is a pellucid gemme which does contain in it self the glory of two
gemms, namely the redness of a Sardius or Sarda, and the whiteness of an
Onyx, by which it does appear, that that stone which Cardanus reckons amongst
the kinds of Cornelians or Sardius, is a Sardonyx. And so indeed it is, for a
Cornelian red in the upper part of it, and white in the lower part of it, is a
Sarda or Sardius in its upper part, and an Onyx in its lower part; hence also
Cardanus calls a Cornelian thus beautified a Sardonyx, lib. 7. de lap.
pretiosis. Boethius says that a Sardonyx consists of a sanguine, white, and
black color, which are distinguished by circles, or girdles, as if they were
done by art. Baccius in Annotat. says, it consists of a treble color, of a
black below, of white in the middle, and of red above. But the name of this
gemm does end all controversies about it, and make a very clear discovery of
its beauty.

Of its Adulteration.
This gemm as the former, is adulterated with glass, but that will easily be
known by its want of beauty, and by its dusty superficies which it will
contract; and it will be eaten out by the air.

Of its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...) even as is the Sardius. In Greek (...) quasi
Sardius and Onyx. Hence this stone is also called in Latin Sardonyx, from
Sardius and Onyx. The jewellers of these our days, says Boethius, call both
the Onyx and the Sardonyx, Nicolus. It is also called Cameus. In English
Sardonyx.

Of its kinds.
1. One kind of it Boethius says has black and white girdles, and is called
the Onyx. 2. Another kind of it he says has one streak of one color and an
other of another color, and this is called Camehuya, or Cameus, or Onyx, or
Sardonyx. 3. Another kind he says there is that has purple, white, rosy, and
sky color, compassing one another like girdles, with the resemblance of a
rainbow, which he says, for their delight to the eye are of great dignity and
worth. 4. Other kinds he says there are of an honey color, which have dross
in them, and have not the girdle united, but diffluent, which he says are
ignoble and of small price.

The place.
These stones are found in Arabia, Germany, and Silesia, and in the
neighboring countries. Of these gemms the Oriental ones are the best of all
others.

The Sardonyx is found in great bigness, insomuch as cups may be made of it,
which are of great esteem and worth.

Of its nature and properties.
It has the same virtues with the Sardius and Cornelian, says Boethius, Pliny,
and Cardanus.

Of its dignity and value.
This stone likewise has been of great esteem, as it was in former times of
sacred use: nature here, as being much pleased with unity, has united the
beauty of two gemms in one, and by thus sporting it self with the consent of
beauty, it has reconciled the Law and Gospel; for the Onyx is one of those
stones which was set in the enclosures of gold in the breast plate of
Judgment, and the Sardonyx is that precious gemm by which the glory of the
fifth foundation of the wall of the New Jerusalem is discovered to us. Exodus
28.20. Revel. 21.20.

Demostratus says that Scipio Africanus was the first that ever brought this
gemm in use amongst the Romans, and by this means it was famous not only
amongst them, but also by their persuasions, amongst the Indians.

The Sardonyx, with the beauty of a Sardius and an Onyx, without mixture of any
other color is of great esteem and worth.

The China vessels which are brought into these parts, are supposed to be made
of this stone and the fatter part of the earth boiled together.

It is related of Mithridates king of Pontus,

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Chalcedony, Carcedonie, or Carchedonie.
Chalcedony or Carchedony is an half-transparent stone, of an obscure, fiery,
red color; and very hard.

Of its adulteration.
It is adulterated with Crystal and calx Argenti melted together in a furnace
for a day.

Of its kinds.
Pliny reckons this stone amongst the kinds of Rubies, but these are of a
blacker aspect: yet they are paler and more obscure then the Carbuncle. He
says there is a male and a female of it; and that the male has its stars
burning within it self: and that the female does pour forth its sparkling
rays. But these for their glory, may better be referred to the Granats and
Oriental Amethysts, then to the Chalcedonies.

There are Oriental Chalcedonies, and they are of a purple or sky-colour, mixed
with white, and pleasing to the sight: or else they have a very pleasing
redness, and those that have such a redness, are the Chalcedonies of the
Ancients; of this sort Anselmus Boethius says he had many, Boet. l. 2. p. 121.

There are Chalcedonies of an earthy, obscure, white color, and these are the
worst of all other.

The truest and best of all other Chalcedonies, Boethius says, are those in
which sky-colour, white, yellow, and red, do with a certain delightful and
pleasing confusion appear, which being held against the the Sun, does by the
reflection of its rays, show the color of the rainbow.

Of the place.
It is found in Germany, in Belgia, about Lovain, and about Bruxels.

Its properties.
It is reported of it, that it drives away evil spirits, that it is good
against melancholy and sadness, that it procures victory to him that is the
possessour of it, and carries it about him. Andr. Bacc. in annot. super 6. c.
de not. gem.

Its dignity and value.
It has been of great esteem for its sacred use; it is one of those stones by
which the glory of the third foundation of the wall of the New Jerusalem is
discovered to us, Revel. 21.19.

The chiefest use of these is in seals; for it seals freely, without any
devouring of the wax.

The best are of the same esteem and price with the Sardonyx.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Onyx and Chamehuia.
Onyx is a precious gemme which represents the candor and beauty of a man's
nayl: hence in Greek it is called (...), and in Latin Onyx and Onychium.

Of its adulteration.
The want of price makes these gemms seldom to be adulterated. That which
has the white distinctly from the black, is often adulterated, and sold for a
Cameus.

The Onyx of Dioscorides is the Alabaster, and this truly is very like to a
man's nayl.

Of its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...), even as is the Sardius and Sardonyx. In Greek
(...), in Latin Onyx and Onychium; in Italian Nicolo. In Germane Onykel; in
English the Onyx.

Its kinds.
There is an Arabian Onyx which is black with white zones or circles, by reason
of which many colors are caused in it. Then there is a Camehuia or Memphitis,
with a black zone or circle under a white zone or circle.

The difference betwixt the Sardonyx, Chalcedony, and Onyx.
The difference betwixt the Sardonyx, Chalcedonie, and Onyx is this: The
Sardonyx has the red color of the Sardius or Corneolus, and the white color
of the Onyx. The Chalcedonie has a red and black color confusedly mixed
together. The Onyx has only the perfect beauty of a man's nayl.

Boethius says it is called an Onyx, when the black appears as it were under
a white. The true Onyx, says Boethius, is a gemme that has many veins
compassed about with milkish zones or girdles, and meeting in a pleasing
concord and consent.

Its properties.
Dioscorides speaks strange things of the virtue of this stone, as that it
does excite passions, move melancholy, and stir up strifes, if it be worn
about the neck as an amulet, and that it does hinder the fits of the Epilepsie.

Dignities and virtues.
This stone likewise, for its sacred use, has been of great esteem; as Job.
28.16. It was much esteemed amongst the Jews, happily because it was commanded
of God to be set in the shoulders of the Ephod, with the names of the twelve
Tribes engraven in it, as Exodus 28.20. It is sometimes of so great magnitude,
that little pillars have been made of it. There are six little pillars of it in
Basilica S. See Andr. Bac. in annot.
Petri Romae. At Colonia in the temple Trium Magorum, there is one broader then
the palm of the hand. Pliny l. 37. c. 1. says, that Polycrates had a very
fair Onyx. Not only the beauty of this stone, but the bigness of it makes it
of very great price. Appianus testifies, that Mithridates king of Pontus had
two thousand cups of this gemme amongst his household stuff.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Agate.
THe Agate is a precious half-transparent gemme, full of pleasure, because of
the variety of its colors: and besides the various delightful colors it is
replenisht withal, it has also many times diverse shapes in it, wrought in
excellent workmanship by the skillful hand of nature, and that very admirably
landskep-wise; so that in them may be seen woods, rivers, trees, living
creatures, fruits, flowers, herbs, and clouds, and all this not very obscurely
neither.

It is reported of king Pyrrhus, Agate in which, by the handiwork of nature,
was to be seen the nine Muses, and Apollo holding his harp.

It is reported of Camillus Leonardus Pisaurensis, that he saw one which
resembled in it self seven trees standing upon a plain.

Of its adulteration.
It is adulterated with glass mixed with diverse colors: but this is easily
known: for the Agate is so hard that it refuses the file, and for its
excellent smoothness dust will not stick to it.

Its names, and places where it is found.
In Hebrew it is called (...), as Exodus 28.19. which by some Jews is interpeted
the Topaz. It has its names from the resemblances and forms which it has in
it: as Leuchachates, Dendrachates, Corallachates. The fairest of it is brought
from India and Sicily; it is also found in Germany in the Landtgrave of
Lichtenbergs country, not far from the town of Schindthutten: and in Bohemia
not far from Argentine, a Leuchachates sprinkled with black specks of a
purplish color, very good and excellent is found.

Its nature and properties.
It is said to be good against poison and contagions. It is reported of the
eagle, that it does carry this gemme into her nest, to secure her young from
the bitings of venomous creatures. So Andr. Bacc. and Dioscorides.

Its dignity and value.
This stone has been of esteem for its sacred use; it was one of those stones
which were set in the enclosures of the breast plate of Judgment, Exodus 28.19.
Anselmus Boethius says, that he saw one that was twice as broad as the palm of
a man's hand, in which was artificially graven the image of Julius Caesar and his
wife, which was sold for 8000 crowns. It has been used for the adorning of
those crowns, which in former times were called precar^^ coronae.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Oculus Beli, Oculus Cati, and Leucophthalmos.
THe Oculus Beli is a half transparent gemm, the body of which is white, and in
the midst of it there appears a black, like unto the pupilla, or the sight of
the eye, which is compast about with an iris, so that it seems to be a very
eye. This stone in ancient times was by the Assyrians dedicated to their God:
this for its raritie is more worth then an Achate. Leucophthalmos is like unto
the eye of the wolf: it comes of the Greek words (...) a wolf, and (...) an
eye. Sometimes they have more eyes, and then they are called accordingly, as
Triophthalmos.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Jasper.
THe Jasper is a precious gemm diaphanous and perfectly transparent, The Jasper
is here put amongst the half-transparent stones, according to the custom of
the ancients, who did not take this stone for a perfect diaphanous stone, as
here I have described it out of Holy writ.
by which the glory of the light of the New Jerusalem is discovered to us in
the book of the Revelations, in these words; And the Angel carried me into a
very high mountain, and showed me the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of heaven, having the glory of God, and its light was as the light
of a stone most precious, even like a Jasper clear as Crystal. Revel. 21.10,
11.

The diverse species of this stone, and the difference of Simplicists and
Lapidists about it, do make it very difficult to be known. The Greek name of it
( viz.) (...) according to the interpretation of Isidore signifies green, and
such a green as does illustriously shine forth with a very supreme viridity or
greenness of glory. Epiphanius and Pliny take the Jaspis for a gemm of an
obtuse green color, like an Emerauld, yet not being so transparently glorious,
and altogether so translucent as the Emerauld is: this says Pliny in his
thirty seventh book, where he reckons up no less then seven kinds of this
gemm: yea, ten kinds of it. The third of these kinds he says is like to the
air and therefore is called aerizusa, and of the Greeks Boria, because it is
like to the morning of an autumnall heaven; and the tenth kind he says is like
to Crystal; which concurreth with the first description of this stone out of
Holy writ; nevertheless he preferres the purple Jaspis above all other kinds;
and next this, that which is like to the rose; and then that which is of the
viridity or greenness of the Smaragde, to which, in his enumeration of the
species of this gemm he does give the first place. Dioscorides speaks of
seven kinds of it, and gives likewise the first place to the Emerauld Jaspis;
the second to the Crystal Jaspis; and the third to the aerizusa. Rulandus
speaks of two and twenty kinds of this gemm, and gives the first place to
the Emerauld Jaspis, which he says is on one part, of the color of an
Emerauld, on the other part, of a ceruleous color. Now in the midst of this
confusion which arises from the multiplicity of species, whither should we
fly but to the truth to discover truth? and this tells us, as before it has
been showed, that it is a diaphanous stone, glorious, and full of light; and if
so, then all the species so far as they partake more or less of tincture, or
more or less of color, so far they fall short of the excellency, beauty and
glory of the best Jasper. It is not Isidores interpretation of the word Jaspis
that makes it like an Emerauld; nor the Ancients various opinion about it, as
that the purple one is the best, or that the rose colored one is the best, or
that the Emerauld Jaspis is the best, that makes it either to be the best
Jasper, or at all a Jasper. But it is the truth of Scripture, which they were
unacquainted with, which will convince all their opinions; that the true Jasper
is a diaphanous perfectly transparent glorious gemm, resembling the beauty and
glory of the light of heaven. This confusion here of the species of gemms has
brought this gemm amongst the half transparent gemms, which is as excellent and
full of esteem as the best of the most glorious perfectly diaphanous gemms, and
ought to be preferred with them in the highest esteem.

Its foyl or tincture.
This gemm or stone of price, for its fullness of glory, and excellency of
beauty, cannot admit of any foyl or tincture to commend its beauty withal.

Of its adulteration.
It can hardly for its excellent glory be adulterated, but the adulteration
will be discovered in the defect of beauty, if the adulterate gemm be compared
with the true Jasper. Its species, all of them for the most part admitting of
more or less tincture or color, may for this cause admit of many
adulterations. See Andr. Bacc. in Annot. de Not. Gem.
It is ascribed by way of glory, to the king of Egypt; that the first
adulteration of the Jasper by tincture was from him; but the glory of this
praise if I be not mistaken, ( vertitur sibi in vitium) does even become his
shame.

Its names.
In Hebrew (...) or (...) as Exodus 28.20. Rabbi Jonathan a Jewish interpreter,
calls the (...) or (...) that is, Lapis Pantherinus because some of them are
spotted with spots like a Panther. In Greek (...). In Latin Jaspis. In English
Jasper. In Dutch ein Jasp. In French, Spanish, and Italian Jaspe.

The kinds of it.
There are diverse kinds of this stone says Dioscorides, Andreas Baccius,
Wurtzung, Pliny, and Martinus Rulandus. The true and best Jasper is that which
has in it such illustrious glory as that it may be said for the excellency of
its beauty to resemble the light of heaven.

The kinds of these stones according to Pliny are these. 1. A green translucent
Jasper, in glory like to an Indian Emerauld. 2. A gray Jasper. 3. An aerie
Jasper called aerizusa. 4. Caerulea. 5. Purpurea. 6. Caerulea with a
non-resplendent purple color. 7. Indica. 8. Turbida. 9. A violet-coloured
Jasper. 10. A Crystal Jasper.

To these Martinus Rulandus adds another kind, namely, the Turchus, which
gemm we do now call Turchoys, and the Dutch ein Turckes, and ein Orientischer
Turckis.

Of the places.
The Jaspers are found in Persia, Cappadocia, India, Cyprus, in Phrygia,
Thracia, Sardis, in Germany, and in the parts of America.

Of its nature and faculties.
Galen testifies, that if a green Jasper be hung about the neck in the manner
of an Amulet, so that in a direct line it may respond to the stomach, it will
strengthen and confirm the natural faculties of the stomach. It is reported of
the cross white Jaspers, that they do preserve men from the injuries of the
water and from drowning: diverse do very superstitiously attribute much power
and virtue to them, if figures, images, and characters be engraven upon them.
The effects which by this means are wrought in or for any, Andreas Baccius does
attribute to the devil, in his Annot. de not. Gemm. It is reported of it that
it does cure Epilepsies, by Nonus an ancient Physician.

Of its dignities and value.
This gemm as many before mentioned is of much esteem, for that it has been of
sacred use, and for that by the glory of it, we have many heavenly things
resembled to us in Scripture. This is one of those gemms which was to be last
set in the fourth row of gemms, with one of the names of the twelve Tribes
engraven in it, in the ouches of gold upon the breast plate of Judgment,
Exodus 28.20. This is the first of those gemms by which in the New Testament
the glory of the first foundation of the wall of the New Jerusalem is
discovered to us; the structure and built of which wall is also there said to
be of Jasper; and the light of the city of the New Jerusalem, is there likewise
said to be like a stone most precious, even like a Jasper. Rev. 21.10, 11. and
21.19. In the fourth chapter of this book, to discover the glory of him that
sat upon the Throne, it is said that he was like a Jasper, Revel. 4.3.

The species of it, for their beauty are of very great esteem. Andr. Bacc. c.
8. de Not. Gem.
Baccius says that the pleasure which may be seen in a Jasper, the beauty of
which arises from the mixture of many excellent greens, reds, and whites,
cannot be expressed: the excellent figures which some of them do make
representation of are wonderful: In some of them may be seen after the manner
of the clear clouds of the air; and in some like mountains, rivers, fields,
and diverse living creatures, and sometimes like armed men trampling upon
serpents: which, says Baccius, do assert and testify their power and virtue
against all enemies: hence in the book of the Revelations it is said, that the
foundations and wall of the New Jerusalem are of Jasper, to signify says
Baccius as S. Hierome interprets it, that the power of the Jasper, and the
greatness of divine wisdom and knowledge, does overcome and beat down all the
power of false doctrine.

The best Jasper, for its excellent beauty and great glory, is of very high
esteem, and of great worth and value.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Heliotrope.
Helotrope is a half-transparent green gemme with sanguine specks, growing to
the Jasper and the Prassius. The name Heliotropus is derived from two Greek
words; the one (...), which signifies the Sun; the other (...), which
signifies a turning; as if did it turn according to the motion of the Sunn, as
the herb Heliotropium or the Marigold does open and shut with the rising and
setting of the Sun.

Its names.
In Greek (...), in Latin Heliotropus, in English Heliotrope, and the
Oriental Jasper.

The places.
It is found in India, in Ethiopia, in Africa, in Cyprus, in Germany, in
Bohemia; and that of so great a mass or bigness, that oftentimes grave-stones
to cover dead bodies are cut out of it; and yet (which is very strange)
Anselmus Boethius says, this stone is known to very few. Boet. p. 130.

Its nature and properties.
It is reported of it, that if it be put into water which is directly opposed
to the beams of the Sun, it will make the water boil, and cause it to be
resolved into a cloud, which not long after is dissolved into dropps of rain.
And that if it be put into fair water, opposed to the beams of the Sun, it
does change its beams, and by the repercussion of the air, seem to shadow the
clearness of its rays; and so to induce a sanguineous color in the air, as
if the Sun by the interposition of the body of the Moon, did suffer an
ecliptic darkness. Martinus Rulandus and Baccius do say, that this power and
faculty is proper only to the Ethiopick Heliotropes. Hence this metrick
elegancie of Marbodaeus: Ex re nomen habens est Heliotropia gemma;
Quae solis radiis in aqua subjecta Batillo
Sanguineum reddit mutato lumine solemn,
Eclipsimque novam terris effundere cogit.


There is a report, which arises of the impudence of Magicians, that if this
gemme be anointed with the juice of a Marigold, it will cause him that carries
it to walk invisible. So says Pliny.

This gemme is said to be endued with the same faculties with the Jasper; and
to procure men riches, and good report amongst men; and to be good against
venoms and fluxes of blood. Pliny lib. 37. cap. 10.

CHAP. XXX. Of Lapis Nephriticus, or the Nephritick stone.
THe Lapis Nephriticus is a hard semi-transparent gemme, of a white greenish
color. Boet. 131.

Of its kinds.
Anselmus Boethius and others reckon both the Heliotrope, and also this stone
amongst the Jaspers; betwixt this and the Jasper he puts only this difference,
namely, that this is the harder, and cannot so exactly be polisht as that may
be.

Boethius says that he had a Lapis Nephriticus like unto Crystal, perspicuous,
with a little white cloud, which grew to one of the green ones.

They are sometimes found growing to the Jasper and Prassius: but for the most
part they are found like unto whetstones in the fields, in so great lumps as
cups may be made with them. Boet. 131.

The places.
They are found in Spain, and New Spain.

Of its nature and properties.
The Nephritick stone is a stone of no grateful aspect; and though Boethius
does here place it amongst the half-transparent gemms; yet other jewellers and
expert Simplicists and Lapidists do not reckon it of any such esteem. It is
called the Nephritick stone, from the power and faculty which it is (as
Authors say) endued withal against the pains of the reins, and to expel the
stone and gravel; and this it does (as is reported) by being worn on the arm
or wrist. This use the Indians make of it. What being thus worn it does effect
upon its subject, is by the power of an occult quality. Wecker says, that a
Nobleman well known to him, had an excellent Nephritick stone which he wore at
his arm, by the power of which he voided a very great quantity of gravel, so
great as that he feared lest he should suffer harm by so large an expulsion of
it in so short a time; and for this cause to avoid the evil, he laid away his
Nephritick stone, and was never troubled with his gravel afterward. He
likewise reports, that the Duchess of Bejar being three times in a very
short space troubled with Nephritick pains, made her self a bracelet of this
stone, and wore it continually; and from the time of her wearing of it, for the
space of ten years and upward, she was not vexed nor troubled with her pain.
Weck. lib. 1. de lap. pretios. Idem dixit Nic. Monardus.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Malachite or Molochite.
THe Molochite is a half-transparent gemme of an obscure green color, much
like the herb called Mallows. The Germans say that this gemme imitateth a
Sapphire in a dilute or clear green, which some affirm to be a kind of
Turchoys. Bacc. de not. gem. c. 29. This gemme Boethius says is adorned with
white veins, mixed with a sky-colour, and sometimes specked with black.

Of its names.
In Greek it is called (...), that is, Malva; in Latin, Molochites, and
Malachites.

The places where it is found.
It is brought from Arabia. In a tower of a temple at the gate of Tangrae,
there may be seen Molochites of a good large bigness: It is found also in
Cyprus, and in Germany, chiefly about Misnia, and the Province of Tirol.
Sometimes in the largeness of the palm of a man's hand, and sometimes so big
and large, as that little cups may be made of it.

Its virtues.
It prevails by a singular power against all perils, dangers, and infirmities
that infants are subject to, and it secureth them from vain fears, and adds
strength unto them; so says Pliny, l. 37. c. 8. and Solinus in Polyhistor. c.
36. and Baccius de not. gem. c. 29. Crato says that this stone has an
excellent faculty in the strengthening of the stomach. It is said to preserve
children from perilous and hurtful chance; and cures them of their familiar
disease, namely convulsions. Superstitious persons do engrave upon it the
figure of the Sun, to preserve them from incantations, and wicked spirits,
and venomous creatures. Ansel. Boet. c. de Moloch.

It is said to cure the Cardialgia and the Colic, it may effect this by its
purging faculty: for Boethius says, that if it be taken in the weight of six
grains, it does purge like Antimony.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Turkey stone.
Turkey stone is a very hard gemm of no transparency, yet full of beauty, as
giving the grace of its color in a sky color out of a green, in the which
may be imagined a little milkish perfusion; Indico will give the perfect color
of it, and Verdigrease has a perfect resemblance of it; and a clear sky
color free from all clouds will most excellently discover the beauty of a
Turkey stone. Non-transparent stones, and wholly shadowed gemms admit of no
foyls, therefore nothing concerning them must be here expected. The Turkey stone
is throughout of the same beauty, as well internally as externally; it wants no
help of tincture to set it off in grace, the constancy of its own beauty
without any extraneall help is the support of it, and bears it up against all
defects. Andr. Bacc. c. 30. de Not. Gem.
It is an excellent gemm of a most simple substance, in every part like it
self, most pure in color, and without spot, and the constancy of its beauty is
a sufficient commendation for it self.

Of the imitation of the Turkey, and the correction of its color if it vanish.
The Venetians have a very pretty way by which they will neatly imitate this
gemm, and that is with Venice glass, prepared with a convenient skie-coloured
tincture.

If at any time there do appear any kind of vanishing of color in the Turkey
stone, it may be recovered by rubbing it with oil of Vitrioll.

Of its names.
In Greek (...). It is in Latin called Turchus, Turchicus, Turchina,
Turchesia, Turchoys; Pliny calls it Boreas, which Martinus Rulandus makes
the sixth kind of Jasper, which he says is ceruleous like unto a serene
heaven, and is called Turcica in Latin, and in Dutch ein Orientischer
Turckise. It is of the Greeks called Jaspis Aerizusa; Mesues calls it
Feruzegi. It has its name Turcicus, either because of its excellent beauty, or
because it is brought from the Turks, says Baccius.

The kinds of it.
There are says Baccius two kinds of it, an Oriental one, which is of
tendency to a sky color rather then to a green; and a Spanish one, of an
obscure green color, with an ungrateful aspect, and seldom without a chink
or vein.

Rulandus makes this stone, the sixth kind of Jasper of a sky color, which
Pliny reckons as the third kind of Jasper and calls it aerizusa; but in
Greek it is called (...), because it has a clear representation of the serene
morning of an Autumnall heaven. Dioscorides even as Pliny, reckons aerizusa,
as a third kind of Jasper.

The place.
Persia and from the Indies into Turkey, and into these parts; these are seldom
bigger then a filberd and very rarely seen so big as a walnut. It is reported
of the great Duke of Hetruria that he had one of this bigness, on which was
engraven the image of C. Julius Caesar, which he kept in his repository as a
gemm of very high esteem.

Boethius says that he never saw one of these gemms bigger then a filberd.

I was once master of one of the best Oriental ones of a very pleasing
delightful beauty, about the bigness for breadth of the nail of a man's little
finger, and for thickness of the small kernel of a filberd, in which was
engraven a Lion Rampant with the year of its engraving, and so excellently as
that no whit of the beauty of the gemm was in the least kind empaired by it.

Some of the Oriental ones are said to keep their color perpetually, and
those are called Turkies of the old rock, and some of these gemms are said by
degrees to loose their color and to grow greenish, and these are called
Turkies of the new rock.

There are also Occidentall ones, or Western Turchoys which are more greenish
then ordinary, or else whitish more then is meet, and these are found in Spain,
Germany, Bohemia and Silesia.

The nature, faculties, and properties of the Turchoys stone.
Many strange things beyond faith are reported concerning the virtues of this
stone, which nothing but excess of faith can believe.

As that if it be worn in a ring of gold it will preserve men from falls, and
from the bruises proceeding of them, by receiving that harm into it self which
otherwise would fall upon the man: yet these virtues are said not to be in this
gemm except the gemm be received of gift.

It is likewise said to take away all enmity and to reconcile man and wife.

Rueus says that he saw a Turchoys which upon the death of its master lost all
its beauty and contracted a cleft, which a certain man afterward buying at an
under price returned again to its former glory and beauty, as if says he, by a
certain sense it had perceived it self to have found a new master. The same
Author says of it, that it does change, grow pale, and destitute of its
native color, if he that wears it do at any time grow infirm or weak; and
again upon the recovery of its master, that it does recover its own lovely
beauty which arises of the temperament of its own natural heat, and becomes
ceruleous like a serene heaven.

This stone is very delightful to the eye and is thought much to strengthen
the sight, because it does not by its over brightness too much dissipate the
visive faculty, nor by its overmuch obscurenesse too much concentrate the
visive faculty.

Baccius in his Annotations says that it is sweat as a gumm out of a black
stone in Persia, which the Indians call Perose; the true Turchoys is known by
the change of its color; in the day time it is excellently ceruleous or sky
colored; at night time by candle light it is green.

See Andr. Bacc. in Annot. de Not. Gem. cap. de lap. Turch.
Another way of trial of it is this, The lower part is sometimes black, from
whence issue small veins which do insinuate themselves into the superficies.

A third way which is very much commended for this purpose; dissolve calx in
water, then anoint the superficies of the gemm with it, or put a little of this
dissolved calx upon the superficies, and if upon this the calx receive a
tincture, or color from the gemm; this will show that gemm to be a very
excellent Turchoys.

Of its dignity and value.
The excellency of the color of this stone does set its price, and the breadth
of it does much enlarge the price.

It is of great esteem with Princes and much pleasure they take in its beauty;
and it being set in gold they wear it on their fingers.

The Mauritanians use this stone in physic and call it Peruzegi, or Perozaa.
Mesues uses it in electuario de gemmis, as Garcias ab horto has observed.

Those Turchoyses that are of the bigness of a filberd, and have an excellent
color like unto a serene sky, and not at all obscured with any black veins,
are sold for two hundred crowns a piece and more. The breadth of the body of
this stone does appoint the price. That which is of the exact color of
verdegrease, or like unto a serene sky, without any black veins, is excellent.
Anselm. Boet. page 137. c. 17.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Lapis Lazuli.
Lapis Lazuli is a fair ceruleous, blue, or sky-colored stone, void of all
transparency, and adorned with many bright golden specks.

It differs, says Boethius, from the Lapis Armenus in this, that this stone
is very hard, and the Lapis Armenus is easily broken and powdered, and wants
with its softness the ornament of bright gold specks.

Its names.
In Greek (...) In Latin Caeruleus lapis, and Cyaneus lapis; in Italian, Azuro
ultra marino; the Arabians call it Hager and Hazul. Of this stone is made the
excellent azure that is more precious then gold. It is also sometimes made of
the Lapis Armenus. The Lapis Lazuli is a precious gemme, which being polisht as
other gemms, is wont to be set in gold rings, and worn on the finger.

Epiphanius does reckon this gemme as a kind of Sapphire, which Pliny calls
Sapphirus Cyaneus, or the male Sapphire, and says it is a ceruleous gemme,
gloriously splendent, with many bright golden starry specks. Pliny lib. 37. c.
9.

Of the places where it is found.
It is found in Africa, Asia, and Germany, in the gold mines; the Lapis
Armenus is the mother of it. It is also found in Egypt, Cyprus, Scythia. It is
oftentimes of so great bigness, that spoons and hafts of knives are made of
it. If this stone being put into the fire does not change its color, it is
called Lapis Lazuli fixus, of which is made that precious blue color called
azure.

Its nature, properties, faculties.
Dioscorides says that this stone has a repercussive faculty. Other
Physicians have found by experience, that it has in it a purgative faculty;
and that it is good in all melancholy diseases, and the Lapis Armenus has the
same faculties.

Antonius Musa Brassavolus in lib. de med. purgant. says, that the greatest
dosis of it is a drachme, and that it does purge excellently well without any
torment at all. He prescribes it in pills after this manner. R. lapidis Lazuli
praeparati j, Camphorae, Anisi, Cinnamomi, Zinziberis, Mastiches ana gr. 6.
Misce, and cum succo salviae vel diacatholico fiant Pilulae quinque Dosis est a
ij ad j, aut in pilulis, aut in pulvere, aut in jure, aut in aqua Boraginis,
aut in conserva Boraginis, aut in vino Cretico.

Its dignity and value.
A pound of the fragments of this stone is worth ten crowns, to make azure of;
( Boet. 140.) and if it be very good, ten ounces of azure may be extracted out
of it by three several extractions: The first of which extractions will be
five ss in weight; every ounce of which azure will be worth twenty crowns: The
second extraction which may amount in weight to a matter of three ounces will
be worth five or six crowns an ounce: and the third extraction which may amount
in weight to two ounces, may be worth in value a crown and a half, or one crown.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Lapis Armenus.
Lapis Armenus is a fair, ceruleous, sky-colored stone, of the same kind that
the Lapis Lazuli is, but very fragil, and much softer, void of all golden veins
or bright aureous specks, and loosing its color in the fire.

Of its names.
It is called Lapis Armenus in Latin, from the place whence it is brought,
namely Armenia. In Italian Verdazure; in Arabic Hager armeni: in Germane
Bergblau. in French Verdazure, that is, blue mixed with green. This Lapis
Armenus being printed on a table, by age degenerateth into a green color,
which is contrary to the nature of a true azure; for that remains constant
and permanent, without any alteration by continuance of time.

Its places.
There is an Oriental Lapis Armenus, and a Germane Lapis Armenus: The
Oriental one is said to be known from the Germane one, in that it loses not
its color, but becomes more illustrious and glorious in the fire. This is
meant of the Lapis Lazuli, and not of the Lapis Armenus. The Lapis Armenus is
found in Ultabade, a famous city in the kingdom of Balaguar. It is brought
from Venice and Germany into these parts.

Its nature, properties, and faculties.
This stone is esteemed good against all melancholy diseases. Unwasht, it
purges by vomit without any difficulty; but it being washed, purges by stool:
for this purpose, that it may lay down all irritation of the stomach to vomit,
it must be washed fifty times: Boethius. Trallianus lib. 1. c. de melancholia,
says that it does not at all in its purging torment or trouble the party that
takes it. The dose of the unwasht stone is from iij to iiij. more or less
according as the disease, or age, or strength of the person will bear. The dose
of the washed stone is from v to vi. in warm water; for by this means it does
not a whit trouble or molest. Or it may be taken in form of pills after this
manner:

R. hierae picrae ss, Epithymi ss, Agarici iiii, Scammoniae i, Garyophyllorum
i, fiat pulvis tenuissimus, and cum melle rosato aut Cydoniato incorporentur,
Dosis est a ii ad iiji: hae pilulae Catholicae sunt, sive Panchymagogae: for
they purge all humors, but especially adust and melancholy humors.

Guanerius does prescribe this stone in the form of a powder, in this manner:

R. Lap. Armeni quinquagies lotae ij. Croci gr. 10. Macis i. fiat pulvis, sumat
in aquae Saccharatae quantitate sufficient pro una dosi. Aetius lib. 2. c. 47.
says, that it is good to give five grains of this stone, to those that are
troubled with melancholy, or to children in pectorall diseases, or to
Phreniticks or Epilepticks. or,

R. Centaurei minoris M. iii. Coque in lb. iiss. aquae majoranae ad. lb. i.
Decocto colato add i, Lapidis Armeni.

See Dioscorides, Cardanus, Garcias ab horto.

The color of this is extracted as the Lapis Lazuli, and is then called Azure.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Astroites or Starre-stone.
Astroites or Starre-stone, is says Boethius, a dark gemm of a whitish color
full of stars, in the stead of which, sometimes it has the appearance of
Roses, and sometimes of waves of water; and sometimes all these representations
are to be had in one and the same gemm. He takes it for a kind of Achate, and
says that these stones are to be found sometimes in the bigness of a man's
head. Marsilius Ficinus calls it the Dracontium, and thinks that it is
taken out of the head of the Indian Dragon. But this is thought to be nothing
else but a falsehood, and a story of it, raised by impostours to advance the
price of it.

Andreas Baccius says of the Astroites or Asteria that it comes near to the
form of Crystal, and shows by repercussion a certain light in a pale color,
in which internally some certain rays after the manner of stars do appear.
And in his Annotations he says it is a hard stone, which being circumverted,
shows the sun shining within it. Cardanus says that the Stellaris lapis
does differ from the Astrites as not being precious at all nor perspicuous, but
only a stone distinguished with many spots of the color of ashes.

Martinus Rulandus calls this the Astroites mas, and says it is of the
figure of a half globe, full of ashy colored stars.

Its names.
It is called Astroites, Asteria, and Astrites. In Dutch it is called ein
Siegstein voller sternen; and ein pater noster, von folchen siegsteinen, and
that because in old times they made use of this stone to number up Pater
nosters by. In English it is called the Starre-stone.

Its kinds.
Of this stone Boethius makes three kinds, which he represents to the eye in
their several forms and figures. The one of which is round and has no stars
at all in it: The other is full of stars and round as the former. And the
last is composed of diverse stars united together in longitude which may
easily be separated either with the hand or by the help of some instrument, and
in their separation they shiver into the form of stars. And this last
Anselmus Boethius calls Asteria vera, or the true Starre-stone. as lib. 2. de
Gemm. p. 151. C. de Astroite.

Martinus Rulandus does also make three kinds of this stone.

The first a male one full of stars.

The second a female one, in which is many resemblances of the worms which do
destroy the herb Rocket and Colewort, which are commonly called Canker-worms
and Palmer-worms: in this he says there is no appearance at all of any of the
stars of the masculine one.

The third kind he calls globuli ex Astroite.

Of its nature and properties.
It is reported that four grains of this stone in some appropriate water, is
excellent good against the plague, and to expel worms out of the body.

Stellaris lapis; which Andreas Baccius in his Annotations attributes to the
male Astroite. Cardanus says that it being put into a vessel of vinegar does
move it self and imitate the goings of creatures: this stone and the power and
faculties thereof, was in times past says Cardane very well known to Rabbi
Aben Ezra. The progression or motion of this stone in a vessel of vinegar or
wine he attributes to the vapor of the wine or vinegar, which penetrating the
stone, and finding not speedy issue out of it again, does by impulsion move the
stone too and again as being a light substance. Which wonder of motion as
before I said Andreas Baccius in his Annotations attributes to the male
Astroite, and the cause of this motion he rendereth from Agricola thus; the
stars being rare and of a thin substance and the intermedium gross and
thick; the meatus, passages, or porosities of the stars do imbibe or drink in
the vinegar or wine, and afterward expel the vapor or air of the wine or
vinegar which in its expulsion does move the stone, and thus dissolve the
wonder and take away the cause of admiration.

Some attribute unto it a power of obtaining victory for him that wears it
against his enemies; hence the Dutch call it Siegstein. It swells and
enlarges it self in its growth, in the form and figure of an eye. It is said
to be good against Apoplexies, and by the very touch of the body to hinder the
generation of worms.

Its dignity and value.
These stones are sometimes found of very great bigness, and sometimes no
bigger then the breadth of a man's nail, but of excellent beauty, and esteemed
worth two crowns a piece, these for their beauty are often set in gold and worn
on the finger.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Garatromo or Toadstone.


Some say this stone is found in the head of an old Toad; others say that the
old Toad must be laid upon the cloth that is red and it will belch it up, or
otherwise not; you may give a like credit to both these reports, for as little
truth is to be found in them as may possibly be: lib. 2. in the chapter of this
stone; who says that to try this experiment in his youth he took an old Toad
and laid it upon a red cloth and watched it a whole night to see it belch up its
stone, but after his long and tedious watchful expectation he found the old
Toad in the same posture to gratify the great pains of his whole nights
restlessenesse, and since that time he takes that stone which is called
Garatromo or the Toad-stone, to be an obscure Starre-stone.

Its names.
This stone is called Batrachites, and Brontia, and Ombria, and Garatronium,
Lapis Borax, Lapis Bufonis, Lapis Rubetae. In French, un Crapaut and
Crapaudine. In Germane ein Krattenstein. Some in Latin call it Crapontina. In
English a Toadstone.

Of its kinds.
Baccius makes two kinds of this stone: One of a whitish brown color: Another
of a black color with a bluish eye.

This stone says Boethius is sometimes found of the bigness of an egg, and
those that are so great, are sometimes brownish, sometimes reddish, sometimes
yellowish, sometimes greenish.

Some are no bigger then the nail of the hand and these by Jewellers are taken
for the true Toad-stones.

It is reported of it that it is good against poison if it be worn so as it may
touch the skin, and that if poison be present it will sweat, and that if any
inflations procured by venomous creatures be touched with it, it will cure
them. So says Weckerus, Lemnius, and Baccius.

The third part of the Lapidarie.
Of non-transparent and common stones.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Coral.
THus having made progress with much perspicuitie through all the species of
diaphanous and perfectly transparent gemms; and through all the species of
semi-transparent, or half-transparent gemms, (amongst which some
non-transparent gemms, for their excellency, beauty, value, and worth are
reckoned, as the Turkey-stone, Lapis Lazuli, and a kind of the Astroites, and
some others,) which are wont to be enclosed in gold, and for their beauty and
esteem worn on the finger, or elsewhere about the body for its greater grace
and ornament: we are at length arrived at the third part of our labor, which
is a port or baven that lets me into the consideration of stones that are not
called by the names of gemms or precious stones, though many of them for their
beauty and virtue, if we consider them jointly, are comparable to some of the
beautiful diaphanous stones; and excelling in beauty and virtue many of the
semi-transparent or half-perspicuous gemms: and with these, to the
consideration of stones commonly so called, as they follow in their order after
these stones of external beauty, which for their softness are of no great
value or price.

In the order of these stones, the first place the Coral challenges to it
self, as being more beautiful then the rest, and as full of virtue as any.
This is a bud of maritime beauty, and the delight of children, the best of
natures buds, as somewhat furthering the springtide of their growth. The
Coral is a plant of natures setting in the sea, which though being covered
with the waters of the sea, it be green and soft, yet so soon as it is elevated
above the waves, and discovered in the region of the air, it alters its
color, and changes its nature: its color from green to a very noble and
beautiful red; its softness into the compacted firmness and solidnesse of a
stone, beautiful and lasting; by the operation of the air encompassing its
sometimes soft and flaccid substance. It is (under the waters of a brinish sea)
a thriving growing plant, sprung up by nature with the ornament of many pretty
branches, which is no sooner violently forced from the place of its growth; and
brought to light above the overflowings of the waters, but it blusheth at the
injurious hand that offers violence to its secret, silent, tender, spreading
growth.

Coral is a delightful, pleasing, beautiful, red, hard stone, resembling a
plant, adorned with many pretty branches.

Ovid. 4. Metamorph. concerning the original of the Coral has this fiction:
Medusa's head being cut off, A fiction of the original of the Coral.
Perseus took it and put it in the sand of the seashore with leaves and green
rods under it, which rods by the touch of the head, grew hard and into a stony
substance, which when the sea-nymphs saw, they took of those rods and spread
them abroad in the sea, which became the seeds of Coral. Hence says Ovid,
Nunc quoque Coraliis eadem natura remansit,
Duritiem tacto capiant ut ab aere: quodque
Vimen in aequore erat, fiat super aequora saxum, and in lib. 15.
Sic and Coralium quo primum contigit auras
Tempore, durescit: mollis fuit herba sub undis.


Of its adulteration.
In imitation of Nature, Art does often excellently find out a way of resembling
this stone. The manner of it is this; Take the shrub which grows out of the
old wild Pear Tree, which is scarce a foot high, and cover it over with a very
hard emplastre made of Minium, Colophonia, and White-wax: this being perfectly
dry, must be levigated or polisht by the fire, and it will be so exactly like
unto the Coral, that it will hardly be discerned from it. Or take the fine
powder of Coral, and the white of an egg, and mix them together, and with
them Minium, and then press them in forms.

Its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...) Ramoth, as Job 28. 18. In Greek (...) and (...),
thus Metrodorus calls it, of the fiction of its original from the Gorgons
head. It is called of Pliny l. 32. c. 2. and of some others besides him,
Corallum, Caeralium, Ciralium, and Curalium, for that it is plucked up with
nets, or cut up with an iron instrument. It is also called Dentrites of Pliny.
It is also called in Latin Coralium, and Corallium, and Sandastrum. In Arabic
Bassad, Besed, Bassath, Belisis. In German Coral. In Italian Corallo. In French
du Coral.

Of its kinds.
Dioscorides, Pliny, Cardane, Rulandus, and Boethius reckon three kinds of
Coral; red, white, and black; yet all these are of the same kind of greenness
while as yet they remain in the place of their growth, under the waters of the
sea.

The best of these kinds is the red Coral, which imitateth the natural
Minium. Next this is the white Coral, and then the black. There is also Coral
yellowish, and brownish, and greenish, and reddish, falling much short of the
beauty of the first Coral.

Of the places.
Some of these kinds of Coral are found in the West parts of England, about S.
Michaels Mount. There is Coralline found growing to Oyster-shells,
muscle-shels, and to stones in the sea, under a place called Reculvers and
Marget in the I Will of Thanet, and in other places along the sands from thence to
Dover.

Its nature and properties.
The Coral is cold and dry, and astringent. It is reported of it, that it will
be of greater beauty if a man wear it, then if a woman; and that it will
contract ungrateful spots, if the possessour of it be dangerously sick. By the
change of its color it is said to foreshew ensuing diseases. If it be worn in
the manner of an amulet, it is said to drive away fears, and to keep men from
enchantments, from poisoning, from epilepsies, and from the insultings of
devils, from thunder, from tempests, and from all manner of perils: for this
cause idolaters were wont to dedicate this stone to Jupiter and to Phoebus.
This stone has been thought of power to hinder the delusions of the devil, and
to secure men from Incubus and Succubus. So Ansel. Boethius, and Dioscorides.
Arnoldus de villa nova, advises to give to newborn children as soon as they
are come into the world, before they have tasted any thing, ten grains of the
powder of Coral in the mothers milk; by which means he says they shall be
preserved all the days of their life from the epilepsie. The same remedy
Camillus Leonardus Medic. Pisauriensis, says that he has often experienced.
There is a composition made of it, which is called Diaccrallium, which is said
to be very effectual against vomiting, and to cure all fluxes of the belly.
The description is this:

Tabellae Corallatae.
A confection in Lozenges.
R. Corallorum Rubeorum praeparatorum ii. Margaritar. praeparatar: i. boli
armeni ss. ligni aloes i. sacch. albissimi dissoluti in aqua rosaru^ and
cinnamomi tenuioris quantum sufficit; fiat confectio in tabellis. Or this may
be used in powder. and the alone powder of the Coral is given in the weight of
half a drachme against all contagions, plagues, poisons, and malign fevers,
and to recreate the heart. The tinctura Corallorum, and the sal Corallorum are
endued with the same power and faculties: of which we may have an occasion to
speak hereafter, according as our success is in this present undertaking.

Its dignity and value.
An ounce of Coral beads were wont to be sold for a crown; sometimes for more,
sometimes for less. Anselmus Boethius says, that he saw one of these shrubs
adorned with many branches, which was esteemed worth an hundred crowns. These
are of great esteem with Princes. If the Coral at any time fail in its beauty,
it may again be restored by rubbing it with Nitre.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Amber, or Succinum.
Amber or Succinum is a fat bituminous substance, congealed into a stone of a
white color, and that through the power of heat. It is rare and precious,
endued with the virtues of Balm, and breaths forth the fragrant smells of
odoriferous spices.

The common sort of Amber, which is fittest for ornament and external deckings
of the body, is a through-transparent stone, usually full of small motes or
atoms, of a yellow or gold color; in which sometimes there are found small
creatures, as worms, and flies, and the like. A fiction.
The Greeks have a pretty fable or fiction concerning the generation and
original of the Amber or Succinum which they call Electrum, A fiction of the
original of the Amber.
as that it should have its first original from the tears of Phaetons sisters,
who the fiction says, lamenting the death of their brother Phaeton who was
slain with lightning, were turned into poplar trees, and pour forth perpetual
tears by the river Eridanus, otherwise called Padus, which afterward do coire
in unam massam, and thus by concretion or congelation they do become the
Electrum, Succinum, or Amber. Hence this of Ovid in his fable of the Heliades,
2. Metam. Inde fluunt lacrymae; stillata que sole rigescunt
De ramis Electra novis; quae lividus amnis
Excipit and nuribus mittit gestanda Latinis.
Others have feigned that this stone is generated ex urina lyncis covered over
in the sands. Epiphanius doubts much concerning the word Lyncurius (which is
interpreted Amber, or Succinum, and by some called Lycurius, but with very
little correspondency to the Hebrew text) what species of gemm or precious
stone it ought to be taken for. Cardan. l. 5. de Mistis.
Cardanus says that there is great contention amongst Authors concerning the
Succinum, or Amber, but he himself asserteth it to be a bituminous substance
congealed into a stone.

Of its adulteration.
I have thus spoken of the adulteration of gemms and stones of worth,
immediately after the discovery of the true stones, least the distance of
place, or other intermediate things should breed some confusion to my reader,
and by this means take him off from the diligent consideration of the
differences of true gemms and stones from their falsifyings and adulterations.
They being thus directly opposed together they will the more easily be
discovered one from the other.

The adulterations of it are these.

Take Succinum melleum, and the white of an egg, and Saffron, and Gumme-dragon,
these mix together with knats or flies, or chaff, or such like things and a
little powder of the true Amber to give it an odoriferous smell, and then by
the power of heat bring it into a hard substance like amber. So Cardanus lib.
de Mistis.

Or take the fine powder of Crystal and the white of an egg and beat them
together, adding a little water mixed with saffron, put this substance into a
glass and evaporate all the moisture till it come to a full consistence, and
then form it, and by drying of it you will have your factitious Amber; and if
you desire to have a diaphanous body strain it before you boil it. So Mizaldus.

Or take liquid Mastick, strain it that it may be purged a little, and then
add of the root of Curcuma and so make a species of Amber. So Baptista Porta
in Magia sua. c. 1. de Succino.

But the best, most profitable, and excellentest of all other artificial ways
is this; dissolve as many small pieces of Amber as you will, and coagulate them
again into a mass, and he that can do this may indeed be called verus
Physicus. This, says Boethius, may easily be done, but such knowledge as this
is meet for none but the wise. Thus much may suffice to be demonstrated
concerning the adulterations of this stone, that pious inquirers into nature
may not be deceived. He that desires to know more of this, let him read the
history of Andreas Libavius.

Of its names.
In Greek it is called (...), because it being rubbed and warmed, does as it
were entice and attract to its self small bodies, and little things, as chaff,
and straws, and the like, after the same manner that the Lodestone does
attract the iron. In Latin Ambra, and Ampar, and Succinum Orientale, thus the
Romans call it says Andreas Baccius, because it is concrete or congealed of a
juice, which flows not from trees, but from the bowels of the earth. In
Persian Carabe. In the language of Ham or Egyptian language Sacal. In French de
la' Ambre. In Germane Agtestien, and Augstein, and Achstein, and Borastien. Of
the Scythians Sacrium Lyncurium, and Langurium.

Of its kinds.
Ansel. Boethius makes four kinds of this stone:

1. White, which is very seldom transparent, but rare and more precious then
any of the other kinds, breathing forth pleasing, sweet, fragrant, spicie,
odoriferous smells. This is endued with the virtues of Balsame.

2. A yellow Amber like unto gold, for the most part transparent, in which is
usually found many motes, and little creatures, such as are flies.

3. An Amber adorned with various colors which is sometimes transparent, and
sometimes opake or obscure.

4. A dark and spotted Amber with very many ignoble colors.

Martinus Rulandus does also thus reckon four kinds of this stone.

1. Succina gravida, of which he says there are seven kinds.

2. Succina liquida or Pellucida, of which he says there are thirteen kinds.

3. Succina crassa, non Pellucida, of which he reckons eleven kinds.

4. Succina mixta cum aliis succis, of which he shows ten kinds: but I omit
these till I have an occasion for addition.

Of the places.
The Amber is found in Prussia, Dania, Suevia, Livonia, Finland, sometimes in
the bigness of the head of a man.

The white is seldom found but in small pieces.

Pliny writes that a piece was brought to Rome of thirteen pound weight of the
yellow Amber.

Of its nature and properties.
The white Amber is astringent and temperately hot, the yellow Amber hotter.

The white odoriferous Amber is esteemed the best for Physic use, and thought
to be of great power and force against many diseases, as against the Vertigo
and Asthmatick Paroxysmes, against Catharres, and Arthriticall pains, against
diseases of the stomach, and to free it from stuffings and putrefactions, and
against diseases of the heart, against plagues, venoms and contagions. The
Florentine Physicians are wont to prescribe some few drops of its oil to be
taken in wine for the former purposes.

It is used either in powder, or in oil, or in Troches either in the distempers
of men; or of women, either married or unmarried, either with child or
without, or in the distempers of children.

Its dignity and value.
Princes were wont in former times to cause the Precariae Coronae to be made of
the yellow Amber, which were little Crowns or Coronets of glory, given to those
that did obtain masteries and set upon their heads in token of their victorious
prizes. It has been also used of women for Crowns; and it is now used in
Neck-laces and Bracelets. It is often made into small cups about the bigness of
a man's fist, which are valued at ten and sixteen crowns a piece.

If the Amber be found with great variety of shapes in it, it may be valued
says Boethius at the pleasure of the possessour.

The Amber is used to make vernix withal.

The white Amber though it want the external glory and transparency of the
yellow Amber, yet is it best for physic use, as being endowed with a pleasing
odoriferous smell, and carrying away the balsamic virtues and all the
efficacy, power, and faculties from the rest.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Gagate, or Stone-coal, as some think.
Gagate is a black stone of a polisht splendor, generated (as says Rulandus)
of an oily substance, which flows forth of the rocks called Petroleum, or of
Naphtha subtle which is much like Petroleum, if not the same: or of the
natural liquid Bitumen, which Wurtzung, a Germane Physician, takes to be the
same with Naphtha and Petroleum.

Of its names.
It has its name Gagate from the river Gagas in Cilicia. Cardan says, that of
the vulgus it is called Ambra Nigra. In Dutch Schewarser Agstein: In French
Agathe: In Spanish Elzavaie. It is of some called Succinum Nigrum.

Its kinds.
The best Gagate is that, which being put to the fire burns like Bitumen. Of
this Rulandus makes these kinds; 1. The Thracius lapis, called in Dutch
Schewars Agetstein. 2. Lithanthrax, which is a stone of an earthy color,
congealed of Naphtha or Bitumen. 3. The Stone-coal.

The places.
The Gagate is found in Britain, in Sicily and in France.

Its virtue.
It is reported of it, that the wearing of this stone does secure men from
nocturnall fears, from Incubus or Succubus, or the nightmare; and from evil
spirits; and that it being drunk, Cardan. lib. 5. de mistis.
will show whether a maid have her virginity or no. Ansel. Boet. c. de Gagate.

Of its dignity and value.
This is a stone of small value, and has been used, says Boethius, as black
patches to make women seem beautiful. Cardanus in lib. de mistis, says that
it has been used to reckon up Pater nosters withal: for the Saints in former
times were wont to wear beads and bracelets of it, to number up their prayers
by, and thereby to keep the account of their devotions. Cardane says, that
pilgrims were wont to bring from Spain the images and consecrated pictures of
Saints, made of the black Gagate or Stone-coal. Card. l. 5. de mistis.

CHAP. XL. Of the Lithantthrax, or Coals.
Lithanthrax is a stony coal of the kinds of Gagate. It is a bituminous
substance, which by the power of heat being concocted, is brought into the
hardness of a stone.

Their names.
In Greek they are called (...). There are light ones which are called by See
Martin. Ruland. Lex. Chyme
Theophrastus (...), or Carbones leves. There are also Carbones graves, called
in Greek (...): in Latin Lapidei Carbones: in Germane, ein Stein-kol: in
English Coals.

Places.
This is found in the country of Liege, and in those places where the Gagate
is found.

Its use.
The common use of coals is so well known to all, as that I shall not need to
spend further time in the discourse of it. See Boet. c. de Lithanthr. and And.
Libav.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Glossopetra, or Tongue-stone.
THe Glossopetra is a stone of the similitude of a Tongue.

The place.
It is found in the Alume-mines near Luneberg.

Its virtue and value.
Plin. lib. 37. cap. 19.
and that if poison be present in the room where it is, it will sweat. Boet. It
is a vile stone of very small worth.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Alectorius or Cock-stone.
THe Alectorius is a transparent gemme, of the bigness of a Bean, found in the
stomach of a Cock, like to Crystal or limpid water.

Its names.
In Greek (...): In Latin Alectorius: In Germane, ein Cappaunstein: In
English, the Cock-stone.

Its kinds.
The best (says Pliny) is transparent like limpid water, or a Crystal.
Boethius says, that some of these stones are like to obscure Crystalls; and
that there are others of a brownish color; and that there are some found
distinguished with sanguine veins.

Its property and value.
It is reported of this stone, that it does by a Solary power which it has in
it, make him that wears it victorious over his enemies. See Solinus cap. 4.
and Dioscorid. l. 2. c. 43. It is said of Milo Crotoniates, who lived in the
times of the ancient Tarquinius, that by the help of this stone he became
invincible. As long as the Cock has this stone in his stomach, it is reported
that he never drinks. Boethius says, that the certain experience of the
Neotericks has found this stone good to allay the heat of the heart, and to
quench thirst if it be held in the mouth. L. Lemnius and Albertus Magnus have
written concerning the virtue of this stone.

It is reported of it, that if it be held in the mouth it procures victory: and
that it has a power of stirring up of love and lust; and of making constant
and eloquent, and of securing from all manner of perils.

This stone is very rare and precious, and may therefore be prized and valued
at the pleasure of the possessour.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Chelidonius Lapis, or Swallow-stone.
THe Chelidonius is a gemme, says Rulandus, that is found in the stomach of
Swallows of the first brood, if they be taken and opened either in the
increase; or before the full of the Moon, as says Weckerus.

There are two kinds of it, says Boethius, one black, the other red. But of
this and some others that follow, I shall not now endeavor to further my
discourse; but defer that, till I may see what the success will be of these
first undertakings. Concerning this stone, see Wecker. l. 1. Antidot. special.
de lap. minus pretios. alterantib.

Diverse things have been spoken of the great virtues of this stone, of which
hereafter I may speak. In the mean time confer with Boethius, page 172. and
Albertus Magnus.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of the Dracontia, Draconitis, or Dragon-stone.
Pliny says that this stone is found in the brain of Dragons, Plin. l. 37. c.
10. But I omit further discourse concerning it till a more convenient
opportunity.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Snake-stone, which the Bohemians call Duchanek.
Boethius says they are much deceived that take this for a stone, seeing they
are nothing else but round glasses, formed on purpose to wind thread upon; and
for this purpose, for the more celeritie of winding, they have a hole in the
midst of them, by which the Bohemian women hold them upon their fingers, during
the time of their winding thread upon them. Verticels.
These are called Verticels from their use, as being fit and meet to turn to
and again. These are used by the Bohemian women, and in Belgia, where Anselmus
Boethius says he has seen many of them.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the stone called the Snakes-egge.
THis stone is a kind of Toadstone, and may be referred to those that are
called Brontia or Ombria, of which see Pliny l. 29. c. 3.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Carp-stone.
THe Carp-stone, or rather the Carp-bone; for (says Boethius) it is a
triangular bone of a yellowish color, found in the beginning of the backbone
of a Carp.

The powder of this being taken in drink, is said to be good against the stone.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Lapis Caymanus.


The Indians and Spaniards are wont to use these stones against quartane
fevers. Anselm. Boet. p. 177.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Palumbella or Dove-stone.
THe Palumbella is a stone found in the belly of Stock-doves, which they are
said to swallow for their healths sake.

CHAP. L. Of the Swine-stone.
THis is a stone of a reddish color and bitter taste, which is said to be found
by a river near Malacca, in the gall of the greater sort of swine. Boet. 178.

CHAP. LI. Of the Lapis Cenar.
THese are those stones of which those beautiful cups and dishes are made,
which are commonly called by the name of China vessels. They are pleasant and
of great esteem, and much used for ornament.

CHAP. LII. Of the Lapis Bezoar.
Lapis Bezoar is (says Boethius) a stone blackish out of a green, about the
bigness of a filberd, round, and hollow in the midst, in the cavity of which
is contained a little sandy powder. Cardan. de lap. lib. 7.
Cardane says, it is a soft stone of an ashy color, about the bigness of a
filberd, egregiously powerful against all venoms.

Andr. Bacc. lib. de not. gemm. c. 34.
Andr. Baccius says, that the Bezoar stones are externally rough, of a green
color, which out of a brown is reddish, as if it was partly tinctured with
redness by blood, and partly with an humor from the creature in which it is
found. Claudius Richardus in his description of this stone ad Archiepisc.
Strigoniensem, says, The Bezoar is a round long stone, in form like an acorn
without its cup, outwardly like polisht iron, but inwardly of an ashy color.
It is not very ponderous, because full of pores, and therefore it is easily
broken. It has no arenositie or harsh sandinesse at all with it; if it be
taken betwixt the teeth, it does dissolve like a crust of bread, softened with
the salivous humor of the mouth: it has in it no savor as some say, but
Richardus says, it has with it a grateful savor. It is generated in the
stomach of a wild goat in the Springtime, and in Summertime, of the juice of
such herbs as they then live upon; at which times only these stones are to be
found in these creatures.

Description of the creature in which the Bezoar is found.
The creature in which they are found is of the bigness of a goat, which has
long yellowish hair, as fine as cotton. So Baccius: but Wecker in lib. de lap.
pretiosis says, that the creature of which the Bezoar comes, is a kind of a
goat which is found in Persia, sometimes rusi coloris, that is of a yellowish
red color, and sometimes of another color; one of these creatures of the
yellowish red color, he says he himself saw at Goa.

Of its adulteration.
This stone being a stone of value, it is to be feared, says Andreas Baccius,
least merchants for lucre sake should adulterate it; which adulterations he
says may thus be discovered: the natural Bezoars are rude, unequal,
unpolished, as those stones that are found in the bladder of a man: these he
says will leave no tincture upon the palm of the hand, if they be there rubbed
with a little moisture from the mouth; but the artificial ones will leave a
tincture if they be so rubbed. The adulterate ones or artificial ones are also
made in form like a kidney or a pigeons egg, and these are externally smooth
and polished, and they being broken, their pieces are hard instar terrae coctae
or gypsi, that is, like clay or earth dried and hardened by the power of the
heat of the fire.

Boethius says that the artificial or factitious Bezoar does usually contain
in its cavity either chaff or herbs; and sometimes like small seeds.

A sure way to try a factitious one is this, give some few grains of it to a
dog or such like creature that has taken poison, and if it be a true Bezoar,
it will quickly discover its virtue in prevailing against the poison; if
otherwise, its want of virtue, power and prevalency will very easily discover
it to be not of nature, but of art.

It is reported of the eyes of the Hyaena that they are of a stony substance;
Pliny takes the Bezoar-stones says Martinus Rulandus for these, and therefore
calls them gemmae Hyaeniae. Martinus Rulandus takes the Bezoar for the
congealed tears of a Dear: The Eastern Dear he says in the Spring time are
wont to search the Caverns for serpents, which when they find, they are wont to
snuff them up into their nostrils and thus purge themselves of their annual
distempers; which so soon as they have snuffed up or eaten, strait-way they
fly to the rivers or waters, and in them overwhelm themselves to the very
head, so long, as till they perceive the power and force of the venom of the
serpents which they have taken to be overcome: In this mean season by the power
and force of the venom, their eyes shed forth abundance of tears which are
coagulated and congealed about them; these coagulated dried tears Martinus
Rulandus calls the Bezoar, that sovereign medicine and antidote against all
poisons.

Its names.
The Hebrews call it, (...) that is, Dominus veneni. The Caldeans call it by
the same name. It is thus called by the Hebrews and Chaldeans from Bell Dominus,
and zaar venenum: because it does bear sway over poisons, and tame and master
their malignity and unbridled violence. It is thought by some, to have its name
from the Persian word Pazar, or Pazan, which signifies a goat. The Arabians
call it Hager Bezaar, that is, Lapis Bezaar, v. Serap. lib. agg. c.
Hager-bezaar. In Latin Lapis Bezoar and Bezaar; and so also in English.

The kinds of it.
Boethius says that there are 1. Bezoars that are black. 2. Bezoar-stones that
are yellowish. 3. Bezoar-stones that are brownish. 4. Bezoar-stones that are
greenish. 5. Bezoar-stones that are blackish out of a green.

The greenish ones, The best Bezoar-stones.
and those that are black out of a green are the best of all others, these if
they be held to the tongue or put into water, will so dissolve that there shall
be nothing of sand remaining. These and the other are all hollow in the midst,
and have a little sandy powder or dust which they contain in their cavity, which
powder will dissolve even as the stone.

The places.
This stone is found in the East Indies, and also in the West Indies. In the
East Indies in these parts, in Persia, India, China, Cathay; it is brought to
Constantinople out of Persia, and by Calecuth to Portugal. It is found in Peru
and other parts of America or the West Indies.

Of its nature and properties.
Claudius Richardus in his epistle where he describes this stone ad
Archiepiscopum Strigoniensem, (which epistle may be read in Andreae Baccii lib.
de not. gemmar.) makes mention of one Dominus Scander a noble man who belonged
to the Emperor, that being troubled with a very grievous disease at the
seventy fifth year of his age, was cured by the only use of Bezoar taken in
the quantity of five grains in a spoonful of wine. The same Author says,
that D. D. Staphylus was cured of an acute fever joined with malignity, by the
use of seven grains of this stone in a spoonful of wine; half an hour after
the taking of which, he took half the yolk of an egg; about an hour after the
taking of which, he took a good draught of the whey of goats milk, as having
eaten very little for fifteen days together; and there followed upon this, a
purgation for six times, of much choleric matter.

It is supposed that no other remedy is so forcible against poison as is this.

The dose of it is usually four grains, more or less either in Carduus water,
Baulm water, or Clovegylo-flower water.

Anselmus Boethius says that the powder contained in the cavity of the stone,
is of more force then the stone it self.

It is used against palpitations of the heart, against melancholies, against
quartan fevers, against epilepsies, against venoms, contagions, and all
pestilentiall diseases, and against all chronick and diuturn diseases.

Cardanus says of the Bezoar, that it is lapis ab omnibus laudatus, and a
nemine ferme cognitus, that is, much extolled in the mouths of all men, but
known to very few; which (says he) Scribonius Largus though Cesars, or the
Emperors Physician, writes to be the tears of Deares found in Sicily, when as
it is manifest that it is found in Pely a Country of the East Indies. Of which
says Baccius, though the original of it be not fully manifest to us, yet the
effects and admirable operations of it has many times been confirmed to us by
experience, and ought not therefore to be doubted of us: Andr. Bacc. c. 35. de
Not. Gem.
yea rather says he, in my judgment it is a very wholesome, blessed and
friendly medicine to humane nature, discovering its wonderful operations, by
an unspeakable sympathy, and not because it is either hot or moist, or cold or
dry, for it is insipid and void of all taste and savor. The greatest dose of it
he says, is the weight of ten grains of wheat in its ordinary dispensation;
and doubts not but it may be taken without peril even of those that are in
health, in the weight of one or two scruples.

The great Turk is wont to take it often every year though he be never so
healthful.

It is given to children against worms, and in malignant fevers, says Montanus
and Amatus. It is said to be good in almost all diseases, especially in
malign, contagious diseases, and venomous.

Its dignity and value.
It is of great esteem amongst Princes and great men, for the admirable virtues
which are taken to be in it, in so much as one of the biggest of the best may
be sold at the pleasure of the possessour. Of so great esteem it has been, as
that Almirama a great Prince of Arabia, being cured of a mortal disease by it,
did afterward give for one of the best of these stones, a great, magnifick,
princely house of his which he had at Corduba, as is affirmed by Authors.

The small ones, says Boethius, which are not of greater weight then a drachme,
are sold in the lower Germany for two ducats apiece.

CHAP. LIII. Of the stone in the gall of an Ox.
THere is, says Anselm. Boethius, a stone of an obscure yellowish color, which
is said to be found in the gall of an Ox, and to be good against poisons.

CHAP. LIIII. Of the Aetite or Eagle-stone.
Aetite is a white stone which is found in the neast of an Eagle, about the
bigness of a Peach or Apricock: it is weighty and has an hollownesse or
cavitie in it, in which is contained an hard stone like a Crystal, called
Callimus.

It is reported of the Eagle, that it brings this stone into her neast, to
help her the more easily to lay. So Boethius. Renodeus lib. 2. sect. 2. de
materia medica, says, that some think that the Eagles bring these stones into
their neasts, to temper the heat of their eggs: others for its colors sake, as
Rulandus.

Of its names.
In Greek it is called (...). In Latin Aetites, and lapis Erodialis, vel
Aquileius, and Enydros, which as the other kinds are pregnant either with
gravel, or earth, or with a Crystal stone; so is this with water: insomuch as
if it be put (says Rulandus) into a warm place, it will sweat. Hence these
verses, Perpetui fletus lacrymis distillat Enydros,
Qui veluti ex pleni fontis scaturigine manat.
that is, Enydros tears eternal does distill,
From it as from a fountain they do drill.
It is also in Latin called Lapis praegnans, because of the matter which it
does contain in its cavity. In Germane ein alderstein: in English the Aetite or
Eagle-stone

Of its kinds.
Martinus Rulandus speaks of six kinds of this stone. The first of which
kinds he says, Praegnans est lapide, insomuch as it being shaken, does sound
as if it had a stone in the womb of it, that is, in the cavity or midst of it,
This kind of the Aetite is a round stone, and hollow as a nutgall.

2. The second kind is pregnant with earth, or a whitish clay; it is called
Aegyptitis, and of Dioscorides Geodes gemma.

3. The third kind is pregnant with water. Of this Pliny lib. 37. c. 11. and
Solinus c. 40. say, that it is always of an absolute rotundity, and of a
smooth candor or whiteness; but it being moved, there flows too and fro a
liquor, after the same manner as the liquor of an egg will move too and fro
within it, if the egg be moved. Solinus says of this Aetite called Enydros,
that it does so abundantly sweat, as that a man would think it did contain in
it a springing fountain of water.

4. The fourth kind is pregnant with gravel or little stones.

5. The fifth kind is pregnant with a Chelonitis.

6. The sixth kind is pregnant with a white flint: one of this kind Martinus
Rulandus says he found at Albis, which when he had opened, he found in the
matrice, womb, or cavity of it, a white flint, round and long, and very hard.

Pliny reckons four kinds of Aetites. 1. A little soft Aetite, which
contains in its womb or matrice a pleasant, white, clayie substance: This is
supposed to be a female Aetite; and is easily broken. This is that stone which
is called (...) Dioscoridis, or the Geode of Dioscorides: in Germane Erdtstein.

2. The second kind he says is like unto the first, but bigger and easily
broken; and this contains in its cavity a pleasant sand, or little stones
like flints, or the Conchylis, which are little fishes like muscles.

3. The third kind are called Taphiussius; this is white and round, and found
in rivers, and contains in its womb or matrice that beautiful Crystal
stone which is called Callimus.

4. The fourth kind is taken for a male kind, this is very hard, and like unto
a nutgall: this contains in its womb or matrice a hard reddish stone. This
stone has been of great esteem with Dioscorides.

Andr. Baccius says, that some of these stones are found of the bigness of
Peaches, others of Apricocks, others in the bigness of Pomegranates, and
others of Melons.

Of the places.
The first kind, says Rulandus, are found in Sala. and Albis: and in a
country whith the Germans call Die Steuermarck. The second of this kind are
found in Egypt, and in Dresden in Misnia, and in Saxony. The other kinds are
found in Albis, and the former places.

Plinies first kind is found in Africa. The second in Cyprus. The third in
Taphiussa near Leucas. The fourth in Arabia.

Of its properties and virtues.
This stone is said to be good to facilitate the partus, and to cause speedy
deliverance, if so be that it be bound to the left thigh of the woman in
travail; and this it does by an attractive faculty, very powerfully and with
so much force, as that if it be not removed upon the deliverance of the child,
or birth, it will endanger the descensus uteri. Franciscus Valeriola a French
Physician, very erudite and learned, Valentia, to the wife of Ponsonus Jobertus
a citizen of that city: The time of her labor being come, to facilitate her
bringing forth, there was tied to her thigh a great Aetite stone, which through
the forgetfulness and imprudence of those that tied the stone to her thigh,
was left tied in the foresaid place, after the woman had brought forth her
child; which remaining so some few hours, Andr. Bacc. 38. de N Gem.
caused a lapsus or descensus uteri; and through this in conclusion the death
of the sick party.

It is likewise reported of this stone, that if it be bound to the left arm
gravidae mulieris, of a woman with child, that it will hinder abortion and all
miscarriage of her birth, and the lapsus or descensus uteri.

It is taken to be of a dry faculty, and endued with astringency. If it be
worn upon the stomach, or betwixt the breasts, it is said of it, that it will
strengthen a woman for the retaining of the birth, and delay the bringing
forth. Some are of opinion that it has a power of procuring love, of
increasing riches, and of making men victorious. Dioscorides says that this
stone has a power of detecting thefts, if it be given to the party suspected
to be eaten in bread. Hence arose this Proverb, Aetiticus panis huic
porrigendus, or, Give him some of the Aetitick bread to eat.

observe. l. 20. c. 23. says, that the Greek Monks called Calcieri, were wont
superstitiously and wretchedly so to use this stone. The manner of it was this;
They called together the suspected persons, and gave them some of the bread
knead with the powder of this stone without any leaven at all in it, in such a
proportion or quantity as that they might well swallow, of which they gave
thrice to every person, and in the mean time they did murmr ever many words,
which charm by the power of the devil, their grand agent, was wont to work so
effectually the third time, as that the bread would stick in the throat of the
suspected person, and choke him: a remedy a thousand times worse then the
disease. The necessitated person steals to supply his necessities; and theft
wicked wretches, to discover his theft, engage with, and take counsel of the
devil to destroy him body and soul. They say that this stone drives away
serpents, but here I am sure it fell into the hands of serpents, even of a
generation of vipers, who made use of it to work the work of the old serpent,
in the destruction of body and soul of man.

The Eagles being mindful of the security of their young, are wont in the
building of their nests ever to make up their structures with these stones; by
this means hoping to secure their young from the annoiances of serpents. So
says Philostratus lib. 2. c. 55. de vita Apollonii.

CHAP. LV. Of the Hematite or Bloud-stone.
Hematite is a common stone of an obscure red color; so called from the Greek
word (...), which signifies sanguis or blood, and that not for its likeness
only, but also for its use; for as says Dioscorides lib. 5. this stone has a
power of stopping fluxes of blood.

Its names.
In Greek (...). In Latin Haematites. In Arabic Sedeneg. In Germane
Blutstein. In English the Bloud-stone.

Of the kinds of it.
The Hematite is of kin to the Lodestone; and so of kin, as that Pliny l. 36.
c. 16. calls Haematitem, Magnetem, that is, an Hematite a Lodestone.

Of the Hematites, Rulandus makes six kinds.

1. Haematites fossilis, of a full red color, which is very much commended of
Dioscorides. l. 5. c. 90.

2. Haematites niger yielding a juice like saffron, this is much harder then
the former, of this Rulandus says, Gemma, seu lapis Medus.
that without doubt, it is the gemma or lapis Medus niger Alberti, which being
broken yields a juice like in color to saffron.

3. Haematites fossilis purpureus or the purple Hematite, which is found in
mines.

4. Haematites fossilis pulcherrimus or the fair Hematite, this is used of
Goldsmiths for the polishing of gemms: this likewise says Rulandus is black,
and as it were turbinated.

5. Fossilis niger trichurus, so called of Pliny l. 37. c. 10. because it being
rubbed upon a whetstone does yield three colors.

6. Haematites pulcherrimus or the fair Hematite, which resembles in form a
discovered brain, which form, says Rulandus l. de Lap. I cannot sufficiently
admire.

Pliny l. 36. c. 20. and c. 16. speaks of these kinds of Haematites.

2. Aethiopicus Haematites which is profitable to the eyes; this is reckoned of
the number of those that are called Pancrestoi, that is, of the number of those
stones, or medicines which are said to be good against all diseases.

2. Androdamanta, or Atrodamanta Haematites, which is of a notable hardness
and weight, of a black color drawing iron like a Lodestone, and being rubbed
upon a whet-stone it does yield a juice red like blood; to this responds the
Trichurus of Rulandus.

3. Arabicus, rendering very little moisture upon the whet-stone, and that of a
saffronish color. To this respondeth Rulandus his second kind of Hematite.

4. Hematites Elatites, so called, whilst it does remain Pliny l. 1. c. 16.
Elatites cum crudus est. Coctus autem dicitur Miles
crude; but coctus, dicitur alio nomine, viz. miles; this is said to be good
against ambusta or burnings, and it is much more profitable then the rubrica or
okre, for all those evils against which the okre is used.

5. Schistos which rendereth a black juice on the whet-stone.

Of the manner of calcining these stones, and of the adulterating of them, and
of their use Pliny writes, and so likewise Dioscorides. L.C.

Of the places.
The Hematites are found in Egypt, Gossaria, Media, Phasis, Hassia, Geurus,
Anneberge, Salfeldia, Africa; in Cheruscis, Northusia, Hasgeroda, Aethiopia,
Arabia; in Judetis montibus, in Salburgia, in Iena, Lybia, and Hispania.

Boethius says of the Hematites that they are sometimes of the color of
Minium, sometimes black, sometimes yellow, sometimes of the color of iron, and
sometimes they are found to have many bright streaks like Antimonie. p. 191. It
is, says Boethius, usually found about the Okre or Iron-mines; and of some the
Lodestone is taken for an Hematite.

Of its nature and properties.
It is supposed to be of a cold and dry quality.

Trallianus says that the powder of the Hematite given from a. to iiij. is of
great power and force to cure a Phthisis or ulcer of the lungs, or the (...),
that is, a spitting of blood.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Smyris or Emeri.
Smyris is a very hard stone of the color of the rust of iron, with asperity
and roughness joined to its hardness; it tends in color somewhat to a
blackness. Engravers of rings and such like artificers are wont to use this
stone to expurge, and sometimes to cut other stones withal.

Its names.
In Greek (...). In Latin Smyris: est lapis quo gemmas annularii exterunt:
Dioscor. lib. 5. c. 116. In Dutch Schmergel. In Italian Smeriglio. In French
Emeri. In English Emeri.

Its use.
It is used ordinarily to cut glass withal, and to burnish jewels, and arms
withal.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Lapis Samias, or Terra Samia.
Lapis Samius, or rather Terra Samia, is a soft white light earth which is
easily broken with the hand, and if it be touched with the tongue it sticks
very close to it; even like glue, says Rulandus.

Its names.
It is called Samius lapis, or Samia terra from the land from whence it is
brought. It is also of some called Collyrion.

Its kinds.
Dioscorides writes of two kinds of this earth.

1. White and not weighty described as before, called by some Collyrion.

2. Crustacea or of a crusty substance thick after the manner of whet-stones.
These being calcined and washed like the Eretriades, are thought to be of the
same virtues, power, and force.

Its virtues.
Lapis Samius is of an astringent faculty, and cold; therefore it is esteemed
good against all fluxes, and inflammations of the Testes and breasts; and
against poisons and stingings of serpents; it cures those that have taken
Cantharides, says Nicander in his Alexipharmica; it is used by goldsmiths to
polish gold withal, and to make it look clear and fair. Dioscor. L. C. Plin.
l. 36. c. 21.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Selenites, or the Moon-stone.
Selenites says Andreas Baccius, is a kind of a gemm which does contain in it
the image of the Moon, and it does represent it increasing and decreasing
according to the increase and decrease of the Moon in its monthly changes.

Of its names.
In Greek (...) and (...); that is as much as to say the splendor of the Moon,
or a beam of the Moon; Bacc. Annotat. upon c. 23. l. de not. gemm. In the same
place also for its milkish color which he says is endued with pellucidnesse,
it is called (...) that is, spuma Lunae. The Romans call it Lunaris. Some take
it for a kind of Marble; others for a kind of the Specularis lapis. It may be,
the earth Selunisia which is of a bright whiteness may be the same with this.

Dioscorides says it is found in Arabia; and that it is endued with very great
virtues; as of making trees fruitful, and of curing epilepsies: he says that
in the night it will illustrate the place that is next to it: yet not by any
transmission of light, but by the collection of light into its self.

CHAP. LIX. Of Gypsum and Talcum.
THis as I suppose is that which is called Plaster of Paris, which is very
well known in many places for its use in building.

CHAP. LX. Of the Pumex or Pumeise-stone.
THe Pumeise-stone is a common spongy-stone well known to all men. The Arabians
call it Famechi vel fenec. It is also called Lapis Vulcani.

CHAP. LXI. Of Lapis Judaicus, or the Jew-stone.
Aetius calls it Lapis Syriacus, others Phrenicites. Pliny for its
fragilitie calls it Tecolithos. It is found in India, and in Silesia. It is
esteemed good against the stone in the bladder and reins, Boethius and
Dioscorides.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Morochthus.
THe Morochthus is a white soft stone. It is good to make linen garments white
withal, if it be first dissolved. It is said to be endued with a power of
opening the pores of the body. Dioscorides says it is found in Egypt; and
Georg. Agricola says it is found in Saxony, near Heldeshim, where it is
called Milchstein.

The Galactite is a kind of it, which is also called Galaxius: this is found in
Egypt. The linen drapers with this stone do use to make their cloth white.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Magnes or Lodestone.
Magnes or Loadstone is a stone of a brownish color, with a tendencie to a
sky-colour, thick and not very heavy, which as says Rulandus, does by its own
proper power and innate virtue, draw iron unto its self. Boethius and
Dioscorides say, that this which is brownish with a tendencie to a sky-colour,
is the best. But Mart. Rulandus says that the best is always of a sky-colour.

Its adulteration.
There is no fear of the adulterating of this stone, if naturally it be endued
with such power, virtue, and attractive faculties as Authors relate and write
of it; for though it is not altogether impossible to make by art a Loadstone in
color, form, and substance; yet is it altogether impossible for any man, to
add such power, virtue, and attraction to it, as naturally the true Loadstone
is said to be endued withal. Though I confess an Impostour may delude an
unwary buyer of this stone, by an acquired attractive faculty, scilicet
mediante daemonis pro tempore potestate.

Its names.
In Greek (...) and (...). In Latin Galen, Nicander, and Pliny call it
Magnes, which name by the two last named Authors is attributed to it, from him
who was the first finder of its attractive power; namely, Magnes a shepherd of
India, who was wont to keep his flocks about those mountains in India, where
there were abundance of these stones. Herculeus lapis it is also called from
its predominant power, by which it is said to draw iron to it self, which
tameth all things. Heracleus lapis it is also called from a city of Lydia
called Heraclea by some and by others Magnesia, where the best of these stones
are said to be found: hence this stone as some think had its name of Magnes;
and hence these verses of Lucretius; Quem Magneta vocant patrio de nomine Graii,
Magnetum quia sit patriis in montibus ortus.
Callimachus calls it Heracleotis. Pliny Siderites. In Germane, Magneth. In
Saxon ein Segelstein; and in Italian Calamita Piodra. It is from its use called
Lapis Nauticus. In English the Lodestone.

The kinds of it.
Albertus Magnus l. 2. Metal. tract. 3. c. 6. says, that in that age in which
Aristotle lived, there were two kinds of Load-stones known: one kind which did
direct or draw iron to the North, another kind which did direct or draw iron to
the South. Pliny L. C. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 16.
speaks of five kinds of this stone: 1. Magnes Aethiopicus, which has power
not only of drawing iron to it self, but also of an other Lodestone: hence
these verses of Silius: Venere Aethiopes, gens haud incognita Nilo;
Qui Magneta secant: solis honor ille metalli,
Incoctum chalybem vicino ducere saxo.


2. The second kind is called Magnesiacus, it is in color of a yellowish red
and black.

3. The third is called Echius, and it is more of a yellowish red then black.

4. The fourth kind is a feminine Lodestone, it is black, and of no use.

5. The fifth kind is a white one of very little moment.

Cardanus l. de lap. makes three kinds of this stone. 1. Ferrugineus, which is
so called as being of an iron color. 2. Candidus. 3. Candidus distinguished
with light ferrugineous veins.

The places.
It is found in Aethiopia, Macedonia, Boeotia, Alexandria, Troas. In Heraclea
Lydiae, in Germany, in Misnia; in Italy in the mountains of Viterbium; in many
iron mines, and the places near adjoining.

Its nature and faculties.
The wisdom of man which has much searched and enquired into the nature of
this stone, has attributed its attractive power to the planets, and to the
influences of the stars; and says that it does receive its virtue from Luna
and Venus, which are both found shining in Cauda Ursae minoris, in gradu 29.
Virginis; Vide Andr. Bacc. cap. 2. de not. Gemm.

The cause of the attractive faculty of this stone, is, as Authors say, that
it may provide it self with a pabulum or fit nourishment of its substance;
Card. lib. 7. de lap.
for this cause says Cardane, it does draw iron to it self: for stones live,
and have need of nourishment for their augmentation and conservation. The cause
of such mutual embraces, Boethius also does attribute to their likeness of
nature, by reason of which they are pleased to be assimilated into one
substance and likeness: therefore does Boethius say of the Loadstone, that it
does draw the iron as sibi simile, or for its conservatio^ or nourishment: for
if you cover over the Lodestone with filings of iron, the Lodestone will grow
more lively, as receiving a nourishment from such filings; and the residue of
the filings will be changed into rust. Martinus Rulandus says, that as by a
natural power and force, it does draw iron and liquor of glass, and concord
with these; so likewise by an antipathy and discord it does mainly disagree
with onions and garlic, and with a Diamond; insomuch as if these be but within
the touch of a Lodestone, or near the Lodestone, they will hinder all its
attractive power, and rob it of all its virtue of drawing iron. Renodeus (l. de
mat. Medic.) asserteth the same. Albertus Magnus says there is a Lodestone to
be found, which with one point draws iron, and with another point does drive
it away. Lodestone, which did not draw iron, but was drawn of iron, even as a
common Lodestone does draw iron. Serapion says (l. aggreg. c. Hagger.
Abnantes, sive Almagritos) esse mineram, or that there is a mineral of this
kind in the maritime parts that lie near India, of so great a quantity, as
that they are forced to use, by reason of it, no other nails in the building of
their ships but wooden nayls.

It is wonderful to see how the Needle of a Compass, being touched with a
Lodestone, does cause the maritime Card to point North and South: And it is
not more wonderful to behold this, then it is difficult to raise a
satisfactorie reason from the nature of the thing concerning it.

the North, and points out only the South: Plagae or climates, as the Pole,
and always that Pole which is nearest to it. The cause of this strange
variation of the Sea-card in the passage under the line, is supposed to arise
from a Magnetic mountain, which in whatsoever place it is, it is observed by
the Sea-card. (See Boet. cap. de Magnet.) Upon these grounds and reasons, it is
to be supposed that there is another Magnetic mountain toward the Antarctick
Pole, directly opposite to that which is toward the Arctick Pole, which does
convey its attractive virtue at so great a distance, to such or such a ship on
the other That is in respect of us that live in these Northern climates.
side the line, to the wonderful affecting of its Needle, and strange
variation and alteration of its Card; insomuch as now it points full South,
whereas before it pointed full North. And that the virtue of this Magnetic
mountain, should at so great a distance be transferred from it self, in the
utmost extremities of the Antarctick Pole, to the Needle of the Card of that
ship, which is now very near the Equinoctial line, is more wonderful then
the sudden variation of the Card.

Its virtue and use.
The Lodestone calcined is said to be of like nature with the Hematite. Galen
and Dioscorides say it has the same virtues. It is said of this stone, that it
is good against the headache, convulsions, and poisons: and that it causes
easy delivery, and procures love betwixt man and wife, and preserves peace
and concord amongst friends, and that it drives away fears and increases
wisdom.

Cardanus l. 7. de lap. says, that Aristotle that great inquirer into nature,
was altogether unknowing of the maritime use of this stone, and of that use
which is made of the sea-card by virtue of this stone; and that Galen and
Alexander Aphrodisius, two great inquirers into the secrets of nature, have not
so much as once made mention of the wonderful nature of this stone. The
maritime use of it was also unkown to the Romans, and that was the reason
says Cardane, that they suffered so many shipwracks. It is reported of
Mahomet, Lodestone drawn up from the earth, and continued in that wonderful
posture for many years together. See Herberts Travels.

CHAP. LXIIII. Of the Belemnites, or Lapis Lincis, or Dactylus Ideus.
medulla or substance in this cavity, which is the center of this stone, if you
break the stone you shall perceive small lines like beams to dart themselves
forth unto the circumference. It is called in Greek (...) from its form of an
arrow.

Of its kinds.
Of these stones there are some externally of a white color, some of a duskish
color, and some pellucid like Amber in color.

If you take some of them and put them into the fire, they will smell like
burned bones or horns, and sometimes like Cats piss: the white ones which are
found in Heildshem with a black hard stone in them, smell like Amber.

Cardanus calls this stone Belemnites, and says it is found in form like an
arrow, and has in the whole length of it a fissure or cavity, which contains
in it a stone joined with a golden armature to the stone containing it; See
Card. l. 7. de subtle.
and that this stone is not; as some think, the Lyncurius.

The place.
It is found in Borussia, and in Pomerania, in many places of Germany and
England: It is found in mount Ida, and from thence it has its name of Dactylus
Ideus: It is found in very great plenty about Wittenberg.

Its virtues.
It is reported of it that if its powder be drunk in some convenient liquour,
it will prohibit lustful dreams, and witchcrafts.

The Saxon and Spanish Physicians take it to be of the same nature with the
lapis Judaicus, and therefore they use it to break the stone withal.

In officinis this stone is commonly taken for lapis Lyncurius. See Matthiolus.

CHAP. LXV. Of the Ceraunia.
Ceraunia says Boethius, is a stone which usually is found five fingers long
and three fingers broad, like a wedge; it is of color like the Belemnites, but
it is not striatus, it has no such lines as the Belemnites have. If these
stones be great they have usually round holes in them, about the bigness of a
man's thumb, as there are (says Boethius) in a mallet.

Of its names.
It has its name Ceraunia from the Greek word (...), which signifies fulmen
or lightning, and this name it has because it is supposed to fall from heaven
with the lightening. In Germane it is called Straalhamer, Donerstein, Schlegel,
Donnerkeil, Stralpfeil, Stral stein, and Gros-krottenstein. In Italian Sagetta.

Its kinds.
These stones are smooth stones, they are sometimes found round and sometimes
long: sometimes in the forms of a wedge, dish, mallet, or plow-share, or of an
ax, and in diverse other forms. Of these, Some are white and pellucid. Some
brown. Some black. Some reddish.

It is reported of this stone that it does secure those that wear it, and their
houses from lightning; and procures rest and sleep; and that it makes men
prevalent over their enemies, and conquerours in wars. See Boethius C. de
Ceraunia.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the Chelonitis, Brontia and Ombria.
Chelonitis is a stone of a yellowish color, which is supposed to fall with
thunder, from heaven; and sometimes with tempests, and sometimes with rain, in
the form sometimes of a wheel, sometimes in a hemi-spherick form, or a
semi-globous form, and sometimes long, in the bigness sometimes of an egg,
more often less.

Its names.
The Chelonitis is by Pliny described to be a precious stone in color like to
a Tortoise shell: the lapis Bufonius and some of these stones are of that
color. This stone is called Brontia from the Greek word (...), that is,
Tonitrus in Latin, and in English Thunder; and thus it is called because it is
supposed sometimes to fall with the thunder. It is called Ombria from the Greek
word (...) Pluo, or (...) Imber; because as it is supposed sometimes to fall
with thunder, so likewise sometimes with a shower of rain.

Its kinds.
These stones are diversely distinguished according to their colors. Some of
them are found to be of a yellowish color. Some of them of a greenish color.
And some of them of a brownish color.

Anselmus Boethius says, that he thinks that the stone which is called Ovum
anguinum, differs only in external form from Brontia. The lapis Bufonius or
Garatromo is called by these names of Brontia and Ombria; as will appear by
that which Anselmus Boethius speaks in the Chapt. of the Garatromo: whom I
have in this particular observed, as you may see, by having recourse to the
thirty sixth chapter of this our Lapidary.

Of the virtues of the Chelonitis, Brontia and Ombria.
They are said to be of like faculties with the Ovum Anguinum, and with the
Lapis Bufonius or Garatromo.

It is reported of these stones that they are endued with a power and virtue of
procuring victory and conquest to him that wears them: other virtues they are
said to be endued with, which are the same with those of the Ovum Anguinum and
Garatromo.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the Marble in general.
THe stones that come next in glory to the gemms are the Marbles, whose
pleasing color, hardness, or perspicuitie makes them more or less esteemed.

The Marbles are usually stones of great magnitude, very hard and beautiful,
and fit for polishing and engraving. Their excellent concretion, says Anselm.
Boethius, begets their hardness; and the equabilitie and purity of the matter
or substance of them, begets their excellency of form and beauty. For if the
matter be ignoble and various, and of an impure earth, the Marbles will be
unequal, full of scales and hard roughness, and unfit to polish.

The Marbles, as all other stones, are not so hard at their first taking out of
the quarries, as they afterward are. These stones of all other stones commonly
so called, are for equability and purity of matter most excellent.

It is by the wise inquirers into the secrets of nature supposed, that various
exhalations are the causes of the variety of tinctures and colors, which are
commonly found in the species of these stones.

Of its adulteration.
It is no impossible thing, nay, a very easy thing to adulterate this stone,
and every species thereof with a fit matter, brought together after the manner
of that wherewith those China cups and pots are made, which out of the Eastern
parts are brought hither to us.

Its Names.
The most noble kinds of Marble Cardanus l. de lapid. does reckon to be these:
Phengiticum, Parium, Zeblicum, Porphyrites, Ophites. In Hebrew the Marble is
called (...) Shaish; as 1. Chron. 29.2. By contraction the Hebrews call it
(...), as Esther 1.6. (...) hoc est, ad orbs vel annulos argenteos, and
columnas Marmoreas. The Marbles by a general name are called in Greek (...),
that is, from their excellent beauty and splendor. In Latin, from the Greek,
for the same cause, it is called Marmor. In Dutch Marmelstein. Almost in all
languages it does retain the same name. In English with a little variation it
is called Marble.

Its kinds.
Of this stone there are diverse kinds. Some white, some black, some green, some
yellow, some brown, and of an ashie color, and some of diverse colors, and
some very beautifully red. Of all the other kinds, the Lapis Parius which is
the white Marble, and the lapis Porphyrites which is the red Marble, are the
most excellent, beautiful, and lovely.

Every one of these kinds of Marble does admit of diverse species, severally
denominated, some from their color, and some from the place of their
original; as afterward when I do come to speak of Marbles in particular, in
the order of their several original species, I shall have occasion to show.

There are multiplicitie of species of these stones, and all of them for the
most part of very exquisite hardness, and fit for polishing. And the greatest
part of the kinds are also endued with much beauty, and being fit for
pollishing they are made of very great ornament.

There is a kind also of this stone which is called Marmor sectile, Cardan.
lib. lap.
which says Cardane is indeed a stone like in nature to the Marble, quippe
quod sectilis sit; but it is of an ashy color, and of an incredible softness,
so that for any use, it may like wood be easily parted in sunder with a saw:
Some by reason of its obscure color, refer this to the kinds of flints, but
not very advisedly, because it is proper to the flints to be full of scales,
like those kinds of Marbles which are called marmora granulata: neither are the
flints at any time found perfectly smooth, no more then are those marmora
called granulata or squamosa, nor have they any glory or beauty of the marble,
nor are they so fit to be cut as that, by reason of their roughness,
ruggedness, scalinesse, and unevenness.

Cardan. de lap. l. 7. page 378.
These stones which Cardan calls marmora sectilia, are improperly called
Marmora or Marbles; nor can they well and truly be called Silices or flints:
for if we compare them to the Marble, we shall find that they do want all the
glory and beauty which is in any of the species or kinds of the Marble, which
their glory and beauty does crown them with the name of marmor: for a
splendendo and rutilando the Greeks call the Marbles by the name of (...), and
the Latins by the name of Marmor, none of which resplendency or refulgencie is
found at any time (witness Cardane) in this marmor sectile: therefore upon
these grounds it is that we say and affirm, that this Marmor called sectile, is
not a Marble.

Again, if we do compare this stone called Marmor sectile, with the flint, it
wants those squamae which are found in the flints; for the flints are seldom
found without scales, but the Marmor sectile has no scales. And for this
cause, says Cardane, loco citato and allegato, the Marmor sectile is no flint.
Abundance of this kind of marble is to be found in Italy about Venice.

Of the places in general.
The marbles of the best sort are found in the Eastern countries, and in many
parts of Asia, as will appear in our speech or discourse of these stones in
particular: And not less excellent for glory, and beauty, hardness, and
ornament, are those which are found in the countries of Europe, as will
afterward likewise appear in the sequel. And these parts of the world are not
alone possessed of these treasuries, but we shall likewise find them by diligent
search in many parts of Africa and America.

Of the use of Marbles in general.
The general use of the marbles is very well known to most Stone-cutters, or
Statuaries; who are wont to fit them for ornament in building, and for the
beautifying of great and magnifick structures. To these purposes, and for these
uses we may see them employed in the palaces of Kings, in the houses of
Princes, and in those Temples which the Heathen have reared and beautified with
these ornaments, and then consecrated to the service of their gods. And in many
of our Temples amongst Christians at this day, we see these stones are used in
the structures to adorn and beautify those places withal, which they have
consecrated to the worship of God. The general use of these stones may also be
observed in cemeteries and mortuaries, where the urns of great men have usually
their dust and ashes covered with a marble, as a monument and ornament in some
kind, gloriously to perpetuate and eternize their memorials, and the
remembrance of them upon earth.

Rabbi Solomon writes, that the use of marble in the Temple, was much in
pillars of the Temple, and for the measures of the Temple, and for the
pavements of the Temple.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Lapis Parius, or white Marble.
Lapis Parius or white Marble, is the first and best of the kinds of Marble, it
is a very beautiful lovely stone, to which for singleness of beauty, and
unmixt formosity, none of all the other species of Marbles may be compared. It
is a stone most white and very fair, and for this cause does Rulandus and
Anselmus Boethius in the consideration of these stones give this the first
place, as being most noble, excellentest and best of all the other species and
kinds of Marbles.

Of its adulteration.
Artists have a way as of adulterating other beautiful, fair, and noble
stones, so also of this, and this they may do with the matter, of which the
China dishes are made, and with Alabaster, and with such like matter as may
well and firmly be compacted, and wrought up by equability of substance and
politure of parts to the fairness, beauty, and glory of a white Marble.

The China vessels of which before in the chapter of the Sardonyx mention has
been made, are brought up to that beauty which we see them in, by the
artificial working of the fatter part and purest of the earth with some
portion of the powder of the gemm called a Sardonyx; and to such like beauty
and solidnesse by art may the fatter part of the earth mixed with certain
proportions of Alabaster be brought, even to an emulation of the fairest beauty
of the excellentest and most noble white Marble; and I see no reason but that
if this matter be handled by skillful Artists, it may be made as fit for the
framing of beautiful vessels, as that other, out of which the China vessels
are made; of which vessels in fairness and beauty emulating the Onyx and
Sardonyx; of which vessels, I say, for their pleasing beauty, Mithridates king
of Pontus had four thousand amongst his other household utensils.

Its names.
In Greek (...). In Latin Parius. This name as some think, it has from the
Island Parus; and hence in Epigrammate this of the Poet, Pario Marmore
structus, etc. Others are of opinion that this white Marble is called Parius by
the name of him who was sometimes an Engraver of this stone, namely Agoracritus
Parius; this Agoracritus Parius is that excellent ancient Engraver that first
made the image of Venus of this stone. The Germans call this stone
Wassermarmelstein. It does appear by Varro that this stone in old time was
called Lychnitis, as being in those days much used for lamps. In English the
white Marble.

The kinds of it.
Rulandus makes mention of ten kinds of this Marble. 1. Marmor candidum
Lunense, which he says is the whitest and best of all the white Marbles, and
called by the Dutch ein weiss Marmorstein. 2. Candidum Cartariense. 3. A
Patavian or Paduan white Marble, called Marmor Patavium serratile, because it
is a stone that is made fit for use by sawing. 4. Italicum Marmor, or an
Italian Marble, sprinkled amidst its white with many brown and ashie colored
veins. 5. Marmor candidum Ratisbonense, or the white Marble of Ratisbone, of
this at Ratisbone they are wont to make tabulae mensarum or trenchers withal.
Of one of these Marbles the Altar at Annenberg is made; the whole Altar
consists of but one only solid Marble of this kind; then this Marble there is
not a fairer in all Italy. 6. The sixth kind of white Marble is called Marmor
candidissimum Carolinum, because it is found in the Caroline baths. 7. The
seventh kind of white Marble is called Marmor candidum Hildeshemium, from
Heildeshem the place where it is found. This is like in whiteness to ivory. 8.
The eighth kind of white Marble is called Marmor candidum Arabicum; this
likewise is as the other found of whiteness like to ivory. 9. The ninth kind
is found amongst metals at Annenberg, and is therefore called Marmor candidum
Annenbergicum metallicum. 10. The tenth kind of white Marble is called
Hildeshemium cinereum in candido; this is of an ashie color in a white, and in
smell it is much like the odor of the burning of horn.

Anselmus Boethius makes but two kinds of the white Marble. Namely, 1. The
lapis Parius, which is the true white Marble and most beautiful with an
exquisite hardness. 2. And the Alabastrites or Alabastrum or the common
Alabaster, which is of no less beauty then the true white Marble, yea if this
be well polished it is comparable to the Onyx for beauty, and carries with it
a very lovely countenance and pleasing aspect: the difference betwixt this and
the best white Marble is only this, that the best white Marble has an
exquisita durities joined with its beauty, and the Alabaster is for the most
part found somewhat softer and less concocted; yet does not the Alabaster
continue in this softness, but by tract of time, and length of days, it
grows harder and harder till it does attain to the perfection of the best and
fairest white Marble.

The places.
The white Marbles are found in the Island called Parus. There are of the best
of these says Boethius, found in Italy and Cappadocia, but seldom in the lump
bigger then a man. These Marbles are also found in Hetruria; In Padua; In
Ratisbone; In the Caroline baths; At Hildeshem; In Arabia; At Annenberg.

The Alabaster is found in many places of England, of very excellent beauty,
and very lovely if it be well polished. Of which we shall have occasion to
speak in the next chapter as in its proper place.

Of the faculties, virtues, and use of the white Marbles.
Discourse concerning the faculties and virtues of these stones I must defer
to a better opportunity.

Its use commonly known, is for the most part to be seen in the ornament of
magnifick structures, and in monumentall statues.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the Alabaster.
Alabaster is a beautiful white stone of the kind of Marbles; of which vessels
or pixes in ancient time were wont to be made, as the receptacles of rich and
costly oils and unguents, and indeed these vessels are the best of all others
for those purposes; and that first for their strength, for they are stronger
then glass: secondly for their purity, for they are much purer then metals:
thirdly for that they do not imbibe or drink in, nor leak, or so easily let
forth any precious liquour which they are the receptacles of; for this cause
they are much better then any earthen vessels what ever for such purposes.

The Alabaster is a known stone to every one that has seen Roman edifices.

It is said of the precious ointment which Mary Magdalene poured upon the head
of Christ and anointed his feet withal, that it was contained in a box of
Alabaster, as appears in the Gospel of S. Matthew, Matthew. 26.7. Mark 14.3.
John 11.2. and 12.3.

Its names.
In Greek it is called (...), and (...), that is, Alabastrum, which word of the
Greeks is derived from a and (...) and that because capi non potest propter
laevorem, ut Dioscor. lib. 5. c. 153. Est (...), that is, est Alabastrites
lapis qui appellatur Onyx, there is a kind of Alabaster which is called an
Onyx, as appears by the fourth and fifth books of Dioscorides. In Latin it
is called Alabastrites and Alabastria from the country of Alabastria whence it
is brought, so says Martinus Rulandus. In Dutch it is called Alabaster stein.
In English Alabaster.

Anselmus Boethius says it is called Onyx, and that it differs from that
precious stone, in softness only. This stone does retain the name of Alabaster
in almost all tongues and languages.

Its kinds.
Anselmus Boethius says that some make two kinds of this stone. Namely the
Alabastrites, and the Alabaster, which do differ only in this, in that the
Alabaster is so soft as that it may be cut with a knife, and the Alabastrites
so hard that it cannot be cut.

The Alabaster says Rulandus is a stone (well known to the Venetians) of the
kinds of marbles.

Rulandus speaks of three kinds of this stone.

1. A white Alabaster, called in Germane weissar Alabaster stein; of this he
says, that in old time they were wont to make the shrines and images of
Saints; together with the monuments and sepulchers for the dead.

2. The second kind of Alabaster he says, has black specks and spots, which
in Germane is called Bundschwarss Alabaster stein.

3. The third kind he says, is white in a yellowish red, and therefore is
called Onyx; or rather, because it is white in a red; this in Germane is called
rothlecht Alabaster stein, because it does represent the color of the nail of
a man's hand. Properly of this kind of Alabaster, that of Dioscorides is to be
understood; where he says, Alabastrites qui and Onyx dicitur, crematus,
duritias cum pice aut resina discutit.

Of the Onyx, and of the Testa Conchylii, and of the Unguis odoratus,
Dioscorides does speak in his second book. In Germany there are two kinds of
Alabaster found, which are nominally distinguished from the places in which
they are found. The first of these kinds is called Alabastrites Cheruscus, as
being found in Cheruscia not far from Northusia. The second kind of these
Alabasters is called Saxonicus, as being found in Saxony about Hildelshem.

Of the places.
This stone is found in a Country called Alabastria in Egypt. It is also found
in Damascus of Syria, and in Northusia, and in Saxony, and about the Egyptian
Thebes; in Carmania, in India, in Asia, and in Cappadocia; in Arabia and Italy.
In England is found very beautiful Alabaster. There are many pieces of this
stone to be found and dug up in the College yard of Henry the sixth, called
the Chapel yard in the University of Cambridge.

Its virtue.
Dioscorides says of this stone, that it is endued with a discussive power,
especially if it be calcined. The like does Mathiolus also speak of this stone.
They likewise say that the powder of it, artificially mixed instar Cerati vel
Unguenti with other fit matter, and artificially applied to the stomach, does
discuss the cause of its hardness, assuage its pains, and mitigate its
dolours and griefs. Galen does highly commend the powder of this stone to be
taken in drink for this purpose.

A scruple of the powder of this stone if it be drunk in milk, is said to be
good against dysenteries and fluxes of the belly; in these cases it may help by
its astringency, for it is said that it is very astringent and for this cause
it is also taken to be very good in Collyriis, or in ophthalmick medicines
which externally are used for the repressing of involuntary tears, and watery
fluxes of the eyes, as does appear by what Mathiolus and Dioscorides speak of
it.

Of its use.
This stone made into pixes and boxes, or convenient vessels, is of excellent
use to keep precious unguents from rancour and corruption, and to preserve
costly oils from wasting. Of its aptness for this use Pliny l. 36. c. 7, and
8. does write; and other things concerning it, l. 13. c. 13. The known use of
this stone is in the ornament of stately edifices. It has been used in
imagery, for the framing and forming out of it, the shrines of Saints; and for
the erecting of Tombs and Monuments, and Memorials for the preservation of the
memory of the dead, and to make their names live when their spirits have left
the world, and their bodies are returned to the dust and scattered into unknown
places. The common use of this stone in these our days is in vessels, either
for eating or drinking, many of which vessels of excellent beauty, I have seen
brought to the fair near Cambridge (a famous University in England) called
Stirrebridge fair, and there sold at very reasonable rates. These vessels are
very commendable for their beauty, and very fit for use, as being somewhat
tenacious, and therefore not broken easily and without violence.

CHAP. LXX. Of the black, brown, and blue Marbles.
Marble is a stone of a large magnitude, and hard, in the form and thickness
of bars of wood sharpened at one end; which being formed and framed by art,
and polisht, is made fit for many noble ends and uses.

Of its names.
This cannot well be called marmaros, because it being thoroughly black, cannot
be capable of that resplendency, which the white marble, and the Porphyrie, and
the other beautiful marbles of light colors are endued withal. This marble
is called Luculleum, from Lucullus the Consul, who brought it first to Rome
from the island of Nilus. So says Boethius, page 245.

It is also called Obsidianus lapis from Obsidius, who first found it in
Ethiopia. The Italians call it the Paragone, and that because of its use: for
with it they examine gold in stead of the lapis Lydius. In French Pierre d'
touch. In Germane Probeirstein. In English The black marble.

Of the places.
This stone is found in the North of Ireland toward Gallowey; also in Belgia,
and in France.

Rulandus speaks of seven kinds of this marble.

1. Marmor nigrum Belgicum, or the Belgic black Marble. 2. Annebergicum, or
the Annebergish Marble. 3. Ratisbonense, or the Ratisbonian Marble. 4.
Belgicum, or the Belgic Marble, which he says has the smell of Sulphur. 5. A
black Marble, which smells like burned or calcined horn. 6. Marmor
Andegavense, which is a very black polisht Marble, and is found not far from
that city. 7. A black Marble called Stolpense of an iron color and hardness.
This Marble Agricola calls Bisalten: and Rulandus Busalten. In Dutch,
Stolpischer-stein. The name Basaltes by which this Marble is called, comes of
the Ethiopian word Basall, which signifies iron. And this stone (says
Boethius) is of the color of iron, and may be exactly polisht. Boethius says
that this stone is found in Ethiopia; and in diverse parts of Germany; in
Silesia, and in the coasts of Bohemia: and that it grows in the mines where
it is found in the form and thickness of bars of wood sharpened at one end.

Of its use.
The black Marble is used for the examination of gold and silver, and hence of
some it is called Basanus, a Basanizo, which signifies to examine diligently:
which name is proper to the lapis Index, or Lydius; and that for its use of
examination of gold and silver. Its common use is in pavements and tombs. The
tomb of that illustrious Prince, Duke Maurice the Electour, was made of this
Marble, says Rulandus.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Lapis Lydius, or the Touchstone.
THe lapis Lydius is a kind of black Marble, it admits of a very good and
perfect politure; and if it be a very good lapis Lydius indeed, you can scarce
have no sooner breathed upon it, but straightway the cloud of your breath will
fly from its superficies, and presently be discussed.

Its names.
This stone in Greek is called (...) a (...), which signifies to examine
diligently: hence also in Latin it is called lapis Index, because by
examination it shows gold to be gold, and silver to be silver; and also other
metalls what they are. It is called lapis Lydius, from the country of Lydia,
from whence it is brought. In French une pierre de touch. In Germane ein
Probier stein. It is found in the same places where the black Marble is.

Its use.
It is used in the examining of metalls; and it may be used to the same
purposes with the black Marbles. In Italy they have a greenish stone, which
they call Veridello, which they use for examination, even as they do the Lydius.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the Green Marble.
THe green Marble is of some taken to be that which the Italians call
Veridello. This Marble is sometimes found specked with clear specks like a
serpent, and for this cause it is called of Albertus Magnus the Serpentine
Marble.

Its kinds.
Rulandus speaks of three kinds of this green Marble. 1. Laconicum viride
marmor, or a Laconick green Marble, which may be seen at Venice. 2. Subviride
Veronense, shining with bright green spots. 3. A Laconick Marble which is
blackish in a green.

The place.
The green Marbles are found in Lacedaemonia. The use of these stones is in
ornament. This stone may be seen in Florence, in the Temple of S. John Baptist.
Cardanus lib. de lapid. says, that he has seen many columns, or pillars, and
tables of this stone.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the Ophites of the Ancients, or the Serpentine Marble.
Serpentine Marble is by some taken for an Alabaster, distinguished with spots
like a Serpent. It is often found of diverse colors.

Its names.
This Marble is called Zeblicum, and (...) ab (...), serpens, as says
Dioscorides, lib. 5. cap. 154. hence the name Ophites. By the Germans
Serpentin stein. In English the Serpentine Marble.

Its virtues.
Galen. l. 9. de simpl. med. facult. says that this stone has a detersive
faculty, and that if it be taken in white wine, it is good to break the stone
in the bladder. It is of a cold nature, and may therefore mitigate pains, as
says Dioscorides. It is said of this by Pliny and Dioscorides, that if it be
worn, it will secure the person wearing it, from stingings of serpents, from
phrensies, and lethargies, and from plagues, pox, and poysonings, and the like.
To this purpose also Cardane in his book de lapid. does speak of the Zeblicum
Marmor which is found in Misnia. Of the various colored Marble called Ophites,
Cardane says that Andr. Alciatus had a fair table of great beauty: and that
naturally there are shapes and personages found in these various colored
Marbles: and sometimes in the Lapis Parius. Of this admirable workmanship of
nature Cardane says there is a Marble in the Temple of in aede sapientiae.
Wisdom at Constantinople, which has in it the image of S. John Baptist, with
his garment of camels hair very exquisite in all things. Cardan. de subtilitat.
l. 7. p. 377.

CHAP. LXXIIII. Of the Phengites or yellow Marble.
THe Marmor Phengiticum is a Marble that has yellowish transparent veins,
says Boethius. Rulandus says that it is a yellow pellucid Marble; and most
likely so, or else it could never discover so much glory in the dark as is
reported of it: For Cardanus says, that it shines exceedingly, and gives the
species of images. For this cause Nero finished the temple of Fortune; as it
were inwardly of the splendor of a golden house, which was a building that
Servius Tullius first began, and called it Sejam. This house (says Cardane)
was so finished by Nero in its internal structure with this kind of Marble
which receives the light; as that the doors being all shut, so much light was
reserved within, as that a daylight claritie and splendor was there to be
seen.

Its names.
This Marble is called Phengiticum, and Marmor flavum; in English, the yellow
Marble.

Its kinds.
Rulandus speaks of two kinds of it: 1. Marmor flavum, which is found amongst
metalls, and called in Germane ein gelver spot. 2. A yellow Belgic Marble
which is not pellucid.

The places.
This kind of Marble Pliny says is found in Cappadocia: it is also found in
Belgia.

CHAP. LXXV. Of the brown or gray Marbles.
THe gray Marble is a hard stone of a clear superficies, well known to all. It
is called Marmor cinereum, and cinereum Hildeshemium.

There are six kinds of this Marble according to Rulandus. 1. Marmor cinereum
Hildeshemium, which smells like burnt horn. 2. Marmor Zeblicium, which the
inhabitants call a serpentine marble, with veins and white points. 3. The third
kind is also called Zeblicium, to which or in which are generated Carbuncles,
that in a polisht Marble give a very pleasant aspect, and a wonderful
representation. 4. Marmor Rochlicianum with yellow specks. 5. Rochlicium with
black specks, like to the claws of crows. 6. Italicum, or an Italian one, with
black specks, like serpents. Cardanus says concerning the colors of Marbles,
Nullus color marmori concessus non est.

The blue Marbles are of the kinds of Porphyry, of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Porphyrites or Porphyrie, or of the Marmor rubrum, or red
Marble.
THe Porphyrite is a red Marble, of very excellent hardness, and of a beautiful
splendor.

Anselmus Boethius says that of all the kinds of red Marbles, the Porphyry is
the best for splendor and hardness.

At Millain before the altar of S. Ambrose temple, (Cardanus in his book de
Lapidibus says) there are two notable pillars of excellent Porphyry to be
seen: And that in the same place there was a very fair tomb of B. Dionysius,
of Porphyrie, for magnitude as large as a man's body, and of no small
thickness, which was translated from the temple of S. Ambrose to a larger
temple of the same city of Millain.

Its adulteration.
It is no hard matter for those artificers that are skilled in the
sophistications of this kind, and in an exquisite imitation of nature in the
making of factitious stones, to adulterate the Porphyrie, for such artists as
these, who are the imitatours of nature, know what matter will be purest and
most exactly compacted together for this purpose; they know what tinctures will
best fit for the production of the beauty of the Porphyrie, and how to mix
these tinctures so, as that their artificial stone shall emulate in beauty the
best red Marble, or Porphyrie of the excellentest beauty; for the matter of the
adulteration of this stone, how such matter may be brought to the perfection of
a stone by art, will appear by what has been spoken concerning the China cups
in the chapter of the Onyx; and concerning the artificial tinctures of gemms
in other chapters of this our lapidary. Alabaster and fat earth well mixed will
raise a fit matter for this purpose, to which a convenient tincture being
added, it will produce the artificial beauty of a very excellent Porphyrie.

Of its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...) as Esther 1.6. In Greek it is called (...) from
(...) which signifies sum purpureus, vel in purpuram vergo. So Dioscorides l.
3. c. 44. In Latin it is called Porphyrites and Marmor rubrum. If it have any
white specks, Pliny calls it Leucostictos. The best Porphyry is by Martinus
Rulandus, from its native soil called Aegyptium Uniforme; and for the same
cause it is in Germane called ein schoner roter Marmor auss Egypten. In English
we call it the Porphyrite, and the red Marble. Diverse other names it has from
the places of its birth, from the soil where it grows, and from its mixture
and variety of beautiful colors, as will appear in the several distinctions
of its species by its several colors, and several places where it grows,
and is found, and from whence it is brought.

Its kinds.
The Porphyry or red Marble, is found of diverse kinds says Rulandus. Rulandus
speaks of eight kinds of this stone, which is called Marmor rubrum, or
Porphyrites.

The first kind he says is Marmor rubrum Aegyptium uniforme, or Porphyrites
uniformis, that is, a Porphyrite full of uniformity, and every way like it
self, of one entire beauty arising from its pleasing red, which is
uncompounded, and not at all intermixed with any variety of other colors, this
is that excellentest or best red Marble or Porphyrite, which is singularly
hard, full of splendor, and more beautiful then all the other kinds, as
having no darkness admixt with the splendor of its redness; nor cloudinesse
or obscurenesse shaddowing of it.

The second kind Rulandus calls Marmor Aegyptium rubrum, or Porphyrites ruber
candidis punctis distinctus; that is, the red Marble of Egypt, or the Porphyry
distinguished with white spots.

The third kind he calls Marmor rubrum Ratisbonense, or Porphyrites
Ratisbonensis, this is so called from Ratisbone the place where it is found.

The fourth kind he calls Rutilans Marmor Ratisbonense cum candidis maculis,
that is, the red Ratisbonian Marble with white spots.

The fifth kind he calls Marmor nigrum in rubro Bohemicum, or Porphyrites
ruber Bohemicus, so called from the place where it is found.

The sixth kind he calls Marmor in rubro candidum Belgicum, or Porphyrites in
rubro candidus Belgicus variis maculis distinctus, that is, the Belgic
Porphyrite which is white in a red, and distinguished with diverse spots.

The seventh kind he calls Marmor Annebergicum, or Porphyrites Annebergicus
in metallis repertus; that is, the Annebergick Porphyrite found in metals.

The eighth kind he calls Marmor rubrum in candido, in metallis fere omnibus
repertum; that is, the Marble or Porphyrite which is red in a white, and is
found says Rulandus, in, or amongst almost all metals.

Cardanus speaks of but two kinds of the Porphyrite, the one distinguished
with red and white spots, the other he says is a red Marble distinguished with
shining spots.

Anselmus Boethius speaks of these kinds of the Porphyrite.

1. A Porphyrite red and full of splendor, excellency, and beauty; of which
before.

2. A Porphyrite which is blue or of a violet color, and is found about the
Gregorian mount in the field of St Pisans in France.

3. A Theban Porphyrite of a red color with golden spots.

4. A white Marble with red veins which is called Lunense. And this truly if it
be excellent and well polished, is of admirable and excellent beauty, and very
grateful to the eye.

The place.
It is found in Egypt, in Belgium, in Bohemia, in Ratisbone, and in diverse
places of France, Germany, and Italy, and at Anneberge, and about Thebes.

Of its dignity and use.
It is of dignity for its beauty; of use for ornament of Princely and stately
Palaces and Temples; it is also used for sepulchers, and as rich and costly
tables.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of common stones which are vulgarly known, and to be found in
most places.
THe stones commonly known and found in most places, are generated of a more
impure matter (for the most part) then are the aforementioned stones. These
stones which are so well known to all men, are distinguished amongst themselves;
either in respect of their magnitude, as some of them are greater, and some of
them less; or in respect of their consistency; or in respect of their
qualities; or in respect of their use. As concerning the magnitude of these
stones, some of them are very large, and hewn out of main rocks of the same
nature with themselves; of this kind are free-stones, grind-stones,
whet-stones: and others of them are very small, and are found in every field,
in every highway, and in every street, of this sort are the pebble-stones,
flints, and pyrites. As concerning the consistencie of these stones, or the
matter of which they are generated, some of them have their original of a
gravelly matter; others of a slimie or muddie substance; which according to the
various operations that nature has upon it, produces stones either of a
smooth superficies, or full of scales, nodose and full of knots. As concerning
their qualities, some of them are liquable or easily molten, as some kinds of
the softer flints: others of them have a strong savor, as the Lapis
Aldenburgicus: and some of them are easily burned, as the Limestone. As
concerning their use, some of them from their use are called Whet-stones, some
Lime-stones, some grind-stones, others free-stones.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of the Saxum Arenarium, or the Gravell-stone.
THe common stones of great Magnitude vulgarly known are first the saxum
Arenarium, or the gravel stone. The gravel stone, is a stone commonly known,
generated of a sandy substance, concrete together into a mass of a very great
and wonderful magnitude.

Of its kinds.
These stones (according to Boethius) are of three kinds. 1. A rough gravel
stone, which is generated of the grosser part of sand, and is so firmly
compacted, as that it is not easily levigated; the roughness of its gross,
sandy substance, makes this stone unfit for levigation; but its
well-compactednesse makes it very fit for building.

2. A gravel stone compacted of the smallest sand, mixed with intersplendent
silver spangles. But this is so soft as that it may easily be rubbed to pieces
with the fingers. This stone is found near Prague.

3. A gravel stone which is sometimes of a yellowish color, sometimes of a
red color mixed with splendent golden spangles, and at other times only red.
There are of these kinds of stones also of an ashy color, and of a blackish
color in a red. The gravel stones are very heavy and weighty, and for the
most part they do consist of diverse mixtures: for some of them are found in
their substance to be mixed with a multitude of small flints, others with small
shells, and other little bodies.

Rulandus speaks of five kinds of this stone.

1. Pirnense saxum Arenarium, which in Germane is called Weisser Pirnischer
Sandstein. 2. Luteum Fribergium. 3. Rubrum Rochlicium. 4. Cinereum Querfurdium.
5. Saxum Arenarium Nigrum in Rubro, of Embecca in Saxony.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of the Crusteous stones, or stones that have scales.
THe crusteous and scaly stones which nature does generate of a diverse matter,
are of color sometimes gray, sometimes whitish, sometimes of a greenish gray,
sometimes blue, sometimes red, sometimes black, and sometimes yellowish, and of
so soft a substance, as that they are fit for very little use, save only that
in the countries where they are commonly found, they are used for the covering
of houses, and for the making of forms to cast bullets in.

Their names.
In Latin these stones are called lapides squamosi and erustosi. Id Germane
Schiferstein: in Belgic they are called Shnilgen: in French, Escailles: In
Franconia they are called Wasser steinen, as being in those parts found in the
water. Ans. Boet. p. 254.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Limosus, limous, mud, or slime-stone.
THe lapis limosus is so called, because it is easily dissolved. This seems
to be but the initium or beginning of a stone. These stones for their
pinguositie and fatness are used to manure and make land fertile withal.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Tophous or knotty stones called Tophi Nodosi lapides.
THe lapides Tophi and nodosi are like to the lapis Parius, or white Marble in
candor and hatdnesse. Some of these are found black, and some of them of a red
earthy color. They have the levity of a Pumise, and are so soft as that they
may be sawed in pieces like wood. These stones are called in Greek (...) and
(...), in Latin, Tophi, and Nodosi, and Pori. These stones are used in
buildings, and they are (says Boethius) very fit for this purpose, because by
reason of their porositie, they do with great facility entertain and imbibe
the lime, and do therefore the better agglutinate the extremities of the walls
to themselves.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Calx viva or lime stone.
THe Limestone or calx viva is a stone of a white color, of which is made a
very commodious matter for building. It is sometimes found of a brownish
color. It is every where obvious, and its use is well known to all.

It being put in water, does by a sudden motion of a contrariety of qualities
which is betwixt its self and the water, produce a great heat. Pliny says
this stone is of a burning faculty, and has discussive power with it, and
that it is good against ulcers. Galen 9. Simpl. says it is good to produce an
Eschare withal; but being quenched or slakt (he says) it loses these
faculties.

Rulandus speaks of two kinds of it, viz. one of a white color, and another
of a sky-colour; both which he says, have a burning faculty with them: and
that both do naturally hate water, and are inflamed by it; but love oil so, as
that they will very easily mix themselves with it. Vide Serap. de Calce. l.
aggreg. c. Horach.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of the lapis Molaris, or the Mil-stone.
THese stones are so common and well known to every man, that I shall not need
to speak any thing, either concerning them or their use. Only this, they are
called (...) in Hebrew ab odore perpetuo farinae, so says Buxtorff. Those
kinds of Millstones which the Hebrews call (...), were wont to be plied and
followed by the hands of captives, who standing behind them, did thrust them
with their hands, and the strength of their whole bodies, in a very servile
labor which they were compelled to; hence it is said Exodus 11.15. (...), hoc
est, qui est post molas.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of the Cos or Whet-stone.
THe ordinary Whetstones are well known to all men by their common use.
Cardanus says that Cos is a kind of Lapis Lydius; and if it be very good, fit
for the trial of metal, whether gold, or silver, or other mettalls.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the common stones of lesser magnitude which are vulgarly known.
THe common stones well known to all, are generated some of a more impure
earth, others of a more pure. Those that are generated of an impure earth, are
of a rough superficies, full of scales and porous: these are soft, and for the
most part of a brown color, yet there are to be found of these stones of all
manner of colors. These stones are usually found in fields, and upon the banks
of rivers. The softer sort of these kind of common stones, are wont to be
melted to pour upon mettalls, to keep them from evaporating.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Lapides been vel male olentes; of stones of smell and savor.
THe stones that have savor are of the kinds of small stones. The savor that
they have is sometimes good and pleasing, and sometimes evil and displeasing.
Anselmus Boethius says, that he had some of the kinds of small stones that
smelt like violets: which were some of them of a white color, and others of a
brownish color. But concerning the original of the savours and sweet smells
in these stones, upon better consideration, he says, that the smell did not
proceed from the stones, but from the greenish slime that did adhere to them;
which slime being taken away, the smell also vanished. Boet. p. 258.

All these kinds of common soft stones, do for the most part, partake of the
savor of those things that grow near to them.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of common stones vulgarly known which are generated of a more
pure earth.
THe common small stones which are generated of a more pure earth, are of a
smooth superficies, and void of scales, roughness, and knottinesse; these are
found so excellent ofttimes, as that they being cut and polished, emulate
Marbles for beauty, nay Diamonds; In-somuch as some of them for the glory of
their sparkling rays, are esteemed valuable with ordinary Diamonds, and sold
at the rate and price of them. Of these kinds of stones which are vulgarly
known, is the Marchasite, and the Silex. Of which in the following chapters.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of the Pyrites, Fire-stone or Marchasite.
Pyrite, Marchasite or Fire-stone, is a soft clear stone and bright, out of
which fire is easily excust. If you break one of them, and rub the two parts of
it together in a dark and shady place, you shall see many sparkles of fire
proceed from it; as often I have experienced in our English Pyrites or
Marchasites.

Of its names.
Dioscorid. l. 15. c. 135.
It is called in Greek (...), and (...). In Latin Pyrites lapis, Pyrimachus,
Marchasita, Lapis luminis, Pyrsotocus, Lapis aerarius scatens rubro sulphur,
and scintillas ex chalybe multas excutiens. In Germane ein kiess hat veil rots
schwefels, kupfferstein, and kupffer erss. In English the Fire-stone, or
Marchasite, or the mine of brass.

The kinds of it.
Of the Pyrites there are some of a silver color, and some of a golden color;
the best are those out of which the fire is easily excust. Of the Pyrites there
are many kinds, and so many as that I will not now speak of them all; but
rather defer that (according to the success of this first fruits of our
labors) for an addition. So many are the species of this stone, as there are
kinds of metalls; but I omit them: Only this, Dioscorides says of the best of
the species, that it is like unto brass, and that brass is made of it.

The place.
It is found in Arabia, and from thence comes its name of Marchasite, and in
Germany, in Greece, and in England.

Of its use.
It is hot and dry of quality, and fit for the discussion of humors, and for
this purpose it is used in physic. Dioscorides says, they are fit to beget
fire in any dry or fungous matter, because of the abundance of fire that they
yield. They are usually calcined for physic use. By Tartar water there may
sulphur be extracted out of them.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of the Silex or Flint.
Silex or Flint is a stone harder then the Marble, and very difficult to be
engraven: extrinsecally it is commonly grayish, without angles and smooth;
intrinsecally it is firmly compacted, and without pores; for the most part it
is obscure or black within. This stone will very well says Boethius supply the
place of the Lapis Lydius or Touchstone.

Its names.
In Hebrew it is called (...) (hoc est) Silex vel petra durissima, sometimes
nomen (...) is joined with it ad (...) or to strengthen its signification, as
Deuteronomy. 8.15. (...) (that is) e rupe petrae, hoc est e rupe durissima, vel e rupe
ex ipso saxo. And again Deuteronomy. 32.13. (...) that is, de petra rupis. In Greek
(...). Of Thucydides the flints are called (...). In Latin Silex and Chalix.
In Germane ein Kyssling, or oder Kysselstein; and ein Tewerstein. In English
the Flint or Pibble-stone.

Its kinds.
There are diverse kinds of this stone says Boethius some of which are red, some
white, some yellow, some green, some of mixed colors.

Rulandus speaks of three principal kinds of this stone, which are
subdivided into many kinds, as 1. Of various colored Flints. 2. Of
non-pellucid Flints. 3. Of pellucid Flints.


The pellucid ones, white ones, or translucide ones, which are one and the same
kind, may be molten: these are those stones which Aristotle calls Pyrimachos.
Those that use to melt metals, may pour these upon their melted metals, that
they may swim over them, and so hinder the evaporating of their metal.

Of the place.
The Flints are found in Noremberge; In Germany; In Saxony; In the river of
Trebisa; In England; and indeed in all stony places almost every where.

Their dignity value and use.
For dignity and value; the translucide and diaphanous ones, are for their
beauty, of esteem and worth; these by jewellers are engraven and sold for
Bohemian Diamonds; factitious beautiful stones are by artists many times
framed of these; and of these may be made excellent glasses.

The Flints are altogether unmeet for building, because they will not imbibe
the lime.

They are commonly of use to procure fire by, and this they do very easily by
reason of the abundance of sparks which they yield, and which is excust from
them by percussion.

Oftentimes these stones are found beautified with Personages, and many other
pretty sportings of nature in her workmanship, which are very delightful, of
which more at large we may hereafter have an occasion to speak.

In the mean while, (...), Cujus potestate freti, huic operi primitiarum nostri
laboris finem posuimus.

FINIS.

