The Noble Progress Or, A true Relation of the Lord General Monks
Political Proceedings with the Rump, the calling in the Secluded Members,
their transcendent Vote for his Sacred Majesty, with his Reception at Dover,
and Royal conduct through the City of London, to his famous Palace at
White Hall.

The tune is, when first the Scottish wars began.



GOod people he asken to my cast,
I Will tell you all what did befall,
and happened of late.
Our Noble Valiant General Monk,
Came to the Rump who lately stunk,
with their Council of State
Admiring what this man would do.
His secret mind there is none could know,
They dived into him as much as they could,
George would not be won with their silver nor gold.
The Sectarian Saints at this looked blew,
With all the rest of the factious crew,
They vapour'd awhile and were in good hope;
But now they have nothing left but the Rope.
Another invantion then they sought,
Which long they wrought for to be brought
to claspe him with they,
Quoth Uane and Scot I Will tell you what,
We Will have a Plot and he shall not
we will carry the swap.
Lets Vote him a thousand pound a year.
And Hampton Court for him and his Heir.
Indeed quoth George you are Free-Parliament men
To cut a Thong out of another man's skin.
the Sectarian. etc.
They sent him then with all his Host a
To break our Posts and raise our Ghosts,
which was their intent.
To cut our Gates and Chains all down,
Unto the ground this trick they found,
to make him be ^^ent:
This Plot the Rump old so (...);
To cast an outu^ old my Lord,
But in the (...) put un^oo't,
'T was enough to intect both his horse and his foot,
the Sectarian, etc.
But when my Lord perceived that night,
What was their snight he brought to light,
their knaveries all,
The Parliament of Forty eight,
Which long did wait, came to him straight,
to give them a fall
And some Phanaticall people knew,
That George would give them their fatal due,
Indeed he did requite them again.
For he pal'd the Monster out of his Den,
the Sectarian, etc.
To the House our worthy Parliament,
With good Intent they boldly weut
to Vote home the King.
And many (...) people more,
Stood at the door and waited for,
good tidings to bring,
Yet some in the House had their hands much in blood,
And in great opposition like Traitors they stood,
But yet I believe it is very well known
That those that were for him were twenty to one.
But the Sectarian Saints at this looked blew,
With all the rest of the factious crew,
they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope,
But now they have nothing left but the Rope.
THey called the League and Covenant in,
To read again to every man,
but what comes next.
All Sequestrations null and void,
The people said none should be paid.
for this was the Text.
For as I heard all the propi^^^p
They voted King Charles the first of May,
Bonfires burning Bells did ring.
And our streets did echo with God bless ye King.
At this the Sectarian Saints looked blew,
And all the rest of the factious crew,
they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope,
But now they have nothing left but the Rope.
Our General then to Dover goes
In spite of Foes or deadly blows
saying U^vele^oy.
And all the Glories of the Land,
At his command there they did stand,
in Triumph and Joy.
Good Lord what a sumptuous sight' was to see
Our good Lord General fall on his knee,
To welcome home his Majesty,
And own his sacred Sovereignty,
But the Sectarian, etc.
Then all the worthy Noble Train,
Came back again with Charlamain,
our Sovereign great,
The Lord Mayor in his Scarlet Gown,
In s Chain so long went through the Town,
in Pomp and State.
The Livery-men each sine the way,
Upon this great Tryamphant day,
The rich Maces carried before,
And my Lord himself the Sword he bore.
Then Uiveleroy the Gentry did hug,
For General Monk rode next to the King,
With Acclamations, Shoots and Cries,
I thought they would have rent the skies,
The Conduits ravished with Joy.
As I may say did run all day
great plenty of Wine.
And every Gentleman of note,
In's Velvet Coat that could be got,
in glory did shine.
There were all the Peers and Barrons bold,
Richly clad in Silver and Gold.
Marched through the reet so brave,
No greater Pomp a King could have,
At this the Sectarian, etc.
And thus conducted all along,
Through out the throng till he did come
unto White Hall.
Attended by these Noblemen.
Bold Hero's kin that brought him in,
with the General.
Who was the man that brought him home,
And placed him on his Royal throne
T was General Monk (...) do the thing,
So God preserve our gracious King.
And now the Sectarian. etc.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson.


