The Cross Crowned: OR, SHORT AFFLICTION Making way for ETERNAL GLORY.

Opened in a SERMON Preached at the Funeral of DANIEL WALDOE Esquire in the
Parish Church of Alhallows Honey-lane, May 9. 1661.

By JAMES NALTON, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of Leonards Foster-lane
London.

(...)

London, Printed by D.M. for SA. GELLIBRAND at the Golden Ball in St, Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

To my Honored Christian Friend, Mris Anne Waldoe, Relict of Mr Daniel Waldoe
lately deceased.
IT was the desine of your dear Husband (while yet living) that I should
perform the last Office of Love, to a Deceased Friend, in preaching his Funeral
Sermon. The honor that I bore to him, not the ambitious humor of appearing in
Print, has made me willing (against my own inclination) to expose these poor
worthless Meditations to public view. This I have done the rather, that
thereby I might be an Instrument to perpetuate the memorial of so worthy and
mitable a Christian, and to commend his practice to posterity. And for so
doing, I looked on that passage of Solomon, as a sufficient warrant, Prove.
10.7. The memory of the just is blessed; yea, the righteous (says David) shall
be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm, 112.6. Wicked men though they be like
Nimrod, mighty hunters before the Lord, (Genesis 10.9.) he great Oppressors, and
dare do this before the Lord as if they would provoke him to his face; and
though they have been the terror of the mighty in the land of the living, as
the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 32.27. Yea, though they use all means possible to
perpetuate their memorial, calling the lands after their own names, Psalm.
49.11. as Absalom reared up a pillar, and called it Absoloms place, 2, Sam,
18.18. and Cain built a City, and called it after the name of his Son Enoch,
Genesis 4.17. and some men at this day can build Hospitalls with the money which
they have got by force and fraud, and crushing the needy: Yet all this will not
make their memory last; the name of the wicked shall rot, and their
Remembrances shall be like ashes, Job 13. 12. that is, Those things by which
they would be remembered and mentioned among the Sons of men, (as Wealth, and
Honor, and Power, and Greatness) shall be but as ashes of no value, but
trodden under the foot of men; but the remembrance of the godly, even when they
themselves are dead, shall still be kept alive, with men to be renowned, and
with God to be rewarded: How precious is the memorial of Moses and Aaron,
though dead so many hundred years ago? The Spirit of God sets a Star of Honor
upon them, Exodus 6.27, These are that Moses and that Aaron.

And certainly, among all those Christian Virtues, which do en balm the
memorial of the dead, there is none of a more sweet and fragrant savor, then
the Grace of Charity. Witness the Speech of our Savior, concerning the woman
that anointed his feet with precious ointment, Matthew. 26.13. Verily I say unto
you, Wheresoever this Gospel (shall be preached in the whole world, there shall
also this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of her, Mary's
name now smells as sweet in all the Churches of Christ, as her ointment did in
the house where it was poured out; such an honorable remembrance did blessed
Paul leave as a Legacy, to Onesiphorus, and his family on the same account; 2 Timothy 1.16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. And Greg. Nazianzen speaking of
Rahabs entertaining the Spies has this remarkable Passage, (...). Her
charitable hospitality conduced not only to her commendation, but to her
eternal salvatition.

I knew not to whom the Dedication of this Sermon so properly belonged, as to
your self, who was so nearly related to that eminently charitable Citizen,
whose death occasioned the preaching of it. Such as it is, I here present unto
you; not that the view of this Monument should renew your sorrow, but that the
frequent Commemoration of those virtues wherewith God was pleased to enrich
him, and the pious fruitful and exemplary conversation wherein he walked before
you, might not only moderate your grief for the loss of so dear a Husband, but
also provoke you, and all that knew him, to tread in the same steps, according
to the counsel of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.12. Be followers of them who through
faith and patience inherit the promises. The Lord Jesus reveal himself more
fully and graciously to your soul, fill your heart with joy and peace in
believing; sweeten your outward loss with those inward comforts of his Spirit,
which may enable you feelingly to say with the Psalmist, In the multitude of my
thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94.19. And this will be
better to you then the comfort of all Relations; yea, it will be Marie's
portion, that shall never be taken from you: And that it may be so, is, and
shall be, the hearty prayer of

Your much obliged Friend and Servant in the Gospel, James Nalton.

^HORT AFFLICTION Making way for ETERNAL GLORY.
2 COR. 4.17. ^^r our light affliction which is but for a moment, The Text.
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.


THe holy Apostle (in the foregoing Verse) lays down an excellent Lesson, for
us all to learn, by his ^^ample, (though there be sew, very (...), that have
learnt to write after (...) Copy)in these words, For this cause ^faint not, as
if he should say, Though (...) meet with sorrows and sufferings (...) all
sorts, temptations, afflictions, persecutions, reproaches, fightings without,
and fears within, yet we do not sit down in despondency and despair, but we
bear the burden that God has laid upon us without fainting and without
fretting: It is true indeed, our outward man does perish, that is, our body,
together with our bodily health, strength, and welfare, does decay and decline,
but yet our inward man, that is, our soul, together with the powers and
faculties of it, being renewed by the spirit of grace, and strengthened by the
graces of the spirit, is, in the midst of all these troubles and trials, more
and more repaired and revived day by day; this is strange, (may some say) But
would ye know how it comes to pass?

The Apostle answers in the words of the Text, and renders a reason of his not
fainting under all his sufferings. For our light afflictin which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

The Text contains in it, the twofold state or condition of a believer, One in
this life: The other in the life to come.


And both these balanced, or compared one with the other, in a threefold
computation.

First, The state of a Believer in this life, is a state of affliction; his
condition in the life to come, is a condition of glory.

Secondly, The afflictions of a believer in this life are light and easy; the
glory of believer in the life to come is a weighty glory: Weighty, did I say?
Yea, It is an hyperbolical or transcendent glory: The Apostle uses such a
high-flown expression here in the Text, as is not to be found in any other
Author sacred or profane, (...), an exceeding excessive weight: He could not
find a word high enough to express the greatness of it: Deus and coe^um non
patiuntur hyperbolen; God is so ^nfinitely great, and heaven is so
unconceiveably glorious, that we cannot either think or speak too highly of
them, for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, then things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

Thirdly, The Afflictions of a Believer in this life are but for a moment; the
glory wherewith he shall be invested in the life to come, is an everlasting
glory.

The words being thus opened, and cut out, there are three points of Doctrine
especially observable in them, which will draw out the strength of the Text,
Viz.

The Afflictions which the godly meet with here on earth, make way for that
glory and happiness, which is laid up for them in heaven. The Afflictions of
this life are but light and eafie; The glory of the life to come is a weighty
and transcendent glory. The Afflictions of this life are but for a momenty, The
glory prepared in the life to come is an everlasting glory.
To begin with the first Doctrine which is this: The Afflictions which the
godly meet with here on earth, make way for that happiness which is laid up
for them in heaven.

For the explication and confirmation of this truth, there are three Queries
would be satisfied.

1. What those afflictions are which the godly meet with here on earth? 2. Why
God will have his children exercised with those afflictions? 3. How or in what
respect these afslictions make way for that glory and ^appiness that is laid up
for them in ^eaven?
For the first Querie, What those af^lictions are and?

Ans. The godly meet with afflictions of all sorts both inward and outward
^roubles.

1. They are exercised often with inward troubles, viz. temptations and
spi^^ual desertions, the tumblings, tos^ings, and disquietments of their own
pirits, which lie as a heavy burden upon the soul, far more afflictive and
in^upportable, then any outward cross or ^ffliction on the body or estate can
be; for a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. Thus ye hear Heman that
godly wise man complaining, Psalm. 88.3. My soul is full of troubles; and David
crying out, Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquteted within me? yea, it sometimes falls out, that the terrors of the
Almighty do set themselves in battle array against them, Job 6.4. and come upon
them with that violence, that they are distracted under them, Psalm. 88.15.
While I suffer thy terrors (says Heman) I am distracted; so that, a godly man
(ye see) may be brought to the condition of distraction; and a child of light
may for a time walk in darkness, without the least sense or apprehension of
peace or comfort, Isa. 50.10.

Secondly, The godly are exercised with outward troubles, such as the (...) the
five terrible things that Aristotle speaks on, Viz. Ignominy, poverty,
persecution, sickness and death.

For the first of these, viz. Ignominy, the best of Gods children have been
reproached and reviled, counted troublers of Israel, as Elijah was, 1 Kings
18.17. and men of contention, is Jeremy was, Jer. 15.10. and pestilent fellows,
and movers of sedition, as Paul was, Acts 24.5. Yea they are counted (...), the
scum and offscouring of all things to this day, 1 Cor. 4.13. Was not the lord
Jesus reviled to his very face? John 8.48. Say we not well, that thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil? Yea, accounted an Impostor or deceiver, Matthew.
27.63. a blasphemer, Matthew. 26. 65. he has spoken blasphemy; and a sad-man,
John 10.20. He is mad, and ^ath a devil, why do ye hear him?

For the second of these, Viz. Pover^y; it has been the condition of the
Saints here on earth, God has kept them very low, that by the poverty of their
condition, they might be brought to poverty of spirit; God usually keeps his
soundest sheep on the shortest Commons: Ye read of poor Saints (...) Jerusalem,
Acts 15.26. They were precious Saints, yet very poor, yea some of whom the
world was not worthy, yet wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins, being
destitute, (wanting some necessaries for a time) afflicted and tormented, Heb.
11.37.

For the third particular, viz. Persecution, it has been the portion of Gods
most eminent servants, as our Savior has foretold, Matthew. 10.23. They shall
persecute you from one City to another; yea, all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Christ himself was no sooner born
then banished, Matthew. 2.13. It was the Motto of famous Mr. Rothwel, who was
called, the Apostle of the North, Persecutio est pignus futurae gloria,
Persecution is the pledge of that eternal glory which we expect.

For the fourth, viz. Sickness, the best of Cods servants are exercised with
it; Timothy was a rare young man eminent for piety; nourished or nursed up in
the words of faith, and of good doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.6. (...) as if he had sucked
piety with his mothers milk, yet he was much acquainted with bodily sickness
and distempers, as appears by Paul's counsel to him, 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no
longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake and thine often
infirmities; He had not onlyone infirmity, but diverse infirmities, and those
not once, but often disturbing his health; yea God will have it so, that the
sickness of the body may conduce to the health of the soul: A very Heathen
could say, Tunde Anaxarchi manticam, nam Anaxarchi minime teris, Beat my sack
(says he, meaning his body) but thou can not hurt my soul. So here, God will
have the body, which is but the sack, (for the soul is the treasure in the
sack) beaten and bruised with sickness, aches and infirmities, that the soul
may be preserved and kept without hurt till the day of the Lord Jesus.

For the fifth particular, viz. Death, The best of Gods servants are not
exexempted from it; for what man is he that lives and shall not see death?
shall he deliver his soul ( h. e. his life) from the hand of the grave, Psalm
89.48. It is true, the Lord Christ has delivered his members from the sting of
death, but he has not exempted them from the storke of death, and the reason
may be this, because he will have his members conformable to their head, that
as the Captain of our salvation was made perfect by sufferings, Hebr. 2.10. and
by the gates of death entered into glory, so must all his soldiers and servants
enter the same way; yea, we shall never be freed from the body of death (that
we carry about us) but only by the death of the body, that look as sin brought
death into the world, so death shall help to carry sin out of the world, God
will have such a cursed Dam to perish by such a Daughter.

Ye see the outward troubles to which the Saints on earth are exposed,
Ignominy, poverty, etc. I might add to these, they are often exercised with
crosses and disappointments in their children, and this is a very sharp
affliction, that those children which God has drawn out of our loins should
miscarry to all eternity, and rush upon the rock of their own ruin; yet thus
it often falls out, that God punishes a good father, in a bad son, and then it
is a cure to the father, and a curse to the son; thus he punished David a good
father, in Absalon a rebellious son, that was taken away, (...), in the very
act of his rebellion: Thus faithful Abraham had a scoffing Ishmael, upright
Jehosaphat had a wicked Jehoram, zealous Josiah that was anon-such for piety,
had not one good son to succeed him in the throne.

In brief (that I may dispatch the first Querie) the godly here on earth meet
with sufferings from God, and sufferings from men, and sufferings from Satan,
and sufferings from their own hearts, which usually work them more mischief,
then all the Devils in Hell can do; sufferings for sin, and sufferings for
righteousness; some are exercised in one kind, some in another, some more, and
some less, but all have their portion in affliction: Deus unicum habuit filium
sine flagitio, nullum sine flagello, God had one only Son ( viz. the Lord
Jesus) without sin, but he has never a Son without sorrow and affliction.

2. Querie for Explication is this; Why God will have his children exercised
with these afflictions?

Answ. Many Reasons may be rendered, but I will reduce them to three heads.

In reference to their Sins. In reference to their Graces. In reference to
their Duties.
For the first, God is pleased to exercise them with afflictions in reference
to their sins, either To Prevent sin. To Discover sin. To Purge out sin.


1 God does it to prevent sin. He hedgeth up their ways with thorns, that they
may not find their crooked paths, Hos. 2.6. He lets them blood, that he may
prevent the Plurifie of Pride and self-confidence and creature dependence. He
never administers this spiritual Physic but when there is need, 1 Pet. 1.6. Ye
are in heaviness (if need be) through manifold temptations, and God sees we
have need of preventing physic, as well, as refreshing cordials; yea, it is a
great mercy that God lays stumbling blocks in the broad way to hell, that if
we set foot in that way, we may break our shins to correct us, rather then
break our necks to destroy us.

2. God does it to discover sin, as appears by that Text, Deuteronomy. 8.2. The Lord
thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness to humble thee, and to
prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, to know, that is, to let thee know,
they had never known so much of the baseness and sinfulness of their own
hearts, if God had not brought them into a wilderness; every rod (ye must know)
has a voice, Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries to the City, Hear ye the rod,
and who has appointed it; this voice bids us search our hearts and say as Job
did (when the rod was upon his back) Job 13.23, 24. How many are mine
iniquities and my sins, make me to know my transgression and my sin (h. e) the
particular bosomesin to which by nature I am most inclined) Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? Put a quart of Ale in a skillet,
and ye see not the scum or dross that is in it, but when you have set the Ale
on the fire, then the scum appears, which did not before: so here, there is a
great deal of scum and dross, and filth of corruption that lies hid in our
hearts, but the fire of affliction does discover it, and makes us more sensible
of it then ever we were before. It was the speech of Gasper Olevian, a German
Divine, I never knew so much of God and his purity, nor of my own heart and its
impurity, as I did in a long sickness.

3 God does it to purge out sin, Isai. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. There are
three desperate diseases that would destroy the soul, which can be purged out
no other way, then by this sharp physic of affliction, viz. Pride, Security
and Earthly-mindedness: But now by affliction God hides pride from man, Job
33.17. By the Rod God awakens the sinner that he sleep not the Sleep of Death:
When David was so fast asleep, that he said in his prosperity. I shall never be
moved, Psalm. 30.6. God by hiding his face from him, ver. 7. did so trouble him,
that he was awakened out of his Security. And lastly, By the bitter potion of
affliction, he weans us from the world and the love of it, My soul is even as a
weaned child, Psalm. 131.2. By laying mustard on the Teat, he keeps us from
sucking too deep a draught of earthly contentments. It was a savoury speech of
worthy Dr. Sibbs, God embitters all other things to us, that himself only may
be sweet.

For the second Head.
God is pleased to exercise his children with affliction, in reference to their
Graces, that they may be tried, exercised and increased. Our Savior counsels
the Laodiceans to buy of him gold tried in the fire, Revel. 3.18. By Gold is
meant, the golden Graces of his Spirit, and those graces are best tried in the
fire of affliction. If our Graces be such as will abide the fiery Trial, then
are they true graces indeed, and not counterfeit; That faith doubtless is a
true says, that is a Furnace Faith, such as was the faith of those three
Worthies, Dan. 3.17, 18, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King; but if
not, be it known to thee, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the
golden Image which thou have set up. Fiery Trials make golden Christians.

And as affliction tryes the truth of our Graces, so does it also try the
strength of our Graces. Some Graces are like stars, quae interdiu latent, noctu
lucent; They shine not in the day time of prosperity, but in the night time of
adversity. The strength of a Fort or Castle is not known, but in the time of a
siege, when it is assaulted with batteries and onsets: So here, the strength of
faith, and fervency of love, and constancy of patience should never be known,
were it not for the batteries of hell in strong afflictions and violent
temptations.

For the third Head.
Thirdly, God will have his children exercised with afflictions, in reference to
their Duties, Partly to Fit them for service. Quicken them in service.


1 To fit them for service; Roses while they are in a Nosegay carried in your
hand, they are of little use, but put them in a Still, and bring them to the
fire, and then they yield you both a sweet Cake, and sweet Rosewater: So here,
while God carries us, as it were, in his hand, or dandles us on his lap in a
way of prosperity, we are in a manner useless, or do him very little service;
but when he brings us to the fire of affliction, we are more useful to him,
and he has more service from us. Remarkable is that Scripture, Acts 9.15,16.
Our Savior speaking of Paul, He is (says he) a chosen vessel to me, to bear
my Name before the Gentiles; I, but how does it appear that he was a vessel so
serviceable to his Master? It follows in the next words, For I will show him
how great things he must suffer for my Names sake; as if he should say, By
sufferings I will fit him for service.

2. As afflictions fit us for service, so they help to quicken us in service;
we are usually in our way to heaven like tops, we run no longer then we are
whipped; In working for our Lord and Master, we are for the most part like a team
of horses, that if the whip be not held over them, they will quickly be at a
stand.

3d. Querie for Explication is this, How or in what respect these afflictions
make way for that glory and happiness, that is laid up for the Saints in light?

Ans. The Text tells ye, They work for us, or make way for the obtaining of
that Crown that is set before us.

Quest. But how do they work for us?

Ans. They work, not by way of merit, (as the Papists would have it) for what
proportion is there between finite sufferings, and an infinite or endless
reward? between light and inconsiderable sufferings, and a superlative weight
of glory?

If our afflictions were meritorious, they must bear some proportion with that
reward of glory which we work for, and wait for at the great day of Christ's
appearing; but there is no more equality or proportion between our afflictions
in this world, and the glory of the world to come, then there is between a drop
of water, and the whole Ocean; see what the Apostle says to this purpose, Romans
8.18. I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed. I dare boldly say, If a man
could endure the torments of Hell for a thousand years on earth, he could not
thereby merit one hours fruition of glory in heaven. The Papists therefore that
hope by their Pennances, and Purgatory satisfactions to merit heaven at the
hands of God, shall be so far from meriting by their sufferings, that they
shall suffer for their merits.

Quest. But if afflictions do not work glory by way of merit, how then do they
work it?

Ans. They work glory on a threefold account. 1. By the free grace and mercy of
a bountiful God and Father, who rewards the services and sufferings of his
children, for his own sake, and his promise sake, and according to his own
heart; so does David acknowledge in that gratulatory confession, 2 Samuel 7.21.
For thy words sake, and according to thy own heart have thou done all these
great things; Yea he looks especially at the merits of his own dear Son our
blessed Redeemer who has purchased this privilege for us with his own blood,
that all things (even afflictions themselves) should work together for our
good, Romans 8.28.

2. Afflictions work or make way for glory, by making us conformable to Christ
our Head, for he first drunk of the brook in the way, (that is, as he passed
through the world, he drunk of a troubled brook of bitter sorrows and
sufferings in the day of his humiliation) before he lifted up his head in the
day of his exaltation, Psalm. 110.7. And therefore our Savior used that
language to his Disciples, Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ first to have suffered
these things, and so to enter into his glory? So then these afflictions when
they are sanctified make us conformable to a suffering Savior, and if we be
conformable to him in his Cross, We shall also be conformable to him in his
Crown, If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him, Rom 8.17.

3. Afflictions work glory for us, because they work us for that glory, that
is, they fit us and prepare us for the fruition of it; They help to make us
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.

Qu. How do they fit us or make us meet to be partakers of that eternal glory?

Ans. These three ways do they fit us for glory: 1. They help to purge out that
dross and filth of corruption, which as it is odious to the Lord, so is it
prejudicial to our own salvation, for there shall in no wise enter into heaven
any thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27. Now affliction helps to purge out this
filth, to purify us and make us white, Dan. 11.35. Hence is it that affliction
is compared to a furnace, Isa. 48.10. I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction: Look what the fire is to the metal, or the fan to the chafe, or
the file to the rough iron, the same is affliction to every teachable sinner,
It helps to rub off his rust, to cleanse him from his chafe, and to refine him
for his Masters use.

2. They fit us for glory, by helping us to act and exercise our graces, and
the more our graces are brightned, the more fit are we to have communion with a
holy God: Therefore he corrects us for our profit, that we may be partakers of
his holiness, Herb. 12.10. Now the more holiness we have here, the more we are
fitted for eternal happiness hereafter.

Thirdly, they fit us for glory, Because they wean us from the world, and the
love of it: The Lord by some smarting rod or other knocks us upon the fingers,
when he sees us take too fast hold on these uncertain vanities; the hardship
and several straits that we meet with on earth, make us long to be in that
place, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, Revel. 21.4. yea
everlasting joy shall he upon our heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away, Isai. 35.10.



First Lesson. The first is this: That afflictions are not so evil, grievous or
hurtful as we take them to be.

We look upon afflictions usually with an eye of prejudice, an evil eye, and
therefore when any unexpected cross or calamity does befall us, we are ready
to say as Ahab did to Elijah, 1 Kings 21.^0. Have thou found me out O mine
enemy? But pull off the vizard from this unwelcome guest, and ye shall find
that the cross has more sweetness then sharpness in it. It is true, no
affliction or chastening (says the Apostle) Hebr. 12.11.) for the present,
seems to be joyous, but rather grievous; neveetheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby: The
pleasures of sin are sweet for the present, Stolen waters are sweet, and bread
eaten in secret is pleasant, Prove. 9.17. But afterward they are more bitter
then gall and wormwood; they may well be compared to the lips of a strange
woman, Pro. 5.3^5. They drop as an honie-comb and her mouth is smoother then
oil, but her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, for her
feet go down to death, and her steps take hold of hell; Or the pleasures of sin
may be compared to the Locusts which John saw at the sounding of the fifth
Trumpet, Rev, 9.7, 10. Their faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair
as the hair of women, but they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were
stings in their tails; on the contrary affliction is bitter for the present,
but profitable afterward to every one that can rightly improve it: It is a
sharp Schoolmaster, but it makes good Scholars; Schola crucis, est schola
lucis, the school of correction is the school of instruction, and in this
school we many times learn more in a month, then we did in seven years before;
witness Manasseh, who in all the time of his prosperity, had not learnt that
one lesson, To know God aright, h. e. to know him as a sin-hating, sin
revenging God who will not spare the proudest Potentates upon earth, if they do
provoke him, but when he was brought to the school of correction, he humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. and the Text
says, Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God, ver. 13. Affliction in this
regard may be compared to a frosty morning in the winter-season, it is somewhat
sharp, but it helps to clear the blood:

How many Christians have you and I known (in our Observation) that have been
whipped to heaven by adversity, whom prosperity would have suddenly, and yet
insensibly drawn to hell? Is there never a soul here present that can say
experimentally, as Themistocles did, Periissem, nisi periissem; I had been
undone, if I had not been undone? Lord, if thou had spared the rod, thou
had lost thy child; but blessed for ever be thy name, thou did not suffer
me to run post to hell for the want of a fatherly whipping.

Second Lesson. The second Lesson by way of Inference is this:

That the wisdom of God is infinite and unsearchable, in that he can make good
Sampsons riddle to all them that fear his name; Out of the eater comes forth
meat, and out of the strong comes forth sweetness, Judge. 14.14. The Lord can
(for the godly's sake) bring good out of evil, grace out of sin, light out of
darkness, glory out of affliction, yea heaven out of hell.

The ways of God (as one says excellently) seem full of contradiction to us,
because it is his usual manner to bring things to pass by contrary means; Sibs
soul-conflict.
for example, when he means to justify a sinner, he condemns him first; when
he means to comfort a sinner he casts him down first, when he intends to bring
a sinner to heaven he brings him by the gates of hell first, when he means to
set a crown of glory on his head, he will have him to wear a crown of thorns
first; Oh how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?
Romans 11.33. Well may we conclude with the Prophet, This (wonderful dispensation
of providence) comes forth from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working, Isai. 28.29.

2 Use. A second Improvement that live may make of this Doctrine is this; If
afflictions make way for glory, it would be a profitable and needful inquiry
for every one of us, by a serious self-scrutiny and impartial examination to
call our selves to an account, to search and sift our hearts and lives, whether
the afflictions that we have met with have had that kindly operation on our
souls, yea or no: I believe, there are none of you that hear me this day, but
ye have had your trials in one kind or other, and in some degree or other; but
the question is, What spiritual advantage have you made by them? Have they been
sent as Gods messengers, in a tendency to that eternal happiness that ye look
and long for?

Quest. It may be you will ask, How may I know that affliction is working for
me this eternal glory that the Text speaks of?

Ans. Take this for a certain rule; If affliction be sanctified doubtless it
is making way for future glory, for Sanctification is the way to Salvation.

Therefore sanctified affliction is better then unsanctifi'd prosperity;
sanctif'd sickness is better then unsanctified health, sanctified losses are
better then unsanctified gain. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he
has gained (a great estate) when God takes away his soul? Job 27.8.
or what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
Mark 8.38. This thou shall find by experience, whoever thou art that have been
trained up in the school of affiction; let thy condition be what it will be,
never so poor or low, or friendless or comfortless. yet if it be sanctified to
thee, it is a mercy, yea, it is a greater mercy then if God should give thee
all the treasures or pleasures the earth can afford thee, for God may give
riches and honors, and these outward accommodations in anger, Hos. 13.11. I
gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. But God never
gives a sanctified use of any condition in anger, but it is always in love and
favor. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: though he may
severely chasten thee, he may at the same time dearly love thee.

How may I know that my affliction is sanctified to me?

Signs of sanctified affliction.
I answer, Then is affliction sanctified to thee, when thou art sanctified by
the affliction: For example, 1. If it make thee more humble and base in thine
own eyes; If thou can say feelingly with the Church in Babylon, Remembering
my affliction and any rebellion (so some read the Hebrew word (...)) the
wormwood and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and ^s humbled in
me, Lam. 3.19, 20. Sound ^umiliation is a special fruit and product of
sanctified affliction, for the more the soul ^s humbled, the more it is emptied
of self-righteousness, and self-confidence; and the more it is emptied, the
more capable it is of Gods grace and mercy; it is the humbled soul that prizes
the Lord Jesus at the highest rate, and says of him as the Church does, Cant.
5.10. My beloved is white and ^uddy, (white in his innocence, and ruddy ^n his
passion) the choicest of ten thousand; ^t is true, our humiliation does not
serve ^o make us more precious to Christ, but it ^^vs to make Christ more
precious to us,

2. Thy affliction is sanctified if it make thee more holy and heavenly minded;
if the hardship thou meetest with here in the wilderness, make thee long to be
at thy Fathers house: If the loss of earthly treasures or outward advantages,
make thee lay up treasure in Heaven, where neither moth can corrupt, nor
thieves break in and steal; if the disappointments thou meetest with here on
earth, and the uncertainty of outward riches, make thee more eagerly seek for
the durable riches which Solomon speaks of, Prove. 8.18. Riches and honor are
with me, (says Wisdom) yea durable riches and righteousness; why, what are
those durable riches? surely such as these, peace of Conscience, joy in the
Holy Ghost, assurance of Gods love and favor, an evidence of Christ Jesus
dwelling in us, the saving sanctifying graces of the spirit of God, and inward
comfort flowing from those graces, these are such commodities that the world
can neither give us, nor take from us; they are Mary's portion that shall never
be taken away, Luke 10.42. If, I say, affliction make thee drive a trade for
heaven more vigorously, certainly affliction is sanctified to thee, and thou
art much bettered by thy affliction.

Active obedience to do what he enjoyneth; If thou can say with Paul (after
he was unhorst and humbled) What will thou have me to do Lord? Acts 9.6. as if
he should say, though it be never so cross and contrary to my carnal and
corrupt nature, though it be a parting with my right hand, or right eye, (a sin
as dear to me as either of them) I will be content to do it. 2. If it teach
thee Passive obedience patiently to suffer what he inflicteth; as it was said
of our dear Savior, Hebr. 5.8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience
by the things which he suffered; so if thou can say, It is good for a man
that he bear the yoke in his youth; I will put my mouth in the dust, if so be
there may be hope, Lam. 3.17, 29. In brief, if thou can say, as the Church
does Mic. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him; certainly affliction has a kindly work upon thy soul.

4. If affliction teach thee to prize mercies more, and to surfeit on them
less, to be more thankful in using them, and more fearful of abusing them,
then thou have been heretofore, it is a token thou have profited by thy
affliction; we usually, in the Sunshine of prosperity, fall asleep, and forget
God and our duty to him, yea forget our selves, and the vows we made in time of
trouble; it fares with us as with little children, the pap makes us wanton,
Hos. 13.6. According to their pasture, so were they filled, ( h. e. when God
had brought them out of the wilderness into a land flowing with milk and
honey, and had fed them to the full) they were filled, and their heart was
exalted, therefore have they forgotten me; Ephraim and Manasseh (ye know) were
brethren, Ephraim in Hebrew signifies fruitful, Manasseh signifies forgetful,
fruitfulness and forgetfulness ((...)) are sworn brethren; but if the Lord by
imbittering our comforts, or mingling water with our wine, teach us temperance,
or a spiritual moderation in our carnal desires, that which the Scripture call,
1 Cor. 7.29, 31. That they who have wives be as though they had none, and they
that rejoice, be as though they rejoiced not and they that use this world, is
not overusing it ((...)) Then certainly such an imbitterment is in mercy.

melt and mollify thy heart, as Job spoke (though in another sense) God makes
my heart soft, and the almighty troubles me, Job 23.16. God sometimes softens
our hearts by troubling of us: If the bitterness of sorrow make thee to taste
the bitterness of sin, and feelingly cry out, O what a bitter thing it is that
I have forsaken the Lord my God, who is the fountain of living water, and have
been digging broken cisterns that will hold no water, Jer. 2.19, 13. O what an
evil and bitter thing it is, that I have so often parted with my peace for the
tickling pleasures of sin for a season? But it is bitter and bitter again, that
I have grieved that holy Spirit of God, wherewith I am (or might have been)
sealed up to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. If thy soul can bespeak it self
in that language which Joseph's brethren used one to another (after their
consciences were awakened for that sinful and injurious act of selling their
innocent brother into the hands of the Ishmaelites,) Genesis 42.21. We are verily
guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear; so if thou can say thus to thy soul, Ah
vile unworthy wretch that I am, verily I am guilty, deeply guilty before the
Lord, for my unkindness and undutifulness to the Holy Spirit of God, when he
besought med (in his heart-melting motions) saying, Oh do not that abominable
thing that I hate, Jer, 44.4. Do not go on in a way of pride and presumption,
security and formality, brutishness and earthly mindedness, but I would not
hearken; I turned a deaf ear to all his piercing motions and pressing commands.

Alas, alas! Is not this that sweet spirit of grace, whose counsels I have
despised, whose secret whisperings I have slighted, whose warnings I have
resisted, and whose warmings I have quenched? Might it not be just with God to
say to his spirit, Never knock more at this sinners heart, never strive more
with him to bring him to repentance, but seeing he will be filthy, let him be
filthy still? Oh that for this my eyes could run down with tears, and my
eyelids gush out with waters, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.18.

If thy heart be thus melted with some penitential thawings, and heart-irking
grief for thy miscarriages; certainly affliction has had a kindly work upon thy
soul, such a softning and sanctifying affliction is an evident sign of thy
adoption.

fearful of offending such a gracious God and Father: If it have taught thee
that lesson which Elihu lays down for us all to learn, Job 34.31, 32. Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any
more, that which I see not teach thou me, if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. If thou can say with David, (who had been trained up in the School of
affliction) My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments, Psalm, 119.120. Burnt child, we say, dreads the fire. If it be so
with thee, that thou can say, I dare not be bold with those sins for which I
have formerly smarted; I dare not be bold with the fire wherewith I have been
scorched; nor stumble on the same stone whereon I have been bruised: then thou
may conclude, thy affliction is sanctified to thee, and thou art sanctified
by it.

But now on the contrary, If after God has made thee smart under many rods, and
exercised thee with various afflictions in thy body, or in thy soul, or in thy
estate, or in thy relations, and yet thou be as proud and self-confident as
ever, as carnal and earthly-minded as ever, as stubborn and inflexible to Gods
commands as ever, as unthankful in the use of mercies, and as ready to abuse
them as ever; as hard hearted and unbroken as ever, and as fearless of
offending God, and careless to please him as ever thou have been heretofore;
doubtless thy afflictions are not at all sanctified to thee, neither art thou
one jot made better by them; they are but the forerunners of thy everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
whereof the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1.9. they are but (...), the prelibations
or foretasts of the punishments in Hell fire.

I have dealt somewhat plainly and freely with you in this Use of Examination!
O that you would deal freely and unflatteringly with your own souls! Oh that
you would be true to your own spirits, and that ye did but love your selves so
well, as not to beguile your own souls in the latter end.



justify the Lord in all his providence and proceedings toward us. Though the
rod be never so sharp, and the burden we groan under be never so heavy, yet
let us keep up good thoughts of God, and say with the godly Levites in their
confession, Neh. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us,
for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly. Lord, thou smitest not
without cause, thou see we stand in need of such sharp physic, else thou
would deal more gently with us. It was the speech of Mauritius the Emperor,
when that bloody and treacherous phocas slew his children before his eyes,
using the words of David, Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
upright are thy judgments. And it was the Legacy that Mr. Ezekiel Culverwel (an
ancient grave Divine in this City) gave to his daughter after he had been many
years bedridden, and sore afflicted with the Gout and Stone, Be sure (says he)
in every condition that God casts you into, keep up good thoughts of God, and
speak well of his name. Wicked men in the day of their calamity, are ready to
dispute the cross which they should take up, and quarrel with every rod that
God lays on them: Though their condition be above their worth, yet their pride
is above their condition; and therefore they are ever murmuring in such
language as the Israelites used, Numb. 14.3 Wherefore has the Lord brought us
into this Land to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey (to our enemies the Canaanites) were it not better for us to return into
Egypt? And when the Prophet Jeremy threatened them with the Caldean Army, that
should even in their days, and before their eyes take away the voice of mirth,
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the
Bride, Jer. 16.9, 10. All that they replied was this, Wherefore has the Lord
pronounced all this great evil against us? What is our iniquity? or what is our
sin that we have committed against the Lord our God? But the godly have another
spirit and a better language, for they say with holy Ezra, chap. 9.13. After
all this is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, Thou,
O our God have punished us less then our iniquities do deserve; Yea, (says
David) Psalm 119.75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. This is the first Duty.

patiently, but also thankfully.

1 Bear it patiently, because we have sinned; so did the Church, Mic. 7.9. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until
he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me.

It was a savoury and submissive speech of Jo Brown a Martyr in Q. Mary's
days, Lord, I will bow, and thou shall beat me.

2 Bear the rod thankfully, because God can order it to our advantage; for all
the paths of the Lord (all the passages of his providence) are mercy and truth
to them that keep his Covenant and his testimonies, Psalm. 25.10. Even paths of
severity are paths of mercy; and we know (says the Apostle) we can speak it by
experience, Romans 8.28.
that all things shall work together for good to them that love God, etc.
Though the passages of providence taken singly by themselves alone, seem to work
against us, as Jacob said on a sad occasion, Gen, 42.36. Me ye have bereaved of
my children, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away
also; All these things are against me; yet take these providence together, and
they are all for us, not against us: As Letters in a Printers shop if ye take
them singly by themselves, they will make never a word, but if you put them
together, they will make first one word, and then another, one line, and then
another till the whole book be printed. A needle woman if she take one color
alone, can make no curious work of it, but if she put many colors together,
then she makes an excellent piece; So here, we must put all providence (both
of goodness and severity, as the Apostle phraseth it, Romans 11.12) together, and
not judge of Gods working by one act, but by many acts together, and then we
shall find them all tending to our salvation, and ending in it: For

1. Either by a Temporal evil God will work a Spiritual Good, to make us more
holy, humble, and heavenly-minded.

2. Or secondly, By a less temporal evil, God will work a greater temporal
Good; as Joseph's imprisonment was the way to Joseph's advancement: Jobs great
losses, were recompensed with far greater gain, for he lost but seven thousand
sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, Job 1.3, 14,
16. But God recompensed all his losses with double gain, for he had fourteen
thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and so
God blessed the latter end of Job, more then his beginning, Job 42.12.

Or thirdly, by a temporal evil, God will work an eternal good for his children,
as it is here in the Text, Our Temporary afflictions work for us Eternal Glory,
according to that of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 61.7. For your shame you shall
have double (a double portion of glory) and for confusion they shall rejoice in
their portion, everlasting joy shall be unto them. And may not all these
considerations make us willing to bear afflictions, not only patiently, but
also thankfully.

I know it is a very hard lesson to take out. But we have both Precept for it,
1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks. Be thankful even for affliction. And
we have President for it, Acts. 5.41. When the Apostles were not only threatened
by the Rulers, but beaten for their preaching up the Lord Jesus, the Text
says, They rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his
name; and it is elegantly expressed in the Original, (...), That they were
honored with dishonor. And the Apostle could say, Rom 5.2, 3. We do not only
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, but we glory also in tribulation. Had we
but such a faith as he had, we should be able to do as he did.

To labor for a sanctified improvement of every affliction; that we may be
able to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 48.8. As we have heard, so have me seen,
this truth by experience. We have heard that afflictions help to discover sin,
or prevent it, or purge it out, and blessed be God we have found and felt in
our hearts this spiritual advantage by it.

We have heard, That affliction helps to try our graces whether they be true or
counterfeit, and to exercise or brighten our graces, that they may not be rusty
(for a rusty key, though it be fitted for the lock, yet til it be brightned, it
will not open it) and to improve or increase our graces (for the more they are
exercised, the more they are increased.) Now as we have heard so have we seen
this spiritual benefit also.

We have heard that affliction helps to fit us for service, and to quicken us
in it; and this we have seen also by experience that when we have been dull and
drowsy and slow-paced in heavens way, affliction has rouzed us out of our
sleepiness, and made us mend our pace in our heavenly journey. It was the
speech of famous Mr. Greenham, when his friends about him were earnestly
begging on his behalf, that God would mitigate his pain (which was acute and
pressing) No, no (says he) Lord give me the good, the good of this affliction.
If the Lord teach you and me this spiritual Trade of improving our afflictions
^o spiritual soul-profit and advantage, we shall find the merchandise of it is
better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof better then the
gain of fine gold, as Solomon speaks of wisdom, Prove. 3.14.



It makes wonderfully for the encouragement of all Gods Children: It may bear
up their spirits, and cheer up their hearts in the midst of the saddest
sufferings and heaviest pressures that can lie upon them; for all these are
making way for Eternal Glory, that will abundantly recompense all our
suffering, and all our waiting; nay, I dare boldly say, One hours fruition or
enjoyment of that glory which is laid up for the Saints in light, will
preponder or outweigh an hundred years suffering: Therefore as our Savior
said to his Disciples, John 16.33. These things have I spoken to you, that in
me ye might have peace: in the world ye shall have tribulation, but he of good
cheer, I have overcome the world. Observe here, Gods people at the same time
when they have tribulation in the world, they may have peace in Christ; at the
same time when there is a great shower rattling upon the tiles, there may be
music, in the chamber; therefore says our Savior, Be of good cheer, be not
daunted or dismayed at those sufferings that ye must undergo, for I have
conquered them all, and ye shall be conquerors in me, and by me; So say I to
you, Lift up those hands that hang down, and those feeble knees, Hebr. 12.12.
Fear none of those things which ye shall suffer: It is the counsel of our
Savior to the Church of Smyrna, and he gives a strong cordial to support her
in the midst of her fears and fainting fits, in the next words, Behold the
Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may may be tried, and ye
shall have tribulation ten days: Observe here, how many Ingredients there are
in this Cordial. 1. It is true, the Devil ( h. e. by his Agents and
Instruments, who do his drudgery) shall cast some of you (not all of you, for
some are not well able to suffer, and therefore the Lord Christ will spare
them, for he is a tenderhearted careful shepherd, that gathers the lambs in
his arms, and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with
young, Isai. 40.11.) 2. It is but a Prison that he casts ye into; if he were
not restrained, he would cast ye all into hell fire. 3. This imprisonment is,
that ye may be tried, (not that ye might be destroyed, or brought to
execution.) 4. Ye shall have tribulation ten days; if the Devil might have his
will, it should be for ten years together, nay, ye should never come out of
prison while ye lived; but his power and rage are limited both for the measure
and the continuance of them; therefore be faithful unto death, and then I will
give ye a crown of life. Oh what a heart-cheating Cordial may this be to every
poor drooping disconsolate soul! God does but cast thee down for a while, that
he may exalt thee for ever; he does but correct thee with a fatherly rod, that
being chastened of the Lord, thou may not he condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. (and believe it (Sirs) it is far better to be a corrected child,
then to be a cocker'd bastard; if we want chastisement whereof all Gods
children are partakers, we are bastards and not sons, Hebr. 12.8. It is better
to go bruised to heaven, then with ease and quietness to go to hell) he does
but cast thee into the furnace of affliction, to purge out thy dross, not to
destroy thy soul; he loves thee in the fire, as well as when thou art out, and
stands by thee all the while; The Lord set home this comfortable cordial upon
thy heart, that it may stand thee in stead in the evil day. So much for the
first Doctrine.

viz. The afflictions of this life are but light and easy; the glory of the
life to come is a weighty and superlative glory.

There are two Branches in this Doctrine, which I must distinctly open and
confirm, Viz.

1. That the afflictions of this life are but light and easy.

2. That the glory of the life to come, is a weighty and superlative glory.

That our afflictions are light and easy: This (ye will say) seems very
strange and incredible; for it may be objected, David say, Psalm. 69.2. I sink
in deep mire, where there is no standing, I am come into deep waters, where the
floods overflow me; does not Heman that godly wise man complain Psalm. 88.7.15.
Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves;
yea, I am so sadly afflicted, that I am ready to die; and that which ^s yet
sadder, these afflictions have lasted not a few days or years, but a long time,
Even from my youth up till this say. And does not holy Paul, speaking of the
trouble which befell him in Asia, say expressly, 2 Cor. 1.8. That we were
pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of
life? How then can the afflictions of the godly be said to be light and easy?

themselves, but lie heavy upon them, and make them sometimes cry out in the
anguish and bitterness of their spirits, as Job did, chap. 6.12. Is my strength
the strength of stones, or is my flesh of brass? Am I made of so hard metal,
that I can endure any thing? Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch
over me? chapter 7.12. How long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till
I swallow down my spittle? ver. 19.

But in two respects they may be said to be light and easy to be born.

1. If ye consider them comparatively, compared either with The torments of
Hell which are prevented. Or the joys of heaven which are prepared for them.


For the first of these, Compare the afflictions of this life with the Torments
of hell, and they are but a fleabiting in comparison of that worm that dies
not, and that fire that shall never be quenched; Oh who is there living upon
earth, that understands the power of Gods anger, or that dreadful indignation,
the mountains and milstones of wrath, that lie upon the damned in hell, and
will lie for evermore? Psalm. 90.11. It was a devout Meditation of Austin,
Domine hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum parcas; Lord cut me here on earth
with the sharpest knife of affliction, bruise me here, nay, burn me here, to
that thou spare me hereafter, and keep me from everlasting fire.

For the second, Compare the afflictions of this life with the joys of heaven,
that are prepared for the godly, and then they are exceeding light and
inconsiderable; what is a drop of Vinegar put into a hogshead of Wine? it is
nothing, it is swallowed up, and not discerned. What is it for a Prince to
travel in a rainie stormy day, when he is riding to take possession of a
Kingdom? He esteems steems the rain not worth regarding.

Pericula non respicit Martyr, coronam respicit, says Basil. A Martyr looks
not at the danger that is before him, but at the Crown of glory that is beyond
that danger.

If one of you should have a Jewel of five hundred pound thrown at you, and in
the throwing, it gives you a blow upon the hand, but you have the Jewel for the
blows sake, you would esteem the blow as nothing for the Jewels sake. What one
affliction, cross or calamity is there that can be named, which is able to
posze one smile of Gods face? And if a smile an earth be able to sweeten the
bitterest cup, and to ease the heaviest burden that can lie upon us, what will
the full fruition of God in glory be? If a woman in travel (though she have
torturing pain for a while yet) as soon as she is delivered of the child
remembers the anguish no more, for joy that a man is born into the world, as
our Savior tells us, John 16.21. How much more may that unconceivable joy and
happiness that is laid up in heaven, when it is enjoyed but one day, nay but
one hour, make the godly forget all their sorrows and sufferings which they
endured here on earth for many years together?

2. Afflictions are light and easy, in regard of Gods gracious supportation
that he affords his servants in bearing of them: Here the Psalmist speaking out
of his own experience, Psalm. 94.17, 19. Unless the Lord had been my helper, my
soul had almost dwelt in silence, When I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy o
Lord held me up; In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my soul. Gods supporting hand made a heavy burden easily born. And
indeed it is worthy our Observation, does not support a man in the day of
trial, the lightest affliction will be so heavy, that he shall sink under it;
see it in Ahitophel, when he saw that his counsel was not followed, (a man
would have thought, this had been a very small trial for so wise a man, and so
great a Politician to grapple with: but God leaving him to himself, he sinks
under it) he goes home to his house, and hanged himself, 2 Samuel 17.23. On the
contrary, when God does support a man in a dark and cloudy day (as the Prophet
calls it, Ezekiel. 36.12.) the heaviest affliction that can befall him shall be so
equally poized, that he shall be able to stand under it; see an instance in
David 1 Samuel 30.1, 6. His City Ziklag is burnt with fire; his two wives Ahinoam
and Abigail were taken captive, David and the people that were with him wept,
till they could weep no longer, and (that which was yet worst of all) the
people spoke of stoning him, for very grief and anger, that their sons and
daughters were carried captive; here was a sore affliction indeed, such a
doleful distress, as might have broken a man to pieces; but God supporting
David, he stands under it without fainting; He encouraged himself in the Lord
his God.

Thus I have made good the first Branch of the Doctrine, That the afflictions
of the Godly are light and easy.

and superlative glory. It is called here (...), A weight of glory, alluding to
the Hebrew word (...), which signifies both weight and glory. It is the weight
of gold that adds much to the value of it. The more weighty a Crown is, the
more it is worth in our esteem.

Nay yet more, This glory is not only a weighty glory, but an hyperbolical
transcendent glory, far surpassing the capacity and comprehension of such poor
creatures as we are; for such is the excellency, beauty and sweetness of it,
that (as one says excellently Bolton of the four last things.
) No mortal man can describe it, no created understanding can conceive it, or
comprehend it: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him; 1 Cor.
2.9. The eye has seen admirable things, Solomon's Temple and the glory of it,
which was so great, That for the Temples sake at Jerusalem even Kings did bring
presents unto God, Psalm. 68.29. and Solomon's stately house, which was thirteen
years, in building, 1 Kin. 7.1. and all the wonders of the world.

The ear has heard most delicious exquisite heart-ravishing music; the heart
of man can conceive yet much more then either eye has seen, or ear has heard,
for in conceit it can turn all the stones upon earth into pearls, all the sand
upon the seashore into Silver, and all the water of the Sea, into liquid gold,
yet the height and happiness of heavenly glory does far surpass all this,
especially if ye consider these three things most worthy of our meditation.

1. The place where this glory is prepared. 2. The Properties wherewith it is
adorned. 3. The Privileges wherewith it is attended.
For the first, The place where it is prepared, is Heaven, The new Jerusalem,
The City of the great King; this must needs be a glorious place, it ye consider
these particulars.

1. God himself is the maker and builder of it, Hebr. 11.10. The most goodly
Palaces that ever were built on earth are but the work of men's hands, but this
is a house (...), made without hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. God himself made it without
man's help. 2. God built this house for himself, for the honor of his Majesty,
to be the place of his residence, where he will keep his court, as if he should
say, Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

3. In building this house, he showed all his skill, it was his Masterpiece,
therefore there are two words used in the Text, Heb, 11.10. (...), The former
of them signifies an Artificer, a curious workman or contriver; God did not
only build this house, but he showed extraordinary workmanship in contriving
it, the frame or fabric of this earthly globe, ye see it is a goodly piece
full of beauty; but alas! this is but a stage or scaffold set up for a while,
viz. for 5 or 6 thousand years; (which is but a moment in comparison of
eternity) but this heavenly house is to last for ever. Now if the scaffold, be
so glorious, how infinitely beautiful will the house it self be?

4. It must needs be a glorious place, because of the Glorious Company there
residing, viz. The great God of heaven and earth, the Lord Christ with a
glorified body, and all the holy Angels and spirits of just men made perfect,
continually triumphing in the praises of the Holy One, rejoicing in him, and he
in them.

For the Second The Properties wherewith this glory is adorned; I will name but
these three.

1 It is a pure Glory without the least mixture of misery or infelicity. There
the Saints enjoy light, without darkness, mirth without mourning, health
without sickness, wealth without woe, beauty without blemish, and honor without
envy. In this life, all our comforts have some mixture of bitterness in them,
but there are unmixed joys and delights without the least wormwood or gall
mingled with them.

2 It is a perfect glory, nothing shall be wanting that the soul can desire,
Fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11 and a full Reward, 2 John 8.

3 It is a satisfying Glory. The Saints shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of his house, and he will make them drink of the River of his
Pleasures, Psalm 36.8. All the pleasures and treasures that this world can
afford us, will not give satisfaction to an immortal Soul; They do not feed
Esurientem animam, but esuriem animae; The hungry soul is not filled, but the
hunger of the soul is increased by them. But this glory will so fully delight,
beautify and satisfy the soul, that it can desire no more.

For the third. The Privileges wherewith this glory is attended.

They are of two sorts, some are Privative. Positive.


1 Privative, in the freedom from all evil.

For example. The soul is here subject to temptations and corruptions,
desertions from God, and provocations from wicked men, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me
that I sojourn in Mesech, etc. These are so exceeding grievous to a gracious
heart, that they make a man cry out with holy Job, My soul chooses strangling,
and death rather than life, Job 7.15. But when the Soul comes to enjoy that
glory, all these shall be removed. All tears shall be wiped away from their
eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain. Rev. 21.4.

2. Positive Privileges in the fruition of all good things, that can be
conceived or desired.

For the Saints shall have an Immediate Communion with God these three ways,
viz. By Seeing God, Enjoying God, Being made like to God.


1. The Saints shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2.

This is that which is called the Beatifical, or blessed-making vision, for in
his presence, ( Hebr. (...) in his faces) is fullness of joy; If a man had all
the pains of hell upon him, this vision were able to make a man rejoice;
because totam amaritudinem Gehennae absorberet, says Chrysostom. It would
swallow up the bitterness of hell it self.

2. The Saints shall enjoy him as their Portion: He shall be All in All, that
is (as one sweetly expresses it*) He shall be joy to our Souls, Life to our
Bodies, Beauty to our eyes, Music to our ears, Perfume to our nostrils, Honey
to our mouths, and Contentment to our hearts; for what can be wanting to him
that has that God for his Portion, who has and does all, and fills all things
in heaven and earth.

3. The Saints shall be made like to God, and conformed to the Image of his Son
Jesus Christ, Romans 8.29.

1. Like him in Soul, by perfection of Grace, for they shall have perfect
knowledge, perfect holiness and righteousness, as much as Creatures can be
capable to receive.

2. Like him in Body; For he shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. Then shall our Bodies be
Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.44. active, lively and nimble as Spirits; And they shall
be Impassible, such as are not capable of suffering, and Immortal such as can
never dye; In brief, they shall have such an admirable beauty and luster put
upon them, that they shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, Matthew. 13.43.

the service of God is no unprofitable service. It was a lying slander that
those Blasphemers cast upon the ways of God when they said Mal. 3.14. It is in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts; Just like some at this
day, What good is got by fasting and praying, and that precise walking, that
Preachers press us to from day to day? O had these men ever seen but one
glimpse of that beauty that is in grace, which is glory begun; or one taste of
that heavenly glory, which is grace ferfected, then they would acknowledge, we
can serve no such master as God is, either for work or wages; as he is the best
master, so is he the best play master: To thee therefore that walk after the
course of this present evil world, and according to the will of the Prince of
the air, the fpirit that works mightily in the children of disobedience, Ephesians.
2.2. Let me propound that Question, which Saul did to his servants that stood
about him, 1 Samuel 22.7. Will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds? So
say I to you, Can sin, or Satan, or the world, give you such wages as this?
such transcendent glory as this, in seeing God, enjoying God, and being made
like to God? No, no, they will pay you with sorrow and vexation, with shame and
confusion, and condemnation to all eternity.

Consider seriously of it before it be too late, for the time will come when
you will befool your selves and say, O what sots and senseless wretches were we
that willingly deprived our selves of that weighty and transcendent glory, for
a few stinking lusts, and the pleasures of sin for a season! We thought the
service of God unprofitable and burdensome saying, What A weariness is it Mal.
1.13. But now, Oh that we had been a thousand years fasting and praying,
mourning and weeping; Oh that we had been ten thousand years excercising the
strictest duties of Religion self denial, renewing repentance, mortification,
contempt of the world; and the like) rather then have lost this weight of
glory; for it is an invaluable, unconceiveable, and irrecoverable loss; the
tears of Hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of Heaven: Thus will it be,
I say it again, thus will it he with all you, that neglect so great salvation,
and account Gods service an unprofitable service: The Lord of his infinite
mercy awaken you to Repentance.

So much for the second Doctrine.

viz. That the afflictions of this life are but for a moment, the glory of the
life to come is an everlasting glory.

That the Afflictions of this life are but for a moment appears in this,
Because our life, if it were ten times longer then it is, in comparison of
Eternity, is but a moment of time, Mine age is nothing before thee, Psalm. 39.5.
It is but as a drop of water in comparison of all the water in the Ocean.

That the glory of the life to come is an everlasting glory, the Scripture
brings in abundant Testimony; the Righteous shall enter into everlasting life,
says our Savior, Matthew. 25.46. And heaven is called a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, Hebr. 12.28. Earthly Kingdoms are quickly shaken to pieces; the great
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, can as easily toss Kingdoms, as we can toss
a Tennis ball; where are the four great Monarchies of the world, the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman? They devoured one another, and death
devoured them all, but this heavenly Kingdom cah never be moved, neither is it
capable of any change, corruption, or alteration: Does not the Apostle call it
an inheritance incorruptible and undesiled, and suck a one as fades not away?
1 Pet. 1.4. Does he not call it a crown of glory that never withers of
waxethold, 1 Pet. 5.4.

O this ETERNITY, ETERNITY, ETERNITY, It is such a great depth or bottomless
Ocean that it swallows up all our thoughts; it is that which makes every man's
condition either infinitely happy, or incomprehensibly miserable* In reference
to the wicked such as have no interest in Christ, no work of grace upon their
hearts, no fear to offend God, nor care to please him; It may smite their
hearts with that fear and consternation, that ghastly horror and doleful
confusion, that if I had the tongue of men and angels, I were not able to
express it suppose a little Bird should every thousandth year fetch a drop of
water out of the Ocean, how many millions of years would it be before this bird
could empty the Ocean? Surely, this is but a picture of eternity; so long, and
infinitely longer, shall those damned wretches suffer the torments of Hell
fire, without end or ease, without mitigation or intermission.

In reference to the godly, this Eternity may ravish their hearts with
admiration, and holy exaltation or rejoicing in Spirit, that the glory prepared
for them is such as shall never have end: After a million or thousand thousand
years expired, their glory is but begun; and when ten thousand millions are
past, their glory is not hear to an end. That golden speech of Bernard,
Momentaneum est quod delectat, aternum quod cruciat; The pleasures of sin are
but for a moment, the punishment of sin is everlasting, may by way of
Inversion, be fitly applied to all true believers; the sufferings they meet
with are but for a moment; the pleasures at the right hand of God, which they
expect, are for evermore; at thy right hand (says David, Psalm. 16.11.) are
pleasures for evermore.

In brief, it is the highest pitch of the misery of the damned in Hell, that
their punishment is everlasting, and yet their torments are so great, that
every moment seems an eternity: On the contrary, It is the highest pitch of the
Saints happiness in heaven, that their joys are everlasting, and yet these
joys are so fresh, that their eternity seems but a moment.



Give all diligence to clear your title to this eternal glory, that you may
know it is prepared for you, I say for you.

Quest. But how may we clear our title to this Inheritance?

Ans. Ye must labor to get evidences of your election, make your calling and
election sure, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10. that is, make your Election sure
by your calling; prove one, and prove both, if ye be called with an internal,
as well as an external vocation, ye may be confident ye are elected: Therefore
get evidences of your effectual vocation, by returning an Echo to Gods call,
that when he says, Seek ye my face, if thy heart can answer, thy face Lord
will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. When Christ says, Come to me, poor dejected sinner,
thou that art weary of the work of sin, and heavy laden, with the weight of
sin, Come to me, and I will give thee rest, Mat. 11.28. If thy heart can
answer, Lord I would creep to thee on hands and knees; when the spirit of God
whispers in a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, Isai.
30.21. If thy heart can return a yielding answer; Lord, if it be the way,
(though it be a narrow way and full of difficulty, yet) I will walk in it; this
is an evidence of thy effectual calling. So likewise, Get Evidences of your
Adoption, that ye are the children of God, because ye are like your father; and
get evidences of your justification and sanctification by feeling the Lord
Christ coming near your hearts, both by blood and water, pacifying your
Consciences, and purifying your hearts and lives; this is the way to clear your
Title to this everlasting Inheritance.

In brief, There are two things will exceeding much conduce to the, clearing of
your Title; Viz. 1. The Adding to your Graces. Viz. 2. The Acting of your
Graces.


For the former, Hearken to the counsel of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.5, 7. Give
all diligence to add to your faith virtue (that is, a well composed life,
says Judicious Calvin) and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge, temperance,
and to temperance patience, and to patience Godliness, and to Godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness Charity; This adding to your
Graces, is a Laying up in store for your selves a good foundation for the time
to come, that you may lay hold on Enternal Life, as St. Paul expresses it, 1 Timothy 6.19. That as wicked men are said to treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath Rom 2.5. So ye (on the contrary) by these Additionals, will be treasuring
up grace against the day of glory.

For the latter, Be still acting of your Graces, and exercising of your selves
to godliness: 1 Timothy 4.7.

For example, 1. Let Faith be in exercise, still feeding upon the Promises, and
making vigorous application of them to your own Souls: If the Promises feed
your faith, your faith will feed your Assurance, and carry you with comfort and
confidence to your journeys end.

2. Let Repentance be in exercise, by renewing that godly sorrow which comes
from God, and leads the soul unto God, looks on God offended, and ends in God
reconciled. Holy Job, though he had a strong faith, as appears by that much
admired speech of his Job. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I put my trust in
him: yet in the same verse, ye may see, he was frequent in renewing his
repentance: I will (says he) reprove my own ways before him (so some read the
phrase, and the Hebr. word (...) will well bear it) q. d. I will be so far from
justifying my self, that I will disallow mine own ways, and disavow my own
righteousness; yea repent daily, and abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job. 42.6.

3. Let Love be in exercise; Love the Lord Jesus dearly and sincerely: Be sick
of Love toward so sweet a Savior, as the Spouse was, Cant. 2.5. Love nothing
much, but only him whom you cannot love too much; And if you love him, see
what he himself says in that comfortable Scripture, John 14.21. He that loves
me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self
to him. Now if Christ manifest himself to thy Soul, then certainly thy Title to
heaven is cleared.

4. Let fear be in exercise; Happy is the man that fears always, Prove. 28.14.
and the more ye walk in the fear of the Lord, the more ye walk in the comforts
of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. This is the first Duty.

eager and earnest, instant and constant in the pursuit of this Eternal Glory,
than ever ye have been to this day,

Oh that ye and I could go up to the top of Mount Nebo as Moses did, Deuteronomy.
32.49. and view the pleasant Land afar off, and taste some of the Grapes of
Canaan by serious Meditation.

Oh that we could seriously consider. 1. From what we are Redeemed. 2. To what
we are appointed.


Redeemed from wrath, appointed to me^cy; Redeemed from the pit ot hell, and
appointed to the glory of heaven; Redeemed from those infernal flames, and
everlasting burnings, but appointed to those everlasting joys, which no heart
can conceive, nor tongue express.

Were these things soundly digested and seriously considered, they would awake
our drowsy spirits, and set the wheels of the soul a going, that we should not
only walk in the way that leads to life, but we should cheerfully run the race
that is set before us: Heb. 12.1.

The truth is, we might do a great deal more in the pursuit of our glorious
hopes than we do, if we did but put forth our strength to do what we are able;
and we might put forth our strength more than we do, if we were not sick of a
spiritual Lethargy; and we are sick of a spiritual Lethargy, because we do not
prize those glorious hopes that are set before us according to the worth of
them.

In Gods fear therefore, let us hearken to the Counsel of the Holy Ghost: Heb.
6.12. Be not slothful but followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the promses. This is the second Duty.

call off our affections from the world, the pomp and glory and vanity of it,
that they may be set upon that Eternal Glory, which is prepared for the Saints
in light

To you that are called with a holy calling, and have had a taste of that
everlasting Consolation, and good hope through Grace, God seems to speak in
that language wherein Joseph spoke to his Brethren, Genesis 45.20. Also regard not
your Stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours: So faith God to
you, set not your hearts on trash and trifles; there is a Crown of eternal
glory set before you: Is it fit for Kings Children to be raking in dunghills?
This duty of weanedness from the world is seasonable at all times, but most
suitable to the times whereinto God has cast us; for now God seems to say to us
as he did to Baruch, Jer. 45.4* 5. Behold that which I have built will I break
down, and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole Land: And
seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not; Oh that we had such a
spirit as Moses had, he refused to be called the son of Pharoah's daughter (he
trampled upon all the honors and pleasures of Egypt) Because, he had an eye to
the Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.24, 26. It is Storied of Alexander, that when
he heard of the riches of the Indies, he gave away all his present Possessions
that he had in Macedon, and being asked why he did so? He answered, I hope and
look for far greater things than these: Oh that we could imitate this Heroic
Resolution, To contemn our present enjoyments in comparison of our future
hopes. This is the third Duty.

frame our selves to a Heavenly Conversation: Though our commoration or abode
be upon earth, let our Conversation be in heaven Phil. 3.20. For hereby we
shall be sitting our selves for that Glory that shall be revealed. If one of
you were to have an Inheritance in Spayn, you would learn the Spanish tongue,
and the Spanish fashion, you would frame your selves to the custom of that
Country or Kingdom, where you were to spend your days: Why surely, ye look for
an Inheritance in Heaven among the Angels, yea to be (...), Equal to the
Angels, Luke 20.36. Why do you not frame your selves to an Angelical
Conversation? You look to be like them in dignity, strive to be like them in
duty; To do your Fathers Will on earth, as the Angels do it in heaven. To this
end, Let us every day take a turn or two with Christ on Mount Tabor, take a
prospect of heaven, and turn every Solemnity into a school of Divinity; Let us
say as Fulgentius did when he saw the Nobitity of Rome sit mounted in their
bravery, Si talis est Roma terrestris qualis est Roma caelestis? If Rome be
such a glorious place, what is Heaven? If the Music on earth be so
delightful, how unconceivably sweet and melodious will the Music of heaven
be? Thus a Sanctified fancy may make every creature a ladder to heaven.



This Doctrine may be as an Alabaster box of precious ointment, to refresh and
revive the spirits of all true Believers, all the Saints and Servants of
Christ, in the midst of all the troubles and trials, sorrows and sufferings
that can befall them; There is a Crown of Eternal Glory prepared for you, which
may make your hearts dance for joy; yet a little while, and he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry, and when he comes he brings his Reward with him,
Rev. 22.12. Then shall ye hear him speaking comfortably to you; he will speak
to your hearts and say, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Enter ye into the joy of
your Lord and Master, Mat. 25* 20. q. d. This joy cannot enter into you,
because of your straitness, but ye may enter into it, because of its fullness;
The Sea cannot enter into a Hogshead, because the Vessel cannot contain it; But
the Hogshead may enter into the Sea, because the Sea can fill it. To conclude,

There are 4. principal Names, whereby the Holy Ghost expresses the felicity
of the Saints in heaven: 1. It is called a Life, and such a Life as is Eternal.
2. It is called a Glory, and such a Glory as is a Crown. 3. It is called a
Kingdom, and such a Kingdom as is Immutable and Unmovable. 4. It is called an
Inheritance, and such an Inheritance as is Immortal.


Now tell me (poor fainting, drooping Soul) What is it that thy heart can wish?
Or what can bear up thy spirit under all afflictions, reproaches, difficulties
and discouragements whatsoever, if this cannot do it?

Is there any thing thou love better than life? Is there any better life,
than a life of glory? Is there any glory greater than a Crown of glory? Is
there any Crown so desirable as that which comes by Inheritance? Is there any
Inheritance so admirable or delightful, as that which is immortal undefiled,
and such as newer shall fade away.

Lift up thy head therefore; because thy Redemption and eternal Glorification
are so near at hand: say to thy own Soul as that godly man did on his
deathbed; Hold out faith and patience; thy work is almost at an end: Encourage
thy self, as Basil tells us the Martyrs encouraged one another, when they were
cast out naked in a Winters night, being to be burned at a stake the next day:
Sharp it the cold, but let us endure a while, and Abraham's bosom will warm us;
Troublesond is the way, but the end of the journey will be sweet and pleasant:
Let our feet burn awhile, that we may dance for ever with the Angels; Let our
hands feel they fire, that we may lay hold on Eternal Life. The Lord Jesus work
these things upon our hearts, that they may make an abiding Impression. Amen.

I have done with the Text.

Let me speak something to the Occasion: How seasonably this Text may be
applied to our dear deceased Brother Daniel Waldoe Esquire, one that fined for
Alderman in this famous City, (whose Funerals we this day solemnize) ye that
knew him and his Conversation, may easily conceive.

He was a man trained up in the school of affliction for many years together;
being exercised with that acute and tormenting disease of the Stone, about 30.
years.

And doubtless God by that long and sharp affiction was preparing him for
eternal glory, partly by purging out his dross, and making him white as the
Scripture phraseth it, Dan. 11.35. and partly by teaching him the exercise of
Patience and perseverance. For that speech of the Apostle was verified in him,
Romans 5.3. Tribulation works patience; It is a Paradox to Reason, for
affliction in its self and its own nature works Impatience, and makes a man
fret and fume like a wild Bull in a net, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 51.20. But
when God works with it, then it works patience, and makes a man say with
David, Be silent unto the Lord, O my Soul, Psalm, 62.5. Do not utter an
impatient word.

Yea his Afflictions taught him not only Patience and submission, but also
self-denial and sympathy, or a fellow-feeling with others miseries; He could
sigh in their sorrows, and bleed in their wounds, and be affected with their
sufferings, as if they had been his own: In brief, the Rod taught him that
excellent Lesson, To have a heart weaned from the world; for the Rod has a
voice, Micah 6.9. and it spoke to him in that language which the Prophet used
to the Jews in Babylon, Micah 2.10. Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your
rest.

The Testimony therefore that I may give of this worthy Citizen, without
flattery or partiality is this.

First, He was a very humble man, low in his own eyes, no way self-consident,
or self-conceited. And I am of the same opinion with that famous Divine, Dr.
Harris, late of Oxford, that was wont to say, He valued no man for his gifts,
but for, his humility under them; Certainly the more Grace any man has in his
heart, the more base he will be in his own eyes: Did ye ever know a man more
eminent in Grace than Blessed Paul? And was there ever any man more humble? I
am says he (...), less than the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8.

Thus was it with this dear Brother of ours; he so hated Pride, and that vain
and sinful excess in apparel, so much affected in this luxurious wanton age,
that he chose rather his own Children should be clothed beneath their rank,
than above it: And though he kept not a penurious Table, yet he professedly
declined that delicacy and profuseness which many delight in, that in both, he
might not only avoid the scandal of the Gospel, and offense the Godly; but
that the superfluity in diet and apparel might be improved to the better
advantage of clothing; the naked, and refreshing the bowels of the hungry.

2. He was very Industrious in his Calling, and doubtless that is very
acceptable and well-pleasing unto God; especially, when this diligence arises
not from a covetous desire of heaping up riches, but from an obediential
respect to Gods Command, because he has enjoined us that duty, Prove. 27.23. Be
thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds; and
again, Prove. 10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich; yea God has annexed a
promise to it, Prove. 22.29. See a man diligent in his business, he shall
stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men.

And indeed, God was pleased singularly to bless his endeavors, and to enrich
him with a Temporal estate: For though a large estate was not his design, yet
was it part of his Reward, and a pledge of future and far better hopes laid up
for him in heaven.

3. He was a Pious man; He did not so mind his particular Calling, as to
neglect his General, but he drove a Trade for heaven, not only in his holy and
religious observation of the Sabbath, but also in a careful Attendance, at the
Posts of Wisdoms house on the week days, as his occasions and bodily
infirmities would permit. Neither was he an idle and unprositable Hearer, but
like the Industrious Be, he gathered honey to carry home to his Hive, for the
feeding of his Family, as well as the refreshing of his own Soul; witness those
heaps of Sermon Notes, that are found in his Study.

4. He was a Faithful man, one that filled his Relation faithful; a tender
hearted Husband to his Wife; a loving careful Father to his Children; one that
knew how to love them without fondness, and to rule them without rigor. A
prudent Governor toward his Servants, minding the good of their Souls, as
well as the fruit of their Service.

5. He was a Charitable man, nay, (I may considently say) Eminent and Exemplary
in the Grace of Charity; being a real. Cordial, faithful friend to a godly
Ministry, as appeared by his great bounty manifested on every occasion; for to
my knowledge, he has given very considerabe Sums of Money toward the
encouraging of those that were painful Laborers in Gods Vineyard.

Never any Minister or Godly man came to propound any work of Piety or Charity,
public or private, that needed to do any more than to propund it: For his
heart was so dipped in Charity, and so set upon works of mercy, that he prevented
Importunity, by his Christian and Heroic Liberality.

I do not speak rashly, but advisedly; He made no more of giving 10 l. to a
work of Charity, than some of you (and those of the richer sort) make of giving
10 s. Yea, there are diverse here present that can witness this Truth. Few did
match him; none that I knew, did surpass him in works of Charity.

His Charity had two singular Concomitants, which made it the more Remarkable
and praiseworthy.

1. He did good while he lived; He carried his Lantern before him; He made his
own hands his Executors, and his own eyes his Overseers. Some will part with
their riches when they can keep them no longer; This is like a Cutpurse, that
being espied or pursued, will drop a Purse or gold, because he can keep it no
longer. But to be doing good in our lifetime, while we have opportunity, this
is an act of Faith, and an evidence that we can trust God with our Estate, and
our Children, that he will provide for them, when out heads are laid in the
grave, according to that of the Psalmist, A good man is merciful and lends,
and his seed, is blessed, Psalm. 37.26.

2. He dispensed his Charity so secretly, without any self-seeking or
pharisaical vainglory, that his left hand did not know what his right hand did.

In brief, He did so much good while he lived, as if he meant to have nothing
to do when he died, and yet he gave so largely when he came to die, as if he
had done no good when he lived.

Now wherefore is all this spoken?

Not as if this Funeral Elegy could be any advantage to him; No, no, Funeral
Sermons are vivorum solatia, not ^^^tuorum subsidia, says Austin; They are no
helpful advantages to the dead, but wholesome Instructions to the living; The
dead praise not thee O Lord, nor any that go down into silence, Psalm. 115.17.
Look as the dead return no praises to the Living God, so neither do they regard
any praises from Living men.

It is not therefore spoken so much by way of Commendation, as to propound him
a pattern of Imitation. This deceased friend (as it is said of Abel) Heb. 11.4.
Though he be dead, he yet speaks, And what is the language that he uses*
Surely it is the same that Gideon used to his Soldiers, Judge. 7.17. Look on
me, and do likewise: If ye do as he did, ye shall speed as he sped.

Remember, you and I must answer for Examples, as well as Precepts.

Ye know what, is laid of Noah; Heb. 11.7. By building an Ark he condemned the
world: His piety condemned their impiety; His faith condemned their infidelity,
his uprightness, their hypocrysie. So this good man's Charity will condemn your
want of Charity at the Great day.

If ye say, You have many Children, so had he; He has left 9. Children alive;
but the providing for them was no obstruction to his Charity.

To conclude; Blessed is that man that so lives as that he is desired, and so
dies as that he is missed.

This Nathaniel, (so I may call him for his Sincerity, as well as a Job for his
Charity) He lived desired, and will be exeedingly missed: Missed I say in his
family, where he was a faithful Governor; In the City, where he was a
bountiful Benefactor; In the Parish, where he was a useful Neighbor; In the
Company, where he was an honored Member.

Missed among the Poor, especially Widows in necessity, to whom he was a Father.

Oh that God would humble us for our stupidity, That the righteous perishes,
and no man lays to heart, and merciful men are taken away, and no man
regards it, Isa. 57.1.

Oh that God would make his example powerful and influential on all the Rich
men that hear me, or shall read this Sermon, and the testimony that is given to
this Worthy man: Oh that God would send us many such WALDOES!

FINIS.

