THE ENGLISH Historical Library: OR, A Short View and Character Of most of the
WRITERS Now Extant, either in Print or Manuscript; Which may be Serviceable to
the Undertakers of a General History of this Kingdom.

By WILLIAM NICOLSON, A. M. Archdeacon of Carlisle.

(...), etc. Lucian. de Conscrib. Hist. LONDON, Printed for Abel Swall and T.
Child, at the Unicorn, in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCVI.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of YORK, Primate and Metropolitan of ENGLAND.
MY LORD,
INstead of prefixing so great a Name to the following Papers, I had thoughts
of craving Your Grace's Patronage for some others which more nearly relate to
the Affairs of Your own Province. But, I know not how, these have gotten the
start; and, though I may (for the present) have some Reason to vary my Subject, I
hope, I may be allowed to put those also under Your Protection hereafter. I am
deeply sensible of my own Insufficiency to perfect what is here begun, without
such Assistances as Your Grace (above all others) can best afford me. My great
distance from Libraries, and the narrowness of my Acquaintance with our English
Historians, will render my best Performances very scanty and imperfect. Yet, if
the Design be approved and meet with acceptance abroad, I shall not despair of
such helps as will rectify all my mistakes, and supply the defects of this
first Essay. To this purpose, I now humbly offer it to Your Grace's View and
Censure; being very ready to acknowledge all your Corrections as so many
Particular Obligations and Honors conferred upon,

MY LORD, YOUR GRACE's Most dutiful Son and Servant, WILL. NICOLSON.

THE PREFACE.
A General History of this Kingdom is what our learned Men begin now so
sensibly to want, and so earnestly to desire, that I do not question but
Attempts will be made to gratify the prevailing Humor of the Times. Though to
me, I confess, the Prospect is a little discouraging: Since the due observance
of all the Rules which Lucian, Father Le Moyne, and others, have laid down for
the carrying on of such a work require so many Accomplishments, that I am very
much of the Jesuits opinion, that their Historian is Le moyne's Art of Writing
Hist. p. 224.
a Man not yet born, nor will be before the year that discovers the perpetual
motion and Philosopher's Stone. It Is not enough, they tell us, that he be (what
the Incomparable Translatour of Polybius observes of his Sir H. S. Pref. to
Polyb.
Author) a Soldier, a Statesman and a Philosopher: but he must be also a
Divine, a Lawyer, an Orator, a Poet, and a downright honest
Countrey-Gentleman. At least, he must be plentifully stocked with Le Moyne, p.
21, 22, etc.
Wit, or an Universal Disposition and unbounded Spirit that comprehends all
that is Great and Glorious in the several States and Empires of the whole World.
To these Intellectual Endowments we must add the great Moral one of his being
Philalethes, a Person of that just Integrity as not to be biased by Passion or
Interest. A Learned Writer has very lately observed, That H. Wharton's Pref. to
AB. Laud's Life p. 10.
Private Affections ought not to accompany works of such a Public Nature: and
yet how difficult a Lesson this is to Flesh and Blood, himself has fairly shown
us, when (in the same Page) he sticks not to affirm that his late Patron left
more Collections of his own handwriting than perhaps any Man, either of this
or the last Age, ever did write.

So that, for my share, I know not where to look for this fine Person; this
Nonesuch of a Man; who alone (it seems) is qualified to write a General
History. We have lately indeed had Proposals for the speedy publishing of an
entire History of this Nation: But I extremely suspect the Author, when he
appears abroad, will not be able to stand this Test. The very Title of his Book
(which promises to bring down our Story J. ^^^on's Proposals.
from the Flood) looks so like a Jest, that I cannot but fear that we shall not
have Alloy enough to qualify the mighty strain of Poetry that will run thorough
the whole Work. What Advances might be made this way by T. Gale, Praef. ad
Script. XV. ^* 8.
Leland, Bale or Josceline, I know not: but I think all three of 'em have
discovered such frailties in themselves, and such defects in their writings, as
are hardly consistent with the being able to finish an Undertaking of this
kind. Nor do I at all believe Dr. Gale's great Mr. Id. ib.
Seldom to have been a Man of Accomplishments sufficient for such a
Performance; and I fancy the learned Doctor himself will be of my opinion when
he has carefully perused his Preface to the December Scriptores, his Spicilegium
to Eadmerus and his Janus Anglorum. Camden Camd. Brit. in Norman.
bewails the rashness and folly of his own Attempting such a Matter; and seems
to acknowledge that 'twas Imprudence and want of thought, which, in his younger
days, had led him into the Sare. Mr. Milton and Sir William Temple designed
only to write Abridgments of our English Story; and therefore they do not
expect that what they have drawn up, for a View of the Times before the
Conquest, should be received as a Complete General History, even for so far as
it reaches. Their Sir W. T.'s Introduct. p. 5.
beating through these rough and dark ways of the Journey appears to be done in
so much haste, and affords so slender a Discovery of the road, that it looks
like the Tale of a Man in a fright; one that has been scared with dismal
Apprehensions of meeting with most monstrous Sprites and Hobgoblins in the
Shades and Night he had passed thorough.

Before therefore I can have any tolerable hopes of seeing a work of this
Grandeur carried on with success, and to the purpose, I must hear of its being
undertaken by a Clubb of Men of Parts and Learning; some whereof are Masters of
our ancient Languages, and others of the Modern; Some versed in the Writings of
the old Britains, Romans, Saxons and Danes, and others thoroughly acquainted
with the Historians since the Conquest; some that know the Geography, and
others the Law, of the Realm; some that have been bred at Court, and others in
the Camp, etc. Nor would I have this Society to consist of such as the
Bookseller only should assure me were Persons of these very Characters; but I
could wish it might be an Engagement mutually and generously entered into by
Men of Leisure and Fortune, as additional Accomplishments, over and above all
that we have mentioned. Or else, let me hope to see a College of Historians as
Nobly endowed here, as that of the Antiquaries is in Sweden; where the
President has a yearly Salary allowed him of six hundred Crowns, and each of
his Assessors three hundred. When these Gentlemen have agreed on, and finished
their several Tasks, they ought to be carefully perused by every particular
Member of the Society; as well as by him whose peculiar Province it shall be to
inspect and supervise the whole.

To serve this imaginary Fraternity I have drawn together the following Papers;
which give the Reader as short and as methodical an Abstract of a great many
larger Collections on the same Subject as I could readily furnish him with. I
know there have been Catalogues of this kind made heretofore by Men of better
Acquaintance with our English Libraries and Manuscripts than I can pretend to.
Such is Joh. Josceline's Commentary cited by Praef. ad Angl. Sacr. Vol. I. p.
26.
Mr. Wharton; and the Hypercritica, frequently referred to by the Oxford
Athen-Oxon. Vol. I. p. 452. and alibi.
Antiquary. Tho. Fuller had also composed something of the like Nature, under
the Title of Hist. Eccles. lib. I. p. 42.
A Library of British Historians; to which he sometimes refers his Readers, as
a piece wherewith he intended suddenly to bless the Public. P. Heylyn began
an Edit. London, 8o 1659.
Examen Historicum, but carried it no farther than the works of a couple of his
Cotemporaries, who very well deserved to be lashed. It Is seldom that the
Censures and Remarks of single Men go any greater lengths than this; just as
far as they are pushed on by private Resentment and Pique. Whereas a General
Examen, a sort of an Universal Index Expurgatorius, that points at the mistakes
and errors of every page in our several Historians, is what we chiefly want;
and what must be the Result of the joint Labors of a Society of English
Antiquaries and Historians as well as the General History it self.

For, most of our Printed Histories have been miserably abused, either in
transcribing, or at the Press, besides (their native blemishes) the falsities
and blunders of their Authors; though some few have had the good fortune to fall
into better hands which have sent them abroad beautiful and well dressed. The
first Person of my Eminence and Learning that was so kind to this Kingdom as to
procure a correct Edition of some of our best Historians, was Archbishop
Parker; who furnished us with London 1570.
Matthew of Westminster, London 1571.
M. Paris, Land. 1574.
Tho. Walsingham and Cum priore.
Asserius Menevensis. After him the Lord William Howard of Naworth published
Francof. 1601.
Florence of Worcester; as did likewise Sir Henry Savile his Francof. 1601.
Scriptores post Bedam, and Camden his Ib. 1602.
Anglica, Normannica, etc. These were four very Great Men: And what they had
begun singly and severally, was, with like accuracy and success, carried on by
a Confederacy of Learned Worthies (Archbishop Usher, Sir R. Twisden and Mr.
Seldom) during our late Civil Wars. To them we are eternally indebted for the
noble Edition they gave us of the Land. 1652.
December Scriptores; and they had certainly See W. Kennet's Life of Mr. S^^^er,
p. 64, 65, 66.
further obliged us, had not the Iniquity of the Times, and the Inconstancy
that attends all humane Affairs, prevented them. What they left unfinished was,
in a good measure, perfected by (that mighty Supporter of Learning) Dr. John
Fell, the late excellent Bishop of Oxford, who took care to Oxon. 1684.
publish some of the Treatises which they had prepared for the Press; and had
been at a great charge in procuring others of 'em, which he did not live to
finish. Of these a more particular account will be given hereafter, in their
proper places.

To repair (as much as was possible) the inexpressible loss we had by the Death
of this worthy Prelate, the like good service to the Public was happily
undertaken by the Industrious and Learned Dr. Th. Gale; who has kindly obliged
us with Twenty of our old Writers, in two Volumes. The former of these (though
last Oxon. 1691.
Printed) contains fifteen pieces of our most ancient Historians (as Gildas,
Nennius, Asserius, etc.) transcribed out of old Manuscripts; with the various
Readings, where any variety of Copies was to be had. To which he has added a
large Appendix of such fragments of Antiquity as are justly to be called
Prime-Primitive, out of Ptolemy, Antoninus's Itinerary, the Notitia Dignitatum,
etc. Upon some of these he has given us his own excellent Notes; together with
Surita's upon the Itinerary, so far as it relates to Britain. It were to be
wished the Printer had performed his part as well: But the Doctor's great
Distance from the Press, and the usual negligence of Correctors, has occasioned
several Errata; which yet will be easily rectified by an Intelligent Reader. In
the Oxon. 1687.
second Volume we have Five Historians of Note; who make us acquainted with
many considerable Transactions in the first eight Reigns after the Conquest.
The Publisher's Design, in this part, would not allow him to descend any lower
than to the Reign of Edward the First: and therefore, although Wikes and the
Annals of Waverley carry him a little beyond his Bounds (as ending soon after)
yet, he tells us, he has reserved a good share of Hemmingford for the more
regular Prosecution of his Method in some other Volume, which he encourages us
to hope for from him hereafter. To these (as he Praef. ad Vol. I. p. 5, 6.
observes) there ought indeed to be added a Third Volume (perhaps, a Fourth and
a Fifth) of our MS. Historians from Hen. III. to Hen. VIII. And that would
complete the Collection which he has, with so great Pains and Judgment, begun.
For, since Printing came in fashion, nothing of History has been penned, worth
the Common View, which is not effectually published and easy to be had; except
only some few choice Papers that are still monopoliz'd by such private men (of
slow thought) as do believe they wrong themselves whenever they communicate
these hidden Treasures. In both Volumes we have most exact and full Indices;
which exceedingly add to the value of the Work.

The like good Services have been done to the Ecclesiastical History of this
Kingdom by H. Wharton, who has published Anglia Sacra, Par. I. and II. Land.
1691.
two Volumes of Writers on that Subject; and seems to intimate that, some time
or other, we might have hoped for a Third and Fourth Volume of the same sort of
Collections from him. Had he improved the Opportunities he once had of fitting
out all these for the Press, before the misfortunes of his Patron had spoiled
both his Cum adversa Clementissimi Patroni fortuna mihi hujusmodi studiorum
subsidia, omnium vero praemia, infoelici excusserit: Praef. ad Par. II. p. 30.
Design and Prospect, his kindness to the Public would have been doubled; and
perhaps other occasions might have been offered him of communicating his
elaborate Notes on the Succession of some of our Bishops. His other Ornamental
Discourses, which seem to have robbed us of a deal of his Time and Pains, might
have been spard. At least; they would have taken no harm, if he had kept them
within Doors a little longer; since some of 'em look as if they were sent
abroad too early, and before they were come to their full growth and
perfection. For instance; That about the two Aelfrics (which he values himself
upon, as his Tot tantisque Argumentis firmata, ut non facile aliis rejicienda
fuerit.
masterpiece) is founded on a gross mistake in A. Wheloc's wrong Translating
an expression in the Saxon Ad Antiq. 975.
Chronicle; which carries no such sense as he puts upon it. Some body, I fansy,
had made him sensible of this Error; and therefore (in his P. 796.
Addenda) he endeavors to gain his point by a fresh Argument, assuring us that
the Codex optimus Cottonianus ends the Chronicle at the year 975.

Had the rest of our Libraries been as well searched, as that at Lambeth was by
this Gentleman, I should have been able to have enlarged this Collection to a
much greater bulk: whereas, for want of such Discoveries, some hundreds of
Volumes may possibly escape me. Sir John Cotton's at Westminster (collected by
his Grandfather Sir Robert) has heretofore been justly esteemed to contain more
Helps for the composure of a General History of England, than all the other
Libraries of the Kingdom J. Usser. Praef. ad Brit. Eccl. Antiq. p. 2.
put together; being not only plentifully stocked with Manuscript Historians,
Original Grants, Patents, etc. but also abundantly furnished with our old
Camden and Speed.
Roman, British, Praef. ad vit. Aelfredi R. Not. ad Tab. IV.
Saxon and Norman Coins. Tho-James first published a Ecloga Oxonio-Cantabr.
Land. 1600.
Catalogue of the MSS. in the Public Library at Cambridge and of the Private
College-Libraries in Oxford; out of which last he is reported to have Athen.
Oxon. Vol. I. p. 459.
borrowed several Volumes, never hitherto restored to their proper Owners,
Afterward he did the like for Oxon. 1605, 1620.
Bodley's; which, the Reader ought to know, has been wonderfully improved since
that time by the many large Additions that have been made to it (chiefly in
Manuscripts) by Archbishop Laud, the Lord Hatton, Mr. Selden's and Mr. Junius's
Executors, etc. To which the Musaeum Ashmoleanum makes now a most Noble
Appendix; as being richly fraught with an excellent Collection of Manuscripts
and Coins (as well as other See Dr. Plott's Hist. of Staffordsh. p. 277.
Rarities in Art and Nature) made by that worthy Person whose Name it
deservedly bears. Some part of the great Treasure here reposited, has been
already discovered to us by Mr. Gibson, who has published a Oxon. 1692.
Catalogue of Sir William Dugdale's Books; and we hope the like good Office
will be done for Mr. Ashmole by Mr. Edw. Lhwyd the worthy Keeper of the Musaeum.
another learned hand. Dr. Hickes's Ad finem Instit. Gramm. Anglo-Sax.
Catalogue of such MSS. as relate to the Saxon and Danish Times is the most
complete we have in its kind: and Mr. Oxon. 1692.
Gibson's Account of Tennison's Library (founded by His Grace the present
Archbishop of Canterbury, at St. Martin's in the Fields) is highly beneficial
and obliging.

But all these are small shreds and scantlings, if compared with the Voluminous
work of Dr. Bernard; who threatens to give us an entire Librorum MSS.
Academiorum Oxoniensis and Cantabrigiensis, and celebrium per Angliam
Hiberniamque Bibliothecarum Catalogus, etc.
List of all the Manuscripts of this Kingdom (of all kinds) that either our
Public or Private Libraries will afford. It Is a very Noble and Generous
Undertaking. Only; a little more caution (I think) should be observed by him,
in carefully perusing the Catalogues that are sent from some of the most
distant Counties: especially, where the Authority relied on, for the Truth of
the Copies, is not very good and staunch. Otherwise, it is possible the Reader
may be sent some hundreds of Miles to enquire after a Book that has not
appeared, in the place referred to, at any time since the Restoration of King
Charles the Second. This, I am very sure, is the Case with some of the Northern
Libraries; whose Catalogues (as he has Printed them) were either drawn thirty
years ago, or else are Prophetically calculated for about thirty years hence.
Of this latter kind is that of a certain Cathedral Church; which neither is,
nor ever was, furnished with any one single Manuscript of the several, in all
Volumes, which it is there said to contain. I have some cause to fear that I
shall never live to see such Books, in that Library, as are there mentioned:
and I am also afraid that most of 'em (if they have any being at all) are of
that modest complexion which becomes a private retirement better than an
appearance in public. The Doctor's Project is certainly very commendable; and
deserves encouragement, and the utmost Assistance that Men of Learning and
Acquaintance with Books can give it. But then, They that pretend to put a
helping hand to the Work should be sure to do it effectually. They should be
scrupulously nice in their Informations; take nothing upon Trust and Hearsay;
send no Transcripts of ancient (heretofore) Catalogues, instead of such as give
the present State of their Libraries; view the Books themselves; be sure they
are already in the Classes referred to, and not only in some distant and
uncertain promise; etc. By these means we might truly discover the dormant
Riches of the Nation; and the c^rious might, with good assurance, apply to such
Persons as were undoubtedly able to Answer their Hopes.

Till these vast Designs are perfected, we cannot hope for a full and exact
Index of all those Historians that have escaped the common Destruction, in the
Dissolution of Abbeys, and the Outrages of our Civil Wars. And 'twill be enough
for a Man that lives in such an obscure corner of the Earth, as my Lot is
fallen into, to point at the Times wherein the greatest part of 'em flourished;
how they were qualified for their several Undertakings; and how well, or ill,
they have acquitted themselves in their Performances. This I shall endeavor to
do in a Method, which, I hope, the Reader will think Natural enough; as
agreeing with me that our General Historian ought to enquire for,

1. Geographical, Chorographical and Topographical Writers of this Nation; such
as give an Account of its chief Remarkables in Nature, Arts and Antiquities.
And that either, 1. In Genera^. Chap. 1. 2. In Particular Counties, Cities and
Great Towns. Chapter 2.
2. Chronicles and Annals. Which are either, 1. General Relating to the Times,
1. Of the Britains and Romans. Chap. 3. 2. Of the Saxons and Danes. Chapter 4. 3.
Since the Conquest. Chapter 5.
2. Particular Lives of our several Kings, down from William the Conqueror. Chapter
6.
3. Ecclesiastical Historians. 1. General. As, 1. From the first Establishment
of Christianity to the Reign of Henry VIII. Chap. 7. 2. Since the Reformation.
Chapter 8.
2. Particular. As to the several 1. Bishoprics. Chapter 9. 2. Monasteries. Chapter
10. 3. Universities. Chapter 11.

4. Law Books, Records and Papers of State. Chapter 12. 5. Biographers, Writers of
the Lives of our English 1. Saints. Chapter 13. 2. Eminent Churchmen and Statesman.
Chapter 14. 3. Writers. Chapter 15.

I have not the vanity to imagine that I shall ever be able to run through all
these Chapters without being guilty of a deal of very gross Mistakes: and
therefore I expect to hear of a large Muster-Roll of Errors and Defects in my
Book. This I shall so little repine at; that I do assure Thee (Honest Reader)
it is what I heartily long for and desire. I pretend to little more at present
than the drawing of such Lines as may be filld up hereafter into a piece worth
the Viewing; and I shall be abundantly thankful to have the finishing part done
by a better and more Skilful hand than my own. I have spent a great deal of
time (perhaps, too much) in conversing with some of these old Gentlemen; and I
cannot but flatter my self into a belief that I have attained to something of a
more than ordinary Acquaintance with them. However, the Characters I shall give
of 'em are not always mine, but are sometimes Censures passed by better Judges
than my self. Wherever I venture to give my own opinion, I hope, I shall do
it with that Sincerity and Caution which becomes an Englishman; one that is
always ready to put himself upon a Trial by God and his Country, as not being
conscious of any Offense, either against Religion or good Manners. And yet,
where there is Manifest Cause of Complaint; where a Writer is either
scandalously Ignorant or Impertinent; where we have Romance or Buffoonry
trump'd upon us for good Sterling-History; where a Bankrupt Plagiary sets up
upon the borrowed Stock of an Industrious Author, or the like; there, I hope, a
moderately keen Resentment will not be Interpreted as a Breach of any
Commandment, either of the First or Second Table.

I have but one thing more to Apologize for; and that is the frequent
Repetitions, the Reader will be apt to observe, of the same Word and (perhaps)
Expression and Phrase. I have repeated Occasions to take Notice of this and the
other Man's Undertaking and Performing, Penning and Publishing, his several
Historical Labors: And possibly a nice Critic in the Finery and Cadence of
the English Tongue would expect that I should have Collected a good Number of
Synonymous Sentences for this Purpose. I can only say, I never intended my
Papers for the View of such Delicate and Curious Judges of Language and
Oratory. If I had but a Word in readiness that would serve my Turn* I never
vexed my Brains in Pumping for another that could only do as well: And, being
to cloth so many People of the very same Size and Shapes, it were too severe
(I think) to force me to provide each of 'em with a different Habit and Fashion.

CHAP. I.
Of the General Geography, State and Antiquities of England.
WHatever crime it might be anciently in private Men to be skilled in Maps and
Charts of whole Countries, (that being thought a Piece of Knowledge, proper
only for Princes and great Generals) it is now a mighty Defect in the modish
Accomplishments of the Age of the otherwise; and every Body is so much a
Politician, Statesman and Warrior, that there is no conversing in the World
without an intimate Acquaintance with all the four Quarters of the Globe. It Is
not my business at present to furnish out Instructions for the speedy
Attainment of this kind of Learning; nor to explain Gazettes and Monthly
Mercuries: that is done abundantly by other Hands. The sole design of this
Chapter is the pointing at such ancient and modern Writers, as have described
(at large, and by wholesale) the Lands and Territories, Cities and Highways,
Natural History, Politics, Antiquities, etc. of this Kingdom.

Ptolemy, Ptolemy.
lived (as H. Lhuyd Fragment. fol. 35. a. Jo. Ant. Maginus, Page 4. etc.
all agree) in the beginning of the second Century; and therefore we may safely
call him the first Geographer that mentioned any thing of the British Islands.
For the little florid Accounts which we have from Julius Caesar or Tacitus,
ought not to come into this reckoning. And well he may seem to be so; since the
Maps which Maginus and others have drawn by his Tables, sufficiently show,
that, when he wrote, Geography was but in its Infancy. So much of him as
relates to us, has been lately published by Append. ad Hist. Brit. p. 735. and
787.
Dr. Gale, who has also give us his own learned Notes upon that part of the
Book.

If Antoninus's Antoninus
Itinerary were truly the Composure of that great Emperor, whose Name it bears,
there would be no controversy in placing it next to Ptolemy's Tables: but De
Hist. Lat. in vita Livii.
Vossius gives it too severe Language to deserve the Honor it had sometime
gained in the world; and (in plain terms) calls it a Bastard. However, let it
be written by Antoninus, Antonius or Vide Usserii Hist. Eccles. Brit. p. 42.
Aethicus; it is of an ancient date, and shall here keep the Station and Repute
it has gotten among as learned and wise Judges as have hitherto condemned it.
That part of his Work which concerns Britain, has been amply treated on by
three of our own Countrymen: Mr. M. S. in Coll. Ben. Cantab. and Bibl. Cott. de
quo vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. par. II. p. 135. and J. Pits, p. 737.
R. Talbot, sometime Canon of Norwich, whose Manuscript Commentaries (much
enlarged by Dr. Caius) are now in the Library at Caius College in Cambridge:
Mr. William Fol. London 1658.
Burton, Schoolmaster at Kingston upon Thames: And Dr. Tho. Append. ad Hist.
Brit. p. 787.
Gale, the present Learned and Worthy Master of St. Paul's School in London.

The Liber Notitiarum comes next in order; Liber Notitia^ rum.
and the last mentioned Id. ib. p. 744, 746, 748.
Learned Person has obliged us with as much of it as is for our purpose. He has
also given us what may seem to have any relation to this Country, out of an old
anonymous Geographer lately published at Paris, together with a List of the
Hides or Tenements in the several Counties of England in the days of our Saxon
Kings. And these (I think) are all the Remains of our old Geography, and the
Sum of what was penned before the Conquest that looked this way. For, with
what confidence soever Page 136.
J. Pits may report it, I do not believe that ever venerable Bede wrote any
Book, De situ and mirabilibus Britanniae; or that any such thing is, or ever
was to be had in the Library of Bennet College. His Ecclesiastical History (as
paraphrased in the English Saxon Tongue by King Aelfred) is indeed there; and
the first Chapter in it bears a Title which might impose upon the good Man, or
his Informer, who is often guilty of more groundless Mistakes than this.

From the Conquest, Since the Conquest.
down to the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; our English Geographers have
either been few, or the want of Printing has occasioned the loss of most of
them. Gyraldus Cambrensis's four Books of the Topography of Britain and his
Itinerary, (both which Id. p. 280.
are said to be in Bennet-Library) are the first I can hear off. And I doubt I
shall only hear of them; for they seem to be the same with his Itinerary and
Topography of Wales. John Leland Assert. Arthur. fol. 33. a.
says, he does not question but there was such a Book as the former of these.
But all his industry could not ferret it out. Ralph de Diceto's Treatise Pits
p. 283.
de mirabilibus Angliae seems to be as rare a Piece as either of the former;
and is, perhaps, laid up with John Horminger's Id. p. 398.
Commendations of England, or (as Bale calls it) de divitiis and deliciis
Angliae. Of the same Stamp, I fancy, is William Thorn's Id. page 529.
Chronicle of all the Countries (as well as Bishoprics and Abbeys) in England;
John de Trevisa's Id. page 567.
Description of Britain; and William Buttoner's Id. p. 646.
Antiquities, collected out of the old Charters, Leiger-Books, Epitaphs, etc.
of the whole Kingdom. Caxton's is the only thing in its kind, which I can
assuredly say we have; as being long since published with his Fol. Land. 1515.
Chronicle or Fructus Temporum. Will it be any inducement to the Reader to
peruse use this Author's Work to hear him recommended by Edit. prim. Cent. 8.
cap. 43.
Bale, under the character of vir non omnino stupidus aut ignavia torpens?

Since the beginning of Henry the Eighth's Reign, In Hen Eighth's Reign.
our eldest general Geographer of Antiquary, is said to be J. Pits, p. 733.
Tho. Sulmo (some call him Sulemanus, others Solimountes) a Guernsey Man, who
died at London, A. D. 1545. The year following a much greater Man of the
profession (Sir Thomas Eliot, one of King Henry's Ambassadors and Sir Thomas
Moor's Friends) Id. p. 734.
di'd also, and left behind him a learned and judicious Commentary de rebus
memorabilibus Angliae. This work gained him the Repute of a most accomplished
Antiquary in the opinion of J. De Encom. virorum illustr. p. 18.
Leland, who is almost immoderate in his Praises. But Humphrey Fragment. fol.
5. a. b.
Lhuyd (being a little disgusted at his Prytannia) could only allow him the
modest Character of vir non contemnendae eruditionis. Cotemporary with these
two, was George Lilly (Son of William Lilly the famous Grammarian) who lived
sometime at Rome with Cardinal Pool; and published the first exact J. Pits, p.
740.
Map that ever was drawn of this Island.

The chief Ornament of this King's Reign, John Leland.
was John Leland, his Library Keeper and Canon of Christ-Church, of whom we
shall have occasion to speak more largely Chap. 15.
elsewhere. Among the many voluminous Writings he left behind him, those that
have any relation to the general Description of England, are his M. S. in Bibl.
Bodl.
Itinerary in five Volumes (which J. Page 743, 744.
Pits seems to have subdivided into a great many other Treatises) and his 4o.
Land. 1545.
Cygnea Cantio. The latter of these is a Poetical Piece of Flattery, or a
Panegyric on King Henry; wherein the Author brings his Swan down the River of
Thames, from Oxford to Greenwich, describing (as she passes along) all the
Towns, Castles and other places of Note within her view. And the ancient Names
of these, being sometimes different from what the common Herd of Writers had
usually given, therefore (in his Commentary on this Poem) he Alphabetically
explains his Terms; and by the bye, brings in a great deal of the ancient
Geography of this Island.

Persons of greatest eminence in this Qu. Eliz.
sort of Learning, under Queen Elizabeth, were Humphrey Lhuyd, John Twyne,
William Harrison and William Camden. The first of these was born at Denbigh,
where he afterward practiced Physic, and wrote many excellent Treatises. He
was an intimate Acquaintance of Ortelius, whom he assisted in the Edition of
his Ancient Geography, furnishing him with Maps of England and Wales. And
because he therein disagreed from the opinions of some former Antiquaries, in
the Position of several of the old Cities, Forts and Rivers, he sent him also
his 8o. Colon. Agrip. 1572. and Anglice ( The Breviary of Britain.) 8o. London
1573.
Commentarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum; which gives reasons for
all the uncommon Assertions he had there laid down. He shows in it how
imperfect all the accounts of this Island are, which we have from the Roman
Writers, and how dark, for want of a little skill in the old British Language.
From thence he derives most of our ancient Names; and herein he is much
followed by Camden, as himself (in other matters) is a great follower of
Leland. John Twyne (Schoolmaster, and sometime Athen. Oxon. vol. I. p. 160.
Mayor of Canterbury) was so considerable in Antiquities, as to deserve a very
high place among J. Leland's Encom. Viror. illustr. p. 83.
Worthies; and appears indeed to have been a man of extraordinary Knowledge in
the Histories and Antiquities of this Kingdom. The only thing of his that is
published is his Treatise 8o. Land. 1590.
de rebus Albionicis, Britannicis atque Anglicis: but his Grandson Bryan gave
several other of his Manuscript Collections to Corpus Christi College in
Oxford; where they still remain. William Harrison (Chaplain to Sir William
Brook Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports) with great Pains, and good Judgment,
collected, A Description of the Island of Britain, with a brief Rehearsal of
the Nature and Qualities of the People of England, and such Commodities as are
to be found in the same. Which in three Books, has been Fol. Land. 1577 and
1587.
several times printed together with R. Holinshead's Chronicle. Besides these,
it is said, George Coryat (Rector of Odcombe, and Father to Tom. Coryat of
famous Memory) wrote a Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. par. II. p. 141.
Description of England, Scotland and Ireland, in Latin Verse, which he
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth.

But the Glory of this Queen's Reign, W. Camden 's Britannia.
as well as her Successor's, and the Prince of our English Antiquaries, was Mr.
Camden, whose Life has been written at large by Dr. Smith, Mr. Wood, and Mr.
Gibson. So that I need not here mention any of its particulars. His Britannia
is the Book which chiefly respects the Subject of this Chapter; and may
honestly be styled the common Vid. H. Spelm. Gloss. in voce Heraldus.
Sun, whereat our modern Writers have all lighted their little Torches. In
Latin it had many 8o. Land. 1582. 85. 87. 4o. Ib. 1590. 94. Fol. Ib. 1607.
Editions during the Life of its Author, who continually polished and improved
it; 'Twas first translated into English by Philemon Holland; who gave two Fol.
Land. 1610, 1637.
Editions of it in that Language. The former of these appearing while Mr.
Camden himself was alive, I am apt to believe (with Tho. Worthies of Engl. p.
128. in Warwickshire.
Fuller) that many of the Additions and Interpolations, which were then charged
on the Translator, might not only come in by the Author's own Permission and
Consent, but were also placed there by his Directions, and are as truly his
proper Work as any other part of the Text. But, in the second, Holland himself
frequently turns Antiquary, taking upon him to correct, add and explode what he
pleases. These Corruptions have been all noted in a late English Edition of the
Work; wherein, it is hoped, effectual care has been taken to do the great Author
all the Honor and Justice he has merited from his Countrymen. Some early
Attempts were made by an envious Person, one Ath. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 411.
Brook or Brookmonth, to blast the deservedly great Reputation of this Book;
but they perished and came to nothing; as did likewise the terrible Threats
given out by Sir Symonds D. Ewes, that he would discover See A. B. Usher's
Letters, P. 496.
Errors in every Page. As little to be regarded is that scurrillous Invective,
which Fuller has most unworthily inserted into his Church History: a Work
wherein (if the Author had been capable of any such thing) a Man would have
expected nothing but what looked like Truth and Gravity. There is now no danger
of his Suffering by the Injuries done him by Holland; and, I think, very little
from the Vid. Not. in Aelfr. mag. vit. p. 33.
unskilful Epitome of the Book drawn by Vitellius a Foreigner, and long since
published at In 12o. 1639.
Amsterdam.

To this we must here add another Work, Camden' s Remains.
which is now generally ascribed to Mr. Camden; but at first carried only in
its Title Page the two last Letters ( M. N.) of both his Names. This is his
Remains concerning Britain, its Languages, Names, Surnames, etc. After 'twas
enlarged by John Philipot (Somerset-Herald) it has had many 4o. and 8o. Land.
1637, etc.
Impressions, and has been confidently, and without any Scruple, fathered upon
our great Antiquary. There are in it a deal of good Collections touching the
Languages, Money, Surnames and Apparel of our British and Saxon Ancestors: but
his List of proper Names might be considerably enlarged and corrected by what
De Ling. Germ. lib. 5. tract. 2.
Scottelius and In Append. ad Chron. Saxon.
Mr. Gibson have written on that Subject. As for his Allusions, Rebus and
Anagrams, he himself feared they would pass for Foolish Fopperies; and I do not
care for thwarting, without very good reason, any of his opinions. The conceits
in Impresses, Apophthegms, Poems, Epigra msand Epitaphs are endless, and
therefore hardly worth registring in a Work of this Nature.

To our late Antiquaries, J. Speed and other late Antiquaries.
Mr. Camden has been the same thing as Homer was of old to the Poets of Greece.
They have usually borrowed or stolen their whole stock from him. J. Speed, it is
true, was a Person of extraordinary Industry and Seize in the Study of
Antiquities; and seems not altogether unworthy of the Name of summus and
eruditus Antiquarius, given him by Sheringham de Angl. Orig. P. 42.
one who was certainly so himself. His Maps are extremely well; and make a
noble Apparatus (as they were designed) to his History. But his Descriptions of
the several Counties are mostly short Abstracts of what Camden had said before
him, saving only that of Norfolk, which (he owns, though he is not always so
civil to his chief Benefactor) he had from Sir Henry Spelman. I am apt to
believe he was not much in Sir Henry's Debt; since it is likely the Villare
Anglicum (afterward published in Sir Henry's Name* and said to be composed by
him and Mr. Dodesworth) was chiefly drawn out of Speed's Alphabetical Tables on
the back of his Maps. The like must be said of Edw. Leigh's short Treatise of
8o. Land. 1659.
England described, etc. which is a small handful of Gleanings out of the same
common Field. Of the like Complexion is a good share of Fuller's Fol. Land.
1662.
Worthies; which pretends to give an account of the Native Commodities,
Manufactures, Buildings, Proverbs, etc. of all the Counties of England and
Wales; as well as of their great men in Church and State; though this latter
looks like the principal Design, and makes up the greatest part of the Volume.
It was hudled up in have, P. 2.
for the procurement of some moderate profit for the Author, though he did not
live to see it published. It corrects many Mistakes in his Ecclesiastical
History; but makes more new ones in their stead. The best things in it are the
Catalogues of the Sheriffs; and the Lists of the Gentry, as they were returned
from the several Counties (twelve only excepted) in the 12th. year of Henry the
Sixth. His chief Author is Bale, for the Lives of his eminent Writers; and
those of his greatest Heroes are commonly misshapen Scraps, mixed with Tattle
and Lies. But the boldest Plagiary in the whole pack, is R. Blome, the
pretended Author of the mock Fol. Land. 1673.
Britannia, or, A Geographical Description of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland
and Ireland, etc. a most entire Piece of Theft out of Camden and Speed.

Besides these Volumes in print, M. S. Collections.
there are many vast Bundles of Collections, relating to the general Geography
and Antiquities of this Nation, which still remain in Manuscript; and are the
peculiar Treasure of our public and private Libraries. Such are those of H.
Ferrers Esquire a great Friend and Assistant to Camd. Britan. in Warwickshire.
Mr. Camden; one large Volume whereof (relating to the Pedigrees of our
Nobility and Gentry) is now in the Ath. Oxon. vol. I. page 504.
Heralds Office at London, and others are scattered in private hands. Many more
of the like kind are referred to by Sir William Dugdale: as those of Monast.
Angl. Tom. II. p. 18. 66. 246. 851. 869, etc.
R. Glover, Ib. p. 41.
Jo. Hanson, Ib. p. 50. 184. 607.
S. Kniveton, Ibid. p. 85.
A. Vincent, Sir Ibid. p. 70. 154. 298. 449. 506.
Hen. Spelman, Sir Ibid. p. 78. 196. 624.
R. St. George and others; and he has also left a fair number of his own
Composure, which were kindly deposited by himself in his Son Ashmole's Musaeum
at Oxford. His Copartner Dodesworth's are in Bodley's Library.

We are likewise indebted to them that have been at the Expense of making
Surveys of the whole Kingdom, Maps.
in order to the affording us more accurate Maps than those which had formerly
been drawn at Random. After the useful endeavors of Saxton and Speed, great
Sums were expended this way by Seller and Morden, at whose charges some
pilfering Interlopers have set up to vend more correct Maps of England (as they
call them) which are in nothing different from theirs, but in some few changes
of the Bearings of Towns, new Currents of Rivers, etc. all of the same value,
and discovered by the same Art, with the Painter's Wife's Island. Mr. Adams's
large Map, with the Contraction of it afterward must also be acknowledged to
be done with good Pains, Judgment and Exactness. 'Twere to be wished his Index
Fol. Land. 1680.
Villaris had no more Errors nor Omissions in it: but we are not without hopes,
but that the mighty Improvements which have been made upon this, by the
Industrious and Learned Mr. MS. in Musaeo Ashmol. Oxon.
Aubrey, may shortly be published.

The Natural History of England was Natural History.
a thing never dreamed on till the Viscount of St. Albans (Sir Francis Bacon)
began to publish his own Discoveries in Experimental Philosophy; and, by his
great Example and Success, set some lesser Heads a working. 'Twas this great
Man who first De Augment. Scient. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
observed to our English Philosophers, that we wanted two parts in three of a
just Natural History; which he calls Expatiatio Naturae and Ars. Under the
former he ranks all the uncouth and uncommon Occurrences in Simple Nature; and,
under the other, her several Modifications (and the many Useful and Instructive
Discoveries that are made of Her) in Arts Mechanical. And yet what is it (upon
the whole) that we have hitherto had on either of these Subjects? Dr.
Childrey's 8o. Land. 1661.
Britannia Baconica does promise an Historical Account of the Natural Rarities
of England, Scotland and Wales; with Observations and Deductions answerable to
the Rules laid down by the Lord Bacon: But his Volume (not to say a hard thing
of him) is manifestly too small for the performance. Sir Hugh Platt's 4o. Land.
1652.
Jewel House, and Dr. Merret's 8o. Land. 1665.
Pinax are also rather short Catalogues of our Natural Curiosities, than just
Treatises upon 'em: For no such thing has yet appeared. We have indeed a pretty
good stock of Materials toward the raising of such a Fabric; if we could but
meet with a Judicious and Daring Architect. The late Honorable and Famous Mr.
Boil has (in several of his Tracts) made large Discoveries of the Nature of
our Frosts, Snow, Hail and other Meteors. Our flying and creeping Insects have
been carefully marshalled and examined by Dr. Tract de Aran. and Not. in
Goedart.
Lister; who also has notably informed us of the most abstruse Phoenomena in
our Springs and De Fontibus Medicat. Angl. 8o. Land 1684.
Mineral Waters (as Dr. Plott likewise has De Orig. Fontium. 8o. Oxon. 1685.
done) and has reduced our Land and Hist. Conchyliorum. Fol. Land. 1685. 86.
etc. ad 1691.
Sea-shells into the best Classes that are any where extant. Our Willughby's
Ornithology. Fol. Land. 1678.
Fowl, His Icthyology. Fol. Oxon.
Fish, and Joh. Raii Synopsis Anim. etc. 8o. Land. 1693.
Quadrupeds are well Trib'd by Mr. Willughby and Mr. R^y. Our Earths, Metals,
and other Fossils, have been inquired into by Metallographia. 4o. Land. 1671.
Mr. Webster, and others. Our formed Stones, which have been strangely
neglected by the Naturalists of former Ages, will (we hope) shortly be very
thoroughly and satisfactorily treated on by the Ingenious Dr. Woodward; who, by
what he has already Not. Hist. of the Earth. 8o. Land. 1695.
published on that Subject, has rather raised our Expectations than removed our
Doubts. We likewise expect a deal of Information, in these amusing Curiosities,
from the Learned Mr. Edward Lhwyd, who has Abilities sufficient to go through
with any Undertaking, wherein his singular Modesty will allow him to engage.
Mr. Beaumont ought also to be reminded of the thoughts he once had o^ Consid.
on the Theory of the Earth. p. 4.
setting forth a particular Tract to this purpose: No Man being better
qualified for such a performance. Mr. Ray has put our Botanists upon daily
searches after new Plants; since his Synopsis Method. 8o. Land. 1690.
Synopsis has told them what numerous Discoveries have been lately made by Mr.
Lhwyd in Wales, Mr. Lawson in the Northern Counties of England, etc. The like
Encouragements our Naturalists have from his (and Mr. Willughby's) Ornithology
to make further Enquiries after the many hitherto undiscovered Species of
Birds; since it is easily observable, that the Authors of that Work having had
the greatest Assistance from Mr. Johnson and Mr. Jessop (both Yorkshire Men)
there are in it more Discoveries of new kinds from the North than any other
Quarter of the Kingdom. To all these must be added the many Ingenious
Informations communicated, from most parts of the Nation, in our Philosophical
Transactions; especially from some of the forementioned chief Naturalists of
this Age, Dr. Plott, Dr. Lister; and Mr. Ray.

Some general Accounts have been given of our English Policy Policy.
and Frame of Government; wherein our Historian ought to be well versed and
conversant; especially in those that are written by Statesmen, and such as may
be presumed to have well understood the Affairs they treat on. Sir Thomas
Smith's First published in English 4o. Land. 1583.
Commonwealth of England has met with good Applause; having been frequently
printed both in English and Latin. There was also another small Treatise
(entitled, The Authority, Form and Manner of holding Parliaments) lately 8o.
Land. 1685.
published in his Name: but some have questioned whether it be rightly
fathered. Upon this latter Subject we have a printed Account of the Opinion of
Mr. Camden High Court of Parliament. 8o. Land. 1658.
; together with those of J. Doderidge, Arthur Agard and Francis Tate. Sir
Walter Raleigh has likewise written (as he used to do on all other Subjects)
most judiciously and Vid. Hen. Spelm. Gloss. page 451.
acutely upon the Prerogatives of our Parliaments; and Sir Robert Cotton's 8o.
Land. 1679.
Posthuma are full of Learning on the same Topic. Dr. Chamberlain's present
state of England has been so well received, as to admit of a new Edition almost
yearly ever since 'twas 8o. Land. 1668.
first published. It has been indeed, of late, very coursly treated by a
nameless Scribler of Observations on the Times: But he seems to have been hired
to the Drudgery of penning such unmannerly Reflections, by a Gentleman who had
newly published another Book (much fuller of Mistakes) under the like Title.

As to what concerns our Nobility and Gentry, Heraldry.
all that come within either of those Lists, will allow that Mr. Selden's Fol.
Land. 1672.
Titles of Honor ought first to be well perused; for the gaining of a general
Notion of the Distinction of Degrees from an Emperor down to a
Country-Gentleman: And, after this, the three Volumes of Sir William Dugdale's
Fol. Land. 1675, and 1676.
Baronage of England; which gives an Account of the Lives and Prowess of all
our English Nobility, from the coming in of the Saxons down to the Year 1676.
Whatever relates to the Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter is
completely shown us by Mr. Ashmole, in his most elaborate and perfect Fol.
Land. 1672.
Work on that Subject. For inferior Ranks we have 'em in the Books of Heraldry
that have been published by Wyrley, Brooks, Vincent, Dugdale, and (especially)
Guillim; of the Fol. Land. 1660, and 1679.
two last Editions of whose Book it is observed, that R. Blome has so disguised
and spoiled it, that if the Author, or Authors, of it were living they could
scarce know it. What is missing in these will be abundantly supplied out of the
great Treasury of MS. Collections in the Heralds Office at London; wherein are
innumerable Inscriptions, Arms, Epitaphs, Pedigrees, Lists of Precedence at
Coronations and Funerals, etc.

CHAP. II.
Of particular Descriptions of Counties; with their Cities and great Towns.
IT IS so much the general Humor of Mankind to be fond of their Native Soil,
and Places of chief Residence and Abode, that Historians must not pretend to be
so far of a different Composition from their Neighbors as not to be subject to
the common Frailty. They are as liable to discover their Dotage, in this
Particular, as other ordinary Mort^ls; and thence it comes that Ingulfus's
History is so full of Crowland, W. Neubrigensis's of Yorkshire, M. Paris's of
St. Albans, etc. whenever any shadow of an opportunity is offered It Is from the
same Principle that we have sew Counties in England whose Records have not been
carefully sought out, and Endeavors used to preserve them, by some of their
Sons; who have usually proved more happy in such Undertakings (as having gone
about them with most hearty Zeal and Application) than any of our more general
Writers. Those that I have met with of this kind are here drawn into Order and
Rank; according to the following Alphabetical Lists of our several Counties.

BARKSHIRE has not hitherto, Berks.
that I know of, had its general Antiquities (nor its Natural History)
collected by any Body. Only, the Castle and Chapel of Windsor have been at
large treated on by the excellent Pen of Elias Ashmole Esquire, in his History
of the Knights of the Garter, before mentioned.

BEDFORDSHIRE is under the like Bedford.
Misfortune; though the History of Dunstable (of which in its proper place) and
other Records are not wanting, to furnish out Materials for such a Work.

BVCKINGHAMSHIRE has had the Bucks.
happiness to have some of its Borders (about Ambrosden, etc.) curiously
described, and its Antiquities preserved, by the Ingenious 4o. Oxon. 1695.
Mr. Kennet.

CAMBRIDGESHIRE, A little of Cambridge.
both the Natural History and Antiquities of this County is touched on by Sir
William Dugdale, in his History of the Fol. Land. 1662.
Imbanking and Dreining of diverse Fenns and Marshes both in Foreign Parts and
in this Kingdom. Dr. Hickes, in the Appendix to his Page 131.
Saxon Grammar mentions a Manuscript in Sir John Cotton's Library (entitled,
Statuta de Gilda quadam in Cantabrigia) which seems to relate to the Town of
Cambridge. The Writers upon the Affairs of the University belong to Chap. 11.
another place.

CHESHIRE Chester.
was long since described by Lucian, a Monk, soon after the Conquest; whose
Work is cited by Britan. in Chesh.
Camden, as a piece of great Rarity and good Value. S. Erdeswick (the great
Antiquary of Staffordshire) seems to have written also something of the History
of this County; as is intimated by his MS. Book in the hands of several
Gentlemen of Staffordshire, which begins thus; Athen. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 275.
Having disposed with my self to take a further View of the Shires of
Staffordshire and Chester, etc. A third Description of this County
(Geographical and Historical) was written by W. Smith, Rouge-dragon Pursuivant
at Arms, and left in the hands of Sir Ranulph Crew, sometimes Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench; whose Grandchild (Sr R. Crew) afterward published
it. A Fourth was compiled by W. Webb M. A. and sometime Town Clerk of Chester;
which was thought worthy the publishing by that Judicious Antiquary Sir Simon
Archer of Tamworth. These two last were afterward printed together (under the
Title of Fol. Land. 1656.
The Vale Royal of England) by Daniel King; who took care to have the Work
beautified with several Cuts of Heraldry and Topography. The Accounts given of
this King by Worthies of Engl. page 184. in Chesh.
Mr. Fuller and the Athen. Oxon. Vol. II. p. 163.
Oxford Antiquary are very widely different: So that whether he was Lux
Patriae, as the former Styles him, or (in the others plain English) a silly
Fellow and an errant Knave, I know not. Sir Peter Fol. Land. 1673.
Leicester's Historical Antiquities were also (no doubt) chiefly intended to do
Honor to this County: For though the first Book pretends to treat of the general
Affairs of Great Britain and Ireland, its true Design was to Introduce (what
alone comes to be handled in the Second) the Antiquities of Cheshire, and
chiefly of Bucklew Hundred. The Contests which hereupon happened 'twixt Sir
Peter and (his Kinsman) Sir Thomas Manwaring are not worth the remembering, as
belonging rather to the Men of the Law than History. There Is an old MS. History
of the Earldom of Chester quoted (out of Bennet-Library) by Mr. Titles of Hon.
p. 729.
Seldom; the sum whereof, I imagine, has been published by Judge Doderidge, in
the History he 4o. Land. 1630.
wrote of the Ancient and Modern Estate of this Earldom, together with that of
the Principality of Wales and Duchy of Cornwall. In this Treatise Sir John,
with a great deal of Industry and Exactness, calculates the ancient and present
Revenues of this Palatinate; but is not so curious in clearing up its original
History. This Defect is since very much supplied by the Labors of the late See
Camd. Brit. N. E. p. 566.
Ingenious Mr. Harrington; who has left behind him several excellent Remarks on
that Subject, together with other good Collections relating to the Antiquities
of this County. Several Books (says Page 690.
John Pits) were written by Henry Bradshaw (a Benedictine Monk, who did A. D.
1513) De Antiquitate and Magnificentia Vrbis Cestriae: All which, I am apt to
believe, are swallowed up by (another Work, says that Gentleman) His Life of
St. Werburg; which is still to be had in several of our Libraries.

CORNWALL. Cornwall.
The Survey of this County is so exactly taken by 4o. Land. 1602.
R. Carew Esquire, that there will be only occasion for Posterity carefully to
continue a Work so excellently begun; and to which Mr. Camden acknowledges
himself indebted for the chief Light he had in these parts. This Book, with
large Additions, is now in the possession of Mr. Chiswell, Bookseller in
London; who may probably, e're long, oblige us with a new Edition. There is
also an Historical Account of this County in MS. penned by J. Norden (who Mr.
Camden Camd. Epist. p. 72.
tells us, did sometime travel into this part of the Kingdom) in the hands of
the Learned Dr. Gale. Sir John Doderidge's History of the Duchy has been
already mentioned in Cheshire.

CVMBERLAND. Cumberland.
There Is a Manuscript Description of this County (written by one Mr. Denton of
Cardew, about 50 or 60 Years ago) which seems to be done with good Care and
Judgment; Copies whereof are in the hands of several of the Gentry. It chiefly
treats of Families, Pedigrees, Conveyances of Estates and Manors, etc. but
occasionally handles some other Antiquities, of a more general Nature and
higher Date. Some Observations have also been made lately, relating to the
Natural History of Cumberland; which may very probably, e're long, come into as
many hands. The Antiquities of the City of Carlisle are collected by Dr. H.
Todd, Prebendary of that Church; and are now (or should be) in the possession
of the Mayor and Aldermen.

DERBYSHIRE. Derby.
The Mines of this County should (methinks) invite some of our Inquisitive
Naturalists to give us as particular an Account of the Metals and Minerals, as
Ed. Manlow (sometimes Steward of the Works) has done of the Miners, in his Book
entitled, 8o. Land. 1653.
Customs of the Berge-moot is the truer Writing.
Barge-Moot-Court; which has been improved by T. Houghton in his 12o. Land.
1687.
Collection of the Laws, Liberties, etc. of the Mines and Miners of Derbyshire.
I should also think the Wonders of the Peak are as proper a Subject for a
Philosopher to write on in Prose, as they can be for the most exalted Poetry of
either De Mirabilibus Pecci. 4o. Land. 1666.
Mr. Hobbs or 4o. Land. 1681.
Mr. Cotton; and that Buxton-Wells deserve a better Describer than Antiquated
8o. Land. 1572.
John Jones.

DEVONSHIRE. Devon.
-- Northcot Baronet, is reported to have written a Description of Devonshire;
the Manuscript whereof is all along quoted by Tho. Fuller (in his Worthies)
when he comes to treat of that County; though he says nothing of him amongst its
Writers. Tho. Risdon's Survey or Chorographical Description of Devonshire,
continues likewise in MS. though Copies of it are no rare Matters among the
Gentry of that County. It Is said one Athen. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 517.
Westcote either wrote another Survey; or, at least, had a hand in that which
was composed by Risdon. I wish this Westcote be not the same Man with Dr.
Fuller's Northcote: for he is often further mistaken than from West to North.
The Remarkable Antiquities of the City of Exeter were published by 8o. Land.
1681.
Richard Izaac; but (as a Wh. Kennet' s Life of Somn. page 20.
worthy Person observes) the Book is a dry Collection, and full of Mistakes;
there being nothing (worth the perusal) which had not been before remarked in
J. Hooker's Description, Reprinted in Holinshead's Chronicle.

DORSETSHIRE. Dorset.
Unless Mr. Etrick (who obliged the late Publisher of the Britannia with some
of his Remarks) will furnish us with the Antiquities of this County, I cannot
tell from what Quarter we are to expect them.

DVRHAM. Durham.
The Collections made by Mr. Mickleton are perhaps the only Papers extant which
treat of the Civil Affairs of this County, as distinct from the Ecclesiastical;
and indeed (considering the whole was anciently, and the greatest part is
still, the Church's Patrimony) the matter is not much to be wondered at. The
City of Durham is described in a MS. old English (or Saxon) Poem, in Vitellius,
D. 20.
Sr. John Cotton's Library.

ESSEX. Essex.
There is a Report of J. Norden's having written a Survey of this County (a
thin Folio MS. in Sr. Edm. Turner's Library) and that Mr. Strangman has
attempted the Collection of its Antiquities: But (whatever their Performances
may have been) we have cause to hope for good things, on that Subject, very
shortly from Mr. Ousley; who has given a Specimen of his Work in what he has
communicated in the New Edition of Camden. The Description of Harwich with all
its Appurtenances and Antiquities was written by Silas Tailor (Author of the
History of Gavelkind) who was Store-keeper at that Port, A. D. 1665. The Book
was never Printed; and where it is to be had in Manuscript my Ath. Oxon. vol.
II. p. 465.
Author does not inform me.

GLOCESTERSHIRE. Gloucester.
Whether the Chronicon Claudiocestriae (written by J. Pits, p. 823.
Andrew Horn, a supposed Citizen of Gloucester, God knows when) speaks wholly,
or at all, of the Affairs of this County, is mighty uncertain: But we are
pretty sure that See his Life, by Dr. Burnet.
Sr. Matthew Hales made large Collections to that purpose, tho he did not live
to fit them for the Press. Proposals were also A. D. 1683.
long since Published for Printing the Antiquities of Glocestershire by Mr.
Abel Wantner; who, meeting with the Discouragements that are Common in that
Case (an untoward Recompense for a Gentleman's twelve years pains and study)
was content to enjoy the Fruits of his Labor himself, the Public not
admitting of his Services. The City of Glocester's Military Government has been
accounted for by 8vo Land. 1651.
John Corbet; and the Laws and Customs of the Miners in the Forest of Dean by
an 12mo Land. 1687.
Anonymous Writer.

HAMPSHIRE. Hampshire.
The County is yet undescrib'd: But a Description of the City of Winchester,
with an Historical Relation of diverse Memorable Occurrences touching the same,
is said to have been written by Ath. Oxon. vol. I. p. 380.
John Trussel; who was himself sometime Alderman of that City, and continued S.
Daniel's History. I guess it to be too Voluminous to appear in Print, rather
than (as Life of Somn. p. 21.
Mr. Kennet presumes it) too imperfect. Something, to the same purpose, was
likewise written by Dr. Bettes; whose Book is still in MS. As are also, I
suppose, Mr. Butler's Remarks on the Monuments in this ancient City. A General
Survey of the Isle of Wight (part of this County) was written by Ath. Oxon.
vol. I. p. 248.
Sr. Francis Knollis, Knight of the Garter and Privy-Counsellour to Queen
Elizabeth: a Manuscript Copy whereof was in the Library of the late Earl of
Anglesey. There is also a Id. ib. p. 525.
Fragment (of 17. Quarto Pages) Entitled Antiquitates Insulae Vectae, in
Bodley's Library, among the MSS. of Richard James (Fellow of C.C.C. in Oxford)
an eminent Antiquary; who died, at Sr. Tho. Cotton's in Westminster, A. D. 1638.

HARTFORDSHIRE. Hartford.
A 4o Land. 1593.
Chorographical Description of this County was published by John Norden,
Gentleman; whom we shall again meet with in Kent and Middlesex, as we have had
already occasion to mention him in other Counties. But it is hoped his Enquiries
will be infinitely outdone by Sr. Henry Chauncey Knight. Sergeant at Law; whose
Antiquities we are greedily expecting to see Published.

HEREFORDSHIRE. Hereford.
Silas Tailor (beforementioned, in Essex) spent four years in collecting the
Antiquities, Pedigrees, Epitaphs, etc. of this County; and his Papers were
lately (perhaps, now are) in the hands of Sr. Edward Harley of Brompton-Brian.
The Athen. Oxon. vol. II. p. 465.
Ransack he made, during the times of Usurpation, in the Libraries of the
Cathedral Churches of Hereford and Worcester, might furnish him with a greater
plenty of Materials than (it may be) a man will easily meet with at this Day:
and therefore his Collections are justly recommended as a good Hist. and Antiq.
Oxon. Part. II. p. 368.
Apparatus for any that shall hereafter write on the same Subject.

HVNTINGDONSHIRE. Huntingdon.
Sr. Robert Cotton is reported to have Tho. Fuller's Chapter Hist. lib. 6. p. 295.
and Hist. of Waltham. p. 12.
written that Description which John Speed has published of this County.

KENT. Kent.
Let this be observed for the Honor of Kent (says an Kennet's Life of Somn. p.
38.
Ingenious and Learned Gentleman, Native of this County) that while other
Counties (and but few of them) have met with single Pens to give the History
and Description of them; ours has had no less than four Writers to celebrate
the Glories of it, Lambard, Somner, Kilburn, and Philpot. He will not, I Hope,
take it ill, if we enlarge the Catalogue. Both Bale and Pits expressly reckon
the Itinerarium Cantiae among John Leland's Composures; so that I should think
he bestowed something of more care than ordinary in disposing the Remarks he
made on this County. W. Lambard's Perambulation of Kent was indeed the first
Account which was 4o Land. 1570.
published; and it was not only highly applauded by Camden, and other Chief
Judges of such Matters, but gave the hint to many more Men of Learning to
endeavor the like Services for their several Counties. 'Twas not well approved
by the Gentlemen of the Roman Communion. Reiner Apost. Bened. in Angl. p. 162.
, particularly, censures it as a Work undertaken and carried on with a Design
to expose the Lewdnesses and Debaucherics of the late Inhabitants of the
Monasteries of that County; in describing whereof (he thinks many things are
spitefully misrepresented. Mr. Somner Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 33, 34, 35.
, it appears, fully purposed to have given us the Antiquities of the whole
County; and had certainly made very great Progress toward the completing the
Work, as appears by his Manuscripts now in the Library of the Cathedral Church
of Canterbury. It Is not doubted but he would mightily have enlarged W.
Lambard's Perambulation; and he gives us some Specimen of his Design to correct
also his Errors, by marking such as came in his way in some of his Antiq. of
Canterb. p. 77, 88, 381.
Treatises already published. However, we are not wholly deprived of this great
Work, some part of it having been lately published under the Title of 8o. Oxon.
1693.
A Treatise of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent; wherein (and in Mr. Gibson's
Notes upon it) we have as entire a Discourse as we could wish for on that
Subject; rectifying a great many mistakes in Camden, Lambard, Philpot, etc. and
discovering the true Situation of those ancient Places. Philpot's Fol. Land.
1659. and 1664.
Villare Cantianum was not written by Thomas Philpot, whose name in bears, but
by (his Father) John, Somerset Herald; who is only owned to be Author of the
Additional History of the High Sheriffs of the County: And, what Faith (a
Learned Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 37, 38.
Countreyman of his puts the Question in my Mouth) can be given to him that
could afford to rob his own Father of the credit of his Book. Kilburn's 4o.
Land. 1659.
Survey of Kent (you may take Life of Somn. p. 37.
Mr. Kennet's word for it) is all Modern and Superficial. Another Survey of the
County (in proportion to the rest of the same Author's) was drawn by John
Norden; which none have hitherto thought worth the handing to the Press, and
few have reckoned so considerable as to mention it. To these, I think, we may
add John Weever's Fol. Land. 1631.
Funeral Monuments; a great share of 'em having been collected in the Dioceses
of Canterbury and Rochester. But let the Reader never forget the Remark made on
him by Angl. Sacr. Par. I. p. 668.
Mr. Wharton; that he has most scandalously mistaken the Numeral Letters and
Figures in most of the Inscriptions he transcribed: which makes it hazardous
for an Antiquary to rely upon his Authority. Both Mr. Somner's Excellent 4o.
Land. 1660.
Treatise of Gavelkind, and Silas Taylor's 4o. Land. 1663.
History of the same, ought also to be referred to the Catalogue of this
County's Historians and Antiquaries; as explaining an ancient Custom, whereof
there are now hardly any Remains elsewhere within the King's Dominions. The
History of the City of Canterbury seems to have been penned long since by Will.
Gillingham, a Benedictine Monk of that place; who is Io. Pits, p. 552.
said to have written De Rebus Cantuariensibus, about the year 1390. John Twyne
Comment. de Reb. Albion.
mentions some Collections that he had made tending to Illustrate the
Antiquities of this City: But Mr. Somner assures us he could no more meet with
them than with those of Tho. Spott, mentioned by Bale. But its everlasting
Monument is W. Somner's 4o. Land. 1640.
Antiquities of Canterbury; or, a Survey of that ancient City with its Suburbs
and Cathedral: A work which secured the Honor of all that the Title Page
mentions from the Levelling Fury and Madness of the Time wherein 'twas
published, and is deservedly recommended (both by the Kennet's Life of Somn.
page 19.
Author's Enemies and Friends) as a Piece most exquisitely Perfect in its kind.
Amongst his Manuscripts at Canterbury, this Book may be seen interleav'd, with
large Additions in the Author's own Handwriting. The Spaw-waters at Tunbridge
are treated on by Lod. Rowzee and P. Madan, MM. DD. And the Chronicle of
Rochester (collected chiefly from the Textus Roffensis, mentioned elsewhere) is
written by Edm. Bedenham Esquire. MS.

LANCASHIRE. Lancaster.
A few years ago Dr. R. Keurden sent out Proposals for the Printing his
Brigantia Lancastriensis Restaurata, or, a History of the Honorable Dukedom or
County Palatine of Lancaster: which (he told us) was composed, and laid ready
for the Press, in Five Volumes. I know not how the Design came to miscarry; but
do imagine that the vastness of the Undertaking slackened its Pace. 'Twere to
be wished the Industrious Author would oblige us with an Abstract of such
Discoveries in it as are purely New to us, and his own. There can hardly be any
danger of his meeting with better Encouragement and Success upon such a fresh
Attempt: whereas it could not well prove otherwise than a very cloying Method
to propose the taking off a Volume or two of General Preliminaries, before we
came at (the main business) the Antiquities of Lancashire. Some particulars
relating to the Antiquities of the Northern Parts of this County were
communicated, to the undertaker of the new Britan. Camd. N. E. p. 802.
Edition of Camden, by Sr. Dan. Fleming Knight. who is a Person of great Curiosity
and Judgment in these Matters, and has made much larger Collections than could
be brought within so small a Compass as the Nature of that work would admit of.
Its Natural History (I am told) is compiled by Dr. Charles Leigh; who has
already given us good earnest of his Abilities, suitable to the Undertaking, in
his 8o Land. 1694.
Phthisiologia Lancastriensis; cui accessit Tentamen Philosophieum de
Mineralibus Aquis in eodem Comitatu Observatis. To which may be added Dr. Edm.
Burlace's 8o Land. 1670.
Latham Spaw, with some Remarkable Cases and Cures effected by it; and Ray's
Engl. words, etc. p. 209.
a short Treatise touching the manner of making Salt of Sea-sand in this
County. The Town of Manchester has its particular History written by one
Richard Hollingworth, an active Presbyterian Preacher in the beginning of our
Civil Wars: which may be seen in MS. in their College Library.

LEICESTERSHIRE Leicester.
is nobly Described by William Burton Esquire a native of this County, and
Barrister at Law. His Fol. Land. 1622.
Description runs in an Alphabetical Order of the Villages; and his Method has
been observed by many more that have since endeavored the like services for
other Counties. The Work consists chiefly of Descents, Pedigrees and
Moot-Cases: But the Author was afterward sensible of its main Defect, and
therefore very much enlarged and enriched it with an Addition of Roman, Saxon
and other Antiquities. This appears from his own Letter to Sr. Robert Cotton,
still extant; and the Book it self, thus improved is Ath. Oxon. vol. II. p. 36.
said to have been lately in the possession of Walter Chetwind, of Ingestree
near Stafford, Esquire who had also other Manuscripts of the said Mr. Burton's
Composure.

LINCOLNSHIRE Lincoln.
wants an Historian of Skill and Courage answerable to the vast Store of
Materials (of all kinds) which are there to be had. Its Fenns and Marshes are
indeed pretty largely treated on by Sr. William Dugdale, in his Fol. Land. 1622.
History of Imbanking; and (in the year 1671.) there was published a short
Relation of great Damages done by a Tempest and Overflowing of the Tides in
this County and Norfolk: But its main Body lies yet undescribed, to the
Reproach of all those Persons of Learning and Ingenuity that are its Natives.
R. Butcher's Survey of Stamford is often quoted by Tho. Fuller (in his
Worthies) when he comes to speak of Lincolnshire; as it is likewise, very
frequently, by J. Wright in his Antiquities of Rutland. It was printed in the
Year 1646.

MIDDLESEX. Middlesex.
John Norden 4o. Land. 1593.
published a Description of this County about the same time that he wrote his
other (somewhat shorter) or Hartfordshire. Both these Surveys are mentioned by
Survey of Land. in Epist. Ded.
John Stow, as undertaken (and published) in imitation of W. Lambard's
perambulation of Kent. The Funeral Monuments within the Diocese of London were
Collected (after his Fashion) by J. Weever; and we are lately encouraged to
hope for the natural Hi^^ory of the County by Dr. Plott. Tho. Johnson's little
short account of the Plants that grow wild on 8o. Land. 1632.
Hampsted-heath is the only thing published that looks this way; and it is to
inconsiderable as hardly to deserve mentioning. The first Description of the
famous City of London (now Extant) was written by one W. Stephens or
Fits-Stephens (a Monk of Canterbury) about the Year 1190. It Is a small Tract of
about ten pages in Quarto; and is published by J. Stow (as an Appendix to his
Survey) under the Title of Stephanides. Robert Bale (Recorder of the City, A.
D. 1461.) is also said to have written several Treatises on that Subject; which
were long kept as choice Rarities in the public Library of the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, and whereof my Jo. Pits, P. 654.
Author reckons up the Titles of these Three: 1. Londinensis Vrbis Chronicon.
2. De Consulibus and praefectis ejus. 3. Instrumenta Libertatum Vrbis. The same
Gentleman makes R. Fabian write a couple of Treatises upon the Affairs of
London: but I suppose all he ever penned of that kind is in his printed
Chronicle. John Stow (we are sure) wrote and 4o. Land. 1598.
published a Survey of London; and owns himself put upon the Undertaking by Mr.
Lambard's general Invitation to the several Antiquaries of this Kingdom to
write the Histories of their Native Counties. The account he gives is very
particular and full; running through every one of the twenty six Wards, and
affording a good View of the Government of this City (together with Westminster
and Southwark) Ecclesiastical and Civil; the Churches, Hospitals and other
Religious Houses; a Catalogue of their Mayors and Sheriffs down to the Fortieth
year of Queen Elizabeth, etc. The whole is Collected out of our best Historians
and most Authentic Records; and discovers a deal of Industry and Accuracy in
the worthy and honest Author. It appears he had perused the small Treatise
called the City Law in its Original: So that there was little occasion for the
Translation and Publishing of that 8o. Land. 1647.
afterward. But, because the State of this mighty City is wonderfully changed
since his time, we are in daily Expectance of a new Edition of this Book; with
very considerable Additions and Improvements. Sir George Buck's Treatise of the
Inns of Court (under the Title of the Third University of England) we have in
the end of Stow's Chronicle: and James Howel's Fol. Land. 1657.
Londinopolis has very little in it more than what he has Copied from the
forementioned Survey; nor is De Laun's pretended Present State of the City much
different from what we have there. Indeed, several new Discoveries and
Observations touching its mighty growth and number of its Inhabitants (proving
that they are more than in Rome, Paris and Roan; that they are above 696000
People, etc.) have been advanced, in some 8o. Land. 1686, 87.
Essays in Political Arithmetic, by (one of the most eminent Mathematicians
and Virtuoso's of this Age) Sir William Petty; who was also the chief Director
and Author of a piece published sometime before by one John Grant, and
Entitled, Natural and political Observations on the Bills of Mortality in
London. The dreadful Fire which happened in this famous City, in the Year 1666.
will for ever remain one of its chief Epoche's; and of this we have Both
Printed A. D. 1667.
two Historical Narratives: One according to the Reports made to a Committee in
Parliament; and another published by Edward Waterhouse. The Epitaphs of our
Kings, Princes and Nobles, that lie buried in the Abbey-Church at Westminster,
were first Collected by John Skeleton, a famous Poet; who (for making too bold
with Cardinal Woolsey, in some of his Satyrs) Jo. Pits, P. 702.
ended his days miserably within the Precincts of the Asylum of that Church, A.
D. 1529. These were afterward enlarged by 4o. Land. 1606.
Camden; and completed by H. Keep, under the name of 8o. Land. 1682.
Monumenta Westmonasteriensia. The Monuments of St. Paul's (the Cathedral of
this Diocese) will be treated on Chap. 9.
elsewhere.

NORFOLK. Norfolk.
The Pen was long since drawn in defense of this County by one John de S. Omero
(or Saintemer) a Norfolk-man, and Job. Pits, p. 294.
Student in Cambridge about the Year 1219. when a certain Monk of Peterborough,
taking upon him to libel the Inhabitants of that Country in Latin Doggrel, was
answered in his own way by this John. The Epitaphs here, with some other
Antiquities, were collected by J. Weever, who Fun. Mon. sub fin.
referrs us for further satisfaction to Sir Hen. Spelman's Iceni; which we
impatiently hope to see published by Vid. Tract. de Portu Iccio, p. 11.
Mr. Gibson. Something relating to the Natural History of Norfolk may be had
from Sir William Dugdale's Imbanking; and in a little Treatise entitled, 12o.
Land. 1664.
Mercurius Centralis, or, a Discourse of Subterranean Cockle, Muscle and
Oyster-shells, found in digging a Well at Sir William Doylie's in this County.
It Is a Letter from one Tho. Lawrence M. A. to Sir Thomas Brown. To which may be
added the (already mentioned) Relation of the Damages done by a Tempest on the
Coasts of this County and Lincolnshire. The City of Norwich was described by
Alexander Nevil, whose Book is quoted by In Epist. Ded. ad Tom. I. Council.
Angl. p. 3, 4.
Sir Henry Spelman. We have Sir Tho. Brown's 8o. Land. 1658.
Vrn-Burial, or, a Discourse of Sepulchral Urns lately found in Norfolk; and we
expect his Repertorium, or, an account of the Tombs and Monuments in the
Cathedral Church of Norwich. It has been Dr. Tennison's Pref. to Sir T. B's
Misc.
promised, and I know not what occasion Sir Thomas has ever given any body to
suspect, that ought of his penning should Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 21.
rather fear, than deserve an Edition. The late Publisher of Camden makes Tho.
Fuller the Reporter of Dr. Caius's having written the Antiquities of Norwich;
but I suspect there is some mistake in that matter, since Fuller (in the
Worthies, in Norw. p. 275.
place where he should especially have noted such a thing says nothing of it.
Nash's Land. 1599.
Account of the growth of great Yarmouth, the History of the Ib. 1582.
burning of East Derham, and Ib. 1615.
Sir R. W.'s Norfolk Furies, may possibly contribute some small helps toward
the Illustration of the Antiquities of these Parts: but seem to be of too great
(or too little) Age to be very valuable.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. Northampton.
Will. Vincent (Windsor-Herald) collected some materials for a Survey and the
Antiquities of this County, which were lately in the possession of Athen. Oxon.
Vol. I. p. 349.
Mr. Wood. He frequently quotes Fran. Tate's Nomina Hydarum in Com.
Northampton. The State of the Town of Northampton, from the beginning of the
Fire Sept. 20. 1675. to Nov. 5. following, was published in a 4o. Land. 1675.
Letter to a Friend: and we had its 4o. Land. 1677.
Fall and Funeral first in a Latin Elegy, and afterward (with some Variations
and Additions) in English.

NORTHVMBERLAND. Northumberland.
John Pits says, That the Genealogies of the Earls of Northumberland were drawn
up by one J. Pits, p. 593.
Tho. Otterburn, a Franciscan Friar, about the Year 1411, and that Id. p. 871.
John Currar (he knows not when) drew up a List of Seventy Eight Castles in
this County, with the Pedigrees of their several Owners. These are
Uncertainties. But we know that Sir Robert Shaftoe and Mr. Clavering (both now
living) have really made large Progresses in its Antiquities; and we hope they
will be so just to the Public and themselves as shortly to communicate 'em.
The Town of Berwick, with some other places of Note in this County, are
described in a MS. in the Earl of Carlisle's Library at Noward. But Newcastle
still wants a just Description and History: For Grey's Excus. A. D. 1649.
Chorographical Survey comes short of its present Glory; and the Anonymous
Author of 8o. Land. 1655.
England's Grievances in Relation to the Coal-Trade, etc. is too much confined
in his Subject to answer the Expectations of a Curious Reader.

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE's Nottingham.
Antiquities were first attempted by Sergeant Boun, who only transcribed what
related to this County out of Doomsday, adding some short Notes at every Town.
This was completed into a fair Fol. Land. 1677.
Work by his Son-in-law, R. Thoroton M. D. at the instance of Sir William
Dugdale. He owns it is capable of Improvements out of the Archbishop of York's
Registry and other Records in private Hands, which he had not an opportunity of
consulting. But the Work, as it is, shows a good Industry in its Author; who,
being a Physician of eminent Practice, had a free access to the Evidences of
most of the considerable Families. The Author had not the Curiosity to intermix
any Observations relating to the British, Roman and Saxon Antiquities; writing
only after the printed Copy of Mr. Burton's Leicestershire.

OXFORDSHIRE. Oxford.
Vast Collections, relating to the Antiquities of this County, were made by
Randal Catherall (who died A. D. 1625.) and were sometime in the Custody of
Bishop Ath. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 731.
Sanderson: But, upon the Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 42.
strictest Enquiry that could be made after 'em, they are not now to be found.
Dr. Plot's Fol. Oxon. 1677.
Natural History of Oxfordshire was the first Essay made in that kind by its
excellent Author; who has made us acquainted with so many Physical Discoveries,
as well as notable Improvements in Trade and Manufactures, that the Work has
met with an Universal Applause. And as this County had the happiness to have
its Natural History set, by that worthy Person, as a Pattern to the rest of the
Kingdom; so it now affords a new Example of having some of its Parochial
Antiquities considered (in the 4o. Oxon. 1695.
History of Ambrosden, Burcester, and other adjacent Towns and Villages) by a
very Learned Antiquary, Mr. White Kennet. Some of the Annals of the City of
Oxford seem to be drawn up in their Red Book, which is quoted by Hist. and
Antiq. Oxon. Par. I. p. 57.
Mr. Wood; who had a Design of obliging the Town in the same Athen. Oxon. Vol.
II. p. 28.
manner he had done the University.

RVTLANDSHIRE Rutland.
is extremely indebted to J. Wright, who has Fol. Land. 1684.
published the History and Antiquities of that County. The Author being himself
a Barrister at Law, proposed Mr. Burton (a person of the same Profession) for
his pattern: So that here, as in Leicestershire, we have the Towns and Villages
in Alphabetical Order; the Intermixture of some few remarkable Law-Cases; the
Inscriptions on Tombs and Grave-Stones; Pedigrees of Families, etc. Sir
Wingfield Bodenham had, as he owns, drawn together a great many Materials out
of the vast Collections of R. Dodsworth; whereof he had the perusal. The rest
we owe to his own pains; which, he says, had been to better purpose, if he had
not met with many of the Gentry (a mishap which will always attend Men that
engage in these matters) very shy in Discovering the Evidences and Conveyances
of their several Estates.

SHROPSHIRE's Shropshire.
Antiquities have been hitherto (as far as my Acquaintance reaches) neglected,
both by its British and English Inhabitants. There Is usually in
Border-Countries that Emulation and Jealousy among the different Nations,
which encourages (or provokes) the Ingenious on both sides, to preserve and
maintain the old Honor of their several Ancestors: So that the want of such
particular Histories in this County is a good Argument of the perfect and happy
Union of all its Natives into one People; though not of their extraordinary
Affection to Books and ancient Learning.

SOMERSETSHIRE. Somerset.
The Natural History of this County has been long look^d for from Plot's
Staffordsh. p. 251.
Mr. Beaumont, who is a person of that known Ingenuity that the World has just
cause to hope for a most excellent Performance. I wish his late Consid. on
Burnet's Theory. in Ep. Ded.
more noble Considerations (as he calls them) have not enlarged his Thoughts
too much for the finishing a Work of so narrow a Compass. The Laws, Customs,
etc. of the Miners in the King's Forest of Mendip are drawn 12o. Land. 1687.
together in a short Manual; and Mr. Beaumont has given us a Specimen of his
forementioned large Design, in the Account we have Philos. Transact. 1681.
Numb. 2.
from him of Ookey-hole, and other Subterranean Grottoes in those Hills. The
City of Bath (and its hot Baths) has been beholden to Jo, Caius, the famous
Cambridge Antiquary, who wrote J. Pits, p. 756.
De Thermis Bathoniensibus; as did also Plot's Oxfordsh. p. 42.
Dr. Mayow, though Mr. Wood (which I wonder at) has not observed it in the Ath.
Oxon. Vol. II. p. 475.
Account he gives of his Works. The Learned Dr. Jorden's Discourse (or Natural
Baths and Mineral Waters) was not so general but that it was all applied to
this place, and published a 8o. Land. 1669.
third time by Dr. Guidot; who has since very greatly enlarged his own
Observations upon both the T. Guidot de Therm. Brit. 4o. Land. 1691.
Antiquities and Natural Curiosities of the Town, and has also given us a 8o.
Land. 1694.
Register of two hundred notable Cures wrought there within the time of his own
Experience. John Chapman's 8o. Land. 1673.
Thermae Redivivae are on the same Subject; and have also an Appendix (in
Coriat's Rhimes) on the Antiquities of this City. To all which we must add Dr.
Tho. Johnson's History of both kinds, annexed to his 8o. Land. 1634.
Mercurius Botanicus; wherein the Reader will find as entertaining a Discourse
as could well be expected from any Man in so little Room.

STAFFORDSHIRE Stafford.
had its Antiquities and Records preserved by S. Erdeswick of Sandon Esquire,
who began his Collection A. D. 1593, and Athen. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 275.
continued it to (the time of his Death) the Year 1603. His Manuscript Papers
fell happily into the Hands of Walter Chetwind of Ingestree (in the same
County) Esquire, a person exactly of Mr. Erdeswick's own Temper ( Venerandae
Camd. Brit. in Staffordsh.
Antiquitatis Cultoris Maximi) and as piously disposed to the Founding, as he
to the Rebuilding of Churches; from whom we had reason to hope for a See Plot's
Not. Hist. of Staff. p. 392.
finishing stroke to the Enterprise, if Death had not unhappily intervened. The
Natural History of this County is written by the same Fol. Oxon. 1686.
worthy Hand, and in the same Method with that of Oxfordshire; and the
Performance is answerable to the Experience and Knowledge we may easily imagine
so industrious an Author would gain in nine Years Study and Travel. It had been
happy if the Doctor's Health and Occasions would have allowed him to have gone
on through the rest of the Counties of England, as he seemed once to Not. Hist.
of Oxf. in Epist. Ded.
promise: But in the Conclusion of this Book, he seems to be weary, resolved to
rest, and to leave some part of the Glory of this great Work to others.

SVFFOLK's Suffolk.
Topography is said to have been W. Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 41.
attempted by (Mr. Selden's great Friend) Sir Simonds d'Ewes; but where his
Collections now are I cannot tell, unless (perhaps) amongst R. Dodsworth's
Papers in the Public Library at Oxford.

SVRREY. Surrey.
A Survey and the Antiquities of this County were sometime Ath. Oxon. Vol. II.
p. 484.
threatened by Sir Edward Bishe: but whether any Advances were ever made (in
good earnest) by him, toward such a Work, I have not yet learnt.

SUSSEX Sussex.
is not only famous for several Monasteries (mentioned by Bid and others) in
the Days of the Saxons; but also for the remarkable Battle which put a stop to
the Glories and Government of that People, and brought in the Norman Conqueror.
And yet none of its Inhabitants, that I know of, have taken the pains to
collect its Antiquities: Notwithstanding the just claim that some of 'em have
to be Registered by the most Skilful Historian.

WALES. Wales.
Gyraldus Cambrensis (Bishop Elect of St. David's, about the year 1200.) is the
oldest Topographer of this Principality; and is every where quoted at large by
Mr. Camden, as an Author of undoubted Credit and Reputation. His Itinerary and
Description were both published by 8vo. Land. 1585.
Dr. Powel; with his own most Learned Notes upon 'em. The former contains a
Journal of the Expedition of Archbishop Baldwine (A. D. 1188.) in Collecting
the Contributions of Wales, for the carrying on of the Holy War. Together with
the Topography we have a mixture of Popish Miracles and Tales; which the
Publisher thought himself obliged, in strictness of Justice, to give us entire.
And we have this Advantage by them, that they do not only divert the Reader,
but afford also an opportunity to the Learned Publisher of communicating a deal
of his own Critical Knowledge. The Description that follows in General: being,
in the main, a Panegyric on the sweetness of the Soil; and the good Humor,
strict Morals and exemplary Piety, of the Inhabitants. There Is a second Part of
this Description ( De Illaudabilibus Walliae, which the Doctor thought it not
convenient to publish; but has been set out lately in Print by Angl. Sac. Part.
II. p. 447.
Mr. Wharton: for which the Welshmen are not very much obliged to him.
Gyraldus's Map of Wales (mentioned by J. Pits, p. 280.
John Pits, and frequently by himself is to be seen in a MS. Copy of some of
his Works, in the Library at Westminster-Abbey. After him David Morgan
(Treasurer of the Church at Landaff, A. D. 1480.) is Id. p. 696.
said to have written the Geography and Antiquities of Wales: and Id. p. 736.
Arthur Kelton (an Ingenious Welsh Bard, in the top of his Fame, about the year
1548.) wrote several English Accounts, both in Verse and Prose, of the Glories
of his Country; most of which he dedicated to Sr. William Herbert. Another
Description of Wales was written by Sr. John Price, in the Reign of Edward the
Sixth; perfected by Humph. Lhwyd, and prefixed to his 4to. Land. 1584.
Translation of the Welsh History. This Humphrey Comment. Brit. Descrip. Fragm.
de quo supra.
himself gives also a more large Account of (his own Country) Wales, than any
other part of Britain; and enlarges often, sometimes corrects, the Description
given by Gyraldus. The History of the Ancient and Modern State of the
Principality is well written by 4to. Land. 1630.
Sr. John Doderidge; and the latest (and incomparably the best) Account of its
Antiquities is just now Edit. Novis. Brit. Camden.
published by my Friend Mr. Edw. Lhwyd. The same excellent Person is also
projecting a Design of a British Dictionary, Historical and Geographical; with
an Essay entitled Archaeologia Britannica, being a Complete Collection of the
ancient Monuments throughout this whole Country; and (lastly) a Natural History
of Wales. In order to the performance of so Noble and Undertaking, he thinks of
travailing in that Principality four or five Summers; and likewise to make one
Journey into Cornwall, and another into Ireland or the Highlands of Scotland,
for Parallel Observations as to their Language; Names of Towns, Rivers,
Mountains, etc. I heartily hope the Work will not meet with those Obstructions
which have hitherto usually befaln Attempts of this Nature: since the Author is
so generally known to be of suitable Industry and Abilities, and cannot fail
(if God continue his Life) of making good his Proposals.

WARWICKSHIRE's Warwick.
Antiquities are truly Fol. Land. 1656.
Illustrated by Sr. William Dugdale; who was Master of all the Advantages
requisite for such a Performance: And no man can so well judge of the great
Labor and Pains bestowed on the bringing of this excellent Work (the Author's
Ath. Oxon. Vol. II. p. 700.
Masterpiece) to perfection, as he that has viewed the many In Musaeo Asmol.
Oxon.
Volumes of Materials which he gathered in order to the compiling of it. His
great zeal against the Sacrilegious Destruction of some Religious Structures
carried his Searches into every corner of the History that related to that
Matter; and his early Inclination to the Study of Heraldry obliged him
carefully to preserve whatever might be grateful (on that Head) to the Nobility
and Gentry of the County. The History of the Earls of Warwick was long since
written by John Ross or Rouse, a noted Antiquary; who died at Warwick (or Guy's
Cliff, within a Mile of the Town) A. D. 1491. A Noble Manuscript Copy of this
Book, with the Pictures of the several Earls, their Coats of Arms, etc. is now
in the Archives of the Public Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Part. II. p. 77.
Library at Oxford. John Pits J. Pits, p. 683.
makes him write four distinct Volumes of the Antiquities and History of
Warwick: but this is all that more credible Enquirers could meet with. The Life
of the Famous Earl Guy was first written by Walter of Exeter (a Dominican
Friar) about the year 1301. There is a sort of Spaw-water at Ilmington in this
County; the History whereof is Published by 8vo. Land. 1685.
Sam. Derham, an Ingenious Physician.

WESTMORLAND. Westmorland.
Mr. Tho Machel, Rector of Kirkbythore in this County, has (with a great deal
of Pains and good Judgment) collected its Antiquities: which, we hope, will ere
long meet with so suitable an Encouragement as will oblige the Author to
publish 'em. That Part of its Story which more nearly concerns the Nobility and
Gentry, has been well preserved by Sr. Daniel Fleming of Rydale Knt. who has
thereby done his own ancient Family a great deal of Right, and has also
approved himself an Eminent Benefactor to those of his Neighbors.

WILTSHIRE. Wilts.
John Aubrey Esquire (Fellow of the Royal Society, and a Person well versed in our
British and English Antiquities) has laid the Foundation of the History and
Antiquities of this County: but designs to leave the finishing part, I think,
to Vid. Camd. Britan. N. E. p. 107.
Mr. Tanner; Whose extraordinary Proficiency in these Studies will quickly be
made known to the World. The Monument of Stonehenge in Wiltshire has engaged
several Antiquaries in disputing the Original of so Famous and Admirable a
Structure; and they have advanced almost as many different Opinions about it.
Mr. Samms Samm. Britan. p. 395.
in a particular Treatise, endeavors to fetch its Original from the
Phaenicians, his only Darlings; and clears the point as fairly as he does all
the rest wherein he is singular. Mr. Inigo Jones (King James the First's Learned
Architect) believes it to be a Stone-henge Restored, Fol. Land. 1658.
Roman Temple; and strongly prove^ that the Fabric is of the Tuscan Order. His
Scheme, however false in it self, is also learnedly defended by Vindicat. of
Stone-h. Rest. ib. 1665.
Mr. Webb, his Son-in-Law. Mr. Camd. Brit. N. E. p. 109.
Aubrey and others think they can evidently prove it is British; and Stone-henge
Restored to the Danes, Fol. Land.
Dr. Charlton is very sure that 'twas erected by the Danes. No Author, that
hitherto has considered it, has so much as dreamed of its being a Saxon
Monument. And yet (if the true old Writing of the Name be Stan-Hengest, as the
Monast. Angl. Tom. I. p. 97.
Monasticon seems to tell us) I cannot see why that people may not have as just
a Title as any to the Honor of it. Possibly the Vid. Praef. ad Edit. Nov. Camd.
MS. Treatise that is said to be written, on this subject, by Joh. Gibbons, may
place it here.

WORCESTERSHIRE. There is now Worcester.
a large MS. Description of this County in the hands of Tho. Abingdon Esquire
written by his Grandfather, an Able and Industrious Antiquary: wherein, if
there be any Defects, they may be supplied by a present Prebendary of the
Church of Worcester, who (when his modesty will give him leave) can effectually
complete such a Work.

YORKSHIRE. There are some Collections York.
in Vespasian, D. 21.
Sir John Cotton's Library relating to this County, gathered by one Tho.
Talbot; who was some time Clerk of the Records in the Tower, and was alive
Athen. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 88.
A. D. 1580. These, and whatever else looks this way, we must believe to have
been long since seen and perused by Dr. Nath. Johnston of Pomfret; who (as he
says) has spent thirty years in amassing together Materials for the
Illustrating the Antiquities and Natural History of Yorkshire. In the former of
these he intends to write after Sir William Dugdale's Copy, and in the latter
after Dr. Plott's; and to finish the whole in five Volumes. I am pretty well
assured that he is not yet (as Ath. Oxon. Vol. II. p. 699.
Mr. Wood was informed) weary of the Work: but that, though some late troubles
have rendered him unable to finish it so soon as he designed, he is every day
doing something at it. H. Keep (mentioned before in Middlesex) is Id. ib. p.
623.
reported to have made some Collections toward the Antiquities of the City of
York; and Sir Thomas Widdrington (sometime Recorder there) did certainly make a
very great Progress in a learned and exact Description of it. Some distaste,
given him by the Citizens, obstructed his allowing of his Papers to be
published; and they are now (I am told) sub sigillo, in the Custody of Mr.
Fairfax of Menston. A lean Catalogue of the Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. (from the
Reign of Edward the First, to the year 1664) is published by their late
Recorder 8o Land. 1665.
Hildyard: And some Learned Observations on a Roman Wall and Multangular Tower,
in that City, have been made by Philos. Transact. Number. 145.
M. Lister. The Tower of St. Mary's in York was the best furnished with ancient
Charters and Records of any Place in the North of England, as appears from the
many Transcripts which are thence Inserted in the two first Volumes of the Tom.
I. p. 386, 393, 394, 395, 399, 427, 496, 497, 498, 501, 510, 554, 565, 587,
599, 661, 758, 776, 778, 798, 799, 827, 834, etc. Tom. II. p. 35, 97, 98, 99,
104, 148, 151, 153, 166, 192, 348, 350, 369, 371, 402, 556, 557, 798, 808, 820,
824, 976, 999.
Monasticon: But the barbarous Rage of our late Days of Rebellion laid it and
them in Ashes. Mr. Dodesworth happily copied all or most of 'em before those
Times of Destruction came upon us; and his large Collections were afterward as
happily deposited in Bodley's Library, where they now remain. The Registrum
Feodorum de Richmondshire is quoted both by* Britan. in Richmondsh.
Mr. Camden and Monast. Angl. Tom. I. p. 877.
Sir William Dugdale. It seems to be the same which is cited by Praef. ad 10
Script.
Mr. Seldom, under the Name of an old Genealogy of the Earls of Richmond. The
Parish of Leedes will shortly be described, and have its Antiquities Published,
by my Ingenious and Industrious Friend Mr. R. Thoresby. The Spaw-waters in
Yorkshire have occasioned the publishing of several Learned and Ingenious
Treatises on that Subject. Knaresbrough is particularly obliged to Mich.
Stanhop's 8o Land. 1632.
Knaresbrough-Spaw; to Dr. Edm. Dean's 8o. Land. 1626.
Spadacrene Anglica; and to Dr. 8o ib. 1652.
French's Yorkshire-Spaw.

Dr. Wittie's Scarborough-Spaw (published both in 8o ibid. 1660.
English and 8o Land. 1678.
Latin) met not with so much quiet as the three former; being briskly
encountered by two several Champions. The first that engaged it was W. Simpson,
in his Hydrologia Chymica; to which the Doctor made a sharp Reply under the
Title of Pyrologia 8o Land. 1669.
Mimica. His next Opposer was Dr. Tonstall, who wrote 8o Land 1672.
Scarborough-Spaw Spagirically Anatomized; together with a New-years-Gift for
Dr. Witty: but whether he was ever vouchsafed any Answer I know not.

The Reader may expect a further Account of the Affairs of our several Counties
from those that have treated of the History of our Cathedrals and Monasteries:
and whatever Writers fall under those Heads will be remembered Chh. 9. and 10.
elsewhere.

CHAP. III.
Of the Histories that relate to the Times of the old Britains and Romans.
IT IS a very discouraging Censure which Sir William Temple passes upon all the
Accounts given us of the Affairs of this Island, before the Romans came and
Invaded it. The Tales (says Introduct. to the Hist. of Eng. p. 19.
he) we have of what passed before Caesar' s Time, of Brute and his Trojans, of
many Adventures and Successions, are covered with the Rust of Time, or Involved
in the Vanity of Fables or pretended Traditions; which seem to all Men obscure
or uncertain, but to me forged at pleasure by the Wit or Folly of their first
Authors, and not to be regarded. And Ib. p. 31.
again; I know few ancient Authors upon this Subject [of the British History]
worth the pains of perusal, and of Dividing or Refining so little Gold out of
so much course Oar, or from so much Dross. But some other Inferior People may
think this worth their pains; since all Men are not born to be Ambassadors:
And, accordingly, we are told of a very R. Talbot. Vid. Athen. Oxon. Par. I. p.
88.
Eminent Antiquary who has thought fit to give his Labors in this kind the
Title of Aurum ex Stercore. There Is a deal of Servile Drudgery required to the
Discovery of these Riches, and such as every Body will not stoop to: For few
Statesmen and Courtiers (as one is lately said to have observed in his own
Case) care for Traveling in Ireland, or Wales, purely to learn the Language.

A diligent Enquirer into our old British Records lost.
Antiquities would rather observe (with Industrious Assert. Arth. Fol. 25. b.
Leland) that the poor Britains, being harassed by those Roman Conquerours with
continual Wars, could neither have leisure nor thought for the penning of a
Regular History: and that afterward their Back-Friends, the Saxons, were (for
a good while) an Illiterate Generation; and minded nothing but Killing and
taking Possession. So that it is a wonder that even so much remains of the Story
of those Times as the sorry Fragment of Gildas; who appears to have written in
such a Consternation, that what he has left us looks more like the Declamation
of an Orator, hired to expose the miserable Wretches, than any Historical
Account of their Sufferings. Besides, it is not to be imagined but another long
and calamitous War (with the Picts and Saxons afterward) that demolished their
Churches as well as Libraries, would sweep away even the very Ruins of
Religion and Learning. Some have thought that there are considerable Relics
of the British History among the Refugees of Britany in France; and that they
have Manuscripts of much elder Dates than the Lives of some ancient Saints,
which have been had from thence. We are sure there are many such Books, of a
very great Age, that still remain in Wales; a good Collection whereof was
lately made by a notable Antiquary, Mr. Maurice of Kevny braich in
Denbighshire, and is now (as I am informed) fallen into the hands of Sir
William Williams.

But 'twill be to no purpose for a Man to seek out these Venerable Remnants,
Language.
unless he be able to understand the meaning of what he meets with; and
therefore it is requisite that our Antiquary furnish himself with a competent
skill in the British, or Welsh Language. The thing will be of no great
Difficulty, if the ancient Tongue be so far perished, that (as Dr. Bernard has
In Epist. ad G. Hickesium, in fine Gramm. Anglo-sax.
observed) the words in Dr. Davies's Dictionary are one half Latin, a Quarter
English, and only another quarter Welsh: But I dare not promise that this will
be found to be a true and punctual Account. Mr. Edward Lhwyd (who took the
pains to examine into the matter) says, there are about 10000 Words in that
Dictionary; whereof 1500 are indeed like the Latin, and 200 like the English:
So that not a sixth part can be so much as suspected to be Latin, nor a
fortieth English. For, though the Welshmen grant 1500 words to be like the Latin,
yet they will not allow that their Original is owing to that Language; since
many of 'em are also used (in the like signification) by other Nations, who are
confessed to have borrowed none from thence. Mr. Sheringham takes De Angl.
Orig. p. 108, 109, etc.
notice that Brutus, coming from Italy (which I do as verily believe as that
Romulus came from Mars and Rhes Sylvia) must necessarily have had a Language
near-a-kin to what was spoken there; and that hence are so many words in the
Welsh which look like the Roman, and not from the Corruption of it by the
Conquering Romans afterward. Tacitus himself In Vit. Agric. Cap. 21.
confesses the Britains zealously kept their Language unmixed: And Dr. Davies
In Praefat. ad Gram. Brit.
says, their old Laws expressly forbid the Bards to introduce any new words into
their Rhimes. Mr. Sheringham further observes that the Britains have many words
nearly related to such old Latin ones as were grown obsolete even before
Caesar's time; and that many of the Roman Proper Names may be handsomely derived
from the British Tongue, which have no Foundation in the Modern Latin. As to
that part of the Language which Dr. Bernard invidiously tells them they owe (
Dominis Anglis) to their Masters, the Saxons, Mr. Lhwyd will not allow that
they are so indebted for one Moiety of the 200 words observed to agree in Sound
and Signification with the English; since above half of 'em are found in the
Armorican Vocabulary, published by 8o. Paris 1521.
Ivon Quillivere. Now, it is certain the Britains went hence to Armorica in the
Year 384, whereas the Saxons came not in before 450.

If then our English Antiquary be not a Native of Wales, Grammars.
it is indispensably necessary that (to complete himself in this Study) he gain
a good acquaintance with the Welsh Tongue; which he may pretty readily do with
the Assistance of such Grammars as have been composed for that purpose. The
first of these was published by W. Salesbury, sometime a Member of Lincoln's
Inn, under the Title of 4o Land. 1550, and 1557.
A plain and familiar Introduction, teaching how to pronounce the Letters in
the British Tongue, etc. The next was Sir Edward Stradling's; which seems to
have given occasion to (the Third) that of J. Dav. Rhese, printed (together
with a large Preface by H. Prichard) by the Fol. Land. 1592.
Name of Cambro-Britannicae Cymraecaeve Linguae Institutiones and Rudimenta,
etc. ad Intelligend. Biblia Sacra nuper in Cambro-Britan. Sermonem eleganter
versa. The Fourth and last was written by Dr. Davies, and bears the Title of
8o. Land. 1621.
Antiquae Linguae Britannicae, nunc communiter dictae Cambro-Britannicae, a
suis Cymraecae vel Cambricae, ab aliis Wallicae, Rudimenta, etc.

There are also several Dictionaries published in that Language; Dictionaries.
which will all be of singular Use and Advantage to a true Antiquary of this
Kingdom. Will. Salesbury (beforementioned) composed one in English and Welsh;
which was first privately presented to King Henry the Eighth (his very kind
Patron) and afterward 4o. Land. 1546.
Printed. The Sum and Substance of this (as likewise what was afterward
written in the same kind by Bishop Morgan, H. Salesbury, H. Perry and Tho.
Williams) was published in Dr. Joh. Davies's most Elaborate Work, entitled,
Fol. Land. 1638.
Antiquae Linguae Britannicae, etc. Dictionarium duplex: A Book which shows its
excellent Author to have been perfectly acquainted with all the Learned
Languages as well as his own Mother Tongue. John Leland is also reported by
Pits, to have written a Dictionarium Britannico-Latinum. But I suspect there is
no more grounds for such a Story than only this: Leland published a Latin Poem
upon the Genethliacon, etc. 4o. Land. 1543.
Birth of the Prince of Wales, afterward King Edward the Sixth; and, taking
occasion to use some hard words in it, added to it Syllabus and Interpretatio
Antiquarum Dictionum, quae passim per Libellum Lectori occurrunt. And this, I
believe, is all the Welsh Dictionary that will be found of his Composure.

With these Helps a Man may venture upon those most Vid. Gyrald. Cambr.
Descrip. Cambr. cap. 3.
Ancient and Authentic Writings of the old Bards; Bards.
wherein he shall have exact Genealogies of all the British Kings and Princes
up to Brute, and from thence to Adam. This very Account is given of those
famous Songsters by Lucan, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus and Am. Marcellinus:
Sheringham de Angl. Orig. p. 165.
And almost all other History (among the Chaldeans, Greeks and Romans) had its
first Foundation in Poetry. Whether he will find the Rules of their Prosodia to
agree with those that are laid down by Captain Middleton in his 4o. Land. 1593.
Bardoniaeth, or Art of Welsh Poetry, I know not: But how methodically they
ordered their TYLWYTHS, or Tribes, Hist of Gavelk. p. 20, 21, etc.
Silas Taylour has at large informed us. Nor were they content to preserve the
Pedigrees of their own Princes and great Men, but were also so good-natured as
to do the like Services for the Saxons. Thus we are told that S. Benlanius (who
is sometimes quoted by the name of J. Leland. Assert. Arth. Fol. 11. a.
Samuel Britannus, and lived about the Year 600) was a curious Enquirer into
the Genealogies of many J. Pits, p. 104. Vid. etiam Usser. Hist. Eccles. p. 206.
English Families; some whereof he carried as high as the Flood. 'Twas
customary to sing these Composures in the presence of their Nobles, and at
their chief Festivals and Solemnities. And, truly, if the Story of one of these
Bards canting the Praises of King Arthur before Henry II. and giving a hint to
the Monks of Glassenbury for the Discovery of that British King's Body, be
fairly true (and have nothing of Legend in it) a very great regard is to be had
to these Historical Ballads.

Amongst these Bards is to be reckoned their famous Merlyn; Merlyn.
whose true Name (says Commentar. Fragm. Fol. 64. b.
Humph. Lhuid) is Merdhyn, so called from Caermarthen [Mariduno] where he was
born. This was so mighty a Man in his Time that our Writers have thought it
convenient to split him into three. The first of these (Godfather to the two
following) they call Merlinus Ambrosius, or Merdhyn Emrys; who lived about the
Year 480, and wrote several Prophetical Odes, turned into Latin Prose by
Jeoffrey of Monmouth. The next is Merlinus Caledonius, who lived A. D. 570,
wrote upon the same Subject with the former, and had the same Translator. The
third is surnamed Avalonius, who lived under King Malgocunus (they might as
well have made him Secretary to Joseph of Arimathea, says our great Orig. Brit.
p. 9.
Stillingfleet; and yet my J. Pits, p. 97.
Author goes gravely on, and affirms that he) was an eminent Antiquary, but
seems to mix too many Fables with his true Story. They write this last indeed
Melchinus, Melkinus and Mewynus, and make him to live some time before the
latter Merlyn: But all this is Stuff; and he is manifestly the same Man, or
nothing. Soon after him came Ambrosius Thaliessin; whom Bale and Pits make to
live in the days of King Arthur, and to record his Story. Sir John Prise In
Defens. Hist. Brit.
quotes a certain Ode of his called Hannes Thaliessin, or Thaliessin's Errors;
which he says is to be seen in several of their old Manuscripts.

The most ancient British Historian Gildas.
now extant is Gildas* For the Chronicle that bears the Name of Brutus mentions
the Usserii Hist. Eccles. p. 72.
Legend of King Lucius, and is apparently a late contrived Piece; and J. Pits,
p. 86.
Sylvius is much of the same Authority with the Writings of Bale, Cent. I. Cap.
1.
Samothes. This Gentleman has had the same Respect paid to his Memory that we
have already noted of Merlyn: Since Gildas Cambricus, Albanius and Badonicus,
are made (by the generality of our Writers) three several Persons. It does not
well appear that there was ever more than one Historian of this Name, whatever
they that Stillingst. Orig. Brit. p. 209.
love to multiply Authors as well as Books, have said to the contrary: And
therefore (notwithstanding Archbishop Hist. Eccles. Brit. p. 237.
Usher's great Authority on the other side) I shall venture to consider him in
a single Capacity. He was Monk of Bangor, about the middle of the Sixth
Century; a sorrowful Spectator of the Miseries and almost utter Ruin of his
Countrymen, by a People under whose Banners they hoped for Peace. His Life is
written at large by Stillingst. Orig. Brit. p. 207. Usser. Hist. Eccles. p.
237, 250.
Car^doc of Lancarvan; and by an Anonymous Author, published by In Biblioth.
Flor.
John a Bosco. His lamentable History De Excidio Britanniae is all that is
printed of his Writing; and perhaps all that is any where extant. Bale, Pits
and others, reckon up some other Matters whereof they make this Gildas
Badonicus (as they distinguish him) to be the Author: But Archbishop Usher is
peremptory in it, that this is the Hist. Eccles. p. 278, 279.
Vnicum quod restat Opusculum; for he makes it and the Epistle to be all one
thing. It was first Published and Dedicated to Bishop Tunstall, by 8o. Land.
1625.
Polydore Virgil; whose imperfect and corrupt Copy was Reprinted in the Fol.
Paris. 1610. Tom. V. Col. 477.
Bibliotheca Patrum. Afterward there was another Edition of it by John
Josseline; who made use of another Manuscript, but not much more correct than
the former: The latest and best is that we have from Hist. Brit. Tom. I. Tract.
1.
Dr. Gale; who had the advantage of a more ancient and much better Copy than
either of the two former had seen. If he did write any thing more, it is now
lost. Leland is mighty desirous to believ^ that there is somewhere such a
Treatise as his Cambreis in Verse; that 'twas stolen and carried into Assert.
Arth. Fol. 32. b.
Italy; and that the Poet Gildas and the Historian were Comment. in Cygn. Cant.
voce Britannia.
two several Persons. But it is now feared we shall never meet with any other
Poetical Treatise, bearing his Name, save only that which Leland himself calls
Gildas fictitius; and which Archbishop Usher frequently quotes by the Name of
Hist. Eccles. p. 27, 30, 37.
Pseudo-Gildas. His Book De Victoria Ambrosii is of the same Ib. p. 12.
base metal; out of which have been coined John Pits's Regum Britannorum
Historia; De primis Insulae Incolis; Lites Luddi and Nennii, etc.

The next British Historian of Note Nennius.
is Nennius. The first of this Name that is said to have taken care of the
Antiquities of his Country, was (if we are not imposed on) Son to King Helius,
and Brother to Ludd and Cassibelane; who had the Honor to die of a wound given
him by Julius Caesar's own hand. 'Twas he, they Bale Cent. I. Cap. 15. and 59.
Edit. 1.
say, (...) first wrote a Book of the British History in his own Tongue; which
was afterward translated into Latin by his Namesake, Abbot of Bangor. This
same Abbot Nennius is generally supposed to be one of the Fifty Monks that were
so wise as to skulk at Chester, when 1200 of their Brethren fell a Sacrifice to
the Pride of Augustine, the first Planter of the Romish Principles and
Practices in our Isle? and to have flourished about the Year 620. Which will
not agree with what is attested by himself in the best Copies of his Vid.
Usser. Hist. Eccl. p. 217. and Edit Galei, p. 93.
Book, that he wrote A. D. 858. Anno 24o. Mervini Regis. He is said to have
left behind him several Treatises; whereof all that is published is his Dr.
Gale's Hist. Brit. p. 93.
Historia Britonum. This is the same Book that Bale and Pits have registered
under the Style of Eulogium Britanniae; and the only piece that must answer for
what those Gentlemen mention by the Titles of his Collectiones Historiarum;
Antiquitates Britannicae; Chronicon, etc. In most of the MS. Copies it is
erroneously Vid. Usserii Hist. Eccles. p. 107. and J. Leland, Assert. Arth.
Fol. 3. b.
ascribed to Gildas. This History says nothing of the other brave Nennius,
abovementioned; whom later Commentators have (...) so great in Story. I am of
Opinion that the Contrivance of this Hero is one of the best things in all
Jeoffrey of Monmouth's Romance. It looks like a grateful Acknowledgment to the
Person that had obliged him (or his Author) with the groundwork of his whole
Fabric: to whom he could not pay a more decent Complement than by making him
Godfather to one of his chief Knights Errant.

Next after Nennius, Hoel Dha.
follow Hoel Dha's Laws; which were enacted about the middle of the Tenth
Century; whereof those that relate to Ecclesiastical Affairs have been
published by Council. Tom. I. p. 408.
Sir Henry Spelman. Of these there are Vid. Humph. Lhuid. Comment. Brit. Frag.
Fol. 53. a. and Hen. Spelm. Gloss. in voce Adelingus and Lex.
several Copies, both in Welsh and Latin, still extant; among which a very old
one (written on Parchment) in Jesus College at Oxford. The Preface to this last
will not allow that King Hoel abrogated (as Mr. Camden Brit. in Carmardensh.
says he did) all the Laws of his Ancestors; but expressly tells us, that
Observat. Ed. Lhwyd in novam Edit. Camd. p. 625.
according to the Advice of his Council, some of the ancient Laws he retained,
(...) he corrected, and some he quite disann^^^, appointing others in their
stead. Dr. Powell will not agree that any new Statutes were ordained by this
King In Additament. ad Hist. Cambr.
But that his Commissioners (according to the Powers given them) retained only
those ancient Laws that were good and useful, explained the Ambiguous, and
abrogated the Superfluous. For, we are to know that (full fourteen hundred
years before Hoel's Time) the Britains had a whole Body of Muncipal Laws,
enacted by King Bale (Edit. I.) Cent. I. Cap. 8. and 10.
Dunwallo Molmutius; which were soon afterward enlarged by Queen Martia. All
these, says Bale, were translated into Latin by Gildas; and into Saxon by King
Aelfred. Nay, some wise Writers will needs affirm, that a certain part of our
English Saxon Laws, which they call Lex Merciorum, had its Denomination from
these Leges Martiae: and this childish Fancy has been embraced by several of
our Vid. R. Higden. Lib. I. cap. 50. and Hist. Jorn. p. 38.
grave and ancient Historians. Others think it improbable that so great a
Prince as King Aelfred should ever trouble his Head with Translating any of the
Laws either of Molmutius or Martia; who were only Antiquated Legislators among
his Enemies, and Heathens. But (since the Britains, as Asserius and others tell
us, voluntarily submitted to him) it seems as wise in Him to give them their
own Laws in his Language, as 'twas in William the Conqueror to grant us the
Saxon Laws in French. Many of 'em (we have already been told) were abolished
even by the Britains themselves, after they became Christians: But Mr.
Sheringham thinks it is evident from several Law-Terms (such as Shering. de
Orig. Gentis Angl. p. 125, 126.
Murder, Denizon, Rout, etc.) which are purely British, that some of them were
taken into the Body of our English Laws. Hoel's are said to have been first
Translated into Latin by (a Gentleman with a very hard Name) Blegabride Bale,
Cent. 2. Cap. 23.
Langauride, Doctor of Laws and Archdeacon of Landaff, in the year 914. which,
if the British History do not misinform us, was about 26 years before that King
began his Reign. There is lately come to my hands a Latin MS Copy (in
Parchment) of these Laws; in the end whereof (in a later hand) is written:
Istum Librum Tho Powel Joanni Da. Rhaeso Med. Doctori dono dedit me^se Augusto
1600.

And these, Uncertain Authors.
I think, are all the British Historical Writers that lived before the Norman
Conquest; whose Books are now to be met with in any of our English Libraries. I
know not how to direct the Reader to seek for the Histories of Elbodus or J.
Pits, p. 103, 105.
Elvodugus (for they are both the same Man) from whom Nennius is made to borrow
a good part of what we now have under his Name; nor for those of J. Pits p. 107.
Worgresius and Mawornus, Abbot and Monk of Glassenbury; nor for the
Genealogies drawn up, by the Famous Bard in King Edgar's days, Id. p. 175.
Saliphilax. When these are retrieved, I would have them all carefully bound up
with the Deflorationes Historiae Britannicae; which (as Jo. De Antiq. Cantab.
lib. 1.
Caius has learnedly proved from Stow and Lanquet) were written by King
Gurguntius about 370 years before Christ. The Welsh MS. cited frequently in
Camden's Britannia, by the name of Triades, seems not to carry Age enough to
come within this Class. It Is the same, I suppose, which he Camd. Remains, Edit.
1614. p. 17.
elsewhere calls the British old Book of Triplicities; running all upon the
number three, as appears from his Quotation out of it: Welshmen love Fire, Salt
and Drink; Frenchmen Women, Weapons and Horses; Englishmen Good cheer, Lands
and Traffic.

We are not to expect any such Assistances Charters.
for the ascertaining the History of these Times, as After-Ages afford us, from
Charters, Letters Patents, etc. And yet it is too forward an Assertion to say
there were no such things in the days of our British Kings, if all be true that
Assert. Arth. fol. 12, 13, etc.
Leland tells us of King Arthur's Seal: But I am not, I confess, so much in
Love with that Venerable Relic as he seems to have been. It might indeed be
brought (as he guesses) from Glassenbury; where I do believe 'twas hung at a
forged Charter by some Monk, who was a better Mechanic than Antiquary. The
Inscription easily discovers the Cheat: PATRICIVS ARTVRIVS BRITANNIAE, GALLIAE,
GERMANIAE, DACIAE IMPERATOR. He is certainly called Patricius here (and no
where else) out of the abundant Respect that Monastery had for their Guardian,
Saint Patrick; and not, as Leland fancies, upon any Account of a Roman Fashion.

Another Help is here wanting, Coins.
which exceedingly Conduces toward the Illustrating the Antiquities of other
Nations; and that is the Light that is often gained from the Impresses and
Inscriptions upon their old Coins and Medals. The money used here in Commentar.
lib. 5.
Caesar's Time was nothing more than Iron Rings and shapeless pieces of Brass:
nor does it well appear that ever afterward their Kings brought in any of
another sort. Camden Remains p. m. 199. 200.
says he could not learn that, after their retirement into Wales, they had any
such thing among them: none of the Learned Men of that Principality having yet
been able to produce so much as one piece of British Coin, found either in
Wales or any where else. And, is it likely that a Royalty of this Nature (of so
great Benefit to their Subjects, as well as Honor to themselves) would have
been laid aside by the Cambrian Princes, if formerly enjoyed by any of their
Ancestors? J. Comment. in Cygn. Cant. voce Britannia.
Leland tells us he never (in all his Travels, throughout the whole Kingdom of
England) could meet with one British Coin, among the many Millions of those of
the Romans found in this Nation. And the Reason, he says, was, because (as he
proves out of Vid. Histor. Gilda,. 5.
Gildas) the Romans would not allow any of our Metal to be stamped with any
other Image or Superscription, save only that of Caesar's, that is, some of
their own Emperors. However, we now have several ancient Coins in our public
and private Libraries, which are generally reputed to be British: though it is
very hard to determine in what Age of the World they were minted. My very
Learned and Ingenious Friend Mr. Lwhyd believes that, before the coming in of
the Romans, they had Gold Coins of their own; because there have been
frequently found (both in England and Wales) thick pieces of that Metal,
hollowed on one side, with variety of unintelligible Marks and Characters upon
them. These, he is sure, cannot be ascribed either to the Romans, Saxons or
Danes; and therefore it is reasonable we should conclude them to be British. And
the Reason why he thinks they were coined before the Romans came, is this: If
the Britains had learned the Art from them, they would (though never so
inartificially) have endeavored to imitate their manner of Coining; and, in
all likelihood, have added Letters and the Head of their Kings. Here Is a fair
and probable opinion against the express Testimony of Julius Caesar; who could
hardly be imposed on in this part of the Account he gives of our Isle. Camden
Remains p. m. 199.
rather thinks that, after the Arrival of the Romans, the Britains first began
to imitate them in their Coining of both Gold and Copper: But his Stories of
Cunobeline and Queen Brundvica, are much of a piece with those of Doctor Not.
Hist. of Oxfordsh. cap. 10.
Plott's Prasutagus; all of 'em liable to very just and (to me) unanswerable
Objections. For my own part, I am of Opinion, that never any of the British
Kings did Coin Money: But that even their Tribute-Money (like the Dane-Gelt and
Peterpence afterward) was the ordinary Current Coin; which was brought in (or
minted here) by the Romans themselves, as long as this Island continued a
Province. The most (if not all) of the forementioned pieces, which are not
Counterfeits, I take to be Amulets; whereof Tho. Antiq. Dan. p. 466.
Bartholine gives this sensible Account: Habuere Veteres in Paganismo res
quasdam portatiles, ex Argento vel Auro factas, Imaginibus Deorum, facie humana
Expressorum signatas, quibus Futurorum Cognitionem explorabant, and quarum
possessione felices se and quodam quasi Numinis praesidio tutos judicabant.
These were in use among the Romans a good while Vid. Spartian. in Caracal.
after they came into Britain: and the Amula (from whence they had their Name)
was a little drinking Coel. Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. lib. 27. cap. 27.
Cup, most probably of this very Fashion. If any man dislikes my Conjecture, I
am willing Sir John Pettus should Umpire the matter between us; and his
Supposition (that Coin is an Gloss. ad Flet. Min. voce Coin.
Abstract of Coynobeline, who first coined Money at Malden) will for ever
decide the Controversy.

After the Conquest, GEOFFREY of Monmouth.
The first man that attempted the Writing of the old British History was
Geoffery Archdeacon of Monmouth; and he did it to some purpose. This Author
lived under King J. Pits, p. 217.
Stephen, about the year 1150. He had a peculiar fancy for Stories surmounting
all ordinary Faith: which inclined him to pitch upon King Arthur's feats of
Chivalry, and Merlyn's Prophecies, as proper subjects for his Pen. But his most
famous piece is his Chronicon sive Historia Britonum; which has taken so well
as to have had several Apud Jo. Badium A. D. 1508. and Hydelb. 1587, etc.
Impressions. In this he has given a perfect Genealogy of the Kings of Britain
from the Days of Brutus: wherein we have an Exact Register of above Seventy
glorious Monarchs that ruled this Island, before ever Julius Caesar had the
good fortune to be acquainted with it. The first stone of this fair Fabric was
laid by Nennius: but the Superstructure is all Fire-new, and purely his own.
They that are concerned for the Credit of this Historian tell us, that he had
no further hand in the Work, than only to translate an ancient Welsh History
brought out of Britany in France by Walter Calenius, Archdeacon of Oxford; who
was himself an eminent Antiquary, and added a J. Pits, p. 198.
Supplement to the Book. The Translation of the whole he committed to the care
of his Friend Geoffry; who (says Ad An. 1151.
Matt. Paris) approved himself Interpres verus. And there I am willing to let
the matter rest. The Translator might have employed his time better, yet may be
an honest man: But the Author (whoever he was) has basely imposed upon the
World, and was certainly something of another Nature. The best defense that can
be made for it is that which was written by Sir John Prise; and is published
under the Title of 4to. Land. 1573.
Historiae Britannicae Defensio: to which something further is added by De
Orig. Gentis Angl. p. 124. ad 134.
Mr. Sheringham (if it could be helped) to part with any thing of an old Story
that looks gay, and is but even tolerably well contrived. As to the regard
(says the ingenious Mr. Camd. Brit. N. E. p. 603.
Lhwyd) due to this History in general, the judicious Reader may consult Dr.
Powel's Epistle In calce Editionis suae Pont. Virun.
De Britannica Historia recte Intelligenda; and Dr. Davies' s Preface to his
British Lexicon; and balance them with the Arguments and Authority of those
that wholly reject them. I am not for wholly rejecting all that is contained in
that History; believing there is somewhat of Truth in it, under a mighty heap
of Monkish Forgeries: But, for the main, I am of Britan. in Monmouthsh.
Camden's Judgment; and I hope my Friend will allow me to think the Arguments
and Authority of that Writer and common Sense to be as weighty (in these
Matters) as those of the two greatest Doctors in Christendom. Ponticus
Virunnius, an Italian, 8o. Land. 1585. curante D. Powel.
Epitomized it; and indeed it is of a Complexion fitter for the Air of Italy
than England.

Cotemporary with this Jeoffrey was Caradocus Monk of Lancarvan; Caradocus
Lancarvensis.
who contented himself with the Writing of a History of the Petty Kings of
Wales, after they were driven into that Corner of the Island by the Saxons.
This History (which was written originally in Latin, and brought as low as the
Year 1156, by its Author) was afterward translated into English by Humphrey
Lhuid; and enlarged and published by 4o. Land. 1584.
Dr. Powel. There are three MSS. of good note, mentioned by Hist. Eccl. Brit.
p. 29, 31.
Archbishop Usher, which seem to reach much higher than Caradocus pretends to
go; all which I guess to have been written about the same Time. The first is in
Welsh, in Sir John Cotton's Library; reported to be the same that was
translated by Jeoffrey of Monmouth. The Second is in old English by one
Lazimon: and the Third (as I take it) in Latin, by Geraldus Cornubiensis.

King Arthur, K. Arthur.
and his Knights of the Round Table, made so considerable a Figure in the
British History, that many Learned Men have been at a great deal of Trouble to
clear up that Prince's Title, and to secure that part of Jeoffrey's Story,
whatever Fate might attend the Rest. The first Stickler (against Will.
Neubrigensis, etc.) was one Gray, the supposed Author of Scalechronicon; whom
J. Pits, p. 680.
Pits calls John, and says, he was Bishop of Norwich and Elect of Canterbury,
and that he died A. D. 1217. Bishop Def. Apolog. Par. I. p. 11.
Jewel calls him Thomas. About two hundred Years after him, Tho. Ma^ory (a
Welsh Gentleman) wrote King Arthur's Story in English; a Book that is, in our
Days, often sold by the Ballad-singers with the like Authentic Records of Guy
of Warwick and Bevis of Southampton. But, about the middle of the last Century,
his chief Champions appeared on the Stage; in defense of him against Polydore
Virgil's fierce attack. These were Hist. Brit. Def. 4o. Land. 1573.
Sir John Prise and Assert. Regis Arth. 4o. Land. 1544.
Mr. Leland; the latter whereof was as able as any Man alive to give the Story
all the Light which the Kingdom could afford it. And yet his Treatise is the
most liable to Exception of any thing he ever published. Many of the Authors he
quotes are only Jeoffrey of Monmouth's Echoes; others come not up to the
Question; and some are too Modern. These, and more Objections are raised
against this History by our most Learned Bishop Orig. Brit. p. 339, etc.
Stillingfleet; who nevertheless confesses that he has sufficiently proved that
there was such a Prince. So that, it seems, there is something of Sir W.
Temple's Introd. p. 51, 52, 53.
plain Stuff in the Story; whatever Imbroydery may be Introduced by the Spanish
vein of Romancing. Arth. Kelton's Chronicle of the 8o. Land. 1547.
Brutes, and H. Ath. Oxon. Vol. I. p. 293.
Lyte's Records, etc. are such Whimsical and Imperfect Pieces as not to deserve
the being named with the last mentioned Authors; though they treat much on the
same Subject.

After King Charles the Second's Restoration, R. Vaughan.
Mr. Robert Vaughan (a Learned Gentleman of Meryonidshire) published his 4o
Oxon. 1662.
British Antiquities Revived; wherein are a great many very pretty Remarks and
Discoveries. The Author, it appears, was well known to Archbishop See Archbish.
Usher's Letters, p. 261, 270, etc.
Usher; by whom he was much countenanced and encouraged in these Studies. In
one of his Letters to that renowned Primate, he says, he had now finished his
Annals of Wales; which he then sent to be perused by his Grace, and to receive
his Approbation (if worthy of it) for the Press. What became of that Work, I
cannot tell: but it has not yet appeared so publicly as the Author (it seems)
long since intended it should. His Executors owe him and us the Justice of
sending abroad whatever they have of his that is complete: For he left also
behind him a large Collection of other Manuscript Papers, relating to the same
Subject; which were sometime in the Possession of Sir William Williams.

After him came forth Aylet Sammes A. Sam.
with his Fol. Land. 1676.
Britannia Antiqua Illustrata; wherein he fetches the Original of the British
Customs, Religion and Laws, from the Phoenicians. This Conceit (which is all
that looks new in his Book) is wholly borrowed from Bochartus; as is his long
Discourse of the Offspring of the Saxons, from Sheringham. As for his own
part, it is visible he equally understood the Phoenician, British, Gothic,
Saxon, and Islandic Languages; and, if left to himself, could as easily have
brought the Britains from New Spain, and the Saxons from Madagascar. Upon the
first publishing of this Book, Mr. Oldenburg (Secretary to the Royal Society)
gave a very obliging Philos. Transact. Number. 124. p. 596.
Character both of the Work and its Author: who (by what the Athen. Oxon. Vol.
II. p. 879.
Oxford Antiquary has since told us) was every way unworthy of such a
Complement. Whether his Uncle or himself was the true Author of what he was
pleased to publish under his own Name, is not worth our while to enquire. But,
if we believe Mr. Wood that Aylet had never so much as heard of John Leland
before the Year 1677, he is the most unaccountable and ridiculous Plagiary and
Buffoon that ever had his Name in the Title Page of any Book whatever. For that
which he pretends to be his, was Printed the Year before; and (in the Preface
to it) we are told, that 'twas John Leland's asserting, that the main Body of
the Welsh Language consisted of Hebrew and Greek words, which first put the
Author upon his search into the Stories of the Phoenician Voyages. So that,
it is very probable that good Master Sammes never read so much as the Preface to
his Book: Or else, either he or Mr. Wood must be under the misfortune of a very
treacherous Memory.

Something of value might have been J. Auburey.
expected from the many Years Labors and Collections of that excellent
Antiquary John Aubrey Esquire, Fellow of the Royal Society; if the Proposals he
lately made for the publishing of his Monumenta Britannica had met with a
suitable Reception. The World is not come to that Ripeness we hope for, as
duly to relish Works of this Nature: but how well his have deserved a better
Encouragement than hitherto they have met with, is apparent from the little
Tastes we have of 'em in the late Edition of the Britannia; especially in
Wiltshire, Herefordshire and Wales. He would have given us (if we had been so
kind to our selves as to have accepted his Pains) a good view of the Temples,
Religion and Manners, of the Ancient Druids; of the Camps, Castles, Military
Architecture, etc. of both Britains and Romans. But we rejected his offers; and
may possibly too late repent of our Folly.

As to the Roman Writers, Roman Historians.
there are hardly any that treat of the Affairs of this Isle any otherwise than
occasionally only, and by the bye. The Design of Caesar's Commentaries is to
give the World an Account of the most glorious Passages of his own Life; and
what he says of Britain (as well as Germany) is apparently what he could pick
up from uncertain Tattle and Hearsay. Something better bottomed are the
Stories we meet with afterward in Tacitus, Dio Cassius, Suetonius, Eutropius,
Spartianus, Capitolinus, Lampridius, Vopiscus, Vid. Hist. August. Script. Edit.
a Fred. Sylburgio, in 2 Vol. Fol. Francof. 1588.
etc. who may all be supposed to have had the perusal of such Memorials as
were, from time to time, sent to the Emperors from their Lieutenants (and
other chief Officers) in this Province. In the use of these, the Reader ought
to take a deal of Leisure and Caution. For most of 'em seem to have been loose
Indigested Adversaria; such as had not the last Examination and Thoughts of
their Authors; and do therefore want the Regard that should be had to Order and
Time. Besides the several Tracts are not well ascertained to their Genuine and
Proper Writers; the not heeding whereof may draw one unawares into very
dangerous mistakes. These Defects are happily supplied by the famous Mr.
Dodwell, in his late Learned Praelectiones 8o. Oxon. 1692.
Camdenianae; which will be highly serviceable to all such as shall hereafter
engage in these Studies. Indeed Tacitus's Life of Agricola (especially as
improved by Fol. Land. 1598.
Sir Henry Savil's most admirable Translation and Learned Notes) looks
something like a Just Treatise upon that great General's Conduct here; and is
done with that Fairness and Respect to the Natives, that I cannot see but
Galgacus is made to talk as Bravely, Gracefully and Eloquently, as the best of
his Enemies. Many Defects in these Accounts have been likewise supplied (as
well as good store of Conjectural Mistakes, in more Modern Authors, rectified)
by the Roman Inscriptions and Coins found in several parts of our Island; and
there are daily new Discoveries of both these sorts.

Since the acceptable Services done to Inscriptions.
the Students of Antiquities by Gruterus and Reynesius, the Inscriptions on
Altars and other Monuments have carried a very high price; and (among others)
the Antiquaries of our own Nation have fansy'd that our History has had great
Improvements from such as have been discovered here. Those that Mr. Camden met
with were all preserved (as choice Ornaments) in his Britannia; and some few
have been added in the late Edition of that Work. Many more might undoubtedly
be had for seeking after: And it is no small Unhappiness, that, among the many
Advancements of Learning in this Age, the Recovery of these precious Treasures
should be so much neglected. The Persons employed in these Searches ought to be
Men of Probity as well as Knowledge; Religiously scrupulous in obtruding any
thing upon the World, under the Venerable Name of Antiquity, which has not an
honest Title to that Character. Annius of Viterbo's scandalous Project of
raising the Credit of that City by some forged Inscriptions (which he had
caused to be hid in the Neighboring Fields, and afterward discovered in a
Boasting Triumph) has been justly resented and exploded by all true Lovers of
ancient Learning: But the Inclinations of all Men are so naturally bent upon
doing Honor and Service to their Native Country in their own way (and the
Temptations that we meet with in these Studies are so many and strong) that a
very great share of Integrity is requisite to the making of a Complete
Antiquary.

Mr. Camden Remains, P. M. 199.
tells us, that, Coins.
from the Time of Claudian to that of Valentinian (about five hundred years)
the Roman Coin only was current in this Nation: And that (whereas all Money for
this part of the World was, for a long time, coined either at Rome, Lions or
Treves) Constantine the Great erected a Mint at London. Some of his Pieces,
which were there coined, I have in my poor Collection; and they are not
uncommon in many of the Musaea in England. But, long before his Days, his
Predecessors took occasion to magnify their Exploits, in this other World of
Great Britain, on the Reverse of their Coins; from whence several good
Illustrations of that part of our History may be had. What are given us of this
kind, in the Britannia, are very valuable: But their Numbers might be further
enlarged; and we are the more encouraged to look after those we want, because I
have not yet heard that our Traiterous English Money-makers have hitherto
busied themselves in Counterfeiting any Coin of so ancient a Date. Such
Rogueries are common in France and Germany; where most of their old Medals have
been Copied (and many New Ones of the first Caesar's stamped and minted) by
Modern Artists: And yet, even there, those that relate to the Affairs of this
Isle are always allowed to be True and Genuine.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Histories, and other Monuments, that relate to the Times of the Saxons
and Danes.
THe Dispatch that Sir William Temple makes of the Saxon times is very short
and pithy; and the Character he gives of their Writers is so full of Contempt,
that (if we were sure it came from a proper Judge) 'twould save an Antiquary a
great deal of trouble and pains. The Authors (he Introduct. page 1.
says) of those barbarous and illiterate Ages are few and mean: and perhaps the
rough course of those Lawless Times and Actions would have been too ignoble a
subject for a good Historian. The times were not so lawless, nor the Authors so
few and mean, as he imagines. A great many of the Records of those days, we
own, are lost: but there are still more remaining, than any of our
Neighbour-Nations can pretend to show, relating to the Transactions of those
Ages. We know not what is become of the Book King Vid. Aelfred. Mag. Vit. p. 82,
92, 93.
Aelfred wrote against Corrupt Judges; of his Collection of the old Saxon
Sonnets; of St. Aldhelm's Hymns, and other Musical Composures, etc. And yet we
have a pretty good stock of their Laws and Historical Treatises; and those that
have been conversant in 'em do not think they have thrown away their time upon
so ignoble a Subject as some may fancy it.

Before a just Sentence could be passed in this case, Grammar.
the Judge ought to have had the leisure and patience to have made himself a
perfect Master of the Saxon Language; which he might do either in the method
prescribed by Archaion. Praef. ad Lect. p. 2.
Mr. Lambard or Praef. ad Gram. Saxon. p. 12, 13.
Dr. Hickes. To this purpose, it had been convenient that he had furnished
himself, in the first place, with a Saxon Grammar, since our Tongue is now very
much altered in the Construction and Termination of such words as we still
retain, from that of our Ancestors. Whether the Monks of Tavistoke (who, as
Britan. in Devon.
Camden tells us, had a Saxon Lecture in their Monastery) ever compiled any
thing of this kind, is not known; tho it has been lately N. E. Camd. Brit. p.
38.
reported, that, in the beginning of the Civil Wars, there was such a Grammar
there printed. The first attempt toward it, that we hear of, was by Mr. John
Josseline, Archbishop Parker's Secretary; who drew up a Specimen, which is now
hardly to be met with. Mr. Somner prefixed some short Grammatical Rules to his
Dictionary: but Mr. Junius did not (as far as I could ever learn) bend his
thoughts that way. Bishop Fell was earnest with Dr Marshall (late Rector of
Lincoln-College) to draw up a Grammar; and he devolved the work upon one much
more unfit for the employment, who had made some Collections to that purpose.
His endeavors were superseded by the excellent performance of Dr. Hickes, who
has published his Institutiones 4to. Oxon. 1689.
Grammaticae Anglo-Saxonicae, etc. The Book discovers an Accuracy in this
Language beyond the Seize of any that had gone before him in that Study;
and will be of most necessary use to such as shall apply themselves to the
right understanding of the ancient History and Laws of this Kingdom. But, as
all first Draughts of any sort are usually Imperfect, so there seem to be some
Defects in this that may be supplied. For Example, There wants a Chapter of the
variety of Dialects; which might have been had out of the Northern Interlineary
Versions of the Gospel mentioned by Doctor Observat. in Verse. Anglo. Sax. p.
491, 492.
Marshall: One whereof is peremptorily affirmed to have belonged to St.
Cuthbert, as the other (in all likelihood) did to Venerable Bede.

After the Grammar is well and carefully perused, Dictionaries
the next Enquiry ought to be after such Dictionaries as have been written in
the Saxon Tongue; whereof we shall meet with as great plenty as we did in the
British. We find, that even in those Barbarous Ages, they had some few men of
Learning, who collected several Vocabularies, in Saxon and Latin, for the use
of their Schoolboys. Some of these are still remaining, having been carefully
picked up and transcribed by Mr. Junius. The chief of them are the two that
bear the Name of the learned Aelfric: whereof the worse was printed, with his
Grammar, in the end of Mr. Somner's Dictionary; the better still continuing in
Manuscript (notwithstanding Auct. Hist. Dogm. Vsserii, p. 377, 378.
Mr. Wharton's Remark to the contrary) both in Cotton's Library, and in that of
St. John's College in Oxford, as well as amongst Junius's Transcripts. Out of
these, and other helps, the most Industrious of our English Antiquaries have
compiled their Saxon Dictionaries; very serviceable toward the carrying on of
these intricate and useful Studies. All that I have heard of in this kind, are:
1. That which was drawn up by Laur. Noel, Dean of Litchfield, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: whose Original Manuscript fell into the hands of
Mr. Seldom, and is now in Bodley's Library; as a fair Copy of it is amongst
Junius's MSS. 2. John Josseline's; said to be in Titles of Hon. p. 82.
Cotton's Library, tho Dr. Hickes does not mention it in his Catalogue. 3.
Will. Somner's; which was Fol. Oxon. 1659.
published at the Earnest Request and Charges of some of the most Learned Men
in this Kingdom. The chief Additions he made, to what was done to his hand by
the two forementioned Gentlemen, were out of Caedmon's Paraphrase, and the
Medicinal MS. in the King's Library; together with two old Glossaries in Sir
John Cotton's. 4. That most elaborate one of Fr. Junius, who has infinitely
outdone all that went before him. His large Glossary or Lexicon of the five old
Northern Languages (whereof the Saxon has the preference) may be seen in the
Author's own MS. in Bodley's Library; and a fair Transcript of it (in Eleven
Volumes, at the charge of the late pious Bishop Fell) in the Musaeum
Ashmoleanum. It was designed for the Press by that most excellent Prelate; and
may be yet hoped for, as soon as it shall please God to restore to us the
Blessing of Peace, together with (one of its certain Consequences) the
Encouragement of Industry and good Learning. We may likewise then expect the
same Author's Etymologicum Anglicanum, a work completely finished in two
Volumes; which will be also of singular use to our English Antiquary. After
these I can hardly think it worth the while to take notice of the Imperfect
Collections made by Sir William Dugdale in Saxon and English; nor of two
Anonymous Fragments, of the like kind, in the Libraries of Sir Thomas Bodley
and Bennet-College.

To these Dictionaries ought to be added the Glossaries of Sir Henry Spelman
Glossaries.
and Mr. Somner; which explain the hard and obsolete Words frequently occurring
in our ancient Histories and Laws The former of these was first Fol. Land. 16^6.
published Imperfect: but in the Fol. Land 1664, and 1687.
Second and Third Editions that Defect is supplied. That the whole is the true
Genuine Work of its pretended Author, appears from the uniformity of the Style
in both parts; from the Quotations of the same Manuscripts; References in both
to the Readings of his Grandfather Sir John Spelman, etc. 'Twas a great
misfortune that the late publisher of it was not made acquainted with the Notes
and Enlargements upon the whole amongst Somner's Manuscripts in the Library at
Canterbury. The other Glossary was long after compiled by W. Somner, and
annexed to the Fol. Land. 1652.
December Scriptores, published by Sir Roger Twisden; who acknowledges, that
without it that work had been a very dry and useless performance. Out of these
two Du Fresne usually transcribes whatever he has, in his Glossar. ad Script.
Med. and Infim. Latinit. 3 Vol. Paris. Fol. 1678.
great work, which relates to the difficult passages in our old Laws, etc. Dr.
Wats has added a Glossary to his Edition of M. Paris; which may be very
serviceable to a young English Antiquary: And In Praef. ad Archaion. Guil.
Lambardi.
Mr Wheloc promised one of his Composure.

There Is not much to be learned Coins.
from any Coins we have of our Saxon Kings, their Silver ones being all of the
same Size, and generally very slovenly minted. In this Metal they coined only
Pennies, worth about three pence of our present Money. But they had also (as
appears from the Saxon Luc. 12. 6. 21. 2.
Gospels Halfpennies and Farthings; which perhaps were of a baser Matter. They
had also Half Farthings (eight to a Penny, like the Liards de France) which
they called Marc. 12. 42.
Sticas: Of which kind I take those Brass pices to be which were lately found
near Rippon in Yorkshire, and by Sir Edward Black^t (into whose possession they
first came) kindly communicated to several curious Antiquaries in that County.
The rest of their Money-Terms are Names of Accounts and Weight; which are thus
stated by Remains p. m. 200.
Camden.

l. s. d. 1. Their Shilling was 5 of their Pennies; in our Money 0 1 3 2. Their
Pound was their 48 s. our 3 0 0 3. Manca, Mancusa or Marca, about 0 1 0 4.
Manca of Gold, their 30 d. our 0 7 6

This computation (tho not exact) comes near the truth; and is as much, or
more, than we have occasion for at present. Camden here omits their Thrimsa;
which Sir Henry Spelman takes to have been three Shillings; Mr. Seldom thinks
it was the third part of a Shilling; and Mr. Somner modestly owns he knows not
what it was. As far as I am able to judge, King Vid. LL. Aethelstan. R. ^dit.
Wheloc p. 55.
Aethelstan's Laws make the Thrimsa, Peninga and Sceat, all one thing. They
tell us a King's Weregild was thirty thousand Thrimsa's: that is (say they) one
hundred and twenty pounds. Now, one of their pounds being allowed to be about
three times the weight of ours, this Sum will amount to about three hundred
and sixty pounds of our Money; and, there being eighty six thousand and four
hundred pence in our three hundred and sixty Pounds, it follows that a Thrimsa
is somewhat less than our three pence; which is the same with their Peninga or
Sceat.

In several Bibl. Cot. Tiber. A. 13. Nero, E. 1. 131. and 132. etc.
Libraries, Charters.
and in many Register-Books of our oldest Monasteries, we have a deal of
Charters granted (and pretended to be granted) by our Saxon Kings: but they are
very cautiously to be admitted and allowed on. The most ancient that we meet
with are those that are said to have been granted by H. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1.
p 118, 119, 120.
Ethelbert King of Kent, about the Year 605. and they have such Marks of
Forgery upon them, as would make a Man jealous of meddling with any others of
the like kind. The Records of the very Chuch of Canterbury, to which these
Grants are said to have been made, assure us that King Withered (who reign^d
almost a whole Century after Ethelbert) was the first that gave out Charters in
Writing; his Predecessors thinking their bare word sufficient to secure any of
their Gifts and Benefactions. Nay, one of their own Gervas. Dorob ad an. 1181.
Monks acquaints us, that his Brethren were eminent Artists at coining of
Charters: and we have all the reason in the world to take his Word for it. The
Cheat may commonly be discovered by a strict Enquiry after, and comparing of,
their Dates and the Times of such Witnesses (Bishops, Abbots, etc.) as are
brought in to attest their Truth. Mr. Wharton Praef. ad Angl. Sacr. par. 2. p.
3.
says, he could rarely observe one Saxon Charter, penned in their own Tongue,
to have been counterfeited: and the reason he assigns, is, because all the
Forgery came in after the Conquest; when the hungry Normans put the Monks and
others upon proving their Titles to their Lands and Houses, or otherwise made
bold to seize them into their own hands. Now, what was written in the Saxon
Tongue being generally slighted, it was necessary they should produce their
Grants in Latin, if they expected that their new Masters would everregard or
cast an Eye on them. Another occasion was afterward taken of feigning
Charters, upon William the Conqueror's extraordinary one to his new erected
Monastery at Battle-Abbey; whereby he exempted the Abbot there, and his Monks,
from all Episcopal Jurisdiction. This set the Religious, in other parts of the
Kingdom, upon grasping at the like Immunities; and, to that end, they
frequently framed the like Grants from former Kings. R. Fabian V^l. 1. p. 310.
will tell us, that the first Charter the Citizens of London ever had was
granted by King William the First; which (notwithstanding the great Antipathy
which he is said to have against it) is written in the Saxon Tongue, sealed
with green Wax, and expressed in eight or nine Lines.

A great many of their Laws have been published; Laws.
and we are not without hopes but that a good deal more, which hitherto have
lain in private hands, will shortly appear abroad. The first attempt toward so
good a service to the Kingdom was made by A. Nowel, who collected all he could
find, and left them to be translated by his Friend W. Lambard. He accordingly
made them Archainom. 4to. Land. 1568. and Fol. C^nta^^ 1644.
public: but his Translation is so false and affected, that the best Judges of
such a performance have not been satisfied with it. For which reason In Praef.
ad Gloss. Goth.
Mr. Junius recommends the old Translation in John Brompton's History, as much
more correct, and better to be relied on. Mr. Somner took the pains to review
the Book, and to correct his Errors; adding several Laws omitted by Lambard,
and giving a Kennet 's Life of Somn. p. 52.
double Translation, in Latin and English, to the whole. These are now, with
what else of that kind was left unpublish'd by that industrious person, in the
Custody of the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury. Mr. Junius took the like pains
with the Book; and his Emendations are to be had at Oxford. But still there are
several Saxon Laws in Manuscript; which we have good hopes will e're long be
published. At least, those of 'em that relate to the Affairs of the Church, will
be given us in a better Edition of Sir Henry Spelman's Councils: Of which more
hereafter.

By the way, Denelaga, etc.
I am not satisfied with the Opinion of Camden, Lambard, Spelman, (and,
generally, all our English Antiquaries and Historians who have treated of these
matters) that there were in this Kingdom, before the Conquest, three Codes or
Digests of Laws: which, from the several Countries wherein they first
prevailed, were rightly named the West Saxon, Mercian and Danish Laws. This
conceit is derived down, without Contradiction or due Examination, from the
most early Translators of our Saxon Records; who took it for granted that Laga
(in Westsexena laga, Myrcena laga and Dene laga) was a word of the same Import
and Signification with the Norman Ley. Whereas, in truth, Laga or Lage is
properly a Country or District: and so, it is very evident, it ought to have
been translated in the Laws of Archaion. Edit. Wheloc. p. 88. On (...). Quae
male Lambardus, Merciae, quae legibus Anglorum gubernatur. Rectius -- quae
postea Ditio Anglorum.
Ethelbert, Ib. p. 110. On (...) and on (...). i. Intra Ditiones Danicas and
Anglicas.
Cnute, and Ib. p. 149. Erat Lex Danorum, Norfolc. etc. Quam ob omni sensu
alienum! Pro Lex itidem hic Loci Diti^ sive Provincia substituenda est.
Edward the Confessor; even in those very parts of 'em which have occasioned
all these mistakes.

It appears there were some Historians Saxon Chronicle.
who wrote of the Saxon Affairs before Venerable Vid. Bed. Eccl. Hist. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
Bede's time; and I am inclinable to think that a part of their old Chronicle
(which has had so Life of Somn. p. 53.
much honor of late done to it by Mr. Gibson) is of that Age. The first
Publisher of this Noble Monument was Ab. Wheloc; who translated it, and caused
it to be printed in the end of his Fol. Cantab. 1643.
Saxon Bid. He made use only of two Manuscript Copies; one in Cotton's
Library, the other in that of Bennet College: whereof the former ended with the
year 1001, and the latter with 1070. Cotton's, he says, had been compared with
a Third; which the Collater (whom he supposes to have been Mr. Josseline) calls
the Book of Peterburgh. Mr. Gibson had the advantage of three Copies more: 1.
Laud: A fair one in Vellum, given by Archbishop Laud to the University of
Oxford; which corrects those that Wheloc had seen, and continues the History
down to the year 1154. This, he fancies, did anciently belong to the Monastery
of Peterburgh; because it often largely insists upon the Affairs of that place.
But, if it did so, it is plain it cannot be the same wherewith Mr. Wheloc's
Cottonian MS. had been compared, tho its variations from it are not very
considerable, being mostly in words, and not in sense. 2. Cant. Another Gift of
the same Archbishop to the public Library at Oxford. It Is a Paper-transcript
of some Copy (now lost) differing from all the rest; and sometimes explaining
their dark passages, and supplying their defects. It ends with the year 977. 3.
Cot. A better Copy than it had been Mr. Wheloc's Fortune to meet with in the
Tiber. B. 4.
Cotton-Library: which was accurately compared with Wheloc's Edition by ^r.
Junius, and ends A. D. 1057. Out of all these we have the Text made up as
entire and complete as 'twas possible to give it us; with an elegant and proper
4to. Oxon. 1672.
Translation, void of all affected Strains, and unlucky Mistakes, which used to
abound in Works of this kind. If some few passages have a little puzzled the
Ingenious publisher, let it be considered, that in these, Florence of Worcester
and Matthew of Westminster (who lived nearer the times wherein they were
penned) were much more lamentably gravelled. Perhaps, some further Enlargements
and Additions might yet be made to this Work, out of such MSS. as came not
early enough to Mr. Gibson's View and Knowledge. Of this Number I take to be,
1. The Saxon Chronicle from Julius Caesar down to the Reign of King Edward the
Martyr, in Tiber. A. 6.
Sir John Cotton's Library: For (if it ends, as Mr. Wharton Angl. Sac. par. I.
p. 176.
says it does, A. D. 975.) it must be different from what was perused by A.
Wheloc. 2. Another, in the same Tiber. B. 1.
Library, from Julius Caesar down to the Conquest; which was transcribed by
Somner, and is now (under the Title of the Chronicle of Abingdon) amongst his
MSS. at Canterbury. 3. A Third, in Latin and Saxon, at the same Domitian. A. 8.
place; which is frequently referred to by Angl. Sac. par. I. p. 332, 558, 791,
796.
Mr. Wharton, and seems to have recorded many particulars of Note not mentioned
by any of the rest. This Book was given to Sir Robert Cotton by Mr. Camden,
says Vsserij Hist. Eccles. p. 20. 218.
Archbishop Usher; who also mentions a Ib. p. 182.
Copy of his own, worth the enquiring after. 4. The Book of Peterburgh, which
was never thoroughly compared with any Copy, hitherto published, and Angl. Sacr.
p. 405.
differs from them all. May we not also bring into this List those hinted at by
Life of Somn. p. 30. 66.
Mr. Kennet; and that which Roman Ports, etc. p. 32. Vid. etiam D. Hickesij,
Catal. Lib. Sept. p. 171.
Mr. Somner had from Mr. Lambard? I think we may.

The History that is written by Bid Historians.
is so purely Ecclesiastical that it will not fall under our consideration in
this Chapter: But some of his Cotemporaries are said to have recorded the Civil
Transactions of their Times. Thus Cimbert (first Monk, and afterward Bishop,
of Lincoln) is the I. Pits, p. 127. Bale, Cent. 1. cap. 89.
reputed Author of the Annals of his own time; and Daniel Bishop of the West
Saxons is Pits, p. 144. Bale, Cent. 1. cap. 91.
said to have written four or five Historical Treatises. I suppose there was no
other grounds for dubbing these men Historians, save only Bede's grateful
Acknowledgments of his being indebted to both of 'em for the Informations and
Assistances they gave him toward the compiling his Ecclesiastical History:
and, if he quotes them in twenty particulars, it is enough for either Bale or
Pits to make them Authors of as many Books.

To W. Caxton, K. Aelfred.
I suppose, good Mr. Fox was obliged for the Account he gives us of King
Martyrol. ad An. 872.
Aelfred' s compiling a Story in the Saxon Speech, etc. But Bale and Pits have
bravely Pits, p. 170. Bale, Cent. 2. cap. 7.
enlarged upon the matter; assuring us that he did not only write Collectiones
Chronicorum, but also Acta suorum Mastratuum. The Mirroir des Justices (written
in the days of Edward the First) would incline us to believe the latter part of
the story; giving so very punctual an Aelfr. Mag. Vit. p. 82, 83.
Account of forty and four of his Judges executed, in one year, for corrupt
Practices. But all that now remains of that great Monarch's Works (which
relates to History) is only his paraphrastical Translation of Bid, and a short
Genealogy of the Kings of the West Saxons. The former of these will be treated
on Chap. 7.
hereafter, and the other may be seen among the Appendices to the Oxford
Edition of his Life.

The earliest Account we have of Asserius.
the Reign of this excellent Prince is owing to Asserius Menevensis; who lived
in his Court, and is said to have been promoted by him to the Bishopric of
Sherburn. This Treatise was first published by A. B. Parker, in the old Saxon
Character, at the end of his Edition of Fol. Land. 1574.
The. Walsingham's History. This he did to invite his English Readers, and to
draw them in unawares, to an Acquaintance with the Hand writing of their
Ancestors, in hopes to beget in 'em (by degrees) a Love for the Antiquities of
their own Country. Asserius wrote his Sovereign's Life no further than the 45th
year of his Age, which, according to his computation, fell in the year of our
Lord893. So that, tho the Book (as it is published) continue his Story to his
Death, yet that part is borrowed from Authors of a later time; particularly,
the Copy of Verses, by way of Epitaph, is Henry of Huntingdon's. He shows,
through the whole, a great deal of Modesty, especially in the Account he gives
of his own being called to Court, and his Reception there. He mentions nothing
of the Visionary Dialogue 'twixt King Aelfred and St. Cuthbert; which all the
rest of our Historians largely insist on, together with the good effects it had
upon the Diocese of Lindisfern. He is exactly copied by Florence of Worcester,
and others; when they come to treat of the great things of this Reign. As to
what relates to the Truth or Falsehood of that Memorable Passage in this Book,
mightily asserting the Antiquity of the University of Oxford, I shall not
meddle at present; that matter having been sufficiently canvass'd by Vid. Hist.
and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 9, 10. Et Vit. Aelfr. R. p. 141, 142, 143, etc.
those whose proper business led them to it. The best thing this Contest could
do for us was the putting Sir John Spelman upon writing a New Fol. Oxon. 1678.
Life of this King; which he seems to have undertaken chiefly upon a Design to
vindicate the University of Cambridge from the Reflections which he apprehended
were cast upon it by the use that had been made of that passage. The most
elaborate piece in his whole Ibid.
Book is on this Subject; and his zealous Management has afforded us some good
Remarks of his own, and others of the learned Translator and Publisher of his
Work. Whether St. Neot ever wrote (as some have reported) the Life of King
Aelfred, Sir John Spelman justly Vit. Aelfr p. 3, 4.
doubts; and I am not able to resolve him, unless the next Paragraph will
unravel the matter.

Another piece has been lately pub^lisht, Pseu^lo-Ass^rius
under the Title of Fol. Oxon. 1691.
Asserius's Annals, by Dr. Gale; who tells us that the Manuscript Copy, which
he used, is now in the Library of Trinity College in Cambridge. Jo Brompton
l^ter X. Script. p. 753.
indeed cites several things, relating to the Story of King Offa, out of
Asserius's Writings, which are not in his Life of Aelfred. Hence some have
concluded that he might possibly have been imposed upon by those that had given
the Name of that Author to such Anonymous Collections as they knew not how
truly to Father; and the Jealousy may still continue for any thing which this
Book discover^^o the contrary. For King Offa is hardly named in it; and
therefore Brompton must have hit upon a Vid. Angl. Sacr. par. I. p. 330.
spurious piece, how genuine soever this may prove. The learned Publisher does
not Praef. 10.
question but it is the true Offspring of Asserius; and its insisting chiefly
on the Fortunes of King Aelfred seems to countenance his Opinion. Leland calls
it the Chronicle of St. Neot's; because he found it in that Monastery. Marianus
Scotus had also met with it somewhere, for he transcribes it by whole Sale.

The next Saxon Historian now extant, Ethelwerd.
is Ethelwerd or Elward Patricius, descended (as himself Lib. 4. cap. 2.
attests) of the Blood Royal; who lived till the year 1090, but did not
continue his Chronicle so far. His work consists of four Books; which are
published by Inter 5 Scrip. post Bed. Fol. Francof. 1601.
Sir H. Savil. The whole is a Translation of a very false and imperfect Copy of
the Saxon Chronicle: and therefore William of Malmesbury has modestly (out of
Deference to his Family) Prolog. ad Lib. 1. de Gest. Reg.
declined the giving a Character of this Writer's performance. If he had done
it truly, he ought to have told us that his Style is boisterous; and that
several parts of his History are not so much as hardly sense. It appears from
what we have noted above, that both Id. ib.
Malmesbury and Britan. in val. Pict.
Camden are mistaken, when they affirm him to be our most ancient Historian
after Bid. J. Pits J. Pits, p. 173.
will tell you that we had two other Ethelwerds of the same Royal Extraction,
who, long before this Man's time, wrote each of 'em a Chronicle or History of
our English Affairs. The Elder of these he makes Son to King Aelfred, and the
other his Grandson. Nay, and St. Ethelwold (Bishop of Winchester) was likewise
most certainly Senior to this Ethelwerd Patricius, dying in the year 984. Now,
he (says the same Id. p. 178.
Author) wrote two Books De Regibus, etc. totius Angliae, and De Tempore Regum
Britannorum: for Copies of both which he sends to the public Library at
Cambridge.

Many things relating to the Civil Lives of their Kings.
Government of these Times are dispersed in some particular Lives of their
Saints and Kings; the latter whereof may be here mentioned, tho the former will
fall under another Head. The Life of Offa (frequently referred to by Council.
Tom. I. p. 302, 303, etc. Gloss. p. 296.
Sir Hen. Spelman) has been published by In Edit. M. Paris.
Dr. Watts: That of King Oswin was somewhere met with by Vid. Monast. Angl.
Tom. I. p. 334.
John Leland: King Ethelwolph's is said to have been written by J. Pits, p. 181.
VVolstan, a famous Monk of Winchester, much commended by William of
Malmesbury: Edward the Confessor's, written by Abbot Ealred, has had Apud
Capgravium, ^urium, etc. Optima autem inter 10. Script.
several Editions: and Queen Emma's Encomium is also made Edit. Paris. 1619.
public.

After the Conquest, J. Pike is I. Pits. p. 195.
Since the Conquest.
said to have written De Regibus Anglo-Saxonum, and De Danis in Anglia
dominantibus: but it seems to be a Vid. H. Wharton, Praef. ad Angl. Sac. par.
II. p. 28, 29.
mistake. Upon the same Credit we are assured that J. Pits, p. 213.
John Mercius, under the Reign of King Stephen, published an Historical Account
of the Mercian Kings, which got him his Surname: That Id. p. 266.
Colman the wise ( John Harding's great Friend) wrote most copiously and
clearly of the Saxon Heptarchy, their uniting afterward into a Monarchy, the
Danish Incursions and Cruelties, etc. And that Id. p. 281.
Gyraldus Cambrensis penned the Story of the West Saxon Kings.

R. Verstegan' s Quarto Antwerp. 1605. oct. Land. 1653. 1674.
R. Verstegan.
Restitution of decayed Intelligence in Antiquities does especially relate to
the Language, Religion, Manners and Government of the ancient English Saxons.
This Writer being of Low Dutch Extraction, a Romanist, and something of an
Artist in Painting, had several advantages for the making of some special
Discoveries on the Subject whereon he treats; which is handled so plausibly,
and so well illustrated with handsome Cuts, that the Book has taken and sold
very well. But a great many Mistakes have escaped him: Some whereof have been
noted by Mr. Sheringham; As, his fancy of the Sheringh. de Angl. Gent. Orig. p.
35, 36, etc.
Vitae being the ancient Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight; Of the Id. p 75,
149, 345.
Saxons being in Germany, before they came in the more Northern Countries; Of
Id. p. 85.
Tuisco's coming from Babel, his giving Name to Id. p. 317.
Tuesday, etc. The rest have been carefully corrected by Mr. Somner, who has
left large Marginal Kennet' s Life of Somn. p. 63. 120.
Notes upon the whole.

Mr. Seldom J. Seldom.
was a person of vast Industry, and his Seize in most parts of Learning
were so extraordinary, that every thing that came from him was always highly
admired and applauded. Tho, I must confess, I cannot think he was that great
Man in our English Antiquities which some have taken him to be: His Analecta
Quarto Francof. 1615.
do not so clearly account for the Religion, Government and Revolutions of
State, among our Saxon Ancestors, as they are Degrees. Whear. Method. Legend. Hist.
p. m. 133.
reported to do. The Laws he quotes in his Janus Anglorum are as faulty, as if
his whole Skill in them reached no higher than Lambard's Translation; and seem
to want Will. Somner's Emendations, as much as those he has published of William
the Conqueror in his Fol. Land. 1623.
Spicelegium in Eadmerum.

The very best performance that I R. Sheringham.
know of, relating to the prime Antiquities of the Saxons, is Mr. Sheringham's
Treatise Octav. Cantabr. 1670.
De Anglorum Gentis Origin. Our Civil Wars sent this Author into the Low
Countries, where he had the Opportunity of coming acquainted with Dr. Marshal
and the Dutch Language; both inclining him to such Studies as this Book shows
him to have delighted in. He appears to have been a person of great Modesty; as
well as Industry and Learning. Hence some will conclude him to be too
credulous; and that several of his Authorities (particularly Cap. 4.
Lazius's Tattle about the Hebrew Inscriptions found at Vienna) have not been
sufficiently considered: But his Collections out of the Greek, Roman, and
(chiefly) the Northern Writers, are highly commendable; and, for the most part,
very well put together.

Our Saxon Antiquary ought also to German Writers.
be skilled in the Writings of those Learned Germans, who have made Collections
of their old Laws; or have written such Glossaries, or other Grammatical
Discourses, as may bring him acquainted with the many ancient Dialects of our
Ancestors and Kinsmen in that part of the World. Of the former sort, those I
would chiefly recommend to his use, are the large Volumes of Goldastus and
Lindenbrogius; S. Meichsner's Kayserlich und Koniglich Land und Lehnrech; The
Frisian Laws, amongst F. Junius's Book^ in Bodley's Library; and (above all)
the Sea Engl. Atlas, vol. II. p. 113, 114.
Sachsen^Spiegel or Speculum Saxonicum, which is a notable Manual of the old
Laws of the ancient German-Saxons. For the acquiring a sufficient knowledge of
the Language, a Man ought not only to be conversant in the Francic pieces that
are collected by Vid. Hickes Catal. Lib. Sept. p. 177.
Junius, and others published by Comment in Biblioth. Vindobon.
Lambecius; but also (and most especially to be familiarly intimate with the
most elaborate and exquisite Work of Von der Teutschen Ha^pt-Sprach, etc. Lib.
V. 4to Brunsw. 1663.
J. G. Schottelius, who has all that can be wished for on that Subject.

'Twas the Opinion of In Epist. ad D. P. Rosaecran, Mon. Dan. p. 159.
Sir Henry Spelman, Danes.
that our British Historians have more largely treated of the ancient Affairs
of Denmark than the Danes themselves. But this seems to have been a little
unadvisedly written; and before his Correspondence with Wormius had better
informed him. I know that some of the most eminent Antiquaries of that Kingdom
bewail a mighty breach in the thread of their History of no less than three
hundred years together) and that in such Centuries as their Records ought to be
most serviceable to us. But Hist. Dan. lib 1. p. 37.
Pontanus has happily removed that Panick Fear; showing that the Story is
entire enough, and only the Chronological part (which is a Fault common to all
the ancient Histories of the whole World) a little dark and troubled.

The Scaldri or Runae were men of Scaldri.
the same fashion among the Danes, and the other Northern Kingdoms, as the
Bards in Great Britain. They were the professed Historians and Genealogists of
their several Countries; always in attendance on their Kings both in Peace and
War, and ready to celebrate every remarkable Occurrence in everlasting Rhimes.
This was their Office: And 'twas of that Consideration in the State, and so
acceptable to the Monarchs themselves, that those Poets were always the chief
Courtiers and Counselors; as being perhaps the only Men of Letters. Out of
their Compositions is fetched all the ancient Danish History for some
Centuries; as both Vid. Praef. ad Sax. Grammat. Hist. Dan.
Saxo himself, and all the rest of their Historians, have acknowledged. The Art
is still in great Vogue and Credit with the Modern Islanders, who are justly
reputed the main preservers of the Northern Antiquities, notwithstanding that a
late Sir Tho. Craig's Scotlands Sovereign. p. 121.
Learned person has affirmed that their Country produces nothing but
Apparitions, Ghosts, Hobgoblins and Fairies. Mighty are the Commendations which
they that pretend to Skill in these Venerable Sonnets have given us of them.
They will not allow any thing that was ever penned by Homer or Virgil to come
in Competition with them: assuring us, that the Vid. S. Ioh. Steph. Not. in
Sax. Gram. p. 11, 1^.
happiest Flights we can meet with in the Greek and Roman Poets are dull Trash,
if compared with the Seraphick Lines of a true Cimbrian Scalder.

The Language wherein the forementioned Asamal.
Rhimes were composed was (by the Northern Nations themselves) called Asamal,
or the Asian Tongue; being supposed to be brought out of Asia by Woden or Odin,
the first great General that led a Colony into these parts. The best Remains of
this (as I long since Engl. Atlas. vol. I. in Denm. p. 49, 70.
acquainted the English Reader) are now amongst the Inhabitants of Island: who
have preserved their ancient Language in the greatest Purity; both by being
least acquainted with foreign Commerce, and by taking care to Registerin it the
public Transactions of their own and the Neighboring Nations. The same old
Tongue was also called Ol. Worm. Lit. Run. cap. 5.
Runa Maali, from the Characters wherein 'twas written, and which they termed
Runer: Of the Original of which word, and its proper signification, Wormius has
given us a large account. The Characters themselves were first (he shows)
called Runer; tho afterward that word came to acquire some new significations:
As, 1. Enchantments; because they were performed by the help of these strange
Letters. 2. Learned Men; whose business it was, by the help of the same
Alphabet, to compose Epitaphs for their great ones, and to make Inscriptions on
their Monuments.

It Is well worth our Observation, Ira Letur.
that among the several Runic Alphabets reckoned up by In Epist. ad Olaum ibid.
Arngrim Jonas, there is one which he calls Ira Letur, or Irlandorum Literae.
Now, it appears indeed that the Danes were long in possession of the Kingdom of
Ireland, or (at least) a good share of it: and yet we have not hitherto met
with any Remains of their ancient Learning, which have been discovered in that
Island. But the thing is not much to be wondered at. As all Reformations in
religious matters are zealous and warm; so we have reason to believe that to
have been wherein these Pagan Nations were first converted to Christianity.
Care was taken to abolish the very Ruins of their former Worship; and their
first Apostles, bringing generally their Commissions from the Court of Rome,
thought the Papal Conquest never to be effectually finished till even the
Italian Characters and Way of Writing had been wholly admitted into practice by
their Northern Converts. Which was the more easily brought about, by reason of
the ill use which had been some time made of their Runic Letters: For the
suggestion was obvious, that, as long as these were at hand, it would be
difficult to preserve Men from trying some of their old Magical Conclusions;
and, by degrees, relapsing into Idolatry and Paganism.

The Danes (as all other ancient Runic Monuments.
People of the World) registered their more considerable Transactions upon
Rocks; or on parts of them, hewn into various Shapes and Figures. On these
they engraved such Inscriptions as were proper for their Heathen Vid. Lit. Run.
cap. 1. and 25. Mon. Dan. lib. 5. p. 344, 345, and 438.
Altars, Triumphal Arches, Sepulchral Monuments and Genealogical Histories, of
their Ancestors. Their Writings of less Concern (as Letters, Almanacks, etc.)
were engraven upon Wood: And because Beech was most plentiful in Denmark, (tho
Firr and Oak be so in Norway and Sweden) and most commonly employed in these
Services, from the word Bog (which in their Language is the Name of that sort
of Wood) they and all other Northern Nations have the Name of Book. The poorer
sort used Bark; and the Horns of Rain-Deer and Elks were often finely polished,
and shaped into Books of several Leaves. Many of their Old Calendars are
likewise upon Bones of Beasts and Fishes: But the Inscriptions on Tapestry,
Bells, Parchment and Paper, are of later use.

Some other Monuments may be known to be of a Danish Extraction, Unlettered
Monuments.
tho they carry nothing of a Runic Inscription. Few of their Mon. Dan. lib. 1.
cap. 3, 6, 7.
Temples were covered; and the largest observed by Wormius (at Kialernes in
Island) was 120 foot in length, and 60 in breadth. Their Altars stood in a sort
of Chapel, or Chancel, in the end of these Temples; being only large broad
Stones, erected on three bulky Supporters, on the top of a Hillock, surrounded
with Rows of lesser Stones. These Altars are usually, three of 'em, found
together; being consecrated to their three chief Deities. They buried their
Princes and great men (as the old Greeks and Romans also did) in Hills, raised
sometimes to a considerable height, surrounded with one row of Stones about
the bottom, and another near the top; and, on some pompous occasions, having a
third row (in a square) at some distance from the lower of the two former
Coronets. They likewise anciently burned their dead, and enclosed their Ashes
in Urns, which were reposited in the forementioned Barrows, together with the
choicest Jewels, Treasure, and valuable Accoutrements, of the deceased. The
places wherein they fought their Duels were sometimes Squares, lined out with
rows of Stones; sometimes round Pits, with convenient Posts (at a due distance)
for the Bystanders. Thus fought Sax. Gram. Hist. Dan. lib. 3.
Ubbo with the Sclavonian. Their Courts of Judicature (which they called Tinge)
were also certain plots of ground, either Mon. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 10.
oval or square, environed with great Stones; and having one larger than the
rest in the middle. Near akin to which were the places assigned for the Ib.
cap. 12.
Election of their Kings; being Circles of such Stones (usually twelve in
number) with the bulkiest in the midst.

The next Monument of Age is their Edda Islandorum; Edda.
the meaning of which Appellation they that publish the Book hardly pretend to
understand. As far as I can give the Reader any satisfaction, he is to know
that Arng. Jonas* in Chrymog. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Island was first inhabited (in the year 874) by a Colony of Norwegians; who
brought hither the Traditions of their Forefathers, in certain metrical
Composures, which (as is usual with Men transplanted into a Foreign Land) were
here more zealously and carefully preserved and kept in memory than by the Men
of Norway themselves. About 240^years after this ( A. D. 1114.) their History
began to be written by one Tho. Bartholin. Antiq. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 11. p. 192.
Saemund, surnamed Frode or the wise; who (in nine years travel through Italy,
Germany and England) had amassed together a mighty Collection of Historical
Treatises. With these he returned full fraught into Island; where he also drew
up an account of the affairs of his own Country. Many of his Works are now said
to be lost: But there is still an Edda, consisting of several Odes (whence I
suspect its Name is derived) written by many several hands, and at as different
times, which bears his Name. The Book is a Collection of Mythological Fables,
relating to the ancient State and Behavior of the Great Woden and his
Followers, in terms poetical and adapted to the Service of those that were
employed in the composure of their old Rhymes and Sonnets. Another Edda
(published by Quarto Hatn. 1665.
Resenius) was written by Snorro Sturlaesonius, who was born ( A. D. 1179.)
above a hundred years after Saemund; and lived to be an eminent Lawyer in his
own Country. His Work is thought to be only an Epitome of the former: but I
rather look upon them as two several Collections of Islandic Tales and Ballads;
out of which may be picked a deal of good History, and the best View of the
Religious Rites of the Northern Nations that is any where extant. It Is plain
Saxo had seen many Sonnets that are not touched upon in either of these; and
thence the Report comes of an Elder Edda much larger (a thousand times says
Bishop In Epist. ad. S. Joh Stephan.
Br. Suenonius) than both of 'em put together. Nor is it indeed improbable but
that a thousand times more Songs of this kind might have been had for seeking
after, whatever Scantiness they may now be reduced to. Magnus Olaus collected
many of 'em for Wormius's; which he was also so kind as to translate and
explain to him: And, near twenty years ago, I met with a much more perfect Edda
than Resenius's in the famous Library of the Duke of Brunswic-Wolfembuttel.
Whether it was a Copy of Saemund Frode's I am not now able so much as to
conjecture; but I remember the Library Keeper (Mr. Hanisius) was so much a
stranger to its Contents, that he had entitled it an old Moscovian MS. To the
Edda is always annexed the Scalda, which is the old Danish or Islandic
Prosodia, teaching how to compose their several sorts of Meter.

Our Danish Antiquary should be also acquainted with the best Islandic
Historians; Islandic Histories.
the most ancient whereof is Aras Frode, Cotemporary with Saemund. He first
wrote a Regular History of Island, from the first planting of the Country down
to his own Time: wherein he gives an account also of the Affairs of Norway,
Denmark, and England, intermixed with those of his own Nation. This fell happily
into the hands of Tho. Bartholine; who with the Tho. Bartholin. Antiq. Dan. p.
197, 198.
assistance of his Friend the Bishop of Scalholt) took care to have it
published, A. D. 1689. Since his time the Islandic Historians have not had any
great occasion to meddle with the Transactions in Britain, excepting only
Chrymogaea. 4to Hamb. 1610.
Arngrim Jonas, who touches upon some passages which we have also in others
already mentioned. And indeed most of 'em are written with so little judgment
(confounding the true and fabulous Sonnets of their Scaldri) that they are not
to be read without some Caution and Acquaintance with those Poetical Writers
who are owned to be their chief Authors: And the Emulation that daily appears
to be betwixt the Antiquaries of the two Neighboring Kingdoms of Sweden and
Denmark (for the gaining the honor of Precedence to their several Countries)
seems to threaten us with further Corruptions in the Editions of their
Manuscripts. A misfortune this is, which is too frequently observable (tho very
highly scandalous) in Historians and Learned Men; who ought not to be biased
by any, even the most natural, Affections.

There is likewise extant a couple of Norwegian Writers.
Norwegian Histories of good Authentic Credit; which explain a great many
particulars relating to the Exploits of the Danish Kings in Great Britain,
which our own Historians have either wholly omitted or very darkly recorded.
The former of these was written soon after the year 1130, by one 8vo. Amstelod.
1684.
Theodoric a Monk; who acknowledges his whole Fabric to be built upon
Tradition, and that the old Northern History is no where now to be had save
only ab Istendingorum antiquis Carminibus. The other was compiled by Snorro
Sturlaesonius; who confesses he drew it out of the Ballads of the Scaldri,
which he verily believes to contain nothing but what may be firmly relied on as
most unquestionable Truth. And Arngrim Jonas so far concurs with him, as to In
Supplement. ad Hist. Norvag.
assure us that the Songsters of those days were far from Flattery; and knew
nothing of the more modern poetical License, of Fable and Rhodomantade, in
recording the story of their Princes and Patrons. This Book was translated into
the Vulgar Danish Language by Pet. Vndallensis; and so 4to. Hafn. 1633.
published by VVormius.

Nor do I know of any more than Danish Historians.
two Danish Historians which are necessarily requisite to be in our Antiquary's
Library; and those are Saxo Grammaticus and (his Cotemporary and
Fellow Servants) Sueno Aggonis. Before Stephanius's excellent Fol. Sorae, 1645.
Edition, Saxo's History had been thrice published, but very faultily. He is
commonly reckoned the most ancient (as well as most polite) Historian of
Denmark; dying, Provost of the Cathedral Church at Roschild, A. D. 1204. Saxo
himself says he In Epist. Ded.
compiled a good part of his out of the Islandic Ballads; yet Arn. Jonas (as
quoted by Proleg. p. 37.
Stephanius) assures us that he did not deal fairly in that matter, nor make
such good use of those Authorities as he ought to have done. J. Lyscander
Antiq. Dan. Sermon. 8.
quarrels him upon the like bottom, and seems to intimate that he had a greater
care of the Style than Matter of his Book. Sueno died before he could bring his
Work (which is also Sorae 1643.
published by Stephanius) to perfection: But what we have is of as good and
valuable a kind as the forementioned: For, as Saxo framed his History out of
the old Rhimes, so he declares that his is mostly taken from the Tales and
Traditions of old people. Out of these two is borrowed the most of what we meet
with, relating to those Times wherein the Affairs of Denmark and Britain were
chiefly interwoven, in Huitfield, Pontanus, Meursius, and all other later
Historians of that Kingdom.

The great Restorer of the decayed O. Wormius.
Antiquities of Denmark was Olaus Wormius; who has also enabled us to make many
new Discoveries in those of our own Nation. His 4to. Hafn. 1636. and Fol. ibid.
1651.
Literatura Runica was the first happy Attempt made toward the right
explaining of the old Cimbrian Monuments: which, till his time, had laid
neglected and unknown to the Learned World; not only in those Northern
Kingdoms, but in several parts of Italy, Spain and other Europoean Countries,
where the Gothic Arms and Letters had gained a footing. The whole Treatise is
divided into 29 Chapters; largely treating of the Name, Number, Figure, Powers,
etc. of the Runic Characters. His Fol. Hafn. 1644.
Monumenta Danica affords a Noble Collection of the scattered Runic Monuments
through all the several Provinces of the Danish and Norwegian Kingdoms: An
undertaking fruitlessly attempted before him, and a Work that was so much
despaired on, that some of the best pieces were put to the most vile uses. Out
of this Misery he recovered them; and has now raised himself an everlasting
Monument out of them all. The whole Book is of singular use to any man that
pretends to write upon any Branch of our English Antiquities; some whereof are
Mon. Dan. p. 326, etc. 339, 342.
particularly Illustrated by the worthy Author himself. To these we must add
his Fol. Hafn. 1650.
Lexicon Runicum and Fol. Hafn. 1626 and 1651.
Fasti Danici: Nor is the Fol. Lugd. Bat. 1655.
Musaeum Wormianum so full fraught with Physical Rarities, but that it will
supply us with some Curiosities in Northern Antiquities worth our seeking.
After him, Joh. Mejerus made some Gleanings in the same Field; which still
remain in MS. And several Swedes were, by his example, induced to pay the like
respect to the long neglected Monuments of their Ancestors. Among whom Buraeus
and Verelius have already appeared in public; and Joh. Hadorphius's more
complete Work ( de Sepultura Sueco-Gothorum) has been long since promised.

Tho. Bartholinus (...).
(Son to the famous Physician of that Name) has lately given us an Antiquitates
Dan. 4to. Hafn. 1689.
Addition to Wormius's Discoveries; enquiring into the Reasons that induced the
ancient Danes to contemn Death, and carry on the most dangerous Exploits with
so much Courage and Bravery. In pursuance whereof he gives us a notable Account
of their Belief of the Soul's Immortality; their Deifying of Woden, Thor, Fro
and other Heroes; their hopes of enjoying a sensual and Turkish Eternity in
Valhalla or Woden's Elysium, etc.

Some few more Writers there are (of a lower form) that have treated on the
same subject; which may be useful to our English Antiquary. But for these I
must refer him to Alb. Bartholine's Treatise 8vo. Hafn. 1666.
de Scriptis Danorum; being not very well disposed (at present) for the writing
of dry Catalogues.

CHAP. V.
Of our English Historians since the Conquest.
TO give an exact and full Register of these would be a tedious Work; and
require a much better acquaintance with our public and private Libraries than I
can pretend to. Sir William Temple has rightly observed, that tho, since this
great period, the face of affairs Introduct. to Hist. of Engl. p. 319, 320.
has not been drawn by any one skilful hand, or by the Life; yet it is
represented in so clear a Light as leaves very little either obscure or
uncertain in the History of our Kingdom, or Succession of our Kings: And 'twill
be enough for my present purpose to pick out the chief of these Limners, and to
give the Reader a View of 'em in their proper Colors. This I shall endeavor
to do as briefly as is possible; ranking them in the several Centuries wherein
they wrote.

1066. The Eleventh Century.
The first of our English Historians, after the Conqueror's Arrival was
Ingulphus: who (because he chiefly treats of the affairs of Crowland, tho he
occasionally intermixes the Story of our Kings) will be more properly placed
Chap. 10.
elsewhere. The Relation he bore to King William does manifestly bias him in
the ill account he gives of Haerold; pelting that Prince with a Volley of hard
Names, all in a breath, Contemptor praestitae fidei, ac nequiter oblitus sui
Sacramenti, Throno Regio se intrusit, etc. About the same time wrote Marianus
Scotus (a Monk of Mentz in Germany) Marianus
who brought down our English History, interwoven with a more general one of
Europe, as low as the year 1083. This Work met with such an universal and great
applause in our Monasteries, that there was hardly Angl. sacr. Tom. 1. Praef.
p. 24.
one in the Kingdom that wanted a Copy of it, and some had several. The
frequent transcribing it gave occasion to a deal of errors and mistakes; and
the Interpolations were so many and confused, that (when it came to be Vid. H.
Lhuid Fragm, Brit. Descr. f. 27. (...)
prepared for the Press) some of its Genuine and fairest Branches were lopped
off, for Morbose Tumors and Excrescencies. Nor will the Reader meet with a
word of our English affairs in that lame Edition of Marianus's Chronicle by
Fol. Francof. 1583.
Pistorius: whose business 'twas only to publish the ancient Writers of the
German History; and therefore he designedly omitted all that concerned this
Kingdom. The best, and most See J. Gregory' s Notes on Ridley' s View, etc. p.
171.
complete Manuscript Copy is in the public Library at Oxford.

1101. Cent. 12. Florence of Worcester.
The earliest Fol. Francof. 1601.
History in the twelfth Century was written by Florence (a Monk) of Worcester,
whom I know not whether to call an Epitomizer or Transcriber of Marianus. He
seems to give Ad Ann. 1043.
himself the latter Character; tho it must be acknowledged that he has added
very many Collections, out of the Saxon Chronicle and other Writers, with much
Care and Judgment. His Book ended, with his J. Pits, p. 197.
Life, in the year 1119; but 'twas continued 50 years farther by another Monk
of the same Monastery. He so Praef. ad Chron. Sax. p. 6. Et Praef. ad V^t.
Aelfr. R. p. 3.
scrupulously adheres to his Authorities, that he sometimes retains even their
very mistakes; and yet I must do him the Justice, to say he is not guilty of
all the Contradictions that have been laid to his charge. An ingenious person
has lately observed that he makes his Friend Marianus die in the year 1052. and
yet affirms that the same Man was made a Presbyter (seven years after) A. D.
1059. But, in truth, the Gentleman himself is more upon the Blunder than his
Author. The Phrase of Saeculum reliquit, does not (as he imagines) import the
same thing with mortuus est: But signifies only (as it does, in the same Year,
and on the same Occasion, in Matt. of Westminster, and others) the Man's
leaving the Concerns of this world, Secular Affairs, to turn Regular and
Secluse. It Is a scandalous reproach, and not worth the answering, which Sir
Thomas Craig gives of him: That Scotland's Soveraignt. Assert. p. (...)
He led his followers into Error, like so many Cattle breaking over a Ditch.

Eadmerus, Eadmerus.
a Monk of Canterbury, is our next Historian, whose Historia Novorum, etc. was
Fol. Land. 1623.
published by Mr. Seldom, and contains the story of the two Williams and Henry
the First, from the year 1066 to 1122. It Is a Work of great Gravity, and
unquestionable Authority. It affords no fooleries of Miracles, so very rife in
the Writings of other Monks, unless perhaps the Story of the B. Virgins p. 88.
Hair have a smack of the Cloister. He had Temptations enough (being an
intimate Acquaintance of Archbishop Anselm) to take the Pope's part, in the
mighty Dispute of his Time about Investitu^e; and yet he approves himself a
person of that steady Loyalty to his Country as to give a fair account of the
management on both sides, and the unanswerable arguments made in Defense of the
Regal Power. His comparing of our Savior's Commission to St. Peter, and Pope
Gregory's to Augustine the Monk (for the establishing of the Primacy of
Canterbury) is notable; and either clears that of Canterbury, or clouds that of
Rome. The Character which Seldom himself gives of him is, that his Style equals
that of Malmesbury, his Matter and Composure exceeds him. His Cotemporary
Aelfred (Monk and Treasurer of the Church) of Beverly seems to be no more than
an Epitomizer of Jeoffrey of Monmouth: So that all the four J. Pits, p. 204.
general Treatises said to be written by this Author may probably well bear the
Name of Deflorationes Galfredi.

But William (Monk and Library Keeper) William of Malmesbury.
of Malmesbury was a person of another figure; and has had the highest
Commendations imaginable given him by some of our best Critics in English
History. One calls him an J. Leland, Assert. Arth. fol. 4. b. and fol. 8. s.
elegant, learned, and faithful Historian: Another says he is the D. Hen. Savil.
In Epist. Ded. ad 5 Script.
only Man of his Time that has honestly discharged the Trust of such a Writer:
And the third calls him the Usher. in Ep. Ded. ad Eccles. Hist.
chief of all our Historians. What falls under our present consideration is his
Account Fol. Francof. 1601.
De Gestis Regum Anglorum, in five Books; with an Appendix in two more, which
he styles Historiae Novellae. In these we have a judicious Collection of
whatever he found on Record, touching the Affairs of England, from the first
arrival of the Saxons; concluding his Work with the Reign of King Stephen; to
whom he shows himself as hearty an Enemy, as (his Patron) Robert Earl of
Gloucester could possibly be. We shall have occasion to mention this Author in
several of the following Chapters; and therefore I shall now only add, that I
think himself has given an honest account of this part of his Labors, when he
tells us, In Prolegom ad Libb. 5. de Gest. Reg.
Privatim ipse mihi, sub Open Christi, gratulor, quod ^ontinuam Anglorum
Historiam ordinaverim post Bedam vel solus vel primus. And again: Ego enim
veram Legem secutus Historiae, nihil unquam posui nisi quod a fidelibus
Relatoribus vel Scriptoribus addidici. Pits says he was epitomized by J. Pits.
p. 723.
W. Horman, sometime Master of Eaton-School: But whether all his Works, or some
part of 'em only, were so contracted he does not tell us. Possibly, he only
transcribed what Id. p. 228.
Simeon Dunelmensis had before drawn up to his hand.

This Simeon, Simeon Dunelm.
and (his Cotemporary) Ealred, Abbot of Rievaulx, are our next Historians of
Note in this Century; and have both deserved to be remembered in several parts
of this Treatise. The former was Monk and Precentor of Durham, A. D. 1164. and
might justly be reckoned one of the most Vid. J. Seldom. Praef. ad X Script. p,
1.
learned Men of his Age. But his two Books De Gestis Regum (which alone are now
to be mentioned) are not his Masterpieces: Being only a few indigested
Collections, chiefly out of Florence of Worcester, whose very words he
frequently copies. Abbot Ealred (not of Ut male J. Seldom, in Praef. ad X
Script. Vid. Monast. Angl. Tom. I. p. 172.
Revesby in Lincolnshire, but of Rievaulx in Yorkshire) gives us a short
Genealogy of our Kings; but enlarges chiefly on the Praises of David King of
Scots, Founder of a great many Abbeys for the Cistertians. His other Books (of
the Life of Edward the Confessor, etc.) are treated on elsewhere. I doubt Sir
George Mackenzy's Def. of the Royal Line of Scotl. p. 22. and 27.
Baldredus Abbas Rynalis is this very Author: Notwithstanding the great pains
he is at to distinguish them.

About the same time flourished Henry of Huntingdon.
Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon, whose eight Books (concluding with the Reign
of King Stephen) were published by Fol. Francof. 1601.
Sir Henry Savil. In the Preface he owns himself a Follower of Bid, in the
main, for the time he wrote in: But says (withal) that he added many things met
with in old Libraries. His first Lines will easily convince the Reader that he
does really follow Bid; for he Copies him to a word. But I am not satisfied
that he has added any great matters, as far as that Author goes. He has indeed
a great many Lies out of Jeoffrey of Monmouth, which Bid never heard of; and
which the World might have wanted well enough. After Bede's time, he has many
particulars out of the Saxon Chronicle; which had been omitted by our
Historians before him. He is pleased to take notice of one great Truth, that he
writes very Lib. 2.
confusedly. All the Transactions of the Heptarchy he reduces to the several
Reigns of the West Saxon Kings: But has not adjusted them so well as he ought
to have done. At the same time lived John Serlo (Abbot of Fountains) who, (as
John J. Pits, p. 224.
Pits tells us) wrote a Treatise De Bello inter Scotiae Regem and Angliae
Barons. We are not so well assured of this, as that he wrote a History of the
Foundation of his own Monastery; for which he shall be remembered in a proper
place. The general Histories written by Richard of the Id p. 255.
Devises, and John of Id. p. 258.
Tilbury (a London-Divine) before the end of this Age, are of the same
authority; and that is all I have to say concerning either of 'em.

William of Newburg was so called from a Monastery in Yorkshire, Neubrigensis.
of that Name, whereof he was a Member, tho his true Surname was Little, whence
he sometimes styles himself Petit or Parvus. His History ends at the year 1197.
and therefore (tho he is said to be alive D. Whear, Method. Leg. Hist. p. 138.
A. D. 1220.) he ought to be reckoned among the Historians of this Age. John
Pits J. Pits, p. 271.
thinks he appears too much a Flatterer of the Grandees at Court to write a
true History: But, by the account he gives of the beginning of it, a Man would
be tempted to believe he never read it. He was a most violent Persecutor of
Jeoffrey of Monmouth, of whose History he gives this sharp Character, that it
contains only pro expiandis Britonum maculis ridicula figmenta, etc. But In
Epist. Ded. ad Pontic. Virun.
D. Powel gives the reason of this bitterness of Spirit. It appears, he says,
from some of their Histories of good Credit and Antiquity, that this William
(whom those Welsh Historians call Gwilym Bach. i. Gulielmus Parvus) put in for
the Bishopric of St. Asaph, upon the death of the said Jeoffrey (Bishop there)
about the year 1165. and, being disappointed, fell into a mad humor of
decrying the whole Principality of Wales, its History, Antiquity, and all that
belongs to it. He is large in his account of the Life, Manners, etc. of Hugh
Bishop of Durham. His Latin Style is preferred to that of M. Paris, and
equaled with those of Eadmerus and William of Malmesbury by Praef. ad M.
Paris, Hist.
Dr. Watts.

1201. Cent. 13.
The thirteenth Century begins with Gervase a Monk of Canterbury; who J. Pits,
p. 268.
is reported to have been a most judicious Antiquary and Methodical Historian,
and to have made excellent Collections of the British and English Story from
the coming in of the Trojans down to the year 1200. 'Twere to be wished these
dormant Tomes could be discovered: For the Reigns of three Kings (which are the
only part of our General History, of this Author's penning, now Fol. Land.
1652. inter X Script.
extant) are done with judgment enough. About the same time Nicholas de Fly,
Bishop of Durham, is J. Pits, p. 889.
said to have written and Historical Treatise; wherein he relates that
memorable passage (mentioned also by some other Historians) of one Simon
Thurvay's forgetting all that he had learned, which was to a good pitch of
Eminence, and turning perfect Blockhead.

Cotemporary to these two (and a much greater Historian than both of 'em
joined) R. Hovedon.
was Roger de Hoveden, who seems to have been Chaplain for some time to King
Henry the Second. His History was Fol. Francof. 1601.
published by Sir H. Savil: But (as Sir H. Glossar. in voce Frithborga.
Spelman observes) there are many errors in that foreign Edition of this and
all our other Historians; and therefore he well cautions the English Reader
attentively to consider the spelling of such words as are of our own growth, as
very frequently mistaken by Printers that are Strangers to our Country and
Language. It Is a heavy Censure which Leland has given of this Author, Comment.
ad Cygn. Cant. voce Dunolm.
Qui Scrinia Simeonis, suppresso ejus nomine, strenue compilavit, and aliena
pro suis, Gloriae avidulus supposuit. Mr. Seldom justifies him Praef. ad X
Script. p. 2.
against this sharp Sentence; and Sir Henry Savil gives a quite different
Character of the Man and his Writings: Epist. Ded. ad 5 Script.
Huntingdoniensis and Hovedenus (says he) Authors cu^^ primis boni and
diligentes, verissimique superiorum temporum Indices. He may possibly have
borrowed something from Simeon of Durham: But, if he did, he has improved his
Story, adding the years to many things confusedly related in that Writer. After
the year 802. he falls indeed a little into confusion himself; jumbling a great
many things touched on before, without any manner of Form or Order. But, after
three or four Pages, he comes to himself again; and goes on regularly enough.
There are in his Book many Letters, Speeches, etc. relating to Ecclesiastical
affairs; which are good Materials toward a General Church history of this
Kingdom. In the year 1291. King Edward the First is said to have caused
diligent search to be made in all the Libraries in England for Hoveden's
History, to adjust the Dispute about the Homage due from the Crown of Scotland:
which (says my J. Pits, p. 272.
Author) it clears effectually. At the same time Joh. Oxfordius (Bishop of
Norwich) is Id. p. 265.
reported to have compiled an English Chronicle; and we may look for some good
Remarks from a person employed (as he was) on an Embassy to Rome, there truly
to represent to his Holiness an account of Archbishop Be^ket's Behavior.
Hector Boethius pretends to have seen his History; and applauds him as a Writer
next to his mighty Jeoffrey of Monmouth, in Authority as well as Time.

The next Historian of Note and Figure is Ralph de Diceto, R. de Diceto.
or Disseto, Dean of London; who wrote about the year 1210. He sometimes refers
to a Angl. Sacr. Par. II. p. 677.
Chronological Account of our British Kings of his own Composure, which must
have reached much higher than any thing hitherto published under his Name. And
such a Work in several parts (containing a British Chronicle from Brute to
Cadwallador, and an English one from Hengist to King Harold) the industrious
Mr. Wharton Praef. ad Par. II Angl. Sac. p. 27.
says he had seen and perused in the Norfolk-Library. The two Treatises which
concern us at present, and are already Fol. Land. 1652. inter 10. Script.
printed, are his Abbreviationes Chronicorum and his Imagines Historiarum: The
former whereof contains an Abstract of our History (but chiefly in
Church Matters) down to the Conquest; and the latter gives the Portraictures of
some of our Kings more at length, ending with the first years of King John's
Reign. Mr. Seldom is much in the Praises of this In Praef. ad 10. Scrip.
Author, and his Works: tho all that is here remembered is usually copied out
of other Writers, who are often transcribed verbatim. Dr. Gale met with a
better Copy of his Abbreviations than had fallen into the hands of Sir Roger
Twisden; and has taken occasion (in discoursing Praef. ad Hist. Brit^ p. 14.
upon that subject) to show how mischievously the old Monks of Canterbury used
to corrupt their Manuscripts. Diceto's Talent lay mainly toward
Church History; and, on that Topic, we shall hereafter meet with him more than
once. If Gyraldus Cambrensis ever wrote any such thing as an J. Pits, p. 281.
English Chronicle, it ought to come in the same rank of time with these of
Diceto's: But I very much suspect the Truth of that Report. Hither also must be
referred the famous H Spelm. Glossar. in voce Scaccarium. J. Stow, Chron. p.
154.
Exchequer-man, King Henry the Second's Nephew, Gervase of Tilbury; who
(besides the Black Book, to be remembered when we come to the Twelfth Chapter)
is said to have written a large historical Commentary upon Jeoffrey of
Monmouth, under the Title of J. Pits, p. 274. Bale, Cent. 3.
Illustrationes Galfredi, which he dedicated to the Emperor Otho the Fourth.

Walter Monk of Coventry deserves a more particular Remembrance, Walter
Coventriensis.
as perhaps very well meriting the account given of him by John Apud Jo. Pits,
p. 290.
Leland, who says the two main Ornaments of an Historian ( Sincera sides and
lucidus ordo) are to be had in him. Upon the strength of this Authority, Bale
tells us he was Cent. 3. cap. 74.
Immortali Vir dignus memoria. But his three Books of Chronicles and Annals
(for which these men send us to Bennet College) are all one; being chiefly
Collections out of Jeoffrey of Monmouth, R. Hoveden, and H. Huntingdon. Some
few things of Note and Consequence he has which are not to be met with in those
Authors. He is said to have lived in Coventry, A. D. 1217. and therefore
Alexander Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Par. I. p. 15.
Essebiensis's Epitome of our English Annals, Peter J. Pits, p. 297.
Henham's history, and R. Id. p. 292.
Niger's (continued by his Namesake Id. p. 301.
Ralph Abbot of Coggeshal) are of the same date.

Soon after these appeared Matthew Paris, a Monk of St. Albans; Mat. Paris.
one of the most renowned Historians of this Kingdom. His Historia Major
contains the Annals (at large) of Eight of our Kings; from the beginning of the
Reign of William the First, to the conclusion of that of Henry the Third. 'Twas
first published at London, A. D. 1571. and the Fol. 1606.
Zurich Edition only copied from that. It was again verbatim reprinted (the
errors of the Press being only corrected) by Fol. Land. 1640.
Dr. Wats, who beautified it with additions of various Readings; the Author's
large Additamenta, and his Lives of the Abbots of St. Albans; a good Glossary
of his own composure, etc. Among other Reasons that prevailed with him to
publish the very words of the former Edition, he thought he should hereby
effectually stop the Mouths of the Romanists (who pretended that the Heretics
had vilely corrupted that Historian) when they should see their Case was not
bettered by comparing it with all the Manuscript Copies that could be had of
it. From the year 1259. (wherein M. Paris died) to King Henry the Third's
Death, it was continued by Will. Rishanger, a Monk of the same Fraternity; as
some inform us. Others will needs affirm, that Paris himself had a very small
hand in the whole, having only begun at the year 1235. the rest being done to
his hand by one Roger de Windleshore, or Windsor, (the MS. Copy of his History
in Cotton's Library calls him Rogerus Wendovre de Wendover prior de Bealvair)
one of his Predecessors in the same Monastery. Before that time (they Vid. D.
Watsi^ P^aefa^.
tell us) there are only some few Interpolations of M. Paris's, who (for some
reasons best known to himself) did not break off at the year 1250. as it
appears he designed, but continued writing to his Death. The Author (whoever he
was) did certainly begin his Chronicle at the Creation, tho we now have lost
all that went before the Conquest; unless, as the ^n Praef. ad Editionem
Tigurin.
Publisher of him guesses, that which now goes under the Name of Matthew of
Westminster, be (in reality) the true Work of Mat. Paris. This undoubtedly is
as much the Offspring of Roger de Wendover, as that following part now
published is the genuine Work of M. Paris, as will sufficiently appear to any
that shall take the pains to consult the abovementioned Manuscript Copy. The
whole Book manifests a great deal of Candor and Exactness in its Author, who
furnishes us with so particular a relation of the brave Repulses given by many
of our Princes to the Usurping Power of the Roman See, that it is a wonder how
such an heretical history came to survive thus long. Quam fuit animo
infensissim^ in Apostolicam Sedem quivis facile potest intelligere, says
Cardinal Annal. Eccles. ad An. 996.
Baronius. The English whereof is only this; he was a Writer of a singular
Courage, and one that durst maintain the Prerogatives of his Sovereign's
Imperial Crown against the Usurpations of the Papal Crosier. And yet he is as
kind to the Pope, as he is either to the King himself, or the Abbot of St.
Albans; for he indiscriminately las^es (upon occasion) every body that comes in
his way. The same Author wrote an Abstract of the forementioned Work, to which
he gave the Title of Chronica, and VV. Lambard first christened it Historia
Minor. It begins, as the former, with William the Conqueror, and ends A. D.
1250 having in it several Particulars of Note omitted in the larger history.
The fairest Copy of this Book (supposed to be written by the Author^s own hand)
is in the King's Library at St. James's. One John Shepshed is J. Pits, p. 313.
supposed to have lived at the same time with M. Paris; and is, by John Stow,
asserted to be the Author of an English history. We may probably bring in also
Robert of Gloucester for another of his Cotemporaries, since Archbishop Hist.
Eccles. Brit. p. 29.
Usher, and Remains, p. m. 8.
Mr. Camden are both positive, that he lived some time in the Reign of King
Henry the Third. His rhyming Chronicle is in English; and the Reader may have a
Taste (...) it (as much, it may be, as ever he will desire) either from Titles of
Hon. p. 535.
Mr. Seldom, or Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Par. I. p. 112.
Mr. VVood.

The Chronicle of Fol. Oxon. 1684.
Mailros (tho its Title may seem to rank it among Chronicle of Mailros.
the Records of another Kingdom, yet) may justly challenge a place among our
English Historians, since it chiefly insists upon the affairs of this Nation.
The Abbot of Prior of Dundrainand (in Galloway, a Nursery under Mailros) is
thought to have been the first Compiler of the work; which was afterward
continued, by several hands, down to the year 1270. There Is very little
relating to the Northern history of this Kingdom before the year 1142. (when
the little Convent of Dundrainand was founded) save what is borrowed from
Florence of Worcester, and Matthew of Westminster: So that it must be after
that time that the Character which the Publisher gives of this Chronicle (
exhibet Principum, Procerum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, (...) Borealibus istis Oris
successiones) is most agreeable. From the year 1262, the Continuator (whoever
had the turn to be Register at that time) is as dull and whimsical as any Monk
needs be. 'Twas his business to draw the Picture of Simon Monfort, the famous
Earl of Leicester; and he has so overdone the matter, that he thought himself
obliged, in the Conclusion, to instance in a great many Authors of Note that
had published some Stories a little Romantic, and yet had found the favor to
be believed.

The rest of the general Historians of this Age are of a much lower form,
Meaner Historians.
and less weight, than these already mentioned. Such were Elias de Evesham, and
(his Namesake) Elias de Trickingham; who are J. Pits, p. 350, 351.
both said to have flourished about the year 1270. There is a Copy of the
latter's Chronicle among my Lord Clarendon's Manuscripts, which ends A. D.
1268. Peter Ickeham (a Id. p. 355.
Kentish Man born, and sometime a Student in the University of Paris) about the
year 1274. collected the British and English Histories, from the coming in of
Brute; and continued them to the Reign of Edward the First. This Chronicle is
E^ Gibson Catal. Bibl. Tennison. p. 26.
said to have been some time in the possession of Sir Symonds D' Ewes; and
perhaps is the same Book which Angl. Sacr. Par. I. p. 116.
Mr. Wharton acquaints us is now at Lambeth. John Buriensir (Abbot of St.
Edmundsbury, where he died A. D. 1280.) wrote also J. Pits, p. 361.
English Annals, wherein he treats at large of the Disputes betwixt Pope
Innocent the Fourth and R. Grostest Bishop of Lincoln. Possibly this Buriensis
may be the same with Id. p. 448.
Burgensis; and all one with John Abbot of Peterburgh, whose MS. Chronicle is
quoted by Angl. Sacr. Par. I. p. 115.
Mr. Wharton. And then he should have been reserved till the next Century,
about the middle whereof that Abbot certainly flourished.

1301. Cent. 14. Th. Wikes.
Tho. VVikes (called by Leland, Vicanus; by others VVic^ius) ought to begin the
Fourteenth Century, tho both Bale and Pits bring him within the foregoing; for
his History (which begins at the Conquest) ends at the Death of Edward the
First, A. D. 1304. The Author was Canon Regular of Osney near Oxford; and
writes as clearly and full (especially in some passages relating to the
Baronwars) as so compendious a Chronicle as his is would allow him to do. We
are indebted to Dr. Gale for the Hist. Angl. Vol. II. Fol. Oxon. 1687.
publishing of this history, together with others of good value, that had long
laid imprivate hands John Castorius (called also J. Leland, Assert. Arth. fol.
30. a.
Fiber and Bever) was a Monk of Westminster, about this time, and wrote a
Chronicle, still extant in some of our Bibl. D' Ewes, Monast. Angl. Tom. I. p.
177.
English Libraries. Leland commends him as an Historian of good credit; and he
is also cited, with respect, by John Stow in his Survey. He begins with the
coming in of Brute, and ends at his own time. VV. Rishanger (who died, very
old, about the year 1312) has been mentioned already; and Rad. Baldoc who died
the year following, and whose history is quoted by Leland and Archbishop Hist.
Eccles. Brit. p. 21.
Usher) seems hardly to deserve it. Of the like kind is the compendious
Chronicle of Tho. (...), Canon Regular of Leedes in Kent, whom both Bale and
Pits have fixed at the year 1321. But Fun. Mon. p. 206.
J. Weever, from a passage in his Book, which gives an account of the Victories
of the Black Prince, shows that he must have lived pretty late in the Reign of
Edward the Third, if not under (his Grandson) Richard the Second.

Of something better value are the Annals of Nicolas Trivet N. Trivet.
(Son of Sir Thomas Trivet, Lord Chief Justice) who was Prior of a Monastery of
Dominican Friars in London; where he was buried A. D. 1328. An excellent Copy
of his history (which John Pits J. Pits, p. 422.
subdivides into three several Treatises) is now in the Library at Merton
College in Oxford, whence several of our most eminent Vid. H. Spelman. Council.
Tom. l. p. 111. Hist. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 392. and Ab. Whel^c. ^ed. Hist. p. 115.
Antiquaries have had very remarkable Observations. It Is in French, and bears
the Title of Les Gestes des Apostoiles, (or, the Spelm. Gloss. in voce
Apostolici.
Popes) Empereurs e Rois. Roger ^estrensis (who was a Benedictine Monk of St.
Werburg's in Chester) was Trivet's Cotemporary, and wrote a large account of
the affairs of this Nation. This Work he entitled Polycraticae Temporum, and
began it with the coming in of the Romans. He continued it at first no lower
than the year 1314. but added J. Pits, p. 438.
afterward a Supplement of fifteen years more.

About the same time (as Mr. Seldom J. Brompton.
probably Praef. and X. Script. inter quos J. Brompton.
conjectures) lived the Author of that Chronicle which goes under the Name of
John Brompton, some time Abbot of Joreval (or Jorvaulx) in the County of York,
which begins (with the coming in of Augustine the Monk) A. D. 588. and ends
with the Death of Richard the First, 1198. It Is not indeed likely that this
History was written by any Member of the Abbey of Joreval, since it takes no
notice of the Foundation of that Monastery, etc. But only procured by Abbot
Brompton, and (by him) bestowed on his Monastery. The Author (whoever he be) is
very full in his Collections for the Saxon times, but takes no notice of the
Chronological part in the whole story of the Heptarchy. In this he has not been
very inquisitive; ending (for example) Northumberland where Bede's History
leaves him. He gives the Saxon Laws at large, and translates them pretty
honestly. In what he borrows from the old Chronicle, in that Language, he is
not altogether so correct: Otherwise, he had never told us such a rare story of
one Vid. Joh. Spelm. Vit. Aelfr. R. p. 18.
Sumerled, a Danish Tyrant, who sacked Reading, etc. His chief Author is Roger
Hoveden. Of Walter Hemmingford the Reader needs no further account than what
has been already given of him by his worthy Tho. Gale, Hist. Brit. and Angl.
vol. II. in Praefat. p. 8, 9, 10.
Publisher: Nor have I any more to say of Richard of Chichester than what John
Pits has told me J. Pits, p. 438.
, that he was a Monk of Westminster, A. D. 1348. that he traveled to most of
the Libraries of England; and, out of his Collections thence, compiled a
notable History of this Kingdom, from the coming in of the Saxons down to his
own time.

Ran. Higden R. Higden.
(Monk of St. VVerburg's in Chester, where he died very aged, Jta Ioh. Pits, p.
517. Verum Balae^s, Anno 1363.
A. D. 1377) was an industrious Historian, a great Follower of Florence of
Worcester and others of our best Writers; Vnicuique Authorum suorum honorem
integrum servans, says Bale. The Character might be true for any thing
(perhaps) he knew: But it is that Writer's way to give accounts of Men and their
Labors at random. It is very evident that, on the Contrary, he falls foul on
William of Malmesbury in many places; and yet that person is thought to have
deserved a Respect, and is usually better treated by all our other Historians.
He is pleased to style his Work Polychronicon: And, if you spell the first
Letters of the several Chapters that begin it, you read Praesentem Chronicam
conpilavit Ranulphus Monachus Cestrensis. What he wrote relating to the times
of the Britains and Saxons has been lately Hist. Brit. Vol. I. Fol. Oxon. 1691.
published by Dr. Gale, who commends him for preserving many Remains out of
ancient Chronicles, now wholly lost or mislaid. (I have a Parchment Manuscript
of this History, which seems to be a better Copy than what the Learned Doctor
made use of.) The rest was first translated into English by John de Trevisa (a
J. Pits, p. 567.
Cornish Man born, and some time Vicar of Berkeley in Glocestershire) who
illustrated the whole with Annotations of his own, says my Author: But they
Vid. Vsserii Hist. Dogm. Edit. ab Hen. Wharton, p. 157, 439.
that know the matter better have observed aright that the many Interpolations
and Additions in W. Caxton's English Edition, are the Publishers and not
Trevisa's. And so is also the Continuation down to the year 1460. For Caxton
expressly takes it upon himself, tho our famous In Praefat. ad 10. Script.
Seldom says 'twas the Work of Trevisa, who (if the great Man were not
mistaken) must have penned it near a hundred years after his death.

John Vicar of Tinmouth J. Tinmuthensis.
(whence he is always called Tinmuthensis, tho he was afterward J. Pits, p.
500.
Monk of St. Albans, A. D. 1366) was a mighty Collector of our English
Histories, which he has left digested in to three very large Volumes; whereof
there are now fair Copies in the Libraries at Oxford, Lamboth, etc. This Work
he was pleased to call Histori^^ (...), and, for that reason, the Author
himself is by Assert. Arth. and alibi.
Leland named Chrysistoriographus. Out of this large Mass many notable Remarks
have been made by the learned Men of this Age: But, because they chiefly relate
to the doughty Feats and Miracles of our English Saints, as well as his other
Works that more professedly treat on that Subject, we shall defer the further
consideration of him to Chap. 13.
another place.

To humor Bale, Pits and Vossius, Matthew of Westminster.
we shall here place Matthew (a Benedictine Monk) of Westminster, who, they
tell us, flourished in the year 1377. It Is more probable that he hardly
outlived the year 1307. in which he Vid. H. Wharton, Praef. ad Angl. S. c.
Par. I. p. 32, 33.
ended his History, tho 'twas afterward (as we shall see anon) continued by
other hands. He was a choice Collector of the Flowers of former Historians,
from whence, and from the Title of his Book; he is usually styled Florilegus.
His chief Benefactoris Matthew Paris, whom he so accurately transcribes, that
he cannot be persuaded to leave him, even when he warmly treats of the
particulars of his own Monastery of St. Albans. Nay, he sometimes refers (in
Paris's very words) to that Author's Addilamenta, as to a Work of his own
composure; and hence some have concluded that the whole, even that part which
precedes the Conquest, was borrowed from the same hand. But I can hardly agree
to that, since the same heedless way of writing (unbecoming the Accuracy of M.
Paris) runs through both of 'em. Hence Ad An. 489.
Vnde Reges Cantiae usque hodie Aeskynges vocantur; with a thousand more of the
like. It Is most likely (as has been already observed) that R. de Wendover was a
common Parent to both the Matthews; and the main of what is published under both
their Names came from that hand. There was an Edition of Westminster's history
before that at Fol. A. D. 1601.
Francfort, but abominably corrupt and imperfect, especially after the year
1245. the Author's punctual Relation of the brisk behavior of our Kings and
Nobility, in opposition to the Encroachments of the Roman See, being wretchedly
mangled and purloyn^d. Upon this bottom John Pits divides the History into two
J. Pits, p. 519.
several Works, whereof the former he calls Historia ampla, which (says he) is
that which was published at Fol. A. D. 1570.
London; and the other Historiarum Flores. The Distinction he had from Bale;
tho the Application be his own. This Report seems to have had some slender
Foundation; since we are told that, amongst my Lord Catalog. Bibl. Tennison. p.
1.
Clarendon's Manuscripts, there is another historical Work which bears the Name
of Flores Historiarum, which is very different from the Printed Copy, and is
continued near forty years further. But the Reader ought to know that there are
many anonymous Historians in this Kingdom, who (beginning at the year 1307,)
manifestly show that they chiefly intended to continue the Work of Matthew of
Westminster. The most eminent (indeed) of his Continuators was Adam Merimuth,
Canon Regular of St. Paul's, and an eminent Civilian, who in the latter end of
his days, gave himself wholly to the reading and writing of English History. He
begins his Work So says Pits, p. 531. and yet Ex Chron. Ad. Merimuth. in Bibl.
Cotton. An. Dom. 1300. W. Pety^'s Quotation runs in his Ancient Right of the
Commons, etc. p. 30.
at 1302. and his first part reaches only to 1343. (which, I suppose, makes the
Enlargement in my Lord Clarendon's Copy) but the second continues the Story to
(in all likelihood, the year of his own Death) A. D. 1300. It Is observable that
his History commences at Michaelmas, and for that reason, he always afterward
begins the New Year at that Feast.

A few more, J. Staffort, etc.
of an inferior Rank, may probably be reckoned amongst the Historians of this
Age. As, 1. John Staffort, a Franciscan ^^iar, who is Pits, p. 523.
supposed to have written an English History about the year 1800. Tho. Fuller
Worthies in Staffordshire, p. 45.
observes very well that the exact time when he wrote (or lived) is not known
(...) only, being a Francisean (and that, I doubt, is not very certainly known
neither) he must have flourished after the year 1226. when that Order first
came into England; and, being quoted by John Ross, must come in before 1400. 2.
William de Packington, Secretary and Treasurer to the Black Prince in
Gascoigne, wrote a Cronique in French from the Ninth year of King John down to
(his own time) 1380. out of which several Collections have been made by MSS.
Tom. 1. p. 657.
Leland, Chron in RR. Joh. Ed. I. etc.
Stow and others. 3. Henry de Knyghton, one of the Canons of Leicester, whose
De Eventibrs Angliae Fol. Land. 1652. inter 10. Scrip.
History may be said to begin at the Conquest, since he has only a short
Abstract of the Saxon Affairs in his first Book. It is continued down to the
year 1395. He fairly owns what he transcribes from Ralph Higden; whom he
imitates also in the Crotchet of making the fifteen first Chapters of his
Second Book give his Name in their Initial Letters, thus:

HENRICUS CNITTON.
It Is plain that neither Leland, Bale nor Pits, had ever seen this Work. An
Encouragement to the industrious Antiquaries of this Age to continue their
Enquiries after such Histories as are presumed to be irrecoverably lost. 4.
Galf, Lingius (a Franciscan of Norwich, about the year 1390.) is also J. Pits,
p. 555.
said to have compiled a History of this Kingdom, from the coming in of Brutus,
down to his own Time.

1401. Cent. 15. Sir J. Froissart.
The fifteenth Century was one of the most rude and illiterate Ages, and
therefore we are not to look for a large Harvest of Historians, in a Dearth and
Scarcity of Persons eminent in other parts of Learning. Sir John Froissart
(sometime Canon See his Hist. Vol. II. cap. 200.
and Treasurer of Chimay in the Diocese of Liege) justly deserves to be placed
first, as having ended his Life and Story about the beginning of it. His Work
contains a General History of the Affairs of France, Spain, and other parts of
Europe, as well as England; tho it chiefly insists on those of this Nation. The
Author was a Frenchman born, but was brought up, in his Youth, in the Court of
our King Edward the Third; and, many years after, familiarly conversant in King
Richard the Second's. He wrote in his own Native Language, which was also, in
his Time, the Selden's Tit. of Hon. p. 635.
Court-Language of England. The Copies that were taken of him in French (as
well Manuscript as in Fol. Paris. 31 Vol. 1505.
Print) are generally faulty and corrupt in Names and Numbers; whereas the
Author himself, being perfectly acquainted with the English Court and Customs,
could not well mistake. Most of these Errors are corrected in the English
Edition, which was published by Sir John Bourchier, Deputy of Calais, at the
Command of King Henry the Eighth, toward the latter end of his Reign. His
Account of matters seems to be plain and honest; and perhaps none gives a
better of the Affairs of Edward the Third, and (his unfortunate Successor)
Richard the Second. Sleidan epitomized his History in Quarto Heydelberg. 1587.
Latin; but has not done it with that impartiality and fairness that might have
been expected from a Man of his great Name. Take the Censure which our learned
Humphry Lhuid long since gave of that piece and its Author: Comment. Brit.
Descrip. fol. 27. a.
Dum Gallico Nomini nimium faveret, Anglorum Nobilissima Gesta aut Silentio
praeteritt, aut, ab Authore dissentiens, aliter, quam a Froissardo scriptum
est, literis commendavit.

After him follow, Tho. Otterburn, etc.
down to the middle of the Century, a set of very ordinary Scriblers, such as,
1. Tho. Otterburn, a Franciscan Friar of some of our English Monasteries about
the year 1411. whose MS. History is Monast. Angl. Tom. II. p. 468.
said to be in our public Library at Oxford. 2. Tho. Radburn, Bishop of St.
David's, Godwin. de Praesul. in St. David.
and C^ancellor of the University of Oxford, A. D. 1420. He is usually quoted
by the Name of Radburn ^enior, to distinguish him from another little
Chronicler of both his Names, who was a Monk of St. Swithin's in Winchester,
and Joh. Ross's great Acquaintance. This latter wrote two Books of our General
History; the one whereof he styles MS. Bibl. Cotton. Nero, A. 17.
Breviarium Chronicorum, which begins at Brute, and ends A. D. 1234. After the
Conquest he copies most from M. Paris, and is very unhappy in his Chronological
part His MS. in Bibl. Lambeth. and Coll. Ben. Cantab.
Historia Major (as he calls his other Work) consists of large Collections out
of other common Historians, save only in what relates to the Church of
Winchester. 3 John Sherburn, a Monk, who wrote MS. inter Codd. D. Com.
Clarendon.
Chronica Britannorum, from the first coming in of the Trojans, to the Reign of
Henry the Sixth. 4. John Henfield, a Monk of Battle-Abby, who drew an 8vo. MS.
in Bibl. D. Com. Carliol.
Abstract of our Chronicles down to the same time. 5. John Langden, J. Pits, p.
607.
Bishop of Rochester, who possibly is all one with John Langton, (another of
the same Id. p. 625.
authentic Gentleman's Historians) a Carmelite Friar, who is said to die at the
Council of Basil, A. D. 1434.

Tho. Walsingham, Tho. Walsingham.
a Benedictine Monk of St. Alban's, (and very probably Regins Professor of
History in that Monastery, about the year 1440.) made something a better figure
than the last mentioned; and accordingly both his Historia brevis and his
Hypodigma Neustriae, have had the honor to be published by Archbishop Fol.
Land. 1574.
Parker. His short History begins at the Conclusion of Henry the Third's Reign,
where M. Paris ended his: And he might well seem to be Paris's Continuator,
were his Language answerable to his matter. The account he gives is well
enough, and we are indebted to him for many things not taken notice of by any
other Writer of those times. Indeed, his Reign of King Edward the Second is
wholly borrowed from Sir Thomas de la More. His Ypodigma Neustriae (as he calls
it) has a more particular regard to the Affairs of Normandy; giving an account
(at large) of that Dukedom, from the time it came first into the hands of Rollo
and his Danes, down to the Sixth year of Henry the Fifth; wherein the Reader
will find many Occurrences not elsewhere to be met with. About the same time
wrote John Wethamstede, the first J. Stow's Pref. to his Chron.
Opposer of the story of King Brutus; and Nicolas Cantelupus (the Cambridge
Historiographer) who is also reported to have penned a Pits, p 635.
General Chronicle of England.

The next Historian of Note was John Harding a, John Harding.
Northern Id. p. 653. Bale, Cent. 8. cap. 30.
Englishman, and an inveterate Enemy to the Scottish Nation; against whom he
carried Arms in several Expeditions. He collected out of all our Histories
whatever might tend to the proof of the ancient Vassalage of that Kingdom to
the Crown of England; and, hearing there was in Scotland an old Record that put
the matter beyond dispute, he went (with great hazard) thither in disguise,
and, with much ado, brought it away, and showed it. to Hen. V. Hen. VI. and
Edw. IV. To the last of these he dedicated his two Books of Chronicles in
English Rhyme; whereof the curious Reader may have a taste in some of our
Modern Vid. Aelfr. mag. vit. p. 63.
Writers. It appears he was living (tho very old) in the year 1461. So that
Nic. Montacute (about that time J. Pits, p. 656, 657.
Master of Eaton-School, and a Collector of English History) may be reckoned
his Cotemporary; as may also Roger Albanus, a Id. p. 644.
Carmelite of London, who drew up the Genealogies of some of our Kings.

William Caxton W. Caxton.
(of whose continuation of Trevisa something has been noted already) seems to
challenge the next place after Harding. He was a menial Servant for thirty
years together, to Margaret Duchess of Burgundy (Sister to our King Edward the
Fourth) in Flanders. He afterward returned into England; where finding, as he
says, an imperfect History (begun by one of the Monks of St. Albans, says John
Pits, very J. Pits, p. 670, 671.
unadvisedly) he continued it in English, giving it only the Latin Title of
Fol. Land. 1515.
Fructus Temporum. How small a portion of this Work is owing to this Author,
has been observed before; but he now usually bears the Name of the whole, which
begins with the first inhabiting of his Island, and ends (the last year of
Edward the fourth) A. D. 1483. The opportunities he had, of being acquainted
with the Court-Transactions of his own time, would encourage his Reader to hope
for great matters from him; but his fancy seem to have led him into an
Undertaking above his strength.

John Rosse, John Rosse.
or Rous, was a person somewhat better qualified to write History; being a Man
of tolerable Parts, and singular Industry. He was born at Warwick, Vid. Hist.
and Antiq. Oxon. Par. II. p. 77.
and bred at Oxford. He traveled over the greatest part of England; and,
having made large Collections out of the Libraries where he came, relating to
the History and Antiquities of this Kingdom, he at last retired to Guy's Cliff
(about a mile from Warwick, on the Banks of Avon) where he spent the Remainder
of his Life, and died A. D. 1491. His History of our Kings is still MS. Bibl.
Cotton. and Coll. Ben. Cantabr.
extant; wherein are many Collections illustrating the Antiquities of our
Universities. Hereupon, he is frequently quoted by our Oxford-Antriquary; who
nevertheless will not allow that his Judgment equaled his Pains.

1501. Cent. 16. R. Fabian.
The first Post in the Sixteenth Century is due to Rob. Fabian, an eminent
Merchant, (and some time Sheriff of London, where he died A. D. 1512. Both Bale
and Pits subdivide his historical Writings into a great many several Treatises;
but I presume that which they call his Historiarum Concordantiae is the sum of
all. This Chronicle is Fol. Land. 1559.
published, and does indeed consist of seven parts, whereof the six first bring
down his Story from Brutus to William the Conqueror, and are chiefly taken out
of Jeoffry of Monmouth; and the Seventh gives an account of our several Kings
from the Conquest of Henry the VII. He is very particular in the Affairs of
London, many good things being noted by him (which concern the Government of
that great City) hardly to be had elsewhere. He gives the Names of all the
Bailiffs, Mayors, and Sheriffs, with the chief Transactions in their several
Years; but, in other matters, he is a great Follower of R. Higden. He mixes all
along the French History with the English; but in different Chapters. He
translates his Authors very literally; whence Monmouth's Phrase of Ferro and
Flamma vastare is rendered P. 42. etc.
to wast with Iron and Fire, and c. In the beginning of his Seventh part he
observes Higden's method of making his Years commence at Michaelmas; by which
the Reader will understand how William the Conqueror comes to begin his Reign
in October 1067. Cardinal Woolsey is said to have procured all the Copies of
this History, that he could meet with, to be burned; because (says my Bale,
Cent. 8. cap. 62.
Author, who is not infallible either in his Reasons or Relations) the Church's
Patrimony was thereby too plainly discovered. This Cardinal's Menial Servant (
John Skuish, Squisus, or Squisius) is Id. Cent. 9. cap. 19. and I. Pits, p. 709.
reported to have compiled a notable Epitome of our Chronicles about the Year
1630. but I am not able to direct the Reader where to meet with it.

Polydore Virgil Polydore Virgil.
was the most recomplish'd Writer, for Elegancy and clearness of Style, that
this Age afforded. So much the J. Leland. Comment. ad Cygn. Cant. voce Isis.
severest Enemy he had has acknowledged of him; and, on this score alone, Sir
Tho. Craig's Scotl. Soveraignt. p. 20, 38, 44, 181.
some have unreasonably extolled him. But there is so little of the other more
Necessary Qualifications of a good Historian (Truth and Fair Dealing) in all
his Fol. Basil. 1534.
Twently-six Books, that he has been justly condemned by our Critics: and it is
no wonder that some of them have expressed an Indignation suitable to the
Abuses put upon their Country. Sir Henry Savil is warmer on this occasion than
is usual with him. Epist. Ded. ad 5 Script. post Bedam.
Polydorus (says he) ut homo Italus, and in rebus nostris Hospes, and (quod
Caput est) neque in Republica versatus, nec magni alioqui vel Judicii, vel
Ingenii, pauca ex multis delibans, and falsa plerumque pro veris complexus,
Historiam nobis reliquit cum coetera mendosam, tum exiliter sane and jejune
conscriptam. Some have fansy'd that the severe Character which Sir Henry is
here pleased to give of this Author, might chiefly by applied to the History of
Henry the Eighth: And that a great many Passages in that Reign may be darkly or
falsely represented by him, by reason of his being unacquainted with the English
Tongue; which could not but very much obstruct his Knowledge in Modern
Transactions. Other things, say Vid. Mantiss. ad Degrees. Whear. Method. etc. p.
143.
they, have fallen from him under a borrowed Light and Color, out of the
Respect he had for Queen Mary, and his great Inclinations to serve the
Interests of that Princess. But does not even this Apology carry a deal of
Invective in it? Sir Henry Savil is far from being singular in the severest
part of his Censure. Some of our late Not. in Aelfr. R. Vit. p. 152.
Writers have agreed to it; and his Cotemporary Humph. Lhuyd out-throws him a
Bar or two. For, what think you of these Comment. Brit. Descrip. Frag. fol. 6,
17, 19, etc.
Expressions? Nominis Britannici gloriam non solum obfuscare, sed etiam
Britannos ipsos mendacissimis suis Calumniis infamare totis viribus conatur. --
Homo Ignotus and Exterus. -- Vir perfrictae frontis -- Invidia and odio tumens.
-- Infamis Homunculus. -- Os Impudens. Nor ought any thing of this to be
attributed to an over-boyling of honest Humphrey's Welsh Blood, if the other
Matters he is accused on be true. He is said to have Hist. Oxon. Lib. 2. p. 50.
borrowed Books out of the public Library at Oxford, without taking any Care
to restore them: Upon which the University (as they had good reason) declined
lending any more, till forced to it by a Mandate which he made a shift to
procure from the King. In other places he likewise pillaged the S. Taylor's
Gavelk. p. 83, 84.
Libraries at his pleasure; and, at last, sent over a Th. Gale, Praef. ad Hist.
Angl. Tom. 1.
whole Ship-load of Manuscripts to Rome. And yet when this Publican himself
left England (when there was no further occasion for his Collecting the Papal
Revenues) King Edward the Sixth is said to have dismissed him with several
handsome Presents: Which we are not to look upon as a Reward, as a certain Ant.
Harmer, p. 95.
late Writer expresses it; but rather to consider, that the young King being
about to take his final leave of the Pope, and all that belonged to him,
resolved to do it as courteously as was possible.

The other Historians of his Time have been much Eclipsed by the glaring Luster
of this Foreigner; John Rastal, etc.
insomuch that some of their Writings have hardly ever seen the Light, John
Rastal, a Citizen and Printer in London (who married Sir Thomas Meer's Sister,
and died A. D. 1536.) wrote an Ath. Oxon. vol. I. p. 38. and J. Pits, p. 726.
English Chronicle; but I know no more where to find it than another of the
same Age, written by Richard Turpin a Leicestershire Gentleman, and an Officer
in the Garrison at Calais, which I find quoted by his Burton, Descript. Lei^.
p. 153.
Countryman. Tho. Lanquet (who died at London in the twenty-fourth year of his
Age, A. D. 1545.) began an Abbreviation of our Chronicles, but brought it no
lower than the Birth of our Savior. Its third part, which chiefly relates to
this Kingdom, was written by the Learned Tho. Cowper (afterward Bishop of
Winchester) and by him 4to Land. 1560.
published. He calls it, as justly he may, an Epitome of our Chronicles, and
it is a Meagre one too, far short of the Performances of the same Author on
other Subjects. The like slender Abstract of our English History was, about the
same time, penned by George Lily (son of William the Famous Grammarian) which,
together with his short Account of the Wars betwixt the Houses of York and
Lancaster, and his Genealogy of our Kings, has had several 4to Venet. 1548.
Francof. 1565. Basil. 1567. etc.
Impressions. Somewhat bulkier is the Work of Edward Hall, who was some time
Recorder (if I understand my J. Pits, p. 735. Vid. etiam Fuller's Worthies, p.
219. in London.
Author right) of London, where he died A. D. 1547. He wrote a large Account of
the forementioned Wars; which, in a very flattering Epistle, he dedicates to
Henry the Eighth. If the Reader desires to know what sort of Clothes were worn
in each King's Reign, and how the Fashions altered, this is an Historian for
his purpose; but in other Matters his Information is not very valuable. A great
Borrower from this Hall was Rich. Grafton, who (as Hist. Scot. lib. 8.
Buchanan rightly observes) was a very heedless and unskilful Writer; and yet
he has the Honor done him to be sometimes quoted by Stow and others.

Of much better Note are the joint R. Holinshead.
Labors of Will. Harrison and Ra. Holinshead, whose Fol. Land. 1577, 1587, etc.
Chronicle has been well received, and still bears a good Port among our Books
of that kind. These Authors are Ath. Oxon. vol. I. p. 189. and 270.
supposed to have been both Clergymen; but it is not certainly known where they
spent the most of their days. So remarkably careful have they been to benefit
the Public, without the Vanity of making their own Story known to Posterity.
Holinshead frequently owns the great Assistance he had from Fran. Thynne,
sometime (in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) Lancaster-Herald, and an eminent
Antiquary. He has been severely treated by Scotland's Sover. 8vo Land. 1695.
pertotum.
Sir Thomas Craig, for some Insolences which that Learned Gentleman supposed
him guilty of, in Relation to the Kingdom of Scotland: Whereas (in Truth) that
part of the Book no farther concerned poor Mr. Holinshead, than as the whole
was sheltered under his Name. In the second Edition the History was continued
(to the year 1586.) by John Hooker, alias Vowel, of whom we shall have occasion
to make some further mention hereafter.

1601. Cent. 17 J. Stow.
Industrious John Stow leads the Van in the present Century, which is now
brought near its Conclusion: And he well deserves to be remembered with Honor.
He was a Member of the Merchant-Taylors Company in London, and (as has been
already observed) a special Benefactor to that City, in enquiring after and
preserving its Antiquities and Records. He traveled (on See his Chronicle
published by Howes, p. 811.
foot) through a good part of England, in search after the Manuscript
Historians in the Libraries of our Cathedral Churches, and was very exact and
Critical in his Collections. Having spent above Forty Years in these Studies,
he was put upon the Correction and Publishing of Reyne Wolf's Chronicle by
Archbishop Whitgift; and he had fairly transcribed his Work, and made it ready
for the Press, when he died A. D. 1605. He always protested (and we may take
his honest word for it) that he never was swayed by Favor or Fear in any of
his Writings; but that he had impartially to the best of his Knowledge,
delivered the Truth. This good Opinion the greatest of our later Historians
seem to have of him, since even Sir Francis Bacon and Mr. Camden (not to
mention others of a less Repute) have boldly taken several things upon his
single Credit, and (sometimes) without being so just as to own their
Benefactor. Upon his Death, the Revising and Continuation of his Book was
committed to Ed. Howes, who says he bestowed thirty Years in bringing it into
that good Order and Method in which we Fol. Land. 1631.
now see it. He is very Unfortunate, if (after so great Pains) he be justly
liable to the sharp Sentence that Tho. Fuller's Worthies, p. 220, 221. in
London.
one has passed upon him; That he is as far short of Mr. Stow in Goodness, as
(...) Age is of the Integrity and Charity of those that went before it. I am
abundantly sensible of the Degenetacy of our Age, and how Corrupt our Morals
are, beyond the Precedents of former Times: But how applicable this grave
Comparison may be to Mr. Howes, I know not: He does indeed say some great
things of King James and King Charles; and if that be a Fault in him. it is
transgressing with a Multitude. Not long after Mr. Stow, died R. White (Vitus
he calls himself) Canon of Doway, who left nine 8vo Duac. 1602.
Books of our English, or rather British, History, in a pretty elegant Latin
Style: His business is to assert the Rights of the Papacy in this Kingdom; and
therefore having settled Religion by Augustine the Monk and other Emissaries, he
ends his Story A. D. 800.

Our next Historian of Eminence was Sam. Daniel, S. Daniel.
some time Groom of the Privy-Chamber to Queen Anne. He was a Person of great
Wit, a notable Poet, and of an Affable and Winning Conversation. His first and
second Part of the History, (...) England fell no lower than the end of Edward
the Third's Reign; but was penned in so accurate and copious a Style, that it
took mightily, and was read with so much Applause, that it quickly had several
Fol. Land. 1618, 1621, etc.
Impressions. It was afterward enlarged, and Fol. Land. 1638, etc.
continued to the end of King Richard the Third's Reign, by John Trussel
Alderman of Winchester, who has not had the Luck to have either his Language,
Matter or Method, so well approved, as those of Mr. Daniel. About the same time
Will. Martyn (Recorder of Exeter) wrote his Fol. Land. 1616.
History and Lives of the Kings of England, from William the Conqueror to Henry
the Eighth. This came recommended to the World by the Author's own Sons: But I
cannot learn that any other Family in the Nation could ever discover so much
Worth and Beauty in the Book, as they pretended to see in it. Upon a Fol. Land.
1638.
second Edition, it was enlarged (by R. B. Master of Arts) with the Reigns of
Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth.

John Speed (who (...) London A. D. 1619.) J. Speed.
must be acknowledged to have had a Head the best disposed toward History of
any of our Writers; and would certainly have outdone himself, as far as he has
gone beyond the rest of his Profession, if the Advantages of his Education had
been answerable to those of his Natural Genius. But what could be expected from
a So Fuller in his Worthies, p. 181.
Tailor? However, we may boldly say that his Chronicle is the largest and best
we have hitherto Extant: It begins with the first Inhabitants of the Island,
and ends with the Union of the Kingdoms under King James, to whom it is
Dedicated. Though some Degrees. Whear. Method. p. 146.
say he spent twice seven years in compiling the whole, he himself owns he made
more haste than he ought to have done; and that he was forced to trust a deal
of his Work in the hands of his Friends and Journey-men. And the Truth of this
honest Acknowledgment and Confession is obvious enough to a discerning Reader;
who will easily find a mighty Difference in the Style, as well as Matter, of
several of the Reigns. Those of King John and Henry the Second, were written by
Dr. Barcham Ath. Oxon. vol. II. p. 9, 10.
, Dean of Bocking, a curious Antiquary, who has done them answerably to the
good Opinion which Men of Learning had of him. Several Remarkables in that of
Henry the Fifth were Collected by Id. vol. I. p. 452.
George (Carew) Earl of Totnes; as was his Catalogue of the Monasteries by Sir
H. Spelm. Council. Tom. I. p. 215.
Will. Burton, etc.

Sir Richard Baker (who died in the Fleet, A. D. 1644.) Sir Rich. Baker.
was a Person of those Accomplishments in Wit and Language, that his Chronicle
has been the best Read and Liked, of any hitherto published; which looks as if
almost every Body in the Kingdom, as well as himself, believed it to be
Collected with so great Care and Diligence, that, if all other of our
Chronicles were lost, this only would be sufficient to inform Posterity of all
Passages Memorable or Worthy to be known. His Method is New, and seems to
please the Rabble: But Learned Men will be of another Opinion; for it is the
same with that of Sueronius, which is justly complained of by Praele^t,
Ca^^den, p. 36.
Mr. D^dwell. In the Fol. Land. 1641. and 1663.
first and second Editions we had nothing more than the Author's own Work,
containing the History of our Kings from the Roman Government down to the end
of King James the First's Reign: But afterward it was Fol. Land. 1660, 1671.
continued to the Restoration of Charles the Second, by Edward Philips; who
(having the perusal of some of the Duke of (...) vol. II. p. 34.
Alb^^arle's Papers) might have set that great Revolution in its true Light,
had not Ambition and Flattery carried him beyond Truth and his Copy. Soon after
these Additions were published, the whole Book was examined by Tho. Blount a
Barrister of the Inner Temple, who 8vo Oxon. 1672.
printed his Animadversions upon it, and gave the World such a Specimen of its
many and gross Errors, as ought to have shaken its Credit. And yet (so little
Regard have we for Truth, if a Story be but handsomely told) the Chronicle has
been Reprinted since that Time, and Sells as well as ever; notwithstanding that
no notice is taken of the Animadversions, but all the old Faults remain
uncorrected. Mr. Blount himself spent some Years in writing an Ath. Oxon. vol.
II. p. 34.
English Chronicle, which we may believe would (at least) want those Errors
which he had descried in the Labors of other Men: But where it is to be had I
know not.

There are some later Histories, Sir W. Churchill, etc.
which are so well known to all that are any thing Curious in these Matters,
that I need do little more than mention them. Such are, 1. Sir Winston
Churchill's Fol. Land. 1675.
Di^i Britannici, which gives the Reader a diverting View of the Arms and
Exploits of our Kings, down to the Restoration in 1660. 2. Fr. Sandford's Fol.
Land. 1677.
Genealogical History of the Kings of England and Monarchs of Great Britain,
from the Norman Conquest to the year 1677. with their several Effigies, Seals,
Tombs, Arms, etc. 3. Let me add Dr. Hoel's 8vo Land. 1679.
Medulla Historiae Anglicanae, which, though only a very concise Epitome of our
History, is done with that great Judgment, that it deserves a place among the
best of our Writers on this Subject. There have been some Additions made to
this Treatise, since the Doctor's death in 1683. which (whatever Relish they
may have with some Readers) are not to be laid to his Charge. Others, we hear,
are now engaged in the bold Work of Compiling General Histories of this
Kingdom. The most considerable of these are Sir John Marsham, and James Tyrrel
Esquire and, if the former writes with the true Spirit of his Father, and the other
with that of (Archbishop Usher) his Grandfather, we have good cause to hope for
great things from them both.

There are also many Anonymous Historians, Anonymous Histories.
whose Books are said to remain in several of our public and private
Libraries, which ought to be referred to in this Chapter. It Is true, the
Numbers of these might be lessened, if they were veiw'd by proper Persons,
before their Titles were sent abroad in our Catalogues; whereas we are now told
of Forty Nameless Authors, who (upon perusal) prove only imperfect Copies of
Paris, Westminster, Hoveden, etc. A few, we are sure, are not of this kind, but
appear to be of good value in themselves, though of an unknown Authority. Such
are three Manuscripts of good Esteem in the Library at Lambeth, sometimes
quoted by In notis ad vol. I. Angl. Sac. p. 55, 109, 121.
Mr Wharton; a Fourth, referred to by Hist. Eccles. Brit. p. 72.
Archbishop Usher; a Fifth and Sixth by Tit. of Hon. p. 25, 83.
Mr. Seldom; a Seventh now in the Possession of, my worthy Friend, Mr. Thoresby
of Leedes in Yorkshire, etc. To which we might add a large Scrole of those that
bear only the Names of such Monasteries as they were penned in: But these may
happen to be remembered when we come more particularly to treat of the
Registers and Records of those Religious Houses.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Writers of Particular Lives of our Kings since the Conquest.
THE Historians that have been already mentioned, in the foregoing Chapter,
have usually treated most Copiously of the Reigns of those Princes that ruled
in their own Times; and are to be most especially consulted in such
Transactions as may be supposed to have happened within the Compass of their
own View and Observation. Others have confined their Pens to the History of
this or the other particular Monarch; and from them (if not manifestly under
some Prejudices and Temptations either to Invective or Panegyric) we may
expect the best and most comprehensive Account, as far as their Subject carries
them. Of these I shall give the Reader as full a List as I can; following the
Succession down to the Union of the two Kingdoms.

William the First's Conquest (or vid. H. Spelm. Gloss. in voce Conquaestus.
Acquest) William the Conqueror.
of this Kingdom was a Revolution that appeared so Great and Glorious, that
it is a Wonder how we come to have so few Writers of his Story, whose Labors
have continued to this day: For, it is plain, our Englishmen have been as
backward in paying this Complement to this Memory, as they were in
acknowledging his Title. Among those that have done it, William of Poictiers (
Pictaviensis) is the largest; and, though a Foreigner, and under some seeming
Obligations to the King's Interests, has so fairly acquitted himself, as to
find good Credit with the most of our Historians. Archbishop Lanfranc Bale
(Edit. 1.) Cent. 2. cap. 28.
is said to have written his Life also; and he is observed to have been so well
affected toward the English Nation (though a Lombard himself) and to have
carried so even betwixt their New Governor and them, that it is very probable
he would likewise approve himself an unbiased Author. There Is a short
Anonymous History of this Reign published by Silas Tailor, in the end of his
4to Land. 1663.
Treatise of Gavel-kind. He guesses the Author was a Monk of Battle-Abbey: But
I see no cogent Reason, in the Tract it self, to press such a Persuasion. It Is
plain the Writer lived in the days of Henry the First, and so might be
sufficiently informed of the Truth of all he relates. There was some time in
the Library of Sir Kenelm Digby, a Manuscript History of the Life and Death of
the Conqueror, said to have been written by Sir Walter Raleigh; but my Ath.
Oxon. Vol. I. p. 373.
Informer reckons it amongst some other Pieces, which he thinks unduly fathered
upon that great Man. But, above all, Sir William Temple has lately given us the
most excellent and Judicious Account of this Introd. to Engl. Hist. 8vo Land.
1695.
King's Reign and Policy; the old Laws he preserved, and the new ones he
enacted; his good Conduct and Success in his many Wars, both in England and
France; several Instances of his Clemency and Wisdom, etc. Upon all which he
makes such Reflections as become a Statesman, and a Person so conversant in the
Management of public Affairs, as that Author is known to have been.

William the Second was more Unfortunate (both in his Life and Death) William
II.
than his Father; and has also been so Unhappy, as to have none to attempt the
preserving his Memory, in any special History, that I have yet heard of.

Henry the First (though he reigned much longer than his Brother, Henry I.
and Founded several Religious Houses in this Realm) met with the like
Treatment: Unless we reckon Walter de Mopez's Book De N^gis Curi^llu^, to be
something of that ^ind; seeing a great many witty things, relating to the
History of this King, are quote^ out of it by Remains, p. m. 260, 262, 264.
Mr. Camden. That Author was Archdeacon of Oxford, and a Merry Good Fellow, in
the Reign of Henry the Second.

King Stephen's Memoirs were collected by Richard, Stephen.
Prior of Hexbam; whose Book is like to be preserved as long as the most
durable of our English Records, having had the Honor to make a part of the
noble Edition of our Fol. Land. 1652.
December Scriptores. Mr. Seldom Tit. of Hon. p. 537, 557, etc.
quotes another Anonymous Writer of his Life, who seems to be a voluminous
Author.

Henry the Second's long Contests, Henry II.
with the haughty Archbishop Becket, gave occasion to vast Numbers of Writers
to engage on both sides: So that we have several Pictures drawn of this King,
who is represented sometimes as a God, and elsewhere as a Devil, according as
the Author favored the Court of England or Rome. Gilbert Folioth J. Pits, p.
251, 252.
, Bishop of London (who died before the end of this Reign, A. D. 1187.) was the
earliest Stickler for the King against the Archbishop, and wrote smartly in
Defense of the Prerogative Royal, and against the Papal and Prelatical
Usurpations of those Times. Will. Stephens (or Fitz-Stephens, the London
Antiquary) is Id. p. 257.
said to be another Writer of this King's Life; but I suspect the Truth of the
Story. Stow and others quote him sometimes as writing in the Reign of Henry the
Second; and that is enough for Pits to conclude that he wrote his Life. Prior
Richard of Hexham is Id. p. 259.
brought in for another; as is also John Oxfordius Id. p. 265.
Bishop of Norwich, This last was sometime Dean of Salisbury; and was certainly
sent by King Henry to Rome, to give the Pope a true Account of Becket's
Behavior. But whether he did really draw up a Journal of his Embassy, with an
Apology for his Master, I cannot assuredly inform the Reader; though Hector
Boethius pretends to have seen it, and recommends it as a Treatise highly worth
the Perusal. Three of Gyraldus Cambrensis's many Historical Books are likewise
Id. p. 281.
reported to be written on this Subject: And Mr. Wharton Angl. Sacr. vol. I. p.
169.
mentions a Manuscript History of the same Reign by Benedictus. Some Hist. and
Antiq. Oxon. p^r. II. p. 241.
say that the Life of this King, as we now have it in Speed's Chronicle, was
composed by Dr. Barcham, Archbishop Bancroft's Chaplain; and penned chiefly in
Confutation of one Bolton (a Papist) who had newly enlarged too far in the
Justification of Becket's Insolent Carriage to his Prince. These are mostly the
King's Friends; and such as engaged on the behalf of our English Monarchy. What
was to be said, on the other hand, for good Saint Thomas, must be learned from
those that have recorded the Actions, Sufferings and Miracles, of that worthy
Roman Saint and Martyr. An Account whereof shall be given in their proper
Infra, Cap. 13.
place.

Richard the First's Meritorious Expedition into the Holy Land, Richard I.
gained him so much Repute, that he is as highly extolled by the Monki^h Writers
of that and the following Ages, as his Father is reproached for his Persecution
of their St. Thomas. The chief Remarkables in his Life (that part of it
especially which was spent in the Levant) are largely treated on by Rich. Bale,
Cent. III. cap. 28.
Divisiensis, [ i. e. of the Devises in Wiltshire] a Monk of Winchester; Walter
J. Pits, p. 263.
Constantiensis, Bishop of Lincoln, who accompanied him in some of his Travels;
Will. Id. p. 266.
Peregrinus, so called from the Peregrination he also made in Attendance on
this King; and Rich. Id. p. 268.
Canonicus (Augustine Canon of St. Trinity in London) another of his Retinue.
Jos. Iscanus (or, of Exeter) had the like Curiosity; followed the Fortunes of
his Prince in the Holy War; and, at his Return, celebrated his Acts in a Book
which he thought fit to call A^tiocheidos: It Is in Heroic Verse; and in a
Camd. Remains, p. m. 317.
Style and Strain of Poetry, much beyond what one would expect to meet with in
the Writings of that Age. John Leland (who thought himself as great a Master
and Judge in Poetry as History) says of this Author, that he was Assert. Arth.
fol. 7. b.
Poeta Britannus omnibus Numeris Elegantissi^us; and calls his Book Op^s
Immortale. His Life is also said to have been written by J. Pits, p. 304.
Stephen Laugton (Archbishop of Canterbury) and Id. p. 316.
Alexander de Hales the Famous School-man. But we have not so particular
Directions where to look for these as for ^n Id. p. 824.
Anonymous Manuscript to the same purpose, in the Library of Magdalene College
in Oxford. The Learned Hist. Angl. Scrip. 5. Fol. Oxon. 1687.
Dr. Gale has obliged us with one of the largest of this King's Journals, taken
by one Je^ffrey Vinesauf (or, de Vino Sal^^) whom he takes to be the same Man
with the forementioned Walter Constantiensis, who sometimes (he says) is also
called Walter Oxoniensis. He likewise believes that Richard of the Devises and
Richard the Canon were the same Person: So that instead of having our Store
enlarged by what he has done for us, we have lost some of our former Stock.

King John's Unhappy Reign was not a Subject so taking as that of his Brother;
K. John.
and therefore has not been enquired into by so many Curious Authors. John de
Forda or Fordeham (who is ignorantly confounded with John Fordon the Scottish
Historian, by J. Pits, p. 277. Vid. Stissingst. Orig. Brit. p. 249.
John Pits) was the first that attempted it; and, being this King's Chaplain,
had Opportunities enough of knowing the Truth, if he was a Person of such
unbiased Honesty as to reveal it. Gyraldus Cambrensis, living also at the same
time, is J. Pits, p. 281.
said to have likewise penned his Story; and we may believe it will discover
that warmness of Temper which runs through all that Author's Writings. Some of
the Learned Men of the present Age, have thought the Extraordinary Freaks of
this Prince worth their Considering; and have therefore bestowed good Pains in
Collecting and Methodizing the most Notable Transactions of his Reign. Of
these, Dr. Barcham's History is (as we have already observed) published in
Speed's Chronicle; and is so well done, that an Industrious Anth. a Wood. Ath.
Oxon. vol. I. p. 10.
Antiquary gives this Character of it, That it shows more Reading and Judgment
than any Life besides in that History. And another Tho. Fuller's Worth. p. 276.
in Dev^^sh.
witty Author says, It Is the King of all the Reigns of that Book, for profound
Penning. The Voluminous Hist. of K. John, R. Hen. III. and K. Ed. I. Fol. L^nd.
1670.
Will. Prynne has also carefully and largely informed us of the public
Occurrences of this Reign, as well as the two next following, in order to the
Asserting and Vindicating of the ancient Sovereignty of our English Monarchs,
against all Foreign Encroachments and Innovations whatever.

Henry the Third's long Reign might seem to afford Matter enough to employ one
Man's Pen; Henry III.
and yet (till the Disturbances given him, in the latter end of his time, by S.
Monfort and the other Barons) so few memorable things happened in so many
years, that it has not hitherto been very nic^ly inquired into. In a late
Edition of the learned 8vo Land. 1679.
Sir Robert Cotton's Remains, the Table of the several Discourses reckons the
last of the Sixteen The Life and Reign of Henry the Third, compiled in a
Critical way: But the Reader, to his great Disappointment, will meet with no
such thing in the Book: Perhaps it is to be had in a former Edition of that
Treatise, as published by James Howel.

Edward the First was a brave and Victorious Prince, Edward I.
and his Achievements in Scotland deserved to be Recorded by some Person of
Abilities suitable to so Noble an Undertaking. To this purpose he carried
Robert Baston, Bale (Edit. 1.) Cent. 3. Fol. 127. Pits, p. 399. But, the Story
is told otherwise by An. Wood. Hist. Oxon. par. I. p. 101.
Prior of Scarborough, with him into that Kingdom, to describe his Battles, and
(particularly) the Famous Siege of Sterling. This was done in pretty Elegant
Heroicks: But the Author, being the next year unfortunately taken Prisoner by
the Scots, was (by the over-powering Commands and Severities of R. Bruce)
obliged to rec^nt all; and to extol the Scotch Nation as highly as he had
lately magnified the English. Will. Rishanger (who was Historiographer-Royal
during this King's whole Reign) composed a special Treatise of the Annals of
Edward the First; whereof, I presume, three other Tracts of the same Man's
Writing (entitled by J. Pits, p. 403.
J. Pits and others, De Joanne Baileolo Rege; Super Electione Regis Scotorum;
and De Jure Regis Anglorum ad Scotiam) are only so many several Parts.

Edward the Second's Misfortunes are very honestly, Edward II.
without either Flattery or Contempt, written by Stephen Eiton or Eden, a Id.
p. 410.
Canon Regular of Warter in Yorkshire, sometime about the Year 1320. His Life
was more accurately penned in French by Sir Thomas de la More, who was Knighted
by So says Pits: But Sir Thomas himself says otherwise, see Stow, p. 233.
Edward the First, was Counselor to Edward the Second, and lived to the
beginning of Edward the Third's more prosperous Reign. It was first Translated
into Latin by Stow's Chron. p. 217.
Walter Baker, or Swinburn, Canon of Osney near Oxford; and has been frequently
published in English by our general Chroniclers. In our Age, Sir Henry Carey
(Lord Viscount Faulkland) wrote the 8vo Land. 1680.
History of this unfortunate Prince; with choice Political Observations on him
and his unhappy Favorites, Gaveston and Spencer. There was also an Historical
Poem written about the same time (though it appeared abroad much 8vo Land. 1629.
sooner) on the same subject, whose Author was Rich. Hobert, a younger Brother
to Sir Henry, who himself made some additional Observations that are Ath. Oxon.
vol. I. p. 501.
of good Use and Ornament to it.

Edward the Third reigned long and prosperously; Edw. III.
and yet I cannot assuredly inform the Reader of one Writer who has singly
treated on those Glories and Successes that attended him. I doubt whether
Walter Hemmingford's Chronicle of this King be as certainly Extant as that
larger History of his which has (in part) been published by Dr. Gale: For, though
Bale, Cent. 5. Cap. 71. Pits, p. 456.
Bale and Pits assert it, De Viris Illustr. MS.
Leland mentions no such thing. If it be, it is not likely that it can escape
the diligent and curious Enquiry of the forementioned worthy Person; who has
encouraged us to hope for his sending abroad a great many more of our old
Manuscript Historians. The like Scruples I have upon me as to some other Res
Gestae of this King, which are said to have been written by Robert Bale,
sometime Recorder of London. And yet, John Pits Page 654.
avers, that, in his time, such a Treatise was kept (as a choice Rarity) by the
Citizens of London, in their public Library; together with some Historical
Pieces of the same Author's Penning, which more immediately related to that
City. The victorious Achievements of the Black Prince, falling all within the
Compass of his Father's Reign, make up a good Share of its Story: And these
were collected, and J. Pits, p. 530.
separately treated on in French, by Will. Packington, who was Secretary and
Treasurer to that Hero, and constantly attended him in the Wars. The English
Historian will observe, that in this and many of the following Reigns, this
Kingdom was so constantly engaged against the United Policies and Forces both
of France and Scotland, that 'twill be convenient for him to consult the
Accounts given by the Writers of those Nations, as well as our own; especially,
since the Testimony of an Enemy (if to the Advantage and Honor of our Country)
is of double value with that of a Friend.

Richard the Second's good Success in Ireland, Richard II.
was so far out-balanc'd by the other (more unlucky) Adventures of his Reign,
that I have not heard of any who have thought it worth their while to write his
Life; except only a poor Knight of John Pits's Creation. That Author Id. p. 576.
says, That one Sir John Gower (a Yorkshire Knight, and Cotemporary with the
Famous Chaucer) died in the Year 1402. leaving behind him a deal of Monuments
of his Learning, and (amongst the rest) a Latin Chronicle of King Richard the
Second. There was indeed one Mr. John Gower, a noted Poet, who lived about the
time he mentions. This witty Person took the Liberty, that has always been
allowed to Men of his Profession, to make Free with his Prince; and Mr. Stow's
Chron. p. 325.
Stow (or, his Continuer, Howes) has done him the Honor to Translate the Elegy
he made on this King's untimely Death, which (it may be) contains the whole
Chronicle. There Is an Ingenious Treatise lately written and published by 8vo
Land. 1690.
Sir Robert Howard, which (in the Title Page) is said to be the History of the
Reigns of Edward and Richard the Second: But the Author himself seems to have
more rightly named it Reflections upon some select Passages in them. His Design
is to give a Prospect of the Hazard and Madness of a Prince's following the
Misguiding Meteor of Arbitrary Power: And, by comparing the Misadventures of
these two unhappy Kings, with the Triumphs of their Prosperous Predecessors, to
show what Vid. p. 17.
Glory and Safety Wise and Virtuous Princes have obtained, and what Ruin the
Cruelty and Folly of others have brought upon Themselves and Subjects. This he
has done in a Well-penn'd Political Essay, which will very much advantage our
English Historian, in giving him a Right Notion of many (otherwise) dark
Occurrences in those Reigns.

Henry the Fourth's surprising and pompous Accession to the Throne, Henry IV.
was a more proper Subject for a Poet to Descant upon, than the Melancholic
Reign of his Predecessor: And therefore we may the more readily believe (what
the same Author tells us) that the forementioned Northern Bard wrote his
Panegyric. Pits also J. Pits, p. 598.
says, that Rob. Mascall, Bishop of Hereford, was employed in several Embassies
during the Reigns of this King and his Successor; and that (dying at Ludlow, in
the Year 1417.) he left, among other things, a Treatise De suis Legationibus.
Sir John Hayward, King James the First's Historiographer at Chelsey, wrote
Henry the Fourth's Life among others; and had the Repute (in those days) of a
good clean Pen and smooth Style, though some have since blamed him for being a
little too Ath. Oxon. vol. I. p. 824.
Dramatical.

Henry the Fifth was a most Heroic Prince; Henry V.
and his single Victory at Agencourt might have afforded Matter for more
Volumes than (as far as I can yet learn) have been written on his whole Reign.
It Is said that his Exploits were carefully Recorded by Peter J. Pits, p. 616.
Basset, who was of his Bedchamber, and an Attendant on him in all his
Triumphs: But what the same Id. p. 824.
Person writes of another (Anonymous) Author who translated Livy's History into
English; and also wrote the Life of Henry the Fifth, is such Stuff as is common
with him. The Truth is, His Life was written at large by one who called himself
Titus Livius; who, by that name, dedicated it to King Henry the Sixth, and is
still quoted by Stow and others. We have, to this day, two good Copies of his
Work; one in Sir John Cotton's Library, the other in that of Bennet College.
Out of these, carefully collated, a third was prepared for the Press by the Sea
Wh. Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 65, 66.
worthy Publishers of the December Scriptores; which (with several other
Historical Treatises, some whereof have been printed) was afterward purchased
by that Indefatigable Promoter of all sorts of Learning, the late Pious Bishop
Fell. This Treatise is abundantly quoted by our General Chroniclers: But no
piece of History relishes so well at the second hand, as it does when we have
it from its first Author. It were therefore to be wished, that the good
Prelate's Executors would do Him and Themselves (as well as the Public) so
much Right as to Print it; together with the like valuable Manuscripts which
have thus fallen into their hands. What was done by Sir George Carew (Earl of
Totness) has been already observed to be remitted into J. Speed's Chronicle;
where the Reader will meet with some Remarks becoming a Statesman, a General
and a Scholar.

Henry the Sixth was as Good as his Father was Great; Henry VI.
being as Conversant in the Holy Scriptures, and Books of Devotion, as the
other was in Arms and Feats of Chivalry: And yet I do not find that all his
strict Piety gained so far upon the Monks of his Time, as that there was any
great struggling among them, who should most effectually recommend him to
Posterity. Archbishop De Script. and Sacr. Vernac. p. 171.
Usher tells us of one John Blackman, a Carthusian, who was particularly
intimate with him, and has left a Collection of the many good things he had
taken notice of, in the most Secret Passages of his Life. Tho. Walsingham (who
also lived in his Time) took a Journal of his Reign; out of which is composed
that which some have entitled his J. Pits, p. 630.
Acta Regis Henrici Sexti. Had the Pope favored the Attempt which was
afterward made at the Enshrining or Sainting of this King, it is very likely
that his Legend would have out-grown his History, and have been penned by more
Writers than his Life: Since the Roman Saints are commonly most Active after
their Decease, and the Wonders of their Relics are usually much greater than
those of their Persons.

Edward the Fourth can hardly be said to have enjoyed so much Quiet, Edw. IV.
during the Twenty Years of his supposed Reign, as to have settled the House of
York in the Throne: So that even the Favorers of Justice, and his Cause, have
not known what Account to give of the Times; or how to Form a Regular History
out of such a vast Heap of Rubbish and Confusion. Mr. Habbington has given us
as fair a Draught as the thing would bear: At least, he has Copied this King's
Picture as agreeably as could be expected from one standing at so great a
distance from the Original.

Edward the Fifth had the Name of a King for some few Weeks; Edw. V.
and purchased the Complement at far too high a Rate. His Accession to the
Throne, the Tower and the Grave (all within the Compass of little more than two
Months) are largely and elegantly described by the Famous Sir Thomas Moor, Lord
Chancellor of England; who has sufficiently shown how a short and doleful Tale
may be improved into a complete History, by a Person of good Skill and
Judgment. This Treatise has met with such a general Acceptance, as that it not
only finds Admission (by wholesale) into all our late Chronicles; but has also
been 8vo Land. 1651.
separately printed, without any other Alteration than a small change of the
English Orthography, according to the Usage and Mode of the present Age. The
short Epitome of this and the three following Reigns, that was written Elenchus
Annalium RR. Edw. IV. etc. 12o Land. 1597.
and published by Will. Fleetwood, Sergeant at Law, is so thin a piece (and
refers so peculiarly to the Transactions in the Courts at Westminster) that it
has been rather looked on as a Table or Index to the Year-books of those Times,
than any Historical Treatise.

Richard the Third's short and unfortunate Reign, Rich. III.
had its 8vo Land. 1651.
Tragical History begun by Sir Thomas Moor, who did not bring it to such a
final Conclusion, as he had done that of his Nephew and Predecessor. Neither
Bale nor Pits take notice of any such thing: But Vossius seems to have seen and
perused it. De Hist. Lat. lib. III. cap. 13.
Vt fuse (says he) persequitur quibus Sceleribus ille ad Regnum pervenerit; ita
quomodo id gesserit non exponit: Ac nec ea part quam habemus ultimam manum
accepit. Praeterea Elegantia Latini Sermonis ab aliis ejusce viri operibus
long vincitur. Which last words must refer to Sir Thomas's Life of this King;
and not to that of Edward, which indeed might seem to be an Introduction to
this, and would answer all the former part of Vossius's Story: But King
Edward's was only written in English; whereas Richard's was in both Languages,
and (as appears from Stow's Chron. p. 458.
Stow's account) was more copiously treated on in Latin. Great Additions have
been since made by a more Candid G. Buck's Hist. of Rich. III. Fol. Land.
Composer of his Annals; who endeavors to represent him as a Prince of much
better Shapes (both of Body and Mind) than he had been generally esteemed.
Various are the Censures which have passed upon this Work. I shall only trouble
the Reader with that of Dr. Fuller: Worthies, p. 282. in Northamptonsh.
His Memory (says he, speaking of King Richard) has met with a Modern Pen, who
has not only purged but praised it to the height; and pity it is that so able
an Advocate had not a more meriting Person to his Client.

Henry the Seventh, having most fortunately and wisely united the Houses of
York and Lancaster, Hen. VII.
continued his Reign as prosperously as it began; and is justly esteemed one of
the most Politic Princes that ever sat on the English Throne. It appears Sir
Thomas Moor had once some Stow's Chron. p. 459. col. 1.
faint Thoughts of writing this King's Life, whilst he was in hand with those
of his immediate Predecessors: But I know not whether he ever lived, or not, to
digest them. Sir James Ware has Industriously Collected and In Append. ad
Disquisit. de Hibernia, 8vo Land. 1658.
Published such Occurrences of this Reign, as relate to the Affairs of Ireland:
And a Poetical History of the whole has been 8vo Land. 1638.
printed by Chapter Aleyn. But this good Work was the most effectually undertaken
and completed by the Incomparable Fol. Land. 1676. and apud Joh. Speed in
Chron.
Sir Francis Bacon, who has bravely surmounted all those Difficulties, and
passed over those Rocks and Shallows, against which he took such Pains to De
Augment. Scient. lib. 2. cap. 5.
caution other less experienced Historians. He has perfectly put himself into
King Henry's own Garb and Livery, giving as spritely a View of the Secrets of
his Council, as if himself had been President in it. No trivial Passages, such
as are below the Notice of a Statesman, are mixed with his Sage Remarks: Nor is
any thing of Weight or Moment slubber'd over with that careless Have and
Indifferency which is too common in other Writers. No Allowances are given to
the Author's own Conjecture or Invention; where a little Pains and
Consideration will serve to set the Matter in its proper and true Light. No
Impertinent Digressions, nor fanciful Comments, distract his Readers: But the
whole is written in such a Grave and Uniform Style, as becomes both the Subject
and the Artificer.

Henry the Eighth was a Prince of great Virtues and Accomplishments, Hen. VIII.
and as great Vices: So that the pleasing Varieties that were in his Life and
Reign, might have temptest many more Writers, than we know of, to engage in the
Composure of so entertaining an History. Edmund Campian wrote a Narrative of
the most remarkable Passages relating to his Divorce of Queen Katharine, which
is printed at the end of Nich. Fol. Duaci, 1622.
Harpesfeild's Church History, and is written with the true Spirit and Heart
(as well as Eloquence) of a Jesuit. Fran. Godwin (Bishop of Landaff, who will
be remembered at large amongst our Ecclesiastical Historians) compiled also the
4to and Fol. Land. 1616, 1628, etc.
Annals of this and the two following Reigns: Whereof Degrees. Whear, Method. p.
144.
one of our Critics gives this just Character, That his Book is penned, Non
m^gis succincta quam laudabili brevitate. The Author was a perfect Master of
the Latin Tongue, and wrote in that Language: But his Annals were translated
into English (and so have been frequently published) by his Son Morgan Godwin
LL. D. Sir Robert Cotton had drawn together some Notes and Collections as
Materials for a future History of this King's Reign: But these fell unfinished
into the hands of John Speed* who has taken Care to preserve them, as orderly
as he could, in his Chronicle. I suppose that which was written in Greek Verse
by George Etheridge, sometime Regius Professor of that Language in Oxford (and
by him Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Lib. I. p. 289. and Lib. II. p. 235.
presented to Queen Elizabeth) was intended only for the Use of Her Majesty and
its Author; and, for that reason, has ever continued in Manuscript, and sub
Noctibus Atticis. Above all, Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury may be truly said
to have written the Life and Reign of King Henry the Eighth; having acquitted
himself with the like Reputation as the Lord Chancellor Bacon gained by that of
Henry the Seventh. For, in the Politic and Martial Part this Honorable Author
has been admirably Particular and Exact, from the best Records that were
Extant: Though, as to the Ecclesiastical, he seems to have looked upon it as a
Thing out of his Province, and an Undertaking more proper for Men of another
Profession. The Oxford Antiquary Athen. Oxon. Vol. II. p. 19.
tells us, That he had seen four thick Volumes (in Folio) of Collections, which
this Lord has furnished himself withal; as Materials necessary for the firm
erecting of so noble a Structure. Out of these, and other Helps, he (at last)
finished his excellent History; the Original Manuscript whereof he was pleased
to bestow on the University of Oxford, in whose Archives it still remains. It
has been frequently Printed, and the several Impressions as greedily bought up:
But the Fol. Land. 1682.
last Edition is indeed (what is always Pretended) the Best and most Correct.

Edward the Sixth. Edw. VI.
The most Considerable Transactions of this Reign, are (it may be) as well
Registered by the Young King himself, as any other Historian, in the Diary
written with his own hand, and still preserved in Sir John Cotton's Famous
Library; from whence our Learned Bishop Burnet transcribed and In Append. ad
Vol. II. Hist. Reform.
published it. There was a Notable Discourse, touching the State of the Times
in this King's Reign, written by (a Person admirably well Skilled in the
Antiquities and Laws of England) Dr. Gerard Langbaine, Provost of Queen's
College in Oxford; which he published, by way of Preface, to Sir John 4to Oxon.
1641.
Cheek's True Subject to the Rebel. As for Sir John Hayward, He is the same Man
in his 8vo Land. 1622.
Life of Edward the Sixth, that we have already observed him to be in that of
Henry the Fourth: Only, his Style is here sometimes too Sharp and Pungent;
especially when he comes to give Characters of the Nobility, Ministers of
State, etc. where an Intelligent Historian ought no more to be Clownish, than
he needs turn Courtier when he Converses with Plowmen.

Queen Mary's Reign had Blemishes in it, Q. Mary.
which have discouraged some sort of Writers from attempting its Story; though I
cannot but wonder that others have not thought themselves obliged to endeavor
to Represent it as Advantageously to Posterity as Art can do it.

Queen Elizabeth, Q. Elizabeth.
in a long and Prosperous Reign, gave the World very ample Proofs of her Sex's
being Capable of Government, and the most gallant A^chievements. Her blasting
the longing Hopes of Spain after an Universal Monarchy in Temporals, and
putting a final Period to that of Rome in Spirituals, together with her
Personal Endowments, were such Extraordinary Glories as tempted a great many
Artists to try how fairly they were able to take the Features of such an
Original in all Points of Sovereignty. Her Establishment of the Reformation,
and Executing the Laws upon some few Turbulent Persons of the Romish Communion,
whetted the Style of that Party against her; and (particularly) provoked Tho.
Bourchier, a Franciscan Doctor of the Sorbon, to write a History of the 8vo
Paris, 1586.
Martyrdom (as he terms it) of the Men of his Order. The Life and J. Pits, p.
799.
Martyrdom of Mary Queen of Scots, was also written by Rob. Turner, sometime
Scholar to Ed. Campian, who was afterward Doctor of Divinity at Rome, and
Secretary to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria. Some of her better Subjects have
furnished us with more agreeable Accounts of the chief Passages in her Reign.
Sir Henry Vnton has drawn up a Journal of his Embassy in France, giving a full
Register of his Commission, Instructions, Expenses, etc. a Manuscript Copy
whereof is now in the Public Library at Oxford. Heyward Towneshend, an Eminent
Member of the House of Commons, preserved the Debates in Parliament of her last
fourteen Years; which, long after the Author's Death, were published under the
Title of Fol. Land. 1680.
Historical Collections, etc. But this, as vast an Undertaking as it seems to
be, is only a part of that more Comprehensive one of Sir Symonds d'Ewes; whose
Journal of Both Houses, during her whole Reign, was soon after given us in Fol.
Land. 1682.
Print. Her Wars with Spain, the several Engagements of her Fleets at Sea, with
their many Successful Expeditions, etc. have been well described by Sir William
Monson, who bore a high Command in most of them, and has shown such a Judgment
in Maritime Affairs, as well qualified him for such Posts of Honor. His Book
bears the Title of For. Lo^d. 1682.
A Particular and Exact Account of the last Seventeen Years of Queen Elizabeth
's Reign, both Military and Civil: The former kind being the Work of Sir
William, and the latter Mr. Towneshend's. Out of all these, and many other good
Helps, Mr. Camden composed his most Exquisite History of this Queen; which, as
Dr. Smith shows in his Vid. Camd. Vit. Epist. Praef. p. 57.
Life, was undertaken by the special Directions and Command of the great Lord
Cecil. It has had many Editions, and in several Languages; though it is pity it
should be read in any other than its Author's Polite Original Latin. Dr. Fuller
Worthies* p. 94. in Margin.
observes, that one of its English Translations (for it had several) was done
out of French by Abraham Darcy; who understood not the Latin, and has therefore
committed many Mistakes. Hugh Holland (one of Camden's Ath. Oxon. Vol. I. p.
498.
Scholars at Westminster, and a Papist) is said to have written this Queen's
Life as well as his Master's: But it is only (if it be at all) an English
Manuscript, and very probably not worth the seeking. Sir Robert Naunton's
Character of her Court and Favorites has been lately published with Sir
Francis Walsingham's 8vo Land. 1694.
Arcana Aulica; and a short System of her Policies has been offered to our
present Sovereign, and the late excellent Queen, by the Ingenious Character of
Queen Elizabeth, 8vo Land. 1693.
Edmund Bohun Esquire Author of many other Treatises of good Value.

The End of the First Part.
AN INDEX OF THE AUTHORS, etc.
A
ABingdon Page 67 Adams 16 Aelfred; King 100, 118 -- of Beverly 147 Aelfric 103
Agard 21 Albanus 190 Aldhelm 101 Aleyn 223 Anonymi 199, 202 Antoninus 2 Aras
136 Asamal 131 Asserius 121 Ashmole 22, 25 Aubrey 65, 102
B.
Bacon 223 Baker 196 Baldoc 165 Bale 46, 213 Barcham 193, 205, 209 Bards 78
Bartholin 146 Basset 217 Baston 218 Beaumont 19, 53, 57 Bid 4 Bedenham 41
Benedictus 205 Benlanius 79 Bettes 35 Blackman 219 Blome 15 Blount 197 Boun 52
Bohun 232 Bourchie^ 229 Boil 18 Bradshaw 29 British Grammars 76 --
Dictionaries 77 -- Charters 89 -- Coins 90 Brompton 175 Brown 50 Buck 47, 222
Burgensis 172 Buriensis 172 Burlace 43 Burton 3, 43, 195 Butche^ 44 Butler 35
Buttoner 5 Byshe 59
C.
Caius 50, 56 Calenius 95 Cambrensis 4, 60, 125, 205, 206 Camden 10, 21, 49,
231 Campian 224 Canonicus 206 Cantelupus 178 Caradocus 97 Carew 29, 193, 218
Carry 211 Castorius 173 Catheral 53 Caxton 5, 178, 190 Cestrensis 174
Chamberlain 21 Chapman 57 Charlton 66 Charters, British 89 -- Saxon 109
Chauncey 36 Chetwind 58 Chichester 176 Childrey 18 Churchill 197 Cimbert 117
Clavering 52 Coggeshall 158 Coins, British 90 -- Saxon 106 -- Roman 107 Colman
125 Constantiensis 205, 206 Corbet 34 Cornubiensis 91 Coryate 9 Cotton, Sir
Rob. 37, 210, 225 -- Mr. 31 Coventriensis 164 Couper 188 Currar 52
D.
Daniel 117, 193 Danish Histories 129 -- Monuments 135 Davies 72, 73 Dean 70
Denelaga 113 Denton 30 Derham 64 Devisiensis 157, 205, 206 D'Ewes 11, 59, 230
Diceto 5, 162 Doderidge 21, 28, 62 Dodesworth 55, 69 Dodwel 104 Dorobernensis
153 Dugdale 22, 26, 44, 49, 63 Dunelmensis 154
E
Eadmerus 151 Ealred 124, 150 Edda 137 Eden 211 Elbodus, or Elvodugus 88 Eliot
6 Erdeswick 26, 58 Essebiensis. 158 Ethelwerd 12^ Ethelwold 122 Etheridge 225
Etrick 32 Evesham 171 Exeter 64, 207
F.
Fabian 46, 192 Ferrers 15 Fitz-Stephens 45, 204 Fleetwood 221 Fleming 42, 65
Florilegus 171 Fly 159 Folioth 204 Fordham 208 French 70 Froissard 185 Fuller
14
G.
Ga^e 3 German Writers 128 Gibbons 66 Gervase Cantuar. 159 Gildas 73, 81
Gillingham 40 Gloucester 169 Godwin 225 Gower 214 Grafton 189 Grant 48 Gray 52,
92 Guidot 57 Guillim 23 Gurguntius 89
H.
Habbington 220 Hagustaldensis 201, 202 Hales 34, 207 Hall 189 Harding 189
Harrington 28 Harrison 8, 190 Hasilwood 173 Hayward 216, 228 Hemmingford 175,
212 Henfield 188 Henham 165 Herald's Office 21 Herbert 226 R. of Hexham 203
Higden 176 Hobert 212 Hoel Dha 85 Hoel 198 Holinshead 190 Holland 10, 231
Hollingworth 43 Hooker 32, 189 Horman 154 Horminger 5 Horn 34 Hoveden 160
Houghton 31 Howard 215 Howel 47, 192 Howes 192 Huntingdon 155
I.
James 35 Ickham 171 Ingulfus 148 Johnson 45, 57 Johnston 67 Jonas 140 Jones
31, 66 Jorden 57 Josseline 101, 103 Ira letur 133 Iscanus 207 Islandic
Histories 140 Junius 103, 112 Izaac 32
K.
Keep 49, 68 Kelron 67, 99 Kennet 25, 54 Keurden 41 Kilburn 39 King 27 Knollis
35 Knyghton 183
L.
Lambard 37, 112 Lanfranc 201 Langaurid 88 Langbain 227 Langden 188 Langton
188, 207 Lanquet 188 Laund 47 Lawrence 50 Lazimon 97 Leigh (Edw.) 14 Leigh
(Char.) 43 Leland 7, 37, 78, 98 Leicester 27 Lhuid Humph. 8, 62 -- Edw. 19, 62
Lilie 6, 189 Ling^^^s 184 Lister 18, 68 Livius 217 Lucian 26 Lyte 99
M.
Machell 64 Madan 41 Mailros 169 Malmesbury 152 Malory 92 Manlow 36 Manwaring
25 Mapez 203 Marianus 148 Marsham 198 Martyn 192 Mascal 216 Maurice 73 Mawornus
89 Mayow 57 Mercius 125 Merimuth 182 Merlyn 80 Merret 18 Mickleton 32 Middleton
74 Molmutius 81 Monmouth 94 Monson 230 Montacute 190 Moor 220, 221, 223 Morden
16 More 211 Morgan 61, 73
N.
Nash 50 Naunton 231 Nennius 84 Neot 121 Neubrigensis 157 Nevil 50 Niget 158 V.
Blackman Noel 103 Norden 29, 33, 36, 45 Northcot 31 Norwegian Histories 141
Notitiarum Liber 3
O.
Otterburn 52, 186 Ousley 33 Oxfordius 162, 205
P.
Packington 183, 213 Paris 165 Peregrinus 206 Perry 77 Petty 48 Philips 196
Philpot 12, 39 Pictaviensis 201 Pike 125 Platt 18 Plott 18, 54, 58 Prise 62,
96, 98 Pritchard 76 Prynne 209 Ptolemy 2
Q.
Quillivere 76
R.
Radburn 187 Raleigh 21, 202 Rastal 188 Ray 19, 20 Rhese 76 Risdon 31 Rishanger
173, 211 Roman Historians 103 -- Inscriptions 105 -- Coins 107 Rosse 64, 192
Rowzee 41 Runic Monuments 134
S.
Saemund 138 Saintemer 49 Saliphilax 89 Salisbery 76 Sammes 65, 101 Sandford
198 Saxo 142 Saxon Grammars 100 -- Dictionaries 102, 105 -- Coins 106 --
Charters 108 -- Laws 111 -- Chronicle 114 Scaldri 130 Seldom 22, 126 Seller 16
Serlo 151 Shafto 52 Shepeshed 169 Sherburn 187 Sheringham 127 Simpson 68
Skeleton 48 Skuish 194 Smith 21, 27 Snorro 138, 142 Somner 38, 40, 41, 105, 106,
112 Speed 13, 194 Spelman 13, 49, 106, 120 Spott 41 Stafford 183 Stanhop 70
Stow 46, 191 Stradling 76 Strangman 33 Sueno 142 Sulemannus 6
T.
Talbot 3, 67 Tanner 65 Tate 21, 51 Tailor 33, 36, 40 Temple 202 Thaliessin 81
Theodoric 141 Thoresby 69 Thorn 5 Thoroton 53 Tilburiensis 151, 157
Tinmuthensis 169 Todd 38 Tonstall 70 Townshend 230 Trevisa 5, 178 Triades 89
Trickingham 171 Trivet 174 Trussel 35, 194 Turner 229 Turpin 188 Twyne 8, 40
Tyrrel 198
V.
Vaughan 100 Vergil 185 Verstegan 125 Vincent 51 Vinesauf 207 Virunnius 97
Vitellius 11 Unton 229 Vowel. V. Hooker
W.
Walsingham 188, 219 Wantner 34 Ware 223 Waterhouse 48 Wats 124 Webb 27, 66
Webster 19 Weever 40, 45, 49 Wendover 167, 180 Westcot 32 Westminster 179
Wethamstede 189 Wheloc 106 White 191 Widdrington 68 Wigorniensis 149 Wikes 172
Williams 77 Willoughby 19, 20 Witty 70 Wolf 191 Wolstan 124 Wood 54 Woodward
19 Worcester 149 Worgresius 89 Wormius 144 Wright 54
ERRATA.
Page 11. l. 15. r. Brookmouth. p. 17. l. 18. r. artis. p. 61. l. 3. r. is for
in.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Universal English Dictionary,
Explaining the Sense and Etymology of all English Words; with Select Phrases,
showing the Force, Significancy, Construction, and different Acceptations of
every Word, the native and borrowed Graces, and all the remarkable
Peculiarities of the English Idiom. And in particular, containing an
Explanatory Account of all difficult and unusual Words, whether such as are
obsolete or not yet universally received: With a full and distinct
Interpretation of the Terms, Phrases and Expressions used in all Sciences and
Arts, as in Divinity, Logic, Metaphysic, Natural and Moral Philosophy,
Medicine, Anatomy, Pharmacy, Chemistry, Surgery, and the Natural History of
Animals, Plants and Minerals. The Terms of the Law, Statute, Common, Canon,
Civil, Feudal and Municipal. The Terms used by Mathematicians in Arithmetic,
Geometry, Algebra, the Doctrine of Conic Sections and other Curve Lines,
Trigonometry Plain and Spherical, Optics, Dioptrics, Catoptrics and
Perspective, Astronomy, Astrology, Dialing, Surveying, Gauging, Measuring, etc.
Music Theoretical and Practical, with the Names of the Instruments. The Terms
and Expressions used in the Arts of Grammar, Rhetoric and Poetry; Painting,
Sculpture, Printing; Architecture, Fortification and Gunnery; the Art of War,
at Land and at Sea; Naval Terms, the Names of the Parts and Furniture of a
Ship, and of all sorts of Arms and Military Engines. The proper Words and
Phrases of Merchants, Husbandmen, Gardiners, and most sorts of Tradesmen; and
the Terms that belong to Horsemanship, Hunting, Hawking, Fowling and Fishing.
The Names of Exotic Productions of Nature and Art mentioned in the Relations of
Travelers; with a particular Description of the Coins, Weights and Measures,
used both at home and abroad. The whole digested into an Alphabetical and the
most natural Order, the Derivatives and Compounds being ranked after the
Primitives; and enriched with many Thousands of Words that were never inserted
in any other Dictionary. Illustrated with Figures curiously Engraven on Copper
Plates, representing all the parts of a Human Body, of a Horse, Ship, Fort, and
several other things that cannot be well understood without such a Help to the
Imagination, particularly Geometrical Figures, etc. To which is added, a
Collection of the Words and Phrases that are peculiar to the several Counties
of England.

Some of the Parts done, and the whole revised by J. Mitchel M. D.

A larger and more particular Account of the Design and Method of this Great
and Useful Work, with a Specimen, will be speedily published.

THE ENGLISH Historical Library

PART II.

GIVING A CATALOGUE Of the most of our Ecclesiastical Historians, And some
Critical Reflections upon the chief of them. WITH A PREFACE; Correcting the
Errors, and supplying the Defects of the former PART.

By WILLIAM NICHOLSON, A. M. Archdeacon of Carlisle.

London, Printed for Abel Swall at the Unicorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of CARLISLE.
MY LORD,
THE first Part of this Work having taken Shelter under the Patronage of our
Metropolitan, this naturally flies to your Lordship: From whom I have good
Encouragement to hope for as kind a Protection. I have great Reason to be fond
of any Opportunity of making my grateful Resentments of your Lordship's Favors
known to the World; and I heartily wish this little Book may be looked upon as
any part of a suitable Return. I can honestly boast of your Lordship's
Approbation of what I have already published, and of your Encouragement to
proceed: Though (give me leave, My Lord, here to repeat it) those are Words which
sometimes appears in Dedications without any thing of the caressed Patrons
Knowledge or Allowance. I dare not presume to enlarge upon your Bounty and
Goodness to the Author; since most of the Instances I should give of 'em are so
many Testimonies of your Lordship's Desire to follow the Directions of your
Great Master, in bestowing your Benefits in Secret. May God be graciously
pleased to reward openly what you have thus done for this Church and Diocese,
as well as for,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obliged, Dutiful, and Grateful Servant, W.
Nicolson.

THE PREFACE.
WHen I was first persuaded to publish this Historical Library, I easily
foresaw some of the many Difficulties to which such an Adventure would expose
me. I knew the little I had to say would fall very far short of being a just
Treatise on so copious a Subject: And I was also sensible that, even in that
little, there was too much that would give Offense. This was the general Notion
I had of the Undertaking; which was so natural and obvious, that 'twas
impossible I should be mistaken. I confess, in Particulars, my Conjectures have
very much failed me. I have been cavill'd at, and buffeted by a couple of
Gentlemen, whom (above all Mankind) I thought I had obliged. One of these is
lately dead; and therefore my Answers to his Reflections (which, I think, were
never made very public) shall be buried with him. The other attacks me in the
Face of the Sun; and what he objects shall be particularly replied to, as soon
as that Author and his Book are out of the Clouds; Till when, it will be
sufficient to acquaint the Reader that I have here amended whatever he has
truly observed to be amiss in me. If these two Persons had known and consider's
that I have been fifteen Years (which Tacitus justly calls In vit. Agric.
grande mortalis aevi spatium) a Member of a Church and Diocese at a very great
distance from our Universities and Public Libraries, they would have
overlooked a few little Failures; and have given some grains of Allowance to a
Writer in my Circumstances. Not that I, who am so insolent as to censure every
body, either do or ought to beg Quarter of any. No. Let each Man that is
offended chastise me in his own way; provided his stripes make me wiser: For
it is indifferent to me whether my Informations come wrinkled or smooth; whether
I have 'em in plain English, or in rough (balderdash) Latin. I was as much
surpised with the different and more acceptable Entertainment which my former
Book met with amongst a great many eminently learned Men; who were pleased,
together with their kind Remarks on the Omissions and Mistakes in it, earnestly
to request the publishing of this Second Part. It Is to their unexpected
Goodness that I owe a great share of the following Emendations; which strongly
oblige and encourage me to proceed in the Attempt, hoping for the like
Assistance and support from them hereafter. I must also acknowledge my self
extremely indebted to the late accurate Edit^a Tho. Smith, S. T^P. Fol. Oxon,
1696.
Catalogue of the Manuscripts in Sir John Cotton's Library; which has
effectually cleared a great many of my Doubts, rectified my Mistakes, and
furnished me with a much better Light than I could have hoped for from any
other hand: So that, if it shall be the good Fortune of this Work to appear in
a second (and more entire) Edition, it may possibly prove more serviceable to
the English Reader than ever its Author had the Confidence to think it would.

The first Error, that is to be taken notice of, is of a very large Extent; and
wherein the Printer and I are joint Faulters. The Index, it is observed, is too
scanty: and the repeating of no less than Twenty Pages (from p. 99. to 108. and
again, from 185. to 194. inclusive) causes great Confusion in some of the
References. This latter Failure is remedied in the following Additions, by
marking the repeated Pages thus, 99. *, 100, *. etc. and the Reader is desired
to correct the first Index after the same manner.

Aelfred, King, 87. 100, 118. -- of Beverley, 147. 152. Aldhelm, 100. 101.
Annius of Viterbo, 106. Antoninus, 2. 17. Aras, 140. Archer, 27. Arthur, K. 98.
Ashmole, 22. 23, 25. Asserius, 14. 16, 87, 119, 121. Aubrey, 17. 65, 66, 102.
Bacon, 17. 192, *, 223. Baker, 196. 212. Baldoc, 173. Baldwine, 60. Bale, 8.
46, 213. Barcham, 195. 204, 205. Bartholine, 140. 146. Baston, 210. Beamont,
19. 56, 57. Bid, 4. 59, 102, 114, 117. Bernard, 24. 74. Blacket, 107. Blome,
15. 23. Bolton, 205. a Bosco, 82. Bodley, 23. Boethius, 205. Bourchier, 186.
229. Britannus, 79. Bodenham, 55. Brompton, 112. 121, 175. Brook, 11. 23.
Brutus, 81. Burnet, 56. 227, Burton, 3. 43, 44, 53, 55, 195. Caedmon, 104.
Caesar, 92. 103. Caius, 50. 56, 89. Cambrensis, 4. 60, 125, 164, 205, 206, 208.
Combden, 8. 9, 10, 15, 21, 29, 49, 93, 105, 108, 117, 192, *, 231. Cantelupus,
189. Caradocus, 82. 97. Carew, 29. 195, 218. Carry, 212. Caxton, 5. 118, 178,
190. Chetwind, 44, 58. Childrey, 17. 18. Coggeshal, 165. Constantiensis, 206.
208. Cornubiensis, 97. Coryate, 9. 57. Cotton, Sir Rob. 21. 37, 44, 210, 225.
-- Sir John, 21. 23, 33. -- Sir Tho. 35. -- Mr. 31. Couper, Cowper, 188. *.
Cheek, 227. Chiswel, 29. (...) Clarendon, 171. 181, 182. Craig, 151. 190, *.
Crew, 27. S. Cuthbert, 102. Darcy, 231. Daniel, 35. 117, 193, *. Danish,
Histories, 129. 142. -- Monuments, 134. 135. 144. Davies, 77. 96. Devisiensis,
157. 205, 206, 208. Digby, 202. Doderidge, 21, 28, 29, 62. Dodesworth, 16. 55,
59, 69. Dadwel, 104. 196. Doilie, 50. Dugdale, 15. 16, 22, 26, 44, 49, 53, 63.
23. 24, 105. Ealred, 124. 154, 155. Edda, 137. 138, 139. Essebiensis, 158. 165.
Ethelwerd, 122, etc. Ewes, 11. 59, 171. S. D' Ewes. Fabian, 46. 111, 192.
Fairfax, 68. Fell, 15. 101, 104, 218. Florilegus, 171. 180. Fox, 118. Fresne,
106. Fuller, 11. 12, 14, 27, 31, 32, 50, 183, 192, *, 222, 231. Gale, 16, etc.
2. 3, 29, 83, 121, 163, 173, 177, 207, 212. Gibson, 23. 24, 39, 49, 114, 116.
Gildas, 73. 81, etc. 85. 87. 16. Grafton, 189. *. Gray, 52. 92, 98. Glover, 15.
Hall, 189. *. Hanson, 15. Harding, 125. 189. Harley, 36. Harpesfield, 225.
Harrison, 8. 190, *. Hatton, 23. Hemmingford, 18. 176, 212. Herald 's Office,
21, 23. R. of Hexham. 203. 204. Heylin, 13. Higden, 176. 184. Hickes, 24. 26,
100, 101, 104. Hobbes, 31. Holinshead, 32. 190, *. Hooker, 32. 191, *. Howard,
14. 215. Howes, 192. *, 215. Huntingdon, 120. 155. Hypercritica, 12. James, 22.
35. Jessop, 20. Ingulfus, 24. 148. Johnson, 20. 45, 57. Jonas, 133. 140, 142,
142. Josseline, 8. 12, 83, 101, 103, 114. Iscanus, 206. 207. Junius, 23. 101,
103, 104, 111. 112. Kelton, 61. 67, 99. Kennet, 35. 39, 25, 54, 117. Keurden,
41. 42. Kilburn, 37. 39. Kniveton, 15. Lambard, 37. 100, 111, 112, 117, 127,
168. Lanquet, 188. *. Laud, 23. 114. Lawson, 20. Leland, 7. 8, 37, 72, 77, 78,
83, 90, 91, 98, 122, 124, 164, 207. Leicester, 27, 28. Lhuid, 8. 20, 62, 75,
80, 97, 186, 186, *. Lhwyd, 92. 96. Lilie, 6. 189, *. Lister, 18. 20, 68.
Mackenzy, 155. Malmesbury, 123. 124, 152, 177. Malory, 98. Manwaring, 28.
Marianus, 122. 148, 149, 150. Marshal, 101. 102, 127. Martia, 87. Martyn, 194.
*. Medals, 90. Middleton, 78. Milton, 9. Molmutius, 81. 87. Monmouth, 85. 94,
152, 158, 164. More, 189. 211. Morgan, 61. 77. Nash, 50. 51. Nennius, 16, 84,
85, 88, 95. Neubrigensis, 24. 98, 157. Niger, 158. 165. Norden, 29. 33. 36, 39,
45. Northcot, 31. 32. Nowel, 111. Olaus Magnus, 139. Oldenburg, 101.
Oxoniensis, 208. Paris, 14. 24, 165, 180. Parker, 14. 119. 188. Philpot, 12.
37, 39. Pettus, 94. Pistorius, 149. Pits, 83. Plot, 18. 20, 45, 53, 54, 58, 93.
Powel, 60. 86, 88, 96, 97, 158. Ptolemy, 2. 17. Rastal, 188. *. Reiner, 38.
Resenius, 138. Rhese, 76. 88. Risdon, 31. 32. Rishanger, 166. 173, 211. Ross,
64. 183, 192. Soemund, 137. 138. Saint George, 16. Sammes, 65. 101. Samothes,
81. Sanderson, 53. Savil, 15. 105, 123, 155, 160, 185, *. Saxo, 131. 139, 142,
143. Saxton; 16. Seldom, 8. 15, 22, 23, 59, 103, 126, 151, 155, 163, 199.
Sheringham, 13. 87, 96, 126, 127. Simpson, 70. Sleidan, 186. Somner, 37. 38,
40, 41, 105, 106, 108, 101, 103, 104, 112, 116, 117, 126, 127. Speed, 13. 16,
194, *. Spelman, 13. 16, 49, 50, 86, 106, 105, 108, 112, 120, 121, 124, 129,
160. Stephens, 45. Stillingfleet, 80. 99. Stow, 46. 47, 191, *, 215. Sueno,
142, 143. Surita, 17. Sylvius, 81. Tailor, 33. 36, 40, 79, 202. Temple, 9. 99,
147, 202. Tenison, 24. Thynne, 190, *. Thoresby, 69. 199. Tilburiensis, 157.
164. Tinmuthensis, 178. Todd, 30. Towneshend, 230. 231. Trussel, 35. 194, *.
Turner, 33. 229. Turpin, 188. *. Twisden, 15. 106. 163. Twyne, 8. 9, 40.
Virgil, 82. 98, 185, *. Vincent, 16. 23, 51. Vinesauf, 207, 208. Vndallensis,
124. Vossius, 221. Usher, 15. 82, 83, 97, 100, 117, 199. Walsingham, 14. 119,
188, 219, 231. Wats, 106. 124. Waverley, 18. Westcot, 31. 32. Westminster, 14,
116. 167, 179. Wharton, 12. 19, etc. 40, 61, 103, 110, 116, 163, 171, 172, 199,
205. Wheloc, 21, 106, 114, 116. White, 193. *. Whitgift, 191. *. Wikes, 118.
172. Williams, 73. 77. Wolf, 191. *. Wood, 54. 57, 68, 102. Woolsey, 194.
Worcester, 14. 116, 120, 149. Wormius, 129. 135, 139, 142, 144. Wyrley, 23.
It Is to be noted, that in this additional Index References are not only made
to the Book it self, but also to the Preface, which is supposed to be Paged
from the Title Page. The other Errors and Defects are thus to be corrected and
supplied.

P. 2. l. 13. Reckoning: Nor ought any thing that has been transcribed from
them by Strabo or Pomponius Mela, by Solinius or Pleny, to carry any higher
Value.

P. 4. l. 26. Most of them. I, Leland, De Script. Brit. Vide and J. Pits, p.
266.
says he, once saw in the Library at St. Paul's, a Description of England
written in the Saxon Tongue by Coleman; who (if he be the the same Man with
Colemannus, Monk of Worcester, the Writer of St. Wulstan's Life) may justly
challenge a Precedence. Otherwise, Gyraldus, etc.

P. 13. l. 6. This Nature. With this fancyful Treatise let me join Mich.
Drayton's Poly-Olbion; which affords a much truer Account of this Kingdom, and
the Dominion of Wales, than could well be expected from the Pen of a Poet. The
first Fol. Land. 1612.
eighteen of these Songs had the Honor to be published with Mr. Selden's
Notes; the other Fol. ib. 1622.
twelve being hardly capable of such a respect.

P. 15. l. 11. and Speed. Mr. Ogilby designed a most Noble Description of
England in Three Volumes; the first whereof (which only is Fol. Land. 1675.
published) contains an Ichnographical and Historical Account of all our great
Roads, on 100 large Copper Cuts. The second was to have given us the like View
of our Cities; and the third should have afforded us a Topographical
Description of the whole Kingdom.

P. 16. l. 7. Library. Sir John Marsham, Junior (lately deceased) took good
Pains in writing an Historical List of all the Buroughs in England, which send
Members to the Parliament. This Work was just finished upon the Death of its
Author; and is now (ready for the Press, in the hands of his Brother Sir Robert
Marsham.

P. 18. l. 8. Performance. There are two small Tracts about our English
Mastiffs, and other extraordinary Animals (as well as Plants) written by Dr.
Caius; which are printed with his Treatise 120. Land. 1570.
de Libris propriis.

P. 25. l. 13. before mentioned: In which Work he told us he designed a more
complete History of these, and that he had made Collections in order to it.
These Collections are now in his Musaeum at Oxford; where there are also very
considerable Materials (of his own gathering) for a General History of
Berkshire.

P. 26. l. 5. Kingdom. A Catalogue of the indigenous Plants of Cambridgeshire
was long since 80. Land. 1660.
published by the learned Mr. Ray; augmented afterward by Mr. Stone-street and
Mr. Dent. There is also a Manuscript-History of this County, by Mr. Laire of
Shephred near Royston; whose Son intends to deposite it in some of the
College-Libraries at Cambridge.

P. 31. l. 13. Jones. There Is a MS. in the Musaeum at Oxford, which bears the
Title of Phil. Kynder's Natural History of Derbyshire: But it is only (as the
Author himself there calls it) a short Prolusion to an intended future History,
and has little in it worth the consulting or looking after.

P. 34. l. 12. Wantner; who, meeting with those Discouragements that were
suitable to the Man's busy meddling in things beyond his Sphere, was content to
enjoy, etc. Nor is Corbet's Book worth the mentioning.

P. 37. l. 4. County. But the late learned Publisher of Sir Robert's T. Smith,
vit D. R. Cott. p. 23. vid. and Tiber. E. VIII. 81.
Life, says, it is only probable (from the great store of Collections that he
had made out of Doomsday, etc. to that purpose) that he had projected such an
History. He does not believe that he ever finished any thing of that Nature.

P. 50. l. 19. Spelman; and was long since printed with the first Edition of
his Treatise 40. Land. 1575.
de Furoribus Norfolciensium Ketto Duce. Sir Symonds D Ewes See the Preface to
his Journal, etc.
thought of making a Survey of Norfolk out of Original Deeds; but we know not
what Advances he had made in it.

P. 51. l. 9. Mr. Peter le Neve, one of the Pursuivants at Arms, is now Hist.
Bibl. Cott. p. 42.
preparing an accurate Description and History of this County; which we hope to
see published ere long. Ibid. l. 10. Augustine Vincent.

P. 52. l. 20. For the Anonymous Author, etc. Read, Ralph Gardener in his
England's Grievances, etc. Ibid. In the Notes (d) 40. Land. 1655.

P. 57. l. 1. Bathoniensibus; as did also Fol. Colon. 1562.
Dr. William Turner, a famous Physician in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign.

P. 59. l. 12. Oxford. A kind Friend of mine could not meet with them there:
But he tells me (what is much better worth the hearing) that Dr. Battely, the
present Archdeacon of Canterbury, has made a good Progress in the History of
the Town and Abbey of St. Edmondsbury. I wish this Discovery of it may be a
means to hasten its publishing.

P. 68. l. 21. The late Recorder of Heddon, Mr. Christopher Hildyard; which is
now enlarging by Mr. Forr, a Gentleman of good Industry and Abilities suitable
to the Work.

P. 79. l. ult. Historical Ballads. Be that Matter as it will, we ought here to
observe that Sam. Beaulanius or Britannus was (as himself owns) Scholar to
Beaulanus Presbyter, who was the Genealogist; and that neither of 'em lived in
the beginning (or perhaps any part) of the Seventh Century. Britannus as we
shall see anon) did certainly write Notes upon Nennius; and therefore must have
flourished after him. It Is likewise very improbable that he never meddled with
any of the Saxon Genealogies: since, in one of those Notes, he says expressly
Vid. Nenn. Edit. Gal. p. 115.
Cum inutiles Magistro meo, id est, Beaulario (it should be Beaulano)
Presbytero, visae sunt Genealogiae Saxonum and aliarum Genealogiae Gentium,
nolui ea scribere, etc.

P. 81. l. 2. or nothing. The most learned of the British Antiquaries agree,
that this Myrdhyn ap Morvryn (called from the Country wherein he lived
Caledonius, and Sylvestris, from his Humor of leading a retired Life in the
Woods) wrote a Poem called Avalleneu, or the Apple Trees, to his Lord
Gwendholen ap Keidio; who was slain in the Battle of Arderith, in the Year 577.
Some Fragments of this Poem were found at Hengwrt in Meiriondyshire, the last
Summer, by Mr. Lhwyd; who very probably conjectures that from hence he had the
Surname of Avalonius. If so; there is a happy Discovery made of one of the many
foolish Impostures of the old Monks of Glassenbury: who, to secure this famous
Prophet to themselves, have made King Arthur's Tomb, and their own Monastery to
stand in Insula Avallonia.

P. 82. In the Notes, (d) 80. Land. 1525. Basil. 1541. 120. Land. 1568. Inter
Orthodoxographa Patrum, etc. and Angl. 120. Land. 1638.

P. 84. l. penult. Mervini Regis. Though here also there seems to be some
Mistake: For the first Mervin Vide Success RR. Walliae praefix. Angl. Sacr.
Tom. II.
died in the Year, 843. and the second did not begin to reign till 885.. It Is
therefore most probable that the Words ought to be read. Anno 828. Anno 40.
Mervini Regis.

P. 85. l. 10. to Gildas. John Leland mentions an ancient Copy of this History,
which (he says) he borrowed from his Friend Thomas Solme Secretary for the
French Tongue to King Henry the Eighth; in the Margin whereof were the
Additions of Sam. Beaulanius, or Britannus. He has Collect. MSS. Vol. 2. p. 46.
transcribed several of these Marginal Annotations; which (it appears) were
afterward inserted in the Body of the History, and are so published by Dr.
Gale. The Doctor indeed, in his Notes, mentions Samuel as the Scholiast upon
his Bennet Copy: but Leland has a great many other things, as Excerpta out of
Beulanius, which are not there observed to be only in the Scholion. There is
also in Bodley's Library a MS. of this Nennius, which cannot be less than 500
Years old; wherein the Prefaces, and all those Interpolations, which are by
Leland said to be this Samuel's, are wanting.

P. 88. l. 11. His Reign. It appears indeed from the Preface of this Hoel's
Laws (in most of the Latin and Bibl. Cott. Caligula, A. 3. Vitellius, E. 11.
Titus, D. 2. 9. Cleopatra, B. 5.
Welsh Copies) that Blegorede, or Blegwrt, was one of the Commissioners
appointed to draw up that Code or Abstract; and it is also probable, seeing he
was the only Ecclesiastic amongst them, that he penned it: But, whether he did
it in the Latin, or British Tongue, is wholly uncertain.

Ibid. l. 17. Augusto 1600. Sir William Dugdale Orig. Jurid. p. 54.
reckons up seven Manuscript Collections of the old British Laws, besides those
we have aloeady mentioned: As, 1. Kyfnerth ap Morgan. 2. Gronu vab Moreddig. 3.
Lhyfr hen y tuy Gwyn. 4. Gwair mab Ruon. 5. Lhyfr Prawf. 6. Prawfyneit; a
Collection (he says) out of the four first. 7. Lhyfr Kyghawssed. The third of
these is undoubtedly the same with Howel's Dha's; as will easily appear from
the Title of those Laws. All the rest (whereof the fifth and sixth seem to be
the same) are now at Hengwrt; except only the fourth, which is supposed to be
(in the hands of Sir William Williams) amongst Mr. Maurice's MSS. There we are
likewise to enquire for that eminent Antiquary's Dedhf-grawn, or Thesaurus
Juridicus; wherein are the various Readings of above thirty ancient Copies of
the British Laws. To which we may possibly add the Liber Cardiffe; being a
Treatise upon the ancient Customs of Wales, in the Welsh Language.

P. 96. l. 6. Sheringham; who is always very loath (if it, etc.

P. 99. l. ult. same Subject. J. Bale Cent. 8. cap. 42.
makes Will. Caxton write King Arthur 's History in no less than One and twenty
several Books; which, if they could have been found, might have saved Rich.
Robinson the trouble of translating Leland 's Assertio into Land. 1582.
English.

P. 100. l. ult. Williams. The forementioned learned Primate made also some
choice Collections, in his Retirement at St. Donate 's, relating to the British
Antiquities; which were afterward in the hands See his Life of A. B. Ilsher,
p. 60.
of Dr. Parr, his Grace's Chaplain: And, from the like Helps in the Library at
Llantarnam, Mr. Percie Enderby collected his Fol. Land. 1661.
Cambria Triumphans, or, Ancient and Modern, British and Welsh Histories from
Brute to Charles the First. Nic. Allen's Britanneis (ten Books whereof are now
in MS. in Bodley's Library) comes no lower than the Conquest.

P. 107. l. 4. from the time of Claudius to that of Valentinian (about five
hundred [he should say four hundred] years) the, etc.

P. 104. *. l. 20. Bodley 's Library: But the Transcript of it (in eleven
Volumes, at the Charge of the late pious Bishop Fell) is not in the Musaeum
Ashmoleanum, as Catalog. Libb. Sept. p.
Dr. Hickes was informed.

P. 111. l. 20. Laur. Nowel. P. 121. l. 19. the matter: But I do know that
there was a short Life of this great King 8o. Land. 1634.
published by R. Powel, a Lawyer; who has been at no contemptible Pains to make
up a Parallel betwixt Aelfred and Charles the First.

P. 128. l. 12. put together. A short Chronicle of our English-Saxon Kings,
from Hengist to the end of the Heptarchy, was written in Latin by 8o. Land.
1634,
Dan. Langhorn; 8o. Land. 1679.
whose chief Authors are those published by Sir Hen. Savil, and Sir Roger
Twisden. He had 8o. Land. 1673.
formerly given us the Antiquities of this Island, previous to the Arrival of
the Saxons; wherein (amongst other Remains of those dark Times) we have a
Catalogue of the Pictish King. It Is said that the Continuation of this History
is See Mr. Bohun's Additions to D. Whear, p. 134.
much desired by Learned Men: And it is pity but the Author, if yet living,
should be prevailed with to gratify them.

P. 139. l. 15. Wormius 's use;

P. 140. l. 14. own Nation. Some part of this fell happily into the hands of
(Tho. Bartholine 's Friend) the Bishop of Scalholt; who took care to have it
printed, A. D. 1689.

P. 152. l. 23. Galfredi. But in this I dare not be positive. Leland saw this
Author's entire History; which ended, Anno 29 Hen. 1. He has made Collections
out of it: wherein (as in some other Passages cited by R. Higden) there are
several things not found in Jeoffrey. Which (considering withal that Aelfred
may probably be reckoned as early a Writer as himself) is one of the most
cogent Arguments, as far as I know, to prove that this Monmouth was not the
first Author of the whole British Story.

P. 159. l. 17. Judgment enough. So much Encouragement we have to look after
the whole, that we are sure Leland had the perusal of an entire Copy; the
Prologue whereof he has Collect. MS. Vol. 1. p. 105.
transcribed, as likewise many following Passages relating to the Affairs of
the Britains and Saxons.

Ibid. l. ult. Blockhead. It Is to be feared we shall hardly meet with this
History, till we find the Historian himself (which is more than either Bishop
Godwine, or Mr. Wharton could do) amongst the Bishops of Durham.

P. 161. l. 3. temporum Indices. And indeed Leland himself was afterward of
the like Opinion: For (in his Book MS. in Bibl. Bodl. p. 183.
de Scriptoribus) he says nothing of his being a Plagiary, but gives him this
great Character -- Mortuo Henrico [Rege sc. ejus nominis secundo] omne studium
suum ad Historiam scribendam contulit; in quo Negotio si diligentiam, si
Antiquitatis cognitionem, si sanctam fidem spectes, non modo quotquot seculis
rudibus quidem praecesserunt Scriptores, verum etiam seipsum superavit.

P. 163. l. 3. Library. This British Chronicle is probably the same that is
printed by Inter XV. Script. P. 553.
Dr. Gale; and seems to be wholly transcribed out of the Works of a former
Author, whom he calls Brom. This may be the same with Jo. Bromius or Bramus,
quoted sometimes by Dr. Caius and Holinshead's Hist. Vol. 2. p. 1589.
Franc. Thynne; but must be different from Jo. Bramis the Friar of Gorleston
(with whom he is confounded by Bale and Pits) because the Friar did not
flourish till 1440. and the Historian must live before Ralph de Diceto, and was
moreover (as Thynne observes) a Monk of Thetford.

P. 164. l. 19. the Fourth. Here likewise notice ought to be taken of Joh.
Wallingford's Chronicle, published by XV. Script. p. 525.
Dr. Gale; if the Abbot of St. Albans of that name (who dy'ds in the Year
1214.) was, as the learned Editor guesses, the Author of it. But he seems to be
a different Person from the Historian; who carries down his Work forty years
after the Abbot's Death. The Doctor indeed makes R. Wendover Author of the
latter Part of that History: But if he had looked into the next Treatise to
this Chronicle (in the Cottonian MS. from whence he had it) he would have met
with another John Wallingford, who was made Monk of St. Alban's in the Year
1231. and so might bring down the History till 1258. without the Assistance of
Wendover.

P. 172. l. 15. flourished. Or, it may be, the Bibl. Cott. Julius, A. 1.
Chronicle that was written by John de Taxston a Monk of Bury, which ends at
the Reign of Edw. 3. is the same thing with these Annals. John de Oxenedes (a
Monk of Hulm, mentioned by Angl. Sac. Vol 1. p. 405. 410.
Mr. Wharton) lived about the same time.

P. 175. l. 7. Years more. It Is probable the Chronicle of Joh. Londinensis (who
lived J. Pits, p. 878.
about the same time) is still extant: For it is quoted in Lambard's Preface to
his Archaionomia, and among R. James's Collections there are several things
extracted out of it.

P. 184. l. 21. To these we may probably add the Author of the MS. Bibl. Cott.
Galb^^, E. 7.
Eulogium; who begins his Work at Bru^e, and ends at the Year 1367. The
beginning of the Book ('it is likely) may be Nennius's: but the rest seems to
have been penned by a Monk of Canterbury, by his calling St. Thomas Becket his
Patron.

P. 194. l. 23. the Year 1530.

P. 185. *. l. 15. their Country. Bale Par. a. p. 103.
reports that Sir Brian Tuke wrote a Chronicle, purposely to vindicate the
Honor of the English Nation, against those Aspersions which Virgil had cast
upon it in this History.

P. 190. *. l. 2. and others. To these we may add two Poetical Historians of
this Age; Chr. Ocland, who wrote 12o. Land. 1582.
Anglorum praelia in Latin Verse; and Will. Warner (an English Rhimer) Author
of the Romantic Story of 4o. Land. 1606.
Albion's England in twelve Books, containing the Occurrences of our Land from
Noah to the 39th of Queen Elizabeth.

P. 194. *. l. 19. Queen Elizabeth. Cotemporaries with these were John Clapham,
Edward Ayscue and Will. Slatyer; the first whereof left us the 4o. Land. 1606.
History of Great Britain; the second that of the 4o. Land. 1607.
Wars, Treaties and Marriages, with Scotland; and the third his Fol. Land. 1621.
Palae-Albion, in ten Books of Latin and English Verse.

P. 198. l. 9. Arms, etc. 3. Dr. R. Brady's Complete Fol. Land. 1685.
History of England; wherein he endeavors to prove (and no Man ever did it
more effectually) that all our adored Liberties are derived from the Crown, and
owing to the Concessions of our Princes. He shows that the Normans themselves
(weary of the Tenure of Knight Service, and other Drudgeries of the Feudal Law)
raised all our old Civil Commotions in England: And that no ancient Rights and
Properties of the Subject were any part of the true Controversy. He very well
illustrates many dark Passages in our English-Saxon Laws; by comparing them
with those of the old Germans, Francs, Lombards, etc. His Preface to the Norman
History largely accounts for the Customs of that People; and shows what sort of
Government and Laws they brought with them into this Kingdom. Afterward we
have a good view of the seven first Reigns after the Conquest. His chief Author
is M. Paris, well epitomized; and confirmed and enlarged with authentic
Evidence from Records, a great many whereof are printed (at large) in his
Appendix. He has also published an Introduction to the English History; which
(treating chiefly of Matters of Law and Government) shall be considered
elsewhere. 4. Let me add, etc.

P. 202. l. 17. great Man. Sir John Hayward's Land. 1623.
History of the three Norman Kings was undertaken at the Request of Prince.
Henry, who hardly lived to read it, and not to requite the Author's Pains. He
calls his Lives of these Monarchs In Epist. Ded.
Descriptions rather than Histories: And so indeed they are; being only short
Portraictures of 'em, in such a witty and humor some Style and Method, as
might better serve to divert the young Prince than instruct him. I shall give
the Reader but one Instance of the Care he took of the Chronological part of
his Story. He P. 216. and 223.
says, Hen. 1. was crowned the second of August; which is the same day whereon
(he acknowledges) King William II. was slain, a little before Sunset, in the
New-Forest. A small Fragment of the Conqueror's History is among Cambden's
Anglica, Normannica, etc. and some Particulars relating to the Reigns of this,
and the two following Kings, may be picked out of Guil. Gemeticensis, and
others published by the learned Fol. Paris. 1619.
And. du Chesne. But above all, etc.

P. 203. l. 21. the second. There Is an old English History (in Saxon Letters)
of the Transactions of some few years of his Reign, after 1123, in Tiberius, B.
4.
Sir John Cotton's Library.

P. 204. l. 3. voluminous Author. In Du Chesne's Collection there is a pretty
large Life of this King; whose Author, though Anonymous, seems to have
flourished in the latter end of this, or the beginning of the next Reign: And
Pits assures us that Ralph de Diceto's Annals of King Stephen are in the
Library at Bennet-College.

P. 205. l. 18. Benedictus; whose Book (we are Bibl. Cott. Julius, A. 11.
since told) is full of notable and politic Remarks, and is much followed by
Hoveden and Brompton. Pet. Blesensis Vid. P. Bles. Epist. 14.
certainly wrote his Life; though we know not what is become of it. Tho. May (the
Translator of Lucan) has given us seven 12o. Land. 1633.
Books, in English Poetry, on this Subject: to which is annexed his Character
in Prose, with a short Survey of the Changes in his Reign, and a comparative
Description of his two Sons, Henry and Richard.

P. 207. l. 5. Antiocheis.

P. 208. l. 8. But perhaps he is mistaken in that Conjecture; since Rich.
Devisiensis was certainly a Monk of Winchester. However, to make up the Number,
the Reader is to know that an old printed 4o. Land. 1528.
Life of this Ceur du Lion, is in English Meeter; though I cannot inform him who
was its Author.

P. 211. l. 15. several Parts. Peter de Langetoft, who drew up an Epitome of
our Bibl. Cott. Julius, A. 5.
Chronicles in old French Rhimes, bestows one whole Book upon Edward the First.

Ibid. l. 21, 1320. The Annals of the greatest and best part of his Reign (from
1307. to 1323.) were digested by Ibid. Claudius, D. 6.
John de Frokelow a Monk; as the History of his Treaty of Peace, in the
Sixteenth Year of his Reign, with Robert King of Scots, was by Henry de
Blaneford. Walter de Heminford's Life of Edw. II. is said to have been in the
Library of Bennet-College; which we are not so sure of as that his Life of Edw.
III. is in that of Magdalene-College in Oxford, as well as in Nero, D. 2.
Sir John Cotton's at Westminster.

P. 212. l. 22. Deleantur I doubt whether, etc. usque ad Old Manuscript
Historians, p. 213. l. 7. inclusive.

P. 214. l. 11. a Friend. R. James, in some Volume of his MS. Collections,
reports that Rob. Avesbury, (Registrary of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Court
wrote Mirabilia gesta R. Edwardi III. post Conquestum, procerumque suorum,
tractis primitus quibusdam gestis de tempore Patris sui D. Edv. II. quae in
regnis Angliae, Scotioe, and Franciae, and in Aquitania and Britannia, non
humana sed Dei potentia contigerunt. Tho. May (the Poet) has likewise 8o. Land.
1637.
some English Raptures upon this King 's Life: Nor ought I to forget that Sir
John Froissard is said to have written two Books on that of Queen Philippa, the
first glorious Patroness of Queen's College in Oxford. Above all; Mr. Joshua
Barnes has diligently collected whatever was to be had, far and near, upon the
several Passages of this Hist. of Edw. III. Fol. Cantab. 1688.
great King's Reign. His Quotations are many; and (generally) his Authors are
as well chosen as such a Multitude can be supposed to have been. His Inferences
are not always like a Statesman; and sometimes his Digressions are tedious. His
deriving of the famous Institution of the Garter from the P. 294. 295.
Phaenicians is extremely obliging to good Master Sammes: But came too late, it
seems, to Mr. Ashmole's Knowledge; or otherwise would have bid fair for a
choice Post of Honor in his Elaborate Book. In short, this industrious Author
seems to have hastened his Work too much to the Press, before he had provided
an Index, and some other Accoutrements, which might have made it more
serviceable to his Readers.

P. 215. l. 6. untimely Death. Deleantur, which (it may be) contains the whole
Chronicle. Et add, Richard Maidstone (a learned Carmelite) wrote also in Latin
Verse MS. in Bibl. Bodl.
Concordiam inter Ricardum II. and Cives Lond^nenses: And Henry Knighton's
History of his Deposition is among the December Scriptores, as another short
History of his Reign (by an anonymous Monk of Evesham) it in the Tiberius, c.
9. Claudius, B. 9.
Co^tonian Library. Amongst later Pamphlets on this Subject, the 120. 1654.
Idol of Clowns (or the Insurrection of Wat Tyler, as a Parallel with some
Occurrences in our late Days of Rebellion) may balance the 40. Land. 1689.
Exact Ac-Account of the Articles and Proceedings, etc.

P. 216. 1. 5. those Reigns. There is an old French MS. in Verse, which treats
of the Affairs of this Reign; the Title whereof, in a hand more modern than the
Book it self, is this: Histoire du Roy D' Angleterre Richard, traictant
particulierement la Rebellion des sus Subjects, and prinse de sa person, etc.
Composee par un gentilhomme Francois de Marque, qui fut a la suite du dict Roy,
avecque permission du Roy de France. At the end, in a hand as old as that of
the Book, is written: Ce livre de la prinse du Roy Richart d' Angleterre est a
Monseigneur Charles Damon Conte du Maine and de Mortaing, and Gouverneur de
Languedoc. This was lately in the Possession of the learned Dr. Hickes; who
(finding many Passages in it not touched on by other Writers, and others
differently related) had once Thoughts of publishing it, with a Translation and
Notes of his own: But, being afterward acquainted that Dr. Brady had written
the Life of this King; and knowing that nothing could escape the Diligence of
that Historian, he lay those Thoughts aside. Here (rather than it should be
wholly forgotten) let me put the Reader in mind of the elegant History of our
old Civil Wars; written in Italian by Sir Francis Biondi (of the Bedchamber to
King Charles the First) and translated into In 2. Vol. Fol. Land. 1641. 1646.
English by the Earl of Monmouth.

Ibid. l. ult. too Dramatical. This Piece is certainly the least liable to that
Censure of any this Author ever wrote; being the most elaborate of all his
Works, and what looks like a part of what he designed for a just History. But
the little that is Land. 1599.
published should rather be entitled the Reign of Richard the Second; since it
reaches no farther than his Death, and the Settlement of his Successor in the
Throne.

P. 218. l. 14. their hands. There Is a very fair Ms. in Bodley's Library,
entitled a Translation of Titus Livius 's Life of K. Hen. V. dedicated to Hen.
VIII. But it is more truly a History of that Prince's Life, compiled out of a
French Book called Enquerrant (which, of all the French Chronicles, is said to
treat most copiously of the Wars betwixt England and France) and out of Titus
Livius: To which Book (says the Author or Translator in the Prologue) I have
added diverse Sayings of the English Chronicles, and to the same Matter also
diverse other Opinions that I have read of the Report of a certain Honorable
and Ancient Person -- and that is the Honorable Earl of Ormond. There are
likewise two several Lives of this King in Julius, E. 4. Tiberius, B. 6.
Claudius, A 8. E. 4.
Cotton's Libary; whereof the one was written by Tho. Elmham (Prior of Lenton)
and the other by an Anonymous Author. Fran. Thynne (in the Conclusion of
Holinshead's Chronicle) mentions one by Roger Wall, a Herald.

P. 220. l. 10. Original. Dr. John Herd was employed by the great Lord Burleigh
to write the History of England, during the Reigns of Edw. IV. V. Rich. III.
and Henry VII. which he did in Latin Verse, and his Book is still extant in
several hands.

P. 222. l. ult. his Client. They that are dissatisfyd with any Passages in
this Book, may have recourse to a Copy Bibl. Cott. Tiberius, E. 10.
corrected and amended in every Page.

P. 223. l. 7. Throne. He is mightily extolled by Bern. Andreas of Toulouse,
his Poet Laureat and Historiographer; who has written Jbid. Julius, A. 3. 4. B.
12. Domitianus. 18, 15.
two good Volumes on the most eminent Transactions of his Reign.

P. 228. l. 20. do it. A slender historical Account of Wiat's Rebellion was
published by one 120. Land. 1555.
John Proctor Schoolmaster of Tunbridge; who (for any thing I have yet
learned) must be looked upon as the only particular Historian of this Reign.

P. 232. l. 5. good value. There are several other Treatises which will be
useful in furnishing out a complete View of her long and prosperous Reign; As,
1. Eliza, 80. 1631.
or the Life and Troubles of Queen Elizabeth from her Cradle to her Crown, by
Tho. Heywood. 2. Elizabetha, 120. Land. 1582.
or a Panegyric on the most considerable Occurrences of her Reign, in Latin,
Verse, by Chr. Ocland. 3. The Felicity of her Time, 120. 1651.
by Sir Francis Bacon. 4. Sir Dudley Digge's Complete Fol. 1655.
Ambassador; containing all the Letters, Instructions, Memoirs, etc. relating
to the French Match with that Queen. 5. Some good Materials may be had from the
Itinerary of F. Moryson; Secretary to the Lord Montjoy, General and Governor
of Ireland. They are given us in that useful Method, which is now generally
allowed to be the most pleasing and instructive; Fol. 1617.
giving us at large all those Original Evidences, whereby the Author justifies
his Narrative. 6. Sir John Hayward In Epist. Ded. ad Hist. RRR. Norman.
acquaints us likewise that he presented Prince Henry with some Years of this
Queen's Reign, drawn at length and in full proportion: But these, I think, were
never published. 7. Dr. Barth. Clerk, Dean of the Arches, was See his Pref. to
Castilion de Aulico.
put upon the writing of her History by my Lord Buckhurst; and he seems to have
been every way fit for the Undertaking: But, whether he might not afterward be
prevented by Death, or Mr. Camden's engaging in the same Design, I know not.

These are the chief of those Errors and Defects that have either been remarked
by others, or hitherto observed by my self, in the former part. There are
several others, of lesser Note, which an intelligent Reader will easily
correct, without my Directions: As (particularly) the frequent References to
some following Chapters, which are here digested in a different manner than was
at first projected. They that have any Acquaintance with the Drudgery of
preparing Books for the Public View, know very well how apt an Undertaking of
this kind is to grow upon the Author's hand; and how little it is we see of our
Work, when we first begin to engage in it. With these I shall need no Apology,
and the rest must excuse me, if I make none. I am now in haste: And can only
stay to tell them that I have as many Papers that treat on our Law Books,
Records, etc. so far as they are serviceable to History (all which I once
thought to have crowded into a Chapter or two), as will furnish out a Third
Part; if they and the Bookseller think it worth their while to call for it. For
the present, I am resolved to keep my self within the Verge of the Church; and
shall only (in this Second Part) give the Reader the best Account I can of our
Ecclesiastical Historians, in the following Chapters: 1. Of the Affairs of the
British Church. 2. Historians of the English-Saxon Church; from the coming in
of Augustine the Monk, to the Conquest. 3. Church-Historians from the Conquest
to the Reformation. 4. Histories of the Reformation, and our Church Affairs to
the End of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. 5. Accounts of our Bishops in general; and
their several Sees. 6. Lives of particular Bishops, and other eminent
Churchmen. 7. Histories, Chronicles, Cartularies, etc. of our Ancient
Monasteries. 8. Histories of our Universities and Writers.


CHAP. I.
Of the Writers of the Affairs of the British Church.
IF De Excid. Brit. cap. 2.
Gildas had cause to complain, That in treating of the Civil History of
Britain, he had no Assistance from any Monuments or Records of his own Country,
but was forced to seek his whole Information from Foreigners; they that take
upon them to write the Church History of the first British Christians, will
find themselves much more obliged to Strangers, and must look abroad for their
Intelligence. 'Twas Happiness enough to enjoy the Gospel Light, as long as the
Heathen Romans were our Masters, without the rejoicing in it so openly as to
have had our Public Notaries registring the Acts of our Councils, Convocations
and Synods; even amongst such of our Ancestors as had (at once) learned to
write and to obey: And they that, either in the North or West, had shunned the
Roman Yoke, and enjoyed their Liberty and See the B. of S. Asaph's Pref. page
8. where he also quotes Irenaeus for his Opinion.
Traditional Christianity in the Woods and Mountains, are generally believed to
have been so much unacquainted with Letters, as not to have been able to
transmit their own Story to Posterity. Some Remains there are of those ancient
Times, and the State of Christianity in them; and our Church has not wanted Men
of Learning and Industry, who (even at this distance) have successfully
employed themselves in gathering up the scattered Fragments, that no part of so
valuable a Treasure might be lost.

Master De Script. Brit. Edit. Wesal. fol. 14. a.
Bale tells us there are some that, Joseph of Arimathea.
with a deal of probability on their side, have guessed, That Joseph of
Arimathea wrote several Epistles to the Churches of Great Britain: And for the
better strengthening of such a Conjecture, he assures us 'twas usual for the
Primitive Fathers to send such Letters to those Churches to which they were
some way or other specially related. He might as well have told us of some
Epistles sent hither by St. Peter or St. Paul; since it is likely that one (or
both) of those Apostles were as instrumental in planting Christianity in this
Island, as this Joseph himself; and we are also very sure, that they used to
write such Epistles.

Our next Ecclesiastical Writer is said to be Vid. Nenii Hist. Brit. cap. 18.
and Pont. Virum. Hist. Brit. l. 4. Bed. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 4.
King Lucius; K. Lucius
who (about a hundred Years after Joseph's Death) wanted somebody, it seems, to
instruct him in the First Rudiments of Christianity: And thereupon sent a
Letter to Pope Eleutherius, desiring that some Persons in Holy Orders might be
sent hither to Baptize Him and his People. There is not any Copy of this
Epistle now extant; and yet I dare not say the Original is lost. Not to mention
the Inconsistences that are among the several Authors, upon whose Credit this
whole Story rests, (...) observable that the pretended Epistle (in return) from
Eleutherius, seems to intimate that Lucius's Request was quite of another
Nature; and that his Enquiry was after the Imperial (Civil) Law, and not after
the Precepts of the Gospel: So that, I know not how we shall be sure of such a
Royal Church Historian. But, in short, the Pope's Letter has so many undeniable
Marks of Vid. II. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. page 3^.
Forgery upon it, that we cannot think it worth our while to be very
inquisitive after the Kings; and though a genuine Piece of this kind were highly
to be prized, we do not desire to build upon Shadow and Fable.

This Story of King Lucius has helped us to a Couple more of Ecclestiastical
Historians; Elvanus and Medvinus.
Eluanus and Medvinus, who (forsooth) were first employed in the forementioned
Embassy to Rome. After their Return, Eluanus was made AB. of London, and wrote
a Joh. Pits, p. 79.
Book, De Origin Ecclesiae Britanniae. Medvinus had not the luck to mount
equally in Preferment, with his Fellow-Ambassador; but he rivaled him in the
public Services of his Pen, having written Fugatii and Damiani gesta in
Britannia. (These were Pope Eleutherius's Legates; and are by others called
Faganus and Derwianus.) The most probable part of this Account is, That this
latter Book was found in the Rubbish at Glassenbury: It Is no matter whether at
the repairing of that Monastery by St. Patrick, or at some other time.

After these, we hear no more of the Writers of our British Church History,
Augustine.
before the coming in of (a more famous and true Legate) Augustine the Monk;
who is believed to have Vid. Antiq. Brit. page 3. and Fr. Godwin de Convers.
Brit. page 12.
written something of the state of Christianity in these parts, even before his
own Arrival. If we could be assured of this, we could not have a better
Authority in some of our Modern Disputes with the Court of Rome: But it is more
than probable that those Learned Men, that assert such a thing, mistook the
meaning of William of Malmesbury; who seems to have been their Informer in that
Matter. That Historian, speaking of something relating to the first Foundation
of the Monastery at Glassenbury which he had met with, Apud Sanctum Augustinum,
Anglorum Apostolum, his unwary Readers presently concluded that he quoted some
latent MS. Work of that Monk: Whereas, in truth, he meant no more than that he
had met with such an Account in the Library at St. Augustine's in Canterbury.
The like Phrase is common with him; and, in the same Paragraph, Vid. Cl.
Vsherii Antiq. Brit. Eccles. p. 56.
Apud Sanctum Edmundum, is to be Englished, in the Library at St. Edmundsbury.

The Remonstrance of Dinoth, Dinoth.
Abbot of Bangor, against the Pretensions of this Legate Augustine, challenging
a Supremacy for his Master in this Isle, is of some better Credit; since even
Page 104. Vide and Baleum, fol. m. 35.
John Pits himself owns that he stoutly opposed such Encroachments, and that he
has left to Posterity his Thoughts on that Subject: having written (among other
Things) two Books, entitled, Defensorium Jurisdictionis sedis Menevensis, and
De Conservandis Britannorum Ritibus. Both these Treatises have certainly been
framed out of that Answer of the Abbots, which Sir H. Spelman Council. Tom. 1.
p. 108. Extat etiam Wallice in Bibl. Cott. Claudius, A. 8.
has given us in Welsh, English and Latin: having found it in an old Transcript
out of a more ancient Manuscript in the two former Languages; and adding a
Translation of his own, in the last. The Critique that our Learned
Stillingfleet gives upon this Piece, and its Publisher, is what I dare not add
to: Orig. Brit. p. 360.
There is, he says, all the appearance of Ingenuity and Faithfulness that can
be expected; and he was a Person of too great Judgment and Sagacity to be
easily imposed upon by a Modern Invention, or a newfound Schedule. I know some
Romanists have endeavored to persuade the World, That this Monument bears no
great Age, and was probably forged since Eman Schelstraet, Dissert. page 103.
the Reformation: But since Venerable Bede Eccles. Hist. l. cap.
himself (who was as great a Favourer of Augustine, and as professed an Enemy
to the ancient British Church, as they could wish) confirms the main of the
Story, they will not easily persuade us that the whole is improbable.

I can hear of no more ancient Treatises relating to the Ecclesiastical State
of Old Britain, S. Graal.
save only the Sanctum Graal: Which, says trusty John Page 122.
Pits, was written by an Anonymous Hermit about the Year 720. and gives an
ample Account of the Miracles wrought by Joseph of Arimathea. Indeed Vincentius
Specul. Histor. lib. 23. c. 27.
of Beauvais mentions such a French Legend; which, as he observes, had the Name
of Graal (or Gruel) because it likewise treated of a Dish of Meat, miraculously
preserved since our Savior's last Supper: But the Book (he confesses) was
somewhat hard to be met with. In this Dish (which was to be seen among the
sacred (...) at Glastonbury) they pretended to have part of the true Blood of
our Redeemer: But whether 'twas of that shed on the Cross, or of that which was
at the said last Supper, after Consecration, the Tho. Malorii Hist. Arthuri R.
Historian dares not be positive. However, from hence the same Person gives the
Relick the Name of Sanegreal, i.e. Sanguis Realis: And from him it is Vid.
Vsserii Brit. Eccles. Antiq. p. 9. and Orig. Brit. p. 13.
probable the following Writers, gave that Title to the Legend it self. The
Learned Reader will pardon me if I give him a further Account of this rare
French MS. out of Monsieur Borel's Tresor de Recherches and Antiquitez
Gauloises and Francoises, 4to, Paris, 1655. in voce Graal.
Glossary: Which (because the Book is not in many of our English Libraries) I
shall do at large in his own Words. Il ya un Romant ancien, says he, intitule,
La Conqueste du Saingreal, c. du S. Vaisseau ou estoit le Sang de Jesus Christ,
qu'il appelle aussi le Sang real, c. le Sang royal. Et ainsi ces deux chooses
sont confundues tellement, qu'on ne connoist qu'auec peine quand les anciens
Romans qui en parlent fort souuent, entendent le Vaisseau, ou le Sang. Perceual
l'explique bien en ces mots:

Senefioit que li greaus,
Qui tant est beaux and precieux,
Que le S. Sang glorieux,
Du Roy des Rois y fu receus.
Et ailleurs: Un greal Trestout descouuert.
Item, Et puis apporta un greaux
Tout plein de pierres precieuses.
R. de Merlin MS. Ne oneques peus ne fust veu au siecle, ne du greal ne palle.
Et apres il dit: Et cil Rois pecheors avoit le digne sang Jesus Christ en
guarde. D'ou il est manifest que le R. de Sangreal, n'est que du Sang Royal de
Jesus Christ. Item, Pensa moult a la lance, and ou graal qu'il avoit veu
porter. Ce text monstre que c'estoit un vase. Mais en suite le mesinem Autheur
parlant du Graal, l'appelle un Vaisseau; car il parle ainsi: Et quand le
premier mes fust apportee, si issi le Graal fors d'une Chamber, and les dignes
Relics auenc; and si tot comme Perceualle vit qui moult en avoit grand desir
de scavoir, si dit: Sire, je vos pry que vous me diez, que l'en sert de cest
Vessel que cest vallet port. Et encore il dit ailleurs: Et porce laupelon nos
Graal qu'il agree as prodes homes. En cest Vessel gist le Sang de Jesus Christ.
En ce text il done une Etymology differente du Sang Royal, a scavoir le Sang
agreeable aux hommes, en ce qu' ils en lavent leurs pechez. Et derechef
confirmant cela, il dit verse le commencement de son Livre. Et ils distrent, and
porrons dire du Vesseil que nos veimes; and coman le clameron nos qui tant nos
gree, cil qui ly voudront clamer ne meter non a nos esciens, le clameront le
greal qui tant agree: Et quant cil l'oyent, si dient, bien doit avoir non cist
vesseaux graax. Et ainsi le nomment. Et enfin il dit: Ou li Vessel de graal
seit. C'est le vase on Joseph (dit- il) recueillit le Sang qui sortit des
plays de Jesus Christ, lors qu'il lavoit son corpse pour l'embaumer, a la
maniere des Juifs.

The present Age, R. Broughton.
amongst her many Writers in all parts of Learning, has afforded us some that
have thought it an Undertaking worth their Pains to search after the Remains of
our first British Church; and the Discoveries they have made have met with very
different Characters and Entertainment, according as they have fallen into the
Hands of proper or improper Judges. The first of these (I suppose) was R.
Broughton, a Secular Priest; who was bred at Rheims, and sojourned sometime
Athen. Oxon. vol. 1. page 854.
in Oxford. In this latter Place he collected Materials for his Fol. Duaci,
1633.
Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain, from the Nativity of our Savior unto
the happy Conversion of the Saxons. The Account that Mr. Wood gives of this
Book, is this; Though it is a Rapsody, and a thing not well digested, yet there is
a great deal of Reading showed in it. It Is said King James J. was overjoyed to
hear of D. Smith, de Vit. D. Rob. Cotton, page 24.
Sir R. Cotton's Design of writing our Church History, from the first planting
of Christianity to the Reformation: And so far he carried on the Project, as to
draw together no less than Bibl. Cott. Cleopatra, E. F.
Eight large Volumes of Collections, which have long been (and still are) very
serviceable to those that engage in those Studies.

The like Collections were made (about the same time) by AB. I. Usher.
Usher, the most Reverend and Learned Primate of Ireland, and soon after
Commendatory Bishop of Carlisle; of whom D. Joh. Marsham, in (...) ad Monast.
Angl. Tom. 1.
one (that knew him well, and was as able as any Man to judge of him) gives
this Character, Vir ob Eruditionis immensitatem, morumque Sanctitatem toto Orbi
Vener andissimus. His Book was first printed at Dublin, under the Title, 4to.
1639.
De P^imordiis, etc. and is since published by the Name of Fol. Land. 1687.
Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates. 'Twas begun by Command of King James
I. who gave him License, under the Great Seal of Ireland, to retire from his
Bishopric of Mead to one of our English Universities, for the more effectual
carrying on of so good a Work: And this See his Life by Dr. Parr. p. 24, 45.
Grant was had and enjoyed above a dozen Years before the Book was first
published. He begins with a Collection of whatever Narratives and old Stories
he could meet with about Simon Zelotes, Joseph of Arimathea, and others, first
planting Christianity in this Island: From whence he proceeds to the Legend of
King Lucius, and the whole Succession of those Archbishops and Bishops
descended from Jeoffrey of Monmouth's Flamines and Archi-Flamines. After this,
we have the Settlement of three Metropolitical Thrones, at London, York and
Caerlion; which are afterward removed to Canterbury, Dole (in Britany) and St.
David's. Then follows the generous Endowments of Glastonbury, and other places
by Lucius and Arthur: The Martyrdom of St. Alban and his Friend (or Cloak)
Amphibalus, with many more of their Fellow-Saints: The famous Expedition of
Vrsula; etc. Interwoven with these Reports, the Reader will find a deal of
excellent Learning, and the clearing of many doubts in our British, Roman and
Saxon Antiquities. He also gives a particular Account of the Original and
Progress of the Pelagian and Semi-Pelagian Heresies; and concludes with the
Remains St. Patrick, and the ancient Scottish (or Irish) Church. The Author
himself In Praefat. p. 2.
modestly calls the Work, Ex omni Scriptorum genere promiscue congesta farrago.
Which Sir Geo. Mackenzie has, a little bluntly, translated; Def. of Royal Line,
p. 11.
A confused Rabble, and a formless Lump of fabulous Nonsense. It Is a more just
Account that another gives of this Treasure of our ancient Church History, That
Dr. Parr, in vit. Authoris, p. 44.
all that have written since, with any Success, on this Subject, must own
themselves beholding to him for his Elaborate Collections. In the late Edition,
the References which the Author makes to the several parts of his Work, are
very faulty: The Margin of the former Quarto Edition having not always been
Corrected.

The same Year with AB. H. Spelman.
Usher's Book, was published Sir H. Spelman's first Tome of the Councils,
Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions, etc. of this Kingdom, and its
Dependencies: Whereof we are to give some farther Account anon. For the
present, the Reader is only to be informed, That the excellent Publisher of
those Collections has prefixed to them an Elaborate and Learned Discourse of
his own; touching the first Preachers of the Gospel in this Country, our
British Metropolitans, and the State of the Churches under them.

The next that engaged in these dark Enquiries, W. Lloyd
was our Learned Dr. William Lloyd, (then Bishop of St. Asaph, now of Coventry
and Lichfield) in his 8vo, Land. 1684,
Historical Account of Ancient Church Government in Great Britain and Ireland.
The Undertaking became a Bishop of our English Church; and the Performance
answered the great Opinion that Men of Learning have always had of this worthy
Prelate. His Aim in it was the encountering an Objection against the Order of
Episcopacy, from the Story of the Scotch Culdees: An Argument put into the
Mouths of our Schismatics by Blondel and Seldom, out of the abundant Kindness
they had for our Establishment. In the answering of the several Cavils of these
Learned Men, the Bishop thought himself obliged to give a short History of the
first planting of the Scots in Great Britain; which thwarted the common Road of
their Historians since the Days of Hector Boethius, and bereaf'd them of about
Forty of their first Monarchs. This shortening of the Royal Line, His Majesty's
Advocate of Scotland, the late Ingenious and Learned Sir Geo. Mackenzie,
presently resented as an Affront little short of what the Lawyers of that
Country call Lese-Majesty; and therefore published 8to. Land. 1685.
a Defense of the Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland. In this Tract the
zealous Author was so wholly on Fire, that 'twas not safe for the Bishop
himself to approach him: but his incomparable Friend Dr. Stillingfleet took the
In praefat. ad Orig. Brit.
Pains to confirm, at large, the Bishops Positions, and to answer the most
considerable of Sir George's Objections. Soon after, the Advocate published a
8vo. Land. 1686.
Reply to his new Antagonist, under the Title of The Antiquity of the Royal
Line of Scotland, further cleared, etc. I am not now concerned to enquire
whether these two great Opponents, or their no less ingenious Answerer, had the
better in these Debates; though I may perhaps hereafter weigh some of the
Arguments on both sides, if I live to publish my Notes on the Scotch and Irish
Historians. For the present, I shall only observe that the Cause of our Church
in this Controversy, was thought long since to have been secured (in few
words) by Sir John Marsham In (...) ad Monast. Angl.
. Columbanus (says he) postquam in Hybernia Armachanum Monasterium fecerat,
Anno 565. Britanniam venit ad Pictos: Australes autem Pictos Nynias Brito ad
Veritatem converterat, Anno 412. and hii Insulam Episcopatus sedem fecerat.
This last particular was more than needed; and is what he could not prove from
(his avowed Author) Venerable Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 4.
Bid, who says no such thing. He never speaks of Nynias's being at Hy: but
expressly tells us, that his Church was at Whithern.

The latest of our British Church-Historians (and, E. Stillingfleet.
who shall come after him?) is the renowned Dr. Stillingfleet, not Bishop of
Worcester; whose Fol. Land. 1685.
Origines Britannicae have perfected all the Collections of former Writers on
that Subject. The Design of the Book is to vindicate the Liberties of the
ancicient British Church, against the pretended Jurisdiction of the Bishops of
Rome: so that it reaches only, from the first appearance of the Christian Faith
in this Island, to the Conversion of the Saxons. It Is penned with an Accuracy
of Judgment and Purity of Style peculiar to its great Author; and clears many
doubtful Passages that had escaped the diligence of the famous AB. of Armagh.
He tells us (in the conclusion of his Preface) that it comes forth as a
Specimen of a greater Design; to clear the most important difficulties of
Ecclesiastical History. He rejects, for very good Reasons, the
Glastonbury-Legend of Joseph of Arimathea; but confirms the Story of St. Paul's
planting a Church in this our (...). The History of King Lucius he endeavors
to set free from the Monkish Fopperies and Contradictions that clog it in other
Authors; explains the Subscriptions of the British Bishops in the Council of
Arles; shows the probability of some of 'em being present in the Council of
Nice; excellently illustrates the State of Arrianism and Pelagianism, etc. The
Picts he thinks (contrary to Camden's Opinion) to have been a People originally
distinct from the ancient Britains; and agrees with Hector Boethius, for better
Reasons than ever he knew, that they were some of the old Maritime Inhabitants
of the Baltic Sea. He teaches his Reader how to judge of the Antiquities and
Antiquaries of Scotland and Ireland; and concludes with a very particular and
full Account of the great Revolution in this Island, upon the coming in of the
Saxons. His Preface (as we have already hinted) was attaqu'd by Sir George
Mackenzie; and the Book it self by Emanuel a Schelstrate (Keeper of the Vatican
Library) in his 4to. Angl. Edit. Land. 1688.
Dissertation concerning Patriarchal and Metropolitical Authority. To the
latter there needs no other Reply, than only to tell him; 1. The probable
Arguments alleged for St. Paul's preaching Christianity in this Isle, are not
to be overthrown by less probable ones on the behalf of St. Peter: Nor should
the Man that admits King Lucius's and Pope Eleutherius's Epistles as genuine,
reject the MS. account of Abbot Dinoth and his Monks. 2. Mr. Launoy and Dr.
Beverege agree with Dr. Stillingfleet, in their Exposition of the sixth Canon
of the Nicene Council, as well as the Anonymous French Author of the Treatise
De Disciplina Ecclesiae; who exactly jumps with our great Prelate in his Notion
about the Suburbicarian Churches. Dr. Basire's Ancient Liberty of the
Britannick Church, 120. Land. 1661.
four Positions, asserting the Legitimate Exemption of the British Church from
the Roman Patriarchate, contain only a short Essay toward the proof of what we
have more amply advanced, and more clearly demonstrated, in the Origines; not
to mention that the greatest part of 'em are borrowed from John Barnes's 8vo.
Oxon. 1680.
Catholico Romanus Pacificus.

The Lives of our British Saints Saints.
must be read with the allowance that is usually given of those of our
Neighboring Nations: and we are not under any great difficulties to learning
what Opinion even the Romanists themselves have of the Writings of their Monks
on these Subjects. Dolenter hoc dico (says Loc. Com. lib. 11. cap. 6.
Melchior Canus) multo severius a Laertio vitas Philosophorum scriptas, quam a
Christianis vitas Sanctorum, longeque incorruptius and integrius Suetonium Res
Caesarum exposuisse quam exposuerint Catholici, non res dico Imperatorum, sed
Martyrum, Virginum and Confessorum. It Is the sense of the gravest and best
Writers of that Church; and what will very well agree to those of the Times and
Country we are now mentioning. There cannot be bolder, nor more inconsistent
Miracles than those we meet with in the Stories of St. Alban and St. Patrick:
And the whole Treasury of Legends seems to be outvy'd by the choice Adventures
of St. Vrsula and her Train. To furnish the Reader with an exact List of all
the ancient Saints of this Island, would be as edifying as to present him with
a Catalogue of the Parishes of Wales; most of which bear the Inscription and
Name of some one or other of Them. Besides the general Pains taken by De
Sanctor. Hist. Tom. 7. Fol. Cologn. 1576. and Collect. Hist. Sanct. Edit.
Lovan. 1485.
Surius and others in this Matter, there are some who have more particularly
treated of our British Saints; and others that have applied themselves to the
History of the Life, Actions and Sufferings, of some special Hero. John Pits p.
868. Ubi and Liber MS. extare dicitur in Bibl. Gu. Copi.
tells us of Johannes Anglicus (who seems to have been a Welsh Man,
notwithstanding his Name) that wrote a Book De Vitis Sanctorum Wallensium: And
we are also told (by a Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 182.
Brother of his, of somewhat better Authority) that there is now in the Library
of the English College at Rome, a Manuscript Treatise (of the like import) by
William Good, a Fugitive Papist under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. It Is
likewise certain that: Ricemarchus (whether Vid. Vsserii Antiq. Brit. Eccles.
page 3. and H. Wharton, praef. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. page 25.
Bishop of St. David's himself, or only Son to Sulgenus Bishop of that Place, or
both) wrote such a Martyrology: though perhaps in the Manuscript Lives of the
British Saints, which are now in the Vespasianus, A. 14.
Cottonian Library, the Life of St. David is only to be ascribed to that
Author. In perusing those of the several other Writers, who have made it their
Business to collect or invent Matter for the magnifying of some single Martyr,
the Reader will be cautious in separating the Chaff and good Corn: And so, by
distinguishing the Monk from the Historian, a good use may be made of these
Romantic ones that follow.

St. Alban is our Proto-Martyr, S. Alban.
and might therefore justly challenge the first place in our Catalogue, if the
method of the Alphabet (which shall be our Guide) had not given it him. His
Life has been the Subject of some learned Pens; and of some that were
otherwise. The first that we hear of was a Pits, p. 103. Vid. etiam Vsser.
Antiq. p. 80.
Person of good Abilities, who wrote about the Year 590. but had the modesty to
conceal his Name. This Work was translated into Latin by Bibl. Cott. Faustina,
B. 4.
Will. Albanensis (a Monk of St. Albans) who afterward prevailed with his
Brother Ibid. Claudius, E. 4.
Ralph de Dunstable, to turn it into Heroic Verse. Vnwon, an old Priest well
skilled in the ancient British Language, translated another such Volume (but of
much greater Antiquity) at the Request of Abbot Aedmar about the Year 970.
whereof we have an notable Account given by In vit. Abhatum S. Albani Edit.
Wats. p. 41.
Matt. Paris; who is also Joh. Pits, p. 339, 887.
reported to have written two Books of the Martyrdom of St. Alban and St.
Amphibalus. Dr. Wats could not meet with them; and indeed Pits is not very
consistent in the Account he gives of them: For he elsewhere tells us, That a
certain modest Gentleman (who calls himself In the Conclusion of that
translated by W. Alban* the Author calls himself Miser and peccator ultimus:
and this is what M. Paris translated into French, Vsser. Antiq. p. 82. 83.
Bibl. Cott. Otho, D. 8.
Miserorum Simplicissimus) wrote these same Books, which were translated into
French Verse by M. Paris; as they were afterward into English Meeter by John
Lydgate. The latest Writer of his Life is Stephen Gourmeline, a Pits, 784.
Cornish Man; who is said to have published something of that kind about the
Year, 1585.

St. Columba's Life translated out of Cornish, S. Columba.
was in the Hands of Mr. Roscarrock, who communicated it to Vid. Camd. Epist.
p. 91. and Britan. Edit. novis. page 10.
Mr. Camden; and thereby convinced him of an Error (which he had advanced in
some of the first Editions of his Britannia) that St. Columb's, a Market Town
in Cornwall, had its Name from Columbanus, the famous Scotch Apostle.

St. David's had almost as many Penmen as St. Albans. S. David
The oldest (says Act. Sanctor. Martyr. lib. 1.. 1. number. 5.
Bollandus) is the Vtrecht-Manuscript, which he publishes, The next to this he
thinks that in Colganus; which he believes to be that which was written by
Ricemarchus, and is now published by Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 645.
Mr. Wharton. This industrious Person observes that, out of this, all the
latter Writers of his Life have transcribed their Treatises: particularly
Giraldus Ibid. p. 628. Bibl. Cott. Vitellius, E. 7.
Cambrensis; who omits some Miracles, but gives new ones in lieu of them, and
is (with the like freedom) epitomized by John of Tinmouth and Capgrave. For
this Reason he has thought it sufficient to give us Giraldus entire; adding
only what he was pleased to omit in that of Bibl. Cott. Vespasianus, A. 14.
Ricemarchus.

St. Dubricius (Archbishop of Caerleon) is beholden to one Benedict, S
Dubricius.
Monk of Gloucester; who is supposed to have written his Life about the middle
of the Twelfth Century. This is also published by the same Learned Person; who
Vid. Praefat. ad vol. 2. Angl. Sacr. p. 26. and deinde p. 654, 655.
acknowledges he passed over some fulsome Miracles, and guesses that its Author
borrowed his best Materials from Geoffrey of Landaff, whose Manuscript-History
of this Saint was in the same Volume out of which this is given us.

St. Germanus's Embassies (under Pope Celestine) have been treated on at large
by some Foreigners, S. Germanus.
and others of our own Nation: of whose Performances the inquisitive Reader
will have a better Account from our great Antiq. Brit. Eccles. p. 175.
AB. Usher, than I can pretend to give him.

St. Kentigern S. Kentigern.
(better known to our Northern Borderers by the Name of St. Mungo) had his Life
largely written by Josceline, a Monk of Fournes in Lancashire, whose Book is
now in Sir John Cotton's Library: But whether that which was written by his
Scholar Bale, Cent. 1. cap. m. 53. and Pits, p. 103.
St. Asaph be any where extant, I dare not take upon me to determine.

S. Lupus S. Lupus.
was Germanus's Colleague in the notable Undertaking for confounding of the
Palagian Heresy, and reestablishment of Catholicism in this Island; and has
been particularly obliged by an Antiq. Brit. Eccles. p. 176.
anonymous Writer of his Life.

St. Ninian (who by our Neighbors on the Borders of Scotland is corruptly
called Ringen, S. Ninian.
and is remembered in our Nine Churches in Cumberland) is Vid. Pits, 229, 230.
reported to have had his Wonders recorded by Ealred Abbot of Rievaulx: which
is not so certain, as that his Life was some time Vsserii Antiq p. 347.
extant and pretty common in Ireland.

St. Patrick, S. Patrick.
the great AB. Usher mentions an old MS. Life of this Saint in the Library at
Lovain; which quotes some Passages out of his own Writings. See his Letters, p.
1.
Apostle of Ireland, is challenged by the Monks of Glassenbury; and therefore
may be reckoned indifferently either a British or Irish Saint. Under the former
Denomination we must believe that his History was written by Pits, p. 279, 280.
and Praef. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 23.
Gyraldus Cambrensis; and under the latter by Joceline and 8vo. Antwerp, 1587.
Rich. Stanyhurst.

St. Teliau (or Eliud, S. Teliau.
St. David's Successor in his Archbishopric) had his Life penned by Geoffrey
of Bibl. Cott. Vespasianus, A. 14.
Landaff, Brother to Vrbane Bishop of that See, about the beginning of the
Twelfth Century; whose Treatise is still to be had at large in an Vid. Vsserii
Antiq. Brit. p. 44.
old Register-book of that Church.

St. Vrsula, S. Vrsula
and her Eleven thousand Companions, had reason to expect to have their Story
handed down to Posterity in a Method peculiar to themselves; and therefore
(about Thirteen Ages after their Martyrdom) they deputed one Verena to bring
hither a true Relation of their Sufferings. This she punctually revealed to one
Elizabeth a Nun of Schaffhausen: who published (with the great Applause of the
Monks of Cologn, who set her on Work) her 8vo. Paris, 1513. and Colon. Agrip.
1628.
Visions on this Occasion.

St. Winefride's S. Winefride.
Miracles (and the many glorious Cures done by her Well in Flint-shire) were
Registered by Bale, Cent. 2. cap. 76.
Robert Prior of Shrewsbury; who (about the Year 1140.) translated her Relics
to his own Convent: so that it is justly Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 605.
wondered how Giraldus Cambrensis came to take no notice of this sacred
Fountain in his Itinerary of Wales, which was penned many Years after. The
Wonder will increase when we consider that, long before the Prior's time, her
Life was written by Pits, p. 109.
Elerius a Monk of St. Asaph, who himself (about the middle of the Seventh
Century) instructed her in the Monastic Rules; and had the comfort of seeing
her so great a Proficient as first to turn Nun, afterward to become an Abbess,
and (in the end) a Martyr, under the Tyranny of Carodocus.

Abstracts of these Lives (and many others which are either now lost, J.
Tynmouth.
or, at least, have not come to my Knowledge) may be had in the voluminous Work
of John of Tynmouth's MS. in Bibl. Cott. Tiberius, E. 1.
Sanctilogium Britanniae; which gives the best and largest Account, that is any
where extant, of the Lives of our British, English, Scotch and Irish Saints.
The whole is a Collection of such Passages as related to these Holy Persons,
out of his Historia Aurea, mentioned in the first part of this Work: And this
perhaps gave occasion to Mr. Pits to split the Sanctilogium into a Majus and
Minus; and to provide a pair of J. Pits, p. 500.
Appendices Martyrologii to bind up with these two Books. There Is an ancient
and fair Copy of it in the Tiberius, E. 1.
Cottonian Library; at the end whereof we have this Note: Hunc Librum dedit
Dominus Thomas de la Marc, Abbas Monasterii St. Albani Anglorum Proto-Martyris,
Deo and Ecclesiae B. Amphibali de Redburn; ut Fratres ibidem in cursu
existentes per ejus Lecturam poterint coelestibus instrui, and per Sanctorum
Exempla virtutibus insigniri.

John Capgrave, J. Capgrave.
Provincial of the Augustine Friars, and Confessor to the famous Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester, epitomized Tynmouth's Book; adding here and there several Fancies
and Interpolations of his own, It was translated into English by Caxton, and
first printed in the Year 1516. since which time it has been frequently
reprinted, both here and beyond the Seas, and is common in the Families of our
Gentlemen of the Roman Communion. He Is not quite so modest as his Principal
John of Tynmouth; who sometimes ( c) Vid. Cl. Vsserii Antiq. p. 10, 11. and 332.
prefaces a Miracle of a more than ordinary size, with leaving his Reader to a
liberty of believing or disbelieving, as his own Reason shall guide him. But,
so far is both Capgrave and his Translator from any thing of this bashful
Temper, that they always load a Man's Faith with more than it well can carry.
For Example; The Story of St. Vrsula and her Eleven thousand Virgins was
thought (in former times) a sufficiently glorious Army of Martyrs: but Mr.
Caxton assures us, there were also Fifteen thousand Men that suffered with
them, and so the whole Company consisted of no less than 26000. This part of
the History was vouched to him by the Men of Cologn; who seem to have had some
farther Revelation since the Days of Tynmouth and Capgrave.

CHAP. II.
Historians of the English Church, from the coming in of Augustine the Monk, to
the Conquest.
THE Conversion of our Saxon Ancestors happened at a time when Learning run
very low, and when a general Credulity and want of Thought gave opportunity to
the Monks of coining their Legendary Fables, and obtruding them upon the World
for true and unquestionable History: So that the main part of the
Ecclesiastical Story (if we may so call it) of those Ages is to be had amongst
the Lives of our English Saints, which are much of a piece with those of the
British already mentioned. The Account that Bale, Fol. m. 35.
Augustine gave to Pope Gregory, of the Success of his Apostleship in Kent, is
hardly extant: But we have the Queries he put to that Holy Father, with the
Pope's Answers, in Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Bid; from whom several of our later Historians have transcribed them. Both
the Questions and Answers are plain enough, and of no great moment; yet I think
Bale's Censure a little too severe, when he affirms that they are Omnis
Evangelii atque Legis Eruditionis vacuae, immo ineptissimae.

In truth Venerable Bede Bid.
is the only Person of those Times, that deserves the Name of an Ecclesiastical
Historian; there having not been many of his Cotemporaries furnished with
either Learning or Judgment sufficient for such an Undertaking. The Account
which Ad fin. lib. 5. Hist. Eccles. page (See Edit. Wheloc.) 492.
himself gives of his own Life, is, That he was born within the Territories
((...), says the Saxon Paraphrase) of the Monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul
at Weremouth and Jarrow; where he was afterward Educated: That he was, when
Seven Years old, committed to the care of Abbot Benedict: That he was ordained
Deacon (at Nineteen) and Priest (at Thirty) by St. John of Beverly: That from
thenceforth he continued still in the same Monastery to the 59th Year of his
Age. Here he employed himself in writing Commentaries on the Scriptures, and
distinct Treatises upon almost every part of Learning; most of which are still
extant. What we are (at present) concerned in is his Ecclesiastical History of
this Island, in Five Books, which have had many 8vo. Antverp. 1550. Heidelb.
1587. Colon. 1601. etc.
Impressions in Latin; the Language wherein he penned them. It Is plain he had
seen and perused several Chronicles of the English Kings, before his own Time:
witness that Expression Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Vnde cunctis placuit Regum tempora computantibus, etc. But he first attempted
an Account of their Church Affairs; and kept Correspondence in the other
Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, the better to enable him to give a true State of
Christianity throughout the whole Nation. He treats indeed most largely of the
Conversion of Northumberland, and the progress of Religion in that Kingdom: but
always intermixes what other Relations he could borrow from Books, or learn
from such living Testimonies as he believed to be credible. Some have censured
his History, as composed with too great partiality; favoring, on all
Occasions, the Saxons; and depressing the Britains. Such a Charge is not wholly
groundless. He must be pardoned for stuffing it, here and there, with thumping
Miracles; the natural product of the Zeal and Ignorance of his Age: Especially,
since so little Truth was to be had of the Saints of those Days, that there was
a sort of Necessity of filling up Books of this kind with such pleasant Legends
as the Chat of the Country, or a good Invention would afford a Man. It Is worth
our observation that none of the Writers of his own Life have mentioned one
single Miracle wrought by him; because, they had enough of Truth to relate: Not
but that we may boldly reckon him (as a Foreign Minister is said once to have
done) a much better Saint than many of those Thaumaturgi that we read of in his
History. There was a Paraphrase very early made of it in the English Saxon
Tongue, which has been printed Fol. Cantabr. 1644.
together with the Original Latin Text: But whether 'twas done by the famous
King Alfred, or some other Hand, we are not very certain. Mr. Wheloc dares not
be positive; yet thinks it very In Praefat. ad Lect.
probable, that it was the Work of that Great Monarch, to whom (in his
Title Page) he has confidently ascribed it. Sir John Spelman Aelfredi mag. vit.
p. 166.
proves him the Author, from a Distich in the Front of that very Manuscript,
out of which Mr. Wheloc afterward published it; which runs thus,

Historicus quondam fecit me Baeda Latinum,
Aelfred Rex Saxo transtulit ille prius.
Indeed, he is commonly so reputed; and particularly by G. Hickes, in Praefat.
ad Gram. Anglo-Sax. p. 12.
one, who (of all Men now living) is the best able to give a Character of the
Performance, which the Reader will be pleased to have in his own Words. Nil
Regiis versionibus perfectius dici possit. Bone Deus! Quam in illis Nativus,
facilis and simplex Sermo! Praecipue in Ecclesiasticae Historae Bedae
Paraphrasi; cujus Augustissimum Auctorem, sive dictionis in ea puritatem, sive
perspecuitatem* Styli, sive hypotyposin illam miram, qua res omnes quasi ob
oculos legentis ponit; spectes, Caesari in dicendo aequalem censebis. The
Publisher of this Noble Monument has beautified his Edition with some learned
Annotations of his own; wherein he takes frequent occasion to show in what
Points of Doctrine our Saxon Ancestors differed from the present Members of the
Roman Church, and agreed with those of the Reformed. If we live to see this
Paraphrase reprinted (and, why should we despair?) it will have considerable
Enlargements from the excellent Notes of Fr. Junius, Inter Cond. MSS. Junianos,
Oxon.
who has carried his Animadversions and Illustrations through the whole Work:
and some advantage may be given it from a Manuscript Copy in Vid. Not. in
Aelf^. m. vit. p. 166.
Corpus Christi College in Oxford, which Mr. Wheloc never saw. The History it
self was translated into English by 8v^. Antverp. 1565.
Tho. Stapleton, a Doctor of Divinity in the University of Lovain: But (as on
other Occasions he has shown himself too partially inclined to serve the
Interests of his own Church, so) we have here Vid. Edit. Wheloc. p. 29. and 115.
sometimes just Cause to complain that he does not deal fairly, and honestly
with us. Rich. Lavingham (Prior of the Carmelite Monastery at Bristol, and a
mighty Writer in Divinity, about the latter end of the Fourteenth Century) is
J. Pits, p. 534.
reported to have epitomized Bede's History; beginning his Work with Britannia
cui quondam Albion, etc. There Is such an Abstract added in Wheloc's Edition,
with a continuation to the Year, 766. which perhaps may be the same: For, though
it does not begin with these words, Bid himself begins with such as are very
like them; and to confound two Writers, if they appear under the same Cover, is
no great Transgression in my Author. There Is another anonymous Continuer of
this History, who descends below the Conquest; and whose Book (now in MS. in
the public Library at Oxford) is quoted by some of our most Learned Guil.
Somner, Antiq. Cantuar. p. 157. Hist. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 49.
Writers.

All that looked like Truth in Bede's Collections, and was purely
Ecclesiastical, was remitted into the First Volume of Sir Henry Spelman's Fol.
Land. 1639.
Councils: to which were added such other genuine Remains of the Saxon Church,
as that Industrious and truly Religious Knight could any where meet with. This
good Work was undertaken at the Entreaty of AB. Abbot, and his Successor Laud;
and mightily encouraged by Bishop Andrews, who had Thoughts of engaging in it
himself. Many of the Notes are owing to AB. Usher; who seems to have furnished
the Author with more than were published. He is mightily perplexed in some of
them, when he comes to reconcile the Times of the Kings and Bishops mentioned
together in the Laws; and the Difficulties increase upon him, by his adhereing
too stiffly to Bishop Goodwin's and Sir H. Savil's Authority. Had he had the
complete Saxon Chronicle (especially, with the Advantages of such accurate
Indices as are now published with it) these Mists would have vanished more
readily; and he would have had much fewer Achronisms to disturb him. He
confesses, he often follows blind Guides; and is therefore apprehensive of the
danger he is in of leading his Reader into the same Ditch with himself. Some
Laws, he acknowledges, were omitted (he knows not well by what Misfortune)
which were even in his own Possession; and others were communicated by his
Friends (chiefly, the Learned Primate of Armagh) when 'twas too late to insert
them in their proper places. His Translations are mostly Lambard's, which we
have already observed to be uncorrect. Where those failed him, he made use of
W. L'Isle, and (sometimes) his Son Sir John Spelman; who seems to have
understood our ancient Language better than his Father. He had also great
Assistances from Mr. Stephens, a Person eminently skilled in our English
Antiquities; and who, for his good Services in the Edition of this very Book,
is Hist and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 223. Vide etiam ipsius H. Spelm. praefat.
ad Lect.
said to have had a Prebend of Lincoln, procured for him by AB. Laud. There are
several Mistakes in the very Titles of his Chapters. I shall only instance in
Two: 1. Page 432. and 434.
Aedgari Regis Anglorum Charta ae Oswaldes-Law, hoc est, de ejiciendis Clericis
Vxoratis and introducendis Monachis. It Is known St. Oswald was Canonized for
his inveterate Hatred of secular and married Clergy; and for that he helped to
enact severe Laws against them. But none of these were ever called by the Name
of Oswald's Law; which signifies no more than a certain Hundred of that Name in
the Country of Worcester, whereof we have this account in an old Register of
that Church: Regist. MS. Coenob. Wigorn. in Monast. Angl. Tom 1. p. 120.
Idem Rex [Aedgarus] fecit de tribus Centuriatibus, sc. Welverdes-Law and
Wiburneto ( qui erant Episcopi) and de Chutberes-Lawe ( qui erat Prioris and
Conventus) unum Centuriatum, i. e. Hundredum: Deditque Beato Oswaldo and ejus
successoribus eandem per omnia libertatem in eodem Hundredo perpetuo
possidendam, quam ipse Rex habuit in suis Hundredis. Et vocatur Oswaldeslaw. So
that here is a very unfortunate Mistake; and of the same Nature with that we
have already observed of Denelage, etc. in the first part. I wonder we never
had any mention of the Laws of the Picts, as well as those of the Danes. since
we read of Vid. Vsserii Antiq. p. 350.
Pithland-Law in Hector-Boethius, of the like signification with the former. 2.
The proof that a Learned Person W. Kennet, paroch. Antiq. p. 24.
alleges for Amesbury being in the Primitive Ages of English Writers called
Vrbs Ambrosii, is not conclusive: For the Title, there referred to, is
manifestly Sir Henry's own; his Author mentioning only Ambresbyrig, which may
admit of another signification than Vrbs Ambrosii. It may be as well, and 'twas
as anciently, translated, Mons Ambrii. We wait impatiently for a New Edition of
these Councils: And the worthy Undertaker (if God please to bless him and us
with the continuance of his Health) will amply answer our Expectations. He will
be able (out of Junius's Collections; a Manuscript in the Hands of Mr. Jones of
Sunningwel, etc.) to make large Additions; and to insert them, appositely
translated, in their proper places. He Will finish the Pains which Mr. Somner
long since took Inter MSS. Somner. in Bibl. Cantuar.
to collate all the Saxon Pieces (already printed) with the Original MSS. and
to correct the Translation. He Will give us necessary Prefaces to the whole,
subjoin a convenient Glossary; and (in a word) do all that is requisite to the
rendering of such a Work as complete as we can wish it.

When this is done, Saints.
we shall have no occasion to search any further for the History of our
English-Saxon Church: unless the Lives of the Saints of those Times (which are
very numerous) will afford us some little Supplies, together with what the
Reader will find considered in other Chapters. I pretend not to any certain
Account of the Vitae variorum Sanctorum, written by Pits, page 121, 205, 212.
Egwine Bishop of Worcester, and Founder of the Abbey of Evesham; those of
Osbert Clarentius (Prior of Westminster, A. D. 1136.) are said to be in the
Library of Bennet College; and Henry of Huntingdon's, in that of the Jesuits at
Antwerp. There are two Books of these Lives, in the Saxon Language, in Sir John
Cotton's Library: whereof the one was written by Aelfric, and the other by an
Anonymous Author. I know not but they may be the same with two small Treatises,
amongst Junius's Saxon Transcripts, de Sanctis in Anglia sepultis. His
Menologium also (which is a Calendar of those ancient Saints, and was
transcribed by him out of two old Copies in the Cottonian and Bennet Libraries)
is a Piece which he thought highly valuable; and which he sometimes refers to
under the Titles of Martyrologium, and Fasti Anglo-Saxonici. Some of their
Lives are described at large in the Old Homilies; though the main of all those
Stories comes usually out of Bede's Shop. This is observable in the Homilies on
St. Edmund and St. Cuthbert in Bodley's Library; on St. Cuthbert, St.
Aetheldrytha, St. Bennet junior, and St. Oswald, in the public Library at
Cambrige; on St. Ceadda amongst Mr. Junius's Manuscripts; and on St. Cuthbert,
St. Swithin and St. Ethelgetha, in that of Bennet College. Other general
Historians of this kind (besides John of Tynmouth and Capgrave, already
mentioned) we have not many. John Wilson's Martyrology is not much to be
heeded, since an unquestionable Usher, Antiq. Eccles. p. 109.
Judge of these Matters has thought fit to bestow the Epithet of Nugivendulus
upon its Author. And I know not what greater regard can be had to ( Tho.
Fuller's Hist, Eccles. lib. 1. p. 40. lib. 2 p. 91. etc.
great Friend) Father Jerome Porter, and his Flowers of the Saints. Particular
Lives may be ranked in the following Order.

St. Aldhelm's S. Aldhelm.
is most copiously written by W. of Malmesbury; whose Fifth Book of the English
Bishops, is (almost) entirely upon this Subject. It has been lately published
both by Dr. Gale and Mr. Wharton; whereof the former is Vid. Epist. Ded. ad
Angl. sacr. vol. 2. and Praefat. ad Lect. p. 1, 2.
said to have employed a careless Amanuensis, and the other confesses he
transcribed a very faulty Copy. Be that Matter as 'twill, betwixt the two we
may hope for an entire Book: whereas Father Act. Bened. Sae^. 4. par. 1. p. 726.
Mabillon gave us only an imperfect Abstract. Of what Authority this Writer is
to be reckoned, we have already been acquainted. It Is in this Treatise chiefly,
that this Credit flags, and that he falls below himself. Pervenisset ad summam
Laudem (says Praefat. at Hist. ^v. p. 11.
Dr. Gale) si carbasa sua non implesset Poetico farore; si veritatem Historia
Fabulis officiosis non contaminasset; si de splendore and dulcedine Aldelmi
minus prolixe judicasset. We are not sure the like was done for this renowned
Prelate by Egwine, Daniel (his Cotemporary Bishop of Winchester) and Alfred
Abbot of Malmesbury; though Pits Page 121, 144, 180.
affirms it: Nor can we tell what is become of those that were written by Ofmund
of Salisbury, or Eadmerus, which Praefat. ad Act. Bened, Saec. iv.
Mabillon vouches for, with the same assurance.

St. Augustine's is J. Pits, p. 136.
reported to have been treated on by Venerable Bede, S. Augustine.
in a very large Volume, the Manuscript Copy whereof is said to be in Walter
Cope's Library. Bid Hist. Eccles. Edit. Wheloc. page 494.
himself says he corrected a false Translation of the Life of St. Anastasius;
which I am apt to think is the Groundwork of this Story. There Is hardly so
good an one for Pits, p. 141.
Nothelmus's three Treatises of his Life, Miracles and Translation; which were
undertaken at the joint Instances of Bid and Alcuinus. It Is enough that we
have a bigger and a less. History of him (as well as two other like Treatises
on his Miracles) written by Gotseline, sometime Monk of Canterbury; the former
whereof is published by Act. Bened. Saec. 1. p. 499.
Mabillon, and the latter by Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p. 56.
Mr. Wharton.

St. Cedda's S. Cedda.
was either penned by Daniel Pits, p. 141.
Bishop of the West Saxons; or (which is the same thing to Bale and Pits) some
Particulars of it were, by that Prelate, communicated to Bid; who took care to
transmit them into his Ecclesiastical History.

St. Cuthbert's S. Cuthbert.
has been treated on at large by a great many Hands. 'Twas first engaged in by
Venerable Bede himself in a particular Inter opera ejus.
Tract; wherein he has omitted no Miracle, that could well be swallowed, even
by the greedy Faith of his own Age. He wrote it first in Heroic Verse; and
afterward in Prose. It is also J. Pits, p. 122.
said to have been compiled by Laurence Monk and Precentor of Durham; as it
certainly was by Reginald, Bibl. Cott. Claudius, D 4.
another Monk of that Church. AB. Usher Antiq. Eccles. p. 489. e Bibl. Cott.
Otho D. 14.
quotes a Manuscript Life of this Saint collected out of the Irish Histories;
and there is another in English Meeter, answerable to the forementioned Latin
Poetry, in the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle's Library at Naworth. Many
more are in Ibid. Nero, A 2. Vitellius, E. 1.
other Libraries. But that which I would especially recommend to my Reader, for
his Diversion and a pleasant Entertainment, is the printed 8vo. Land. 1663.
Legend of St. Cuthbert, with the Antiquities of the Church of Durham; which
was published by B. R. a Gentleman of the old Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 455.
Lord Fairfax's Retinue, but written by one Robert Hegge, sometime Fellow of
Corpus Christi College in Oxford. The latter part of the Title might have been
spared, since there is not much in it that will any way illustrate the
Antiquities of that Church: But the Saint's own History is prettily composed,
in a good orderly Method and handsome Style; intermixed with great variety of
Learning and witty Reflections. The Publisher did not do his Author Justice:
For, besides the concealing his Name, he Vid. D. Tho. Marshal. praefat. ad
observat. in Evang. Anglo-Sax. p. 492.
omitted a great many considerable Passages, all his Quotations, and a Learned
Preface. All these Defects have been lately supplied (from the Author's own
Manuscript) by Mr. Tanner; who has also added some curious Notes and
Observations of his own. This Piece he has had, for some time, ready for the
Press: and (methinks) the Members of that great Cathedral, which owes so much
to the Memory of this Saint, should encourage and countenance his Pains.

St. Dunstan's S. Dunstan.
Wonders were as famous in the West, as St. Cuthbert's in the North; and have
been as duly recorded. This was first done by Bridferth, Monk of Ramsey; who
was his Cotemporary, and whose Treatise is published in the Maii. Tom. 4. p.
344.
Antwerp Collection. This was afterward epitomized and beautified with a set
of new Miracles, by Bibl. Cott. Nero, c. 7. Vide and E. 8. It. Cleo, patra, B.
13.
Adalard, at the Command of St. Elphegus, to whom it is dedicated. This is also
published, with the former. Out of these two, and some other Helps, Osbern (a
very Learned Monk, and Precentor of Canterbury, about the Year 1074.) composed
a couple of elegant Treatises; in one of which he gives us the Life, and in the
other the Posthumous Miracles, of St. Dunstan. The former of these was
published by Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 88.
Mr. Wharton; and both of them by Monsieur Act. Bened. Saec. v. p. 654.
Mabillon.

St. Edmund, S. Edmund.
King of the East Angles has been celebrated in Saxon by Abbot Bibl. Cott.
Julius, E. 7.
Aelfric; and in old English, by John MS. in Bibl. Hon. D. Com. Carl^ol.
Lydgate, Monk of Bury. Both Bale and Pits tell us a formal Story of one
Burchardus, a Dorsetshire Hermit, whose Company was much affected by Fremund
Son of King Offa; whose Life (after he was Martyred by the Danes) he took the
Pains to write: and Fol. m. 63.
Bale pretends to have seen it. This very Life is quoted by John Survey of
L^nd. p. 28.
Stow; who says it is the Life of St. Edmund, and that Burchard was Secretary to
King Offa. 'Twas also written by Bibl. Cott. Vitelli^s, D. 14.
Will. Monk of Croyland; and more fully penned (at the Request of King
Aethelred and St. Dunstan) by the famous Abbo Flori^censis, about the Year of
our Lord 985. And, soon after the Conquest, another Book (of his Miracles) was
composed by Archdeacon Herman. The two last are bound up in Ibid. Tibe^ius, B.
2.
one Volume; with several other Pieces, relating to the Monasteries of St.
Edmundsbary and Ely.

St. Elphegas. S. Elphegus.
(AB. of Canterbury, who was also murdered by the Danes) is indebted to the
abovementioned Osbern; whose two Books, on his Passion and Translation, are
still Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 122. 143. Bibl. Cott. Nero, C. 7. Otho, A. 12.
Vitel. B. 17.
extant.

St. Ethelbert was slain by King Offa, S. Ethelbert.
A. D. 793. and had afterward the Honor of being reputed a Martyr. To him the
Old Church of Hereford was dedicated; and therefore Gyraldus Cambrensis (who
was sometime Canon there) took the pains to write his Ibid. Vitellius, E. 7.
Life, among many others that his teeming Pen has given us.

St. Ethelreda (commonly called S. Ethelreda.
St. Audry) was the famous Virgin Queen to Egbert King of Northumberland; and
first Founder of a Religious House at Ely. Upon this latter score, she has her
Life largely treated on by Ibid. Domitianus, A. 15.
Thomas, a Monk of that City; part whereof has only been published by Act.
Bened. Saec. i^. p. 739. Vid. etiam Bedae Hist. Eccles. Edit. Wheloc. p. 312.
313.
Mabillon, to whom we are likewise indebted for Saec. v. p. 608.
Wulstan's Life of Saint Ethelwold.

St. George. S. George.
Though neither Tinmouth nor Capgrave mention him amongst our English Saints,
yet we meet with him in both our old Saxon Legendaries. I cannot promise the
Reader, that he will have any great stock of English History in his Life: But
it is written at large by 4to Land. 1631. 1633.
Dr. Heylin; who designed to have obliged (for ever) our Knights of the Garter,
by such a signal Service to the Memory of the great Guardian Saint and
Protector of their Order. Out of this Elaborate Book have been stolen 4to Land.
1661. and 8vo. Ibid. 1664.
two shorter Accounts of his Life; which bear the same Title, and are sometimes
sold amongst Romances and Ballads.

St. Guthlac, S. Guthlac.
the Tutelar Saint of Croyland, had his Austerities early discribed by Faelix a
Monk of that Place, about the Year 730. who has the Honor to be quoted by our
Learned Rem. p. m. 319. MS. in charact. vet. Saxon. in Bibl. Ben. and Cot.
Nero, E. 1.
Camden, as a Poet fortunate enough in his descriptions, though Bale is pleased
to give this harsh Character of him, Fol. m. 50. a Vid. Pet. Blesens. in
contin. Histor. Ingul^.
Fictis Narratiunculis, immo manifestissimis mendaciis, Historiam, Monachico
more implevit. The like was done (in Latin Heroics) by Will. Bibl. Cott. Otho,
D. 14.
Ramsey, who died Abbot of that Monastery, A. D. 1180. of whom Comment. in C^g.
Cant. voce Grantae.
Leland (who was a good Judge of Poetry) gives this Account, that he was, Poeta
tam barbaro Saeculo clarus. We are told of a third, by Aelfric, in the
Cottonian G Hickes, Catal. Libb. Septen. p. 175
Library; which I guess to be that Saxon Translation of Felix's Book which is
mentioned by Archbishop Antiq. Eccles. p. 33. Bibl. Cott. Vespas. D. 21.
Usher. We are further assured by P. 193. 339. Vid. Bibl. Cott. Nero, c. 7.
Mr. Pits, that both Ingulfus and M. Paris wrote of the Life and Miracles of
St. Guthlac: but I dare hardly rely upon his single Authority.

St. Frideswide's exemplary Chastity is recommended to Posterity by Philip, S.
Frideswide.
Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 12. and 55.
sometimes Prior of her Monastery in Oxford: whereof there is a fair MS. Copy in
the Library of Jesus College in that University.

St. John of Beverley's S. John of Beverley.
History was first written (at the request of Aldred Archbishop of York) by
Pits, p. 188. Bibl. Cott. Otho, c. 16. Faustin^, B. 4.
Folcard, a Benedictine Monk, about the Year 1066. which was enlarged by Will.
Pits, p. 411.
Asketel (or Chettel, Clark of Beverley) A. D. 1320. Another draught was taken
of him by Id. p 204.
Alfred, Canon and Treasurer of that Church, in the beginning of the twelfth
Century: and a Third (or Fourth) by an Hist. and Ant. Oxon. lib. 1. p 11. and
Monast. Angl. Tom. 1. p. 169.
Anonymous Writer about 1373.

St. Marcellinus would have been utterly forgotten by our English Historians,
S. Marcellinus.
had not Pits met with him in his Travels beyond Seas; and learned (from his
own Coln. 1508.
printed Works) that he was a Dominican Monk of York, and one of the twelve
Apostles sent by Abbot Egbert ( A. D. 690.) to convert the Pagan Germans. The
Particulars of their Mission, with their Entertainment in Westphalia, Frisland,
etc. we have from his own Pen.

St. Neot's Life, S. Neot.
written by Will* Ramsey, is in the Library at Magdalene College in Oxford.
It Is in Verse: but of so Vi^. Not. in Aelfred. M. vit. p. 103.
low a strain, that the Author seems to have failed here of that Spirit which
Leland observed in his Guthlac. The Matter is likewise as fulsome as the
composure is flat; so that it is not probable we shall ever see it out of
Manuscript. I suppose this is the same which is quoted by Hist. et Antiq. Oxon.
lib. 1. cap. 13.
Leland, and some of our later Writers.

St. Oswald, S. Oswald.
Archbishop of York, merited highly of the Regular Clergy; and therefore it is
no wonder that a Manuscript Copy of his Life was to be had in (almost) every
Monastery of the Kingdom. That whereof Eadmerus was the Author (which seems to
have been collected with good Judgment, out of some others that had been
written before him) is lately Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p. 191.
published; as is also another written by an Apud Joh. Mabillon, Act. Bened p.
735.
Anonymous Monk of Ramsey. A Third, more Voluminous than either of these, was
composed by another Nameless Monk of Ramsey; which is now amongst the many more
valuable Manuscripts in Nero, E. 1.
Sir Jo. Cotton's Library. There also (as I Vid. Praefat. ad Angl. Sac. vol. 2.
p. 14.
guess) the Reader may meet with his Saxon Legend, by Abbot Aelfric: But where
he will find either of those that were penned by Ord. Vital. Hist. Eccles. lib.
2. ad an. 1108.
Folcard, or J. Pits, p. 237.
Senatus Bravonius, I cannot inform him.

St. Swithun's miracles were recorded by Lamfrid or Lantfred, S. Swithun.
a Benedictine Monk of Winchester, about the Year 980. Of whose Book we are
told there was a Manuscript Copy in the Lord J. Pits, p. 178.
Lumley's Library, and we are sure there now is one in Nero, E. 1. vide et
Gal^^, A. 13.
Sir Jo. Cotten's. This treats only of the great things he did after his Death:
but it is probable there was a former part of the Discourse (which seems also to
have been Prae^at. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 29. 30.
translated into the old English-Saxon Tongue) that took the Story higher. The
like, says Pits, page 181.
was penned by Wolstan, the same famous Monk of Winchester, who (about the Year
1000) did as much for St. Ethelwald: but I can hear of this piece no where else.

St. Wilfrid's S. Wilfrid.
uneasy Life and Sufferings were first regester'd by Eddius or Heddius, a
noted Monk of Canterbury; whence he was brought, by Wilfrid himself, to
instruct his Quire-men of the Kingdom of Northumberland in the Art of Singing.
Out of this (which is lately published by Inter 15 Scriptt. p. 40.
Dr. Gale) there was a second Account taken in Latin Rhyme by Fridegod, Edit. a
Job. Mabillon, Act. Bened. Saec. V. p. 283. e Bibl. Cott. Claudius, A. 1.
another Monk of the same Church, who was put upon the Employment by Odo,
Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop himself wrote a Preface to the Book,
which was omitted by Mabillon, but is since published by Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p.
50.
another; and, for this Mr. Pits page 174.
makes him a distinct Writer of St. Wilfrid's Life. A Third was written in
Prose by Apud J. Mabillon Act. Bened. Saec. III. par. 1. p. 196. et. Bibl.
cott. Caligula, A. 8.
Eadmerus; and a fourth by Vid. Monast. Angl. Tom. 1. p. 172.
Petrus Blesensis, dedicated to Jeofrey A. B. of York. So that this Petrus
Blesensis and Mr. Pit's Petrus J. Pits, p. 257.
Ripponensis (though he makes them two several Authors) are the same Person.
There is now in my Possession a Latin Manuscript Life of this Saint; which
perhaps may be the same with the last mentioned. It is certainly different from
the three first; and seems not to have Length enough for that tedious Discourse
on this Subject, which is said to have been written by one Id. p. 911.
Stephen a Priest; and Epitomized by William of Malmesbury. It begins, An^^
igitur ab Incar natione Verbi Dei Sexcei^^esimo tricesimo quarto; and ends with
St. Wilfrid's Epitaph, in twenty Hexameters.

St. Wulstan (as two of his immediate Predecessors) S. Wulstan.
held the Archbishopric of York, together with the Bishopric of Worcester;
and was Sainted for the same Reasons as St. Oswald. There Is a double Account of
his Life already published; a short one by Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 541.
Hemming, a Monk of Worcester, and another (more at large) by the famous Ibid.
vol. 2. p. 241.
Will. of Malmesbury* But what is become of those by J. Pits, p. 237. et 339.
Bravonius and M. Paris, we know not.

These are they that make the most considerable Figure in the Saxon Calendar,
and whose Lives, being most amply treated on, will afford some Passages that
may be of use to our English Historian. Nor are the little inferior Saints of
those times to be wholly despised by him. He Will meet with abundance of such in
the several Voluminous Collections to which we sometimes referr him: And I dare
promise that, in most of 'em he shall frequently discover some hidden Treasure,
even in the midst of the most drossy Miracles.

CHAP. III.
Of our Church-Historians, from the Conquest to the Reformation.
THE Subject of this Chapter is, in a great measure, dispatched already. The
general Historians of the Kingdom, during this whole Period, were mostly Monks
and other Churchmen; who have taken care to Register our Ecclesiastical
Transactions as accurately as the Civil, and to carry along with them the
Affairs of our Church and State together. Canon Law and Appeals to Rome were
first brought into England in King Vid. Gervas. Dorobern. Act. Pontif. col.
1665. Number. 20. 30.
Stephen's Reign, upon the Debates that arose betwixt the Bishop of Winchester
(the Pope's Legate) and the AB. of Canterbury: And these soon introduced that
Exaltation of the Clergy, that they were necessarily in at every thing; no
Intriegue (either of the Court or Camp) being to be managed without them. So
that it is no wonder if, after that time, our Histories are generally crammed
with Disputes and other Matters of a purely Ecclesiastical Nature; and the main
Body of 'em look like the Annals of Saint Peter's Patrimony.

Odericus (or Ordericus) O. Vitalis
Vitalis ends his Ecclesiastical History at the Year 1121. some time before
these Alterations happened in England. He was Monk of St. Eurole's [ Vtici] in
Normandy; where he lived 56 Years. The most of his Thirteen Inter Script.
Normann. Fol. Paris. 1619.
Books are spent in Affairs of the Church within his own Native Country: But,
toward the latter end, he has intermixed a great many Passages that relate to
us. There are in his Writings two Faults (and they are great ones) which Lucian
of old condemned in History: For 1. He Is immoderate in the Praise of his
Friends; and the Dispraise of his Enemies; either all Panegyric, or all Satyr.
Now such Discourses are rightly observed to be strangely monstrous and
unnatural Productions: They want Meeter to become Poems, and Truth to make them
just Histories. 2. He Is too large in his Descriptions of little petit Matters;
and, on the contrary, passes too cursorily over some things of such weight as
would well endure Reflection and a second Thought. We are told of one J. Pits,
p. 248.
Richard Pluto (who was Monk of Canterbury, A. D. 1181.) a Writer of the
Ecclesiastical History of England; which he dedicated to Richard Duke of
Normandy. Where (or what) it is, I know not. But what is hoped for in that Book
may possibly be found in the Inter Hist. Angl. Fol. Oxon. 1684.
Burtonenses Annals; written, I suppose, by some Monk of Burton in
Staffordshire: For it begins with the Foundation of that Monastery, A. D. 1004.
and ends at the Year, 1263. Many Passages in it are borrowed from Roger Hoveden
(whom the Author calls Hugh) and not a few from M. Paris. The latter of these
was certainly Cotemporary with this Author, whoever he was; and they may be, to
good purpose, read together. The Reader will meet with a great many remarkable
Stories in it that are hardly to be had elsewhere: none (perhaps) having a
better Collection of Letters, Memorials, etc. of the Church History of those
Times.

The Defects of these Annals will be (in part) supplied by W. Linwood's Fol.
Oxon. 1679.
Provinciale; W. Linwood.
being a Collection of Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, enacted and
published by no less than Fourteen Archbishops of Canterbury, from Stephen
Langton (inclusively) down to Henry Chicheley. These give us a View of what
Points were chiefly under Debate in the Church, for about 200 Years; and are
ranked (after the Example of the Decretals) under several distinct Titles, or
Common Places: having annexed to them a large Commentary or Gloss, of the
Learned Collector's own composure. This Writer was Dr. of Laws, Official of
Canterbury, and (at last) Bishop of St. David's; after he had been employed by
King Henry the Fifth in Godwin. de praeful. p. 613.
several Embassies, and entrusted with his Privy Seal. The Book was first
published by 4to. Paris. 1506.
Jodocus Badius, and dedicated to Archbishop Warham: but, the Abbreviations in
the Original MS. being retained in this, and two following Editions, it was
lately reprinted at Oxford, much more accurately and correct. The Legatine
Constitutions of the two Cardinals Otho and Othobon (in the Years 1236, and
1268.) have been always added to these, in the Prints; together with the like
Commentaries of John Acton or Athon, sometime Prebendary of Lincoln. The Oxford
Edition gives us the Canons of the several Archbishops entire and apart, as
well as in that confusion to which Linwood's Method had reduced them: and it
also intermixes some other Edicts of a spiritual kind; such as Edward the
First's Statute of Circumspecte Agatis, the Decree of the University of Oxford
against some Tenets of Wickliff, etc. Lastly, it furnishes us with some other
Canons made by Stafford and Wa^ham* which will bring us down as low as the
beginning of the Reformation.

What is here missing may be sought for in Sir Henry Spelman's H. Spelman.
Fol. Land. 1664.
second Volume of our English Councils; which unhappily wanted the finishing
Hand of its Author. Indeed, he was so far from perfecting what he had
projected, that he is Ath. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 697. and Wo^ Kennet, Life of Some.
p. 88, 89.
said to have left no more than 57 Sheets, of the 200. which are now published
under his Name: the rest being entirely owing to the indefatigable Pains of,
our late excellent Antiquary, Sir William Dugdale. It Is a pity that the joint
Labors, of two such great Men as these, should stand in need of a third Hand
to complete them: And yet the Errors that were committed (either in
Transcribing, or Printing, or both) are apparently so many, that we cannot but
earnestly wish that better care may be taken in a second Edition. Archbishop
Sheldon and Chancellor Hide thought such a Structure, as this, worth the
rearing; and will none of the present Patrons of our Church think fit to repair
it? Mr. Somner has long since made a considerable advance toward so good a
Work; having with W. Kennet, ibid.
great Pains and Accuracy collated the Printed Copy with many of the Original
Records, and in the Margin amended the infinite Defects. This Book is now,
amongst others of the same worthy Person's valuable Labors, in the Library at
Canterbury: where it cannot lie much longer in obscurity.

After the Papal Yoke was thrown off, N. Harpesfield.
in that great Revolution, which was begun in our Church by King Henry the
Eighth, and finished by Queen Elizabeth, the Roman Emissaries tried all
imaginable Expedients, to reduce us to our former Obedience; and, amongst
others, spared no Pains in representing to us the Primitive State of
Christianity in this Isle. The first of these doughty Champions was Nicholas
Harpesfield, sometime Archdeacon of Canterbury; but outed ( A. D. 1559.) for
refusing the Oath of Supremacy. John Pits Page 781.
says he, was afterward imprisoned. So far from it, that AB. Parker took him
into his own particular care; and gave him all the assistance he could wish
for, in compiling what he calls his Fol. Duaci. 1622.
Ecclesistaical History of the British Church. In the first Ages he has lazily
followed Bid and Malmesbury; transcribing the very Errors of such Copies as he
met with, and not giving himself leisure to examine the Incoherencies in
Chronology; and other Contradictions, that he delivers for good and grave
History. In aftertimes, he amasses Things together, out of the Registraries and
other Helps he had at hand, without any sort of Order or Form: Insomuch, that
sometimes the Reader is plagued with several Sheets of tedious Impertinences;
and elsewhere scarce meets with the bare Names of the Prelates for some Ages
together. Some things are said to have been expunged out of his Original
Manuscript, by the Licenser of his Book; being mostly particular Opinions of
his own, condemning the Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 172.
Discords, Broils, and ambitious Poverty of the begging Friars: So that we may
probably want the best part of his Work; since this would have a little
balanced that Vid. Somner. Antiq. Cantuar. p. 272.
load of Infamy which he endeavors to lay upon the chief of our Reformers. I
confess our Oxford Antiquary gives a somewhat different Character of this
History: Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 137.
Quo quidem in Libro Eruditio an Industria conspicua magis sit, haud facile
dicendum. Vtroque revera Nomine laudandus adeo comparet, ut, nisi partium
studio abductus suorum in Vtilitatem omnia rapuisset, haud modice de Republica
Literaria meruisset.

Another Zealous engager in this undertaking was, R. Parsons.
the famous Jesuit, Robert Parsons; who wrote an Account of the three
Conversions of England from Paganism to Christianity, in as 8 vo. Audomar.
1603. 1604.
many little Volumes. The first of these he ascribes to St. Peter; whom he very
Logically proves to have been here, because he was not at Rome when St. Paul
sent his Epistle thither. His story of King Lucius's change is Vsserii Antiq.
Eccles. p. 26.
shown to be borrowed from Baronius; who also (though he would have been loath to
have owned any such thing) had it from the Centuriators. The whole seems to
have been designed in answer to Mr. Fox, whom he profess'dly opposes,
throughout a great part of his Second and Third Volumes. He represents that
Author, as a Person very ignorant and very dishonest; perverting the Sense in
some of his Quotations, and mistaking it in others.

Rich. Smith R. Smith.
(Titular Bishop of Chalcedon, who took upon him to exercise Episcopal
Jurisdiction here in the beginning of K. Charles the First's Reign) was not
much short of Parsons in Learning; and was certainly much his superior in that
Candor and fair Dealing which ought to be the Property of an Historian. He
made very large Collections out of our English Histories; which were published
(in seven Books) under the Title of Fol. Paris, 1654.
Flores Ecclesiasticae Historiae Gentis Anglorum. The whole Volume is rather an
indigested heap of Materials than a just and formal History: and thus much may
be said in it is commendation, that it honestly Quotes the Reformed Writers as
well as those of the Author's own Persuasion.

After these Flores, M. Alford.
came out the Annals Ecclesiae Britannicae (in Leod. 1663.
four Volumes) by Michael Alford, a Jesuit; whose true Name is Ath. Oxon. p.
387.
said to be Griffith. From this Work a late H. Woarton, Angl. Sacr. in Praef.
ad vol. 1. p. 15.
Learned Member of our Church has well proved how vain and empty are the brags
of our Romanists; who are frequently valuing themselves upon the great Treasure
they have of our Ancient English Records. These, they say, were carried off by
Monks and other Religious People, who were forced to fly in the last Age; and
are now ( in Salva Custodia) in several Monasteries beyond the Seas. It Is much,
as he unanswerably argues, that none of their own Friends should ever reap any
Benefit from these mighty Spoils: that this same Alford, for Example, should
not have the Advantage of one of those Venerable Instruments to grace his Book;
but be forced to run on in the beaten Track, and fetch all his Quotations from
such printed Authors as we poor Heretics have published for him. This is the
true state of his Case. There Is nothing in him that carries a Face of
Antiquity, save only some few Shreds that were picked up at Lambeth by
Harpsfield; who has furnished him and his Brethren with whatever looks this way.

Out of this Gentleman, S. Cressy.
and some more of our late published Historians, Serenus Cressy compiled his
Church History; which should have been brought down to the Dissolution of
Monasteries by K. Henry the Eighth, though what is Fol. Rothom. 1668.
published reaches no lower than the Conquest. 'Twas much wondered (by those
that had been acquainted with this Learned Person in Oxford, before he fled to
the Roman Communion) how he came to stuff his Book so full of Legendary
Miracles; since a Man of good substantial Learning, and that enlargement of
Thought which usually accompanies it, is very rarely split upon such Rocks. Yet
let this be said for him (says honest and blunt Ath. Oxon. p. 388.
Anthony Wood) that for as much as he mostly quotes his Authors for, and leaves
what he says to the Judgment of the Readers, he is to be excused, and in the
mean time to be commended for his grave and good Style, proper for an
Ecclesiastical Historian.

In the rear of these, let us remember such as have penned the Lives of those
few Saints that flourished in the English Church after the Conquest; who have
been usually Canonized for such Exploits as (in our days) are commonly thought
to desevre another sort of Treatment.

St. Anselm, S. Anselm.
who is believed to have a better Vid. Godwin. de Prae^ul. p. 95.
Title to his Saint-ship than any of those that follow, had great contests with
Henry the First about Investitures: an Account whereof, with the other
Remarkables of his Life, was written by John J. Pits, p. 249. vide etiam Bibl.
Cott. Nero, c. 7.
of Salisbury, an Author much commended by Petrus Blesensis. It Is the same with
that which is now extant in Manuscript (I suppose in the Library at Angl. Sac.
vol. 1. p. 109.
Lambeth) and goes by the Name of John Carnotensis.

St. Edmund's S. Edmund.
is I. Pits, p. 318, 319, 339. Bibl. Cott. Julius, D. 6. Vitelius, C. 12.
said to be penned by Rob, Bacon a secular Priest, and Dr. of Divinity in
Oxford; who is also reported to have been sometime Servant to that eminently
learned and pious Archbishop. The same Authority assures us that 'twas
likewise written by, his only Brother and Companion in all the varieties of his
Fortune, Ibid. Cleopatra, B. 1.
Robert Rich; as also by M. Paris. Let me add, 'twas also written by Hist. et
Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 10.
Albert AB, of Prussia, the Pope's Legate.

St. Gilbert of Sempringham (the Founder of our Famous English Order of
Gilbertines) had his Life written by a modest Brother of his own Order; S.
Gilbert.
who dedicates his Work to Hubert AB. of Canterbury. This is published in the
Monasticon, out of the Cottonian Library.

St. Goodric. Nicholaus Dunelmensis, S. Goodric.
a Monk of Durham, was (as M. Adan. 1170. p. 120.
Paris tells the Story) a great Comrade of an Eminent Hermit of his Time called
Goodric; whose Life Nicolas being by some of his Friends desired to Write and
Publish, he acquainted Goodric with the Design, and desired his Assistance. But
instead of having an Account of the remarkable instances of Piety and
Mortification, which he expected, the Hermit gives him a long Schedule of all
the Crimes he had been guilty of, during his whole Life: Yet, on a second
Importunity, his request was granted; and plenty of Materials given for such a
Treatise.

St. Remigius and St. Hugh, S. Remigius.
were both Bishops of Lincoln; and had their Histories written in the same Vid.
Angl. Sac. 408 et 419.
Treatise, by Gyraldus Cambrensis. The latter having himself been sometimes
Prior of a Carthusian Monastery at Witham in Somersetshire, had his Life also
written by one Adam, a Monk of that Order; which is supposed to be done about
the Year J. Pits, p. 442.
1340.

St. Richard (de Witz or Wych, S. Richard.
Bishop of Chichester) was sometime Chaplain to St. Edmund; and so intimately
privy to all the Severities of his Life that he could not well avoid the being
very exemplary afterward in his own Conversation. This, and the Miracles that
were necessary upon such an Occasion, procured for him an Enrolment in the
Calendar of Saints by Pope M. Paris, Edit. Wats. p. 982.
Urban, in the Year 1259. And Ralph Rocking, his Confessor, wrote Godw. de
Praesul. p. 554. et Pits, p. 349.
two Books of the History of his Life and Wonders which he dedicated to Isabel
Countess of Arundel.

St. Robert's S. Robert.
is reckoned amongst the Works of Id. p. 287.
Joceline Bracland; a Learned Monk of St. Edmundsbury about the Year 1214.

St. Thomas Becket S. Thomas Becket.
was the great Goliath Saint of these times; and, as his Shrine out-did that of
all the Martyrs that had gone before him, so his Life and Miracles have had
more Writers to record them (for the use of after Ages) than the most Glorious
Adventures of the best of our Kings. The following long list of 'em may be
picked out of Leland, Bale and page 214, 239, 249, 250, 257, 271, 286, 304,
316, 501, 797, 835.
Pits; together with some of our later Authors. 1. Herbert Bosenham (Boseham
Bibl. Cott. Nero, A. 5.
or Bosseham) Secretary to this Archbishop; who was also present at the
Slaughter of him. Others call him Herb. de Hoscham; and, by that Name, we shall
shortly meet with him again. 2. Edward a Monk of Bibl. Cott. Vespasianus, E. 10.
Canterbury; the Martyr's most intimate Friend. 3. Joh. Ibid. Claudius, B. 2.
Salesburiensis, who accompanied Becket in his Exile; but never countenanced
him in his Misbehaviour toward his Sovereign; being as sharp a Writer against
the Encroachments of the Papal See, as any Man of his time. 4. Barthol. Iscanus
(or Exoniensis) Bishop of Exeter; where he died A. D. 1184. 5. E. a Monk of
Evesham, who dedicated his Book (or wrote by way of Epistle) to Henry Abbot of
Croyland. 6. Will. Stephens (or Fitz-Stephen) a Monk of Canterbury; and, for
that reason, some times called Guilielmus Cantuariensis. He is said to have
written three several Treatises of the Life Martyrdom and Miracles, of this
precious Saint; which we are See W. Petyr's praef. to his Right of the Commons,
etc. p. 64.
told, are now in Cottons Library. But that which there carrys his Name seems
to have been penned by Joh. Carnotensis, who is the same Person with Vid G^dw.
de Praesul. p. 459.
Salesburiensis above mentioned; since in the Quadripartite History, what we
have from him, is often (in the same Words) in that Life there attributed to
Fitz-Stephen. 7. Benedictus Petroburgensis, Abbot of Peterborough; who died in
the Year 1200. 8. Alanus Teukesburiensis, Abbot also of the Monastery, from
whence he had that surname, who lived and died about the same time. 9. Roger
Monk of Croyland; who lived about the Year 1214. It Is Fuller's Worthies. p.
164. in Lincolnsh.
observed that St. Thomas's Miracles increased so fast in his time, that, as
late as he was started, he had matter enough for Seven full Volumes; in
composing whereof, he spent no less then Fifteen Years. 10. Stephen Langton, a
famous Successor of his in the Sea of Canterbury; whose Work on this Subject,
is said to be in the Library of Bennet College. 11. Alexander de Hales, so
called from the Monastery of Hales in Glocestershire, where he was sometime
Educated; one of the most eminent Schoolmen of his Age, Master to Thomas
Aquinas and S. Bonaventure, etc. 12. John Grandison, or Graunston, Bishop of
Exeter, who died in the Year 1369. 13. Quadrilogus, or the Author of the Book,
entitled, De Vita and Processu and Thom^ Cantuariensis and Martyris super
Liberate Ecclesiastica. It Is See Dr. Brady's Pref. to his English Hist.
collected out of Four Historians, who were Cotemporary and conversant with
him, in his height of Glory and lowest depression; Herbert de Hoscham, Joh.
Carnotensis, Will. of Canterbury, and Alan of Tukesbury: who are brought in, as
so many several Relators of Matters of Fact, interchangeably. This Book was
long since Paris. 1495.
printed in an Old Character and senseless Method; and is often quoted by our
Historians, in the Reign of Henry the Second, by the Name of Quadripartita
Historia. 14. Thomas Stapleton, the Translator of Bid; in whose De tribus
Thomis. Fol. Duac. 1588.
Pair-royal of Thomas's, this Gentleman makes as considerable a Figure as
either Thomas the Apostle or Thomas Aquinas. 15. Laurence Vade, or Wade, a
Benedictine Monk of Canterbury, who lived and died we know not when or where;
unless perhaps he be the same Person with, 16. An Anonymous Writer of the same
Life, who appears to have been a Monk of that Church; and whose Book is now in
Manuscript in the Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 523. Vid. and Bibl. Cott. Vitellius,
C. 12. Vespasiamus, B. 14.
Library at Lambeth. 17. Rich. James (Nephew to Dr. Tho. James, our Bodleyan
Library Keeper) a very industrious and eminent Athen. Oxon. p. 524, 525. See
also AB. Usher's Letters, p. 303.
Antiquary; who endeavored to overthrow the great Design of the forementioned
Authors, in his Decanonizatio Thomae Cantuariensis and suorum, which (with many
other MSS. of his Composure) is in the Public Library at Oxford.

CHAP. IV.
Histories of the Reformation, and of our Church Affairs, down to the end of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
THE first Man that engaged in the History of our Reformation was Mr. John Fox,
J. Fox.
sometime Prebendary of Salisbury, who died at London in the Year 1587. His
Acts and Monuments were first written in Latin, for the Instruction of
Foreigners; and were so published, during his own Exile in the Reign of Queen
Mary. They afterward grew into two large English Volumes, which have had
several Land. 1583, 1596.
Impressions; and have (at last) been published in Ibid. 1684.
three, with fair Copper-Cuts. In behalf of this last Edition, the Publishers
had well nigh prevailed with King Charles the Second to revive Queen
Elizabeth's Order and AB. Parker's Canon, for the having a Set of these Volumes
in the Common Halls of every Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, etc. But
that Project failed, and came to nothing: And indeed it would have looked a
little odly, to have paid such a respect to the Works of an Author, Hist. and
Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 195.
Qui Matri Ecclesiae Anglicanae non per omnia Amicus deprehenditur, ut pote qui
Puritanis faveret, and Ritibus Ecclesiae se non Conformem praestiterit. The
Design of the Author is to discover the Corruptions and Cruelties of the Romish
Clergy; together with the Sufferings and Constancy of the Reformed, and of the
Maintainers of their Doctrins in all Ages of the Church: which he has done so
thoroughly, that it is no wonder to find those of the Papal Communion very much
galled with his Writings. Hence the Jesuit Parsons De tribus Convers. vol. 1.
took such Pains to represent him as a Corrupter of Antiquity, an impertinent
Arguer, etc. And Nich. Harpsfield treated him as coursely; in those 4to.
Antverp. 1566.
six Dialogues of his, which were printed beyond Seas in his Friend Alan Cope's
Name, during their true Author's residing in England. It must be confessed that
these Volumes (being large and penned in haste) have some Mistakes in them that
are not to be dissembled: But in the main, it is an Honorable Character that G.
Burnet, Praef. ad Hist. Reform. vol. 1.
one of the greatest Historians of our Age gives of them, That having compared
these Acts and Monuments with the Records, he had never been able to discover
any Errors or Prevarications in them, but the utmost Fidelity and Exactness.
Indeed, where his Stories are of a more modern Date, and depend on common
Reports, or such Informations as were sent him from distant parts of the
Kingdom, the like exactness is not always to be looked for; since the Author's
hasty Zeal against the Papists, furnished him with a large Stock of Faith, and
a readiness to avouch any thing that might effectually blacken them and their
Religion. One Young Lawyer's Recr. p. 161. and Roll's Reports. p. 87.
unlucky Tale occasioned a deal of Trouble to a Clergyman; who very innocently
reporting from him that one Greenwood had by Perjury taken off a Martyr in
Queen Mary's Reign, and came afterward to a shameful End; the said Greenwood
was (it seems) present at the Sermon, and brought an Action of Scandal against
the Preacher. However the Judge cleared him at the Trial; as only harmlesly
quoting an Author, without any malicious intent, of slandering his Neighbor.
Such Slips as these were pretty numerous in some of the first Editions: But as
many of them as came to the Author's knowledge were rectified by himself; and
others have been corrected since his Death.

Several Papists were provoked to write Counterparts to these Volumes; Popish
Historians.
wherein they pretended to set forth the Reformers in as bloody a Dress, as Fox
had painted Them; and to draw up as large Kalendars of their own Martyrs. The
chief of these were, 1. Maurice Chancey (by some called Chamney, and by others
Chawney) a famous Carthusian Friar in the Monastery of that Order near London;
who fled upon starting the Question of the King's Supremacy, and died in a
voluntary Exile A. D. 1581. He wrote a large Account of the Sufferings of Sir
Thomas Moor, Bishop Fisher, and others; as also of Eighteen Monks of his own
Order. This Work bears the Title of 4to. Mogunt. 1550. and. Colon. 1607.
Historia aliquot nostri saeculi Martyrum; and is falsely subdivided into three
several Books by John Pits. 2. John Fenn, sometime a Civilian of New College in
Oxford, and afterward a Member of the University of Lovain; who clubb'd with
one John Gibbon, a Jesuit, for such another Martyrology: which they published
under the Title of 8vo. Trev. 1583.
Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia adversus Calvino-Papistas and
Puritanos. This Book was afterward enlarged by John Bridgwater (or
Aquaepontanus, as he styles himself) another Jesuit; who, having corrected
many faulty Particulars, and added about a hundred new Martyrs, dedicated his
4to. Trev. 1594.
Edition to the AB. of Triers. 3. Thomas Worthington, Doctor in Divinity, and
sometime President of the English College at Doway; who died in England, A. D.
1626. His Book or Pamphlet (for it consists only of Four Sheets) bears the Name
of 8vo. Duac. 1612, 1614.
Catalogus Martyrum pro Religione Catholica in Anglia occisorum ab Anno 1570.
ad Ann. 1612. and is mostly taken out of the Book last mentioned. It Is chiefly
valuable upon the Account of a Preliminary Discourse; wherein the Author gives
the History of our English Seminaries beyond Seas, and the Success that has
attended several Missions out of them. 4. John Musheus, sent from Doway into
England; where he lived A. D. 1612. somewhere in his Native County of York. He
is J. Pits, p. 810.
said to have drawn a Register of the Sufferings of all the Roman Catholics in
the Northern parts of this Kingdom.

Nicolas Sanders deserves a peculiar Respect, N. Sanders.
and ought to be considered by himself. The short of his Story (as we have it
from his Nephew Page 775.
Pits) is this: He was born in Surrey, Educated at Winchester and New College
in Oxford; where he was sometime Regius Professor of the Canon Law. He
afterward fled to Rome: whence he attended Cardinal Hosius to the Council of
Trent, as also into Poland, Russia, etc. At last Pope Gregory the 13th sent
him, as his Nuncio, into Ireland; where he died about the Year 1580. He was an
indefatigable Writer, as well as Warrior, for the Roman Cause; and stuck at
nothing that he thought might advance it. Amongst his many Treatises, those
that fall under our present Consideration, are 8vo. Colon. 1610.
De Martyrio quorundam temp. Hen. 8. and Elizab. running in the same Strain
with those of the like Title already mentioned. 8vo. Colon. 1585. Romans 1586.
etc.
2. De Origin and Progressu Schismatis Anglicani, with such Enlargements as
were made to it by Edward Rishton, another Popish Emissary, Camd. Annal. R.
Eliz. ad An. 1584.
Qui impie ingratus in Principem cui vitam debuit, publicatis scriptis malitiae
Virus illieo evomuit. This Libellous Invective was mainly designed for a
Calumny upon Queen Elizabeth, in her Birth and Parentage. It was not in her
Reign allowed to be answered: because such an impudent Slander ('it was thought)
would soonest fall to nothing, if slighted and despised. But this allowance, of
its walking abroad without control, has emboldened some in our Days to
magnify its Authority; and to quote it as a Story of great Truth and Gravity.
Hence it has had the Honor to be translated, by a Polite Pen, into 8vo. Par.
1673, 1674.
French: A respect which had formerly been paid it in Italian by L' Hist.
Eccles. della Rivoluzion d' Inghil terra. 8vo. Romans 1594.
Pollini, who (though he pretended to write a History of his own, yet) in reality
was no more than a Translator of Sanders. But sufficient care has been taken by
our Learned Bishop In fi^e utriusque Tomi Hist. Reform.
Burnet, to guard the English Protestant Reader against any Mistake that this
bold Romancer might lead him into; by publishing a Catalogue and Refutation of
his Calumnies and Lies. His Style is generally clean and pretty; and his way of
telling his Tales is facetious enough and pleasant: So that the Book may pass,
with Argenis and Euphormio, for good Diversion; but ought not to be relied on
for sound History.

Great were the Clamours of many other Romanists upon this Kingdom's breaking
the Papal Tyranny, R. Twisden.
and the Monarchy's resuming its ancient and just Rights; insomuch that
Pamphlets were penned and published by Men of all Professions (Priests, Lawyers
and Lay-Gentlemen) aspersing our Reformers with Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, etc.
As much of these as falls under our present Consideration has been amply
replied to by Sir Roger Twisden, in his most elaborate 4to. Land. 1675.
Historical Vindication of the Church of England in point of Schism; as it
stands separated from the Roman, and was reformed 1 Eliz. Wherein he shows, 1.
How the Papal Usurpations grew upon us; and what immense Sums they extorted
from the English Clergy. 2. That our Kings were always believed to be invested
with a Plenary Power in sacris; as much as is at this Day acknowledged by our
Laws. 3. That the Procedure of our Princes, in this Separation from the Roman
See, was agreeable to that Power; and consistent with the legal and primitive
Constitution of our Government. These Particulars he proves at large, by the
irrefragable Authorities of a vast number of our old Histories and Records;
wherein no Man was ever better versed than this truly Learned and Religious
Baronet.

Though Sir Henry Spelman In Praefat. ad Tom. 1. p. 2.
speaks of a third Tome of his Councils (which should give us a Collection of
all the Acts and Constitutions of our Reformed English Church) as of a Work
already finished, H. Spelman.
and ready for the Press, we have no great encouragement to enquire after any
such thing. We have seen in what an imperfect Condition the second was left at
his Death; and though his Grandson acknowledges some assistance given, in the
Edition of that Volume, by Mr. Stephens, (who Vid. Car. Spelm. Praef. ad Tom. 2.
he says, not only Corrected the Press, but brought in a deal of Materials,
yet) he says nothing of any such Provision like to be made for the sending
abroad his Grandfathers third Tome. The Truth is, the Gentleman takes no notice
of his chief Benefactor in that Matter; who was (as has been already observed)
Sir Will. Dugdale; and who seems to have had a Resolution to have completed
the whole Work. Amongst his MSS. at Oxford, there is one Volume of his own
Collections, which he has Entitled, Inter MSS. Dugd. in Musaeo Ashmol. lit. Y.
Papers to be made use of for a Third Volume of the Councils; or History of the
Reformation: And there is no doubt but they will be found to contain most of
what was any where to be had on that Subject.

Thomas Fuller's Fol Land. 1655.
Church History must have the next Place: for, T. Fuller.
though he begins higher, and goes lower than the strict limits of this Chapter
would require, his chief business falls within the Times we are speaking of. It
starts with the first planting of Christianity in this Island; and ends with
the Death of King Charles the First. It Is divided into Eleven Books; whereof
the Sixth gives the History of the Abbeys of England; from the first rise of
Monkery, to the final Eradication of it under Henry the VIII. These are
subdivided into lesser Sections; which are severally dedicated to such Patrons
as were most likely to make their due acknowledgments to the Author. Nor were
these Infant Lords and Rich Aldermen the only People he designed to flatter. He
was to make his Court to the Powers then in fashion; and, he well knew, nothing
would be more grateful to them than squinting Reflections on the Management of
the Late King's chief Ministers of State, Eminent Churchmen, etc. For such
mis-behaviour as this he was severely taken to task by Peter Heylin, in his
8vo. Land. 1658.
Examen Historicum: to which was added Dr. Cosin's Apology in Answer to some
Passages in that History, which concerned himself. We have formerly observed
that his Worthies were sent abroad to Apologize for the mistakes in his
Church History; and we have here an ample instance of the Truth of that Remark.
Upon the King's Restoration, Dr. Cousin was deservedly advanced to the Sea of
Durham; and 'twas then high time to harp upon another string, and to turn his
Eloquence another way. The late wavering Doctor, is now the very Fuller's
Worthies, p. 295. in Durham.
Atlas of the Protestant Religion; confirming the same with his Piety and
Learning, etc. But to what purpose should we insist upon Particulars? Through
the whole he is so full of his own Wit that he does not seem to have minded
what he was about. The Gravity of an Historian (much more an Ecclesiastical
one) requires a far greater care, both of the Matter and Style of His Work,
than is here to be met with. If a pretty Story comes in his way, that affords
scope for Clinch and Droll, off it goes with all the gayety of the Stage;
without staying to enquire whether it have any Foundation in Truth, or not; and
even the most serious and most authentic Parts of it are so interlac'd with
Punn and Quibble, that it looks as if the Man had designed to ridicule the
Annals of our Church into Fable and Romance. Yet, if it were possible to refine
it well, the Work would be of good use: since there are in it some things of
Moment, hardly to be had elsewhere; which may often illustrate dark Passages in
more serious Writers. These are not to be despised, where his Authorities are
cited and appear Credible: But, otherwise (in matters wherein he is singular,
and without his Vouchers) (...).

The first that attempted a formal History of our Reformation was Dr. Peter
Heylyn; P. Heylin.
who, upon the return of Monarchy and Episcopacy, published his Book entitled
Ecclesia Fol. Land. 1661.
Restaurata; wherein he pretends to give a punctual account of the rise and
progress of that great Work. But the first Agitations in Religion (as he calls
them) are very slenderly touched; his Story beginning at the Year 1537. What he
chiefly designed by it, I cannot well apprehend; unless 'twas to show K.
Charles the Second the Errors and Mistakes of our first Reformers, and to
direct him how to settle the Church on a better Foundation: For he falls foul
on all the Princes of those Times, without any regard to their good or ill
Wishes to the Protestant Interest. He represents K. Edward the Sixth as one of
ill Principles, and Soft; and Censures his Mother's Relations with a more than
ordinary Freedom. He intimates as if the Zwinglian Gospellers would have
carried all before them, had that Prince Lived; and observes they were far too
rife in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reformation, when many were raised
to great Preferments, who were too much inclined to the Platform of Geneva. On
the other hand; Queen Mary's Bloodiness is no where set off in so lively a
Paint as where he tells us, Page 139.
She admitted of a Consultation for burning the Body of her Father, and cutting
off the Head of her Sister. It Is a good Rule which a modern Le Moyne. Dissert.
4. cap. 3.
Critic gives his Historian, That he should have a Regard to his own Birth;
and not forget the Respect due to the Memory of those Princes that have
Governed his native Country. As this should restrain a Man from exposing the
Failures of such Governors in their own Persons; so it ought to caution him
against making too free with the Frailties of their Kindred and Counselors. He
concludes with the Act of Establishing the Government of the Church by
Archbishops and Bishops, in the Eighth Year of Queen Elizabeth; whose famous
Court of High Commission, he calls the Principal Bulwark and Preservative of
the Church of England. If the Reader desires any further Character of this
Writer and his History, it is given him by one G. Burnet, Praef. ad Hist.
Reform. Tom. 1.
who should be best acquainted with it: He wrote (says he) Smoothly and
Handsomely; His Method and Style are good; and his Work was generally more read,
than any thing that had appeared before him. But either he was very ill
informed, or very much led by his Passions; and, being wrought on by some
Violent Prejudices against some that were concerned in that Time, he delivers
many things in such a manner, and so strangely, that one would think he had
been secretly set on to it, by those of the Church of Rome. Though I doubt not
but he was a sincere Protestant; but violently carried away by some particular
Conceits. In one thing, he is not to be excused, That he never vouched any
Authority for what he wrote: which is not to be forgiven any who write of
Transactions beyond their own Time, and deliver new things not known before.
[The most of his Materials (I guess) were had from the Transcript which AB.
Laud caused to be made of all that related to the Story of the Reformation, out
of those eight large Volumes of Collections that are still in the Cleopatra, E.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. F. 1, 2. Vid. etiam Hist. and Synops. Bibl. Cott. p. 43.
Cottonian Library.] So that upon what Grounds he wrote a great deal of his
Book we can only conjecture; and many, in their Guesses, are not apt to be very
favorable to him. I know endeavors have been used to blunt the Edge of this
Censure; by one G. Vernon, in vita D. P. H^yli^, 8vo. Land. 1682.
who has done all, that a true Friend could do, to place the Doctor and his
Writings in a better Light. But what would that kind Gentleman have said to a
sharper Sentence passed by B. Bar. Re. p. 18^.
another Learned Prelate on this Book? How would he have resented the telling
the World that Dr. Heylin's representing our first Reformers as Fanatics, was
an Angry and Scandalous injury to Truth and our Church? This, I confess, is
very hard Language; but, perhaps, it may more easily be digested than refused.

The Defects of the forementioned Author were abundantly supplied in the more
complete History of our Reformation by Fol. 2. vol. Land. 1681.
Dr. Burnet, G. Burnet.
the present Bishop of Salisbury; whose first Volume was published in the Year
1679. by Secretary Coventry's Order, and Dedicated to K. Charles the Second. In
the Months of December and January (in the Year following, 1680.) The Historian
had the Thanks of both Houses of Parliament for what he had already done; and
was desired to proceed to the finishing of the whole Work: which was done
accordingly. This History gives a punctual Account of all the Affairs of the
Reformation; from it is first beginnings in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, till
it was finally completed and settled by Queen Elizabeth, A. D. 1559. And the
whole is penned in such a Masculine Style, as becomes an Historian, and such as
is this Author's Property in all his Writings. The Collection of Records, which
he gives in the conclusion of each Volume, are good Vouchers of the Truth of
all he delivers (as such) in the Body of his History: and are much more perfect
than could reasonably be expected, after the Pains taken, in Q. Mary's days, to
suppress every thing that carried the Marks of the Reformation upon it. The
Work has had so much Justice done it, as to meet with a general Acceptance
abroad, and to be translated into most of the European Languages: insomuch that
even the most Picquant of the Author's Enemies allow it to have a Ant. Harmer,
in Praefat.
Reputation firmly and deservedly established. Indeed, some of the French
Writers have cavill'd at it: But the most eminent of them (Mr. Varillas and Mr.
Le Grand) have received due correction from the Author himself Reflections on
Varill. 12o. Amstel, 1686. Defense of those Reflections. Ibid. 1687.
Continuation of Reflect. Ib. 1687. Answer to Joach. Le Grand's Defense of
Sanders, etc. 4to. Ibid. 1688.
. It was no wonder to see some Members of the Roman Communion, laying out their
best endeavors to raise themselves a Name by so glorious a Service to their
Church, as the disparagement of this Writer (and the disgracing his History)
might justly have been reckoned: But 'twas a little unaccountable that the same
Rancour should possess Men within the Pale of our Reformed English Church; and
such as desired to be looked upon as Zealous maintainers of Her Honor, and the
Justice and Honesty of her Reformation. The first of these was Of the Subject
of Church power, 8vo. Land. 1685.
S. Lowth; who pretended only to batter the Erastian Tenets in Mr. Hobbes's
Leviathan: But took occasion, in the conclusion of his Book, to Censure the
Account Dr. Burnet had given of some of Archbishop Cranmer's singular
Opinions. This Gentleman had the confidence to assert, That both our Historian
and Dr. Stillingfleet had imposed upon the World in that Particular; and had
unfaithfully joined together in their endeavors to lessen Episcopal
Ordination. I am not now concerned with his Charge against Dr. Stillingfleet;
who did him the Honor, which he ought not to have hoped for, to expose his
Folly in a short Letter to the Bishop of London. His Quarrel with Doctor
Burnet, is wholly about Method and the Sea Dr. Burnet's Letters in Answer to
Mr. Lowth, 4to. Land. 1685.
Art of Composure; wherein, most certainly, these two Authors have extremely
differed. And yet, notwithstanding the awkardness of Mr. Lowth's Style, it is
thought the Man himself was not Master of so much Venom and Ill Nature, as
appears in his Book: But that he had a great share of his spiteful Language put
into his Mouth by a warm Neighbor; who is now dead, and ought to be forgotten.
The next Assailant was a peevish Gentleman in Masquerade; who, under the
feigned Name of Anthony Harmer, published a 8vo. Land. 1693.
Specimen of some Errors and Defects in the History of the Reformation, etc. As
if what he there gives were only a Sample of what he had in store for us: when
it appears that he has stooped to such mean and pitiful Remarks, as
sufficiently show that he had pumped himself to the bottom, and that his Malice
was upon the Lees. It Is a great Indignity which some have put upon the Memory
of a late most Reverend, Learned and Pious, Prelate; in reporting him to have
been the Author of that malicious Libel: For, whatever other unhappy Mistakes
he might be guilty of, he could never fall so low as to write at such an
unmanly and uncharitable Rate. The Historian vouchsafed this Book a short
Answer, in a 4to. Land. 1694.
Letter to the Bishop of Litchfield; to which the Animadverter made no Reply.
To those that are still inclined to favor the Specimen, I shall only say that
the whole 150 Particulars, therein summed up, will fall under these six Heads;
as being either, 1. Such aerie and superficial Matters as we usually call
Impertinencies. 2. Some inconsiderable Mistakes of the Printer's or Copiers. 3.
Others that have a little Weight; but might have been corrected without Noise;
and do not affect the Reformation. 4. Some few (a very few) that do touch upon
its Justice and Honor: In most of which it is easy to discern the Affection
which the Animadverter pretends to bear it, if Apologies for the old Monks and
N. Sanders be any Argument of such Affection. 5. Others wherein he himself is
mistaken. 6. Several Objections are raised purely for the sake of Calumny and
Reflection. These are the Thoughts I had of this Piece, upon my first perusal
of it; and I am thoroughly confirmed in them from the successful Pains that has
been since taken with it by my modest and industrious Friend. Something of a
fresh Attaque was afterward made by Discourses on Dr. Burnet and Dr.
Tillotson, etc. 4to. Land. 1695.
one, who had set himself to discredit, whatever had been published by this
Historian: And yet all that even such a Writer could find chargeable on his
History of the Reformation, was only, that See the Bishop of Sarum's
Vindication, 8vo. Land. 1696. p. 83, 87.
In a Matter of no great Consequence there was too little Care had in Copying
or Examining a Letter writ in a very bad Hand; and that there was since
probability that Dr. Burnet was mistaken in one of his Conjectures. I think I
may justly observe thus much of all those that have hitherto endeavored to
lessen the Repute of this History; That they have apparently shown their
Inclinations rather to bespatter the Author than his Work: And, whatever
Success such Persons may meet with in their Attempts, they have commonly the
Misfortune to discover themselves to be (at least) Men of like Passions with
their Adversary.

The Reverend Author of these Volumes published also an 8vo. Land. 1682.
Abridgment of them; Burnet 's Abridgment.
wherein the Reader has a full and clear View of the Reformation, without any
of those Obscurities or Defects that usually attend Works of this kind. Take an
Account of it in his own Words: I have wholly waved every thing that belonged
to the Records, and the proof of what I relate; or to the Confutation of the
Falsehoods that run through the Popish Historians. All that is to be found in
the History at large. And therefore in this Abridgment, every thing is to be
taken upon Trust; and those that desire a fuller Satisfaction, are to seek it
in the Volumes I have already published.

The Memorials of Archbishop Cranmer, which were lately published by Fol. Land.
1693.
Mr. Strype, J. Strype.
shall conclude this Chapter; though (were it not that the Subject rather than
the Title of the Book inclines me to bring them in here) they would more
properly belong to another Place. The Writer of them has adhered to Dr.
Burnet's Method; giving us his own Historical Account in Three Books (ending
with the several Deaths of Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary)
and in the Conclusion, a good Collection of Records. Several Things, relating
to the State of the Church during that Primacy, are well Illustrated by him;
and some Authentic Letters, and other Original Papers of Value, are discovered
and made public. The only Blemish I know in this Book is (what, it may be, the
Author will think its most comely Feature) the crowding so much of his other
Learning into the Body of his History; which, instead of entertaining his
Readers answerably to his good Design, is apt to distract and amuse them. Where
the Subject is dry and barren, a few choice Flowers out of a right
Common-place-book, are very refreshing; provided they are sprinkled with a
sparing Hand, and a steady Judgment. But, where the Matter it self is pleasant
and diverting, all those Embellishments are nauseous; and even Tully and
Tacitus themselves are troublesome.

CHAP. V.
Histories of our Bishops in general, and those of their several Sees.
THAT Joceline de Fourness (an Historian quoted by Stow and Fitzherbert) wrote
several Books concerning the ancient British Bishops, John Page 884.
Pits is very certain: But, whether he was an Englishman, or (as he rather
fancies) a Welch-man, he dares not be positive. One Book, indeed, of that kind,
was written by Joceline a Monk of Fourness in Lancashire; and is still Vid.
Vsser. Antiq. Eccles. p. 36.
extant: But (as the Author himself could not be of any great Age, so) his
Collections seem to have been made out of Histories that were penned since the
Conquest. Of somewhat less Account (I fear) is that of the Saxon Prelates,
whereof Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, is said to be the Author; whereof a
MS. Copy is likewise J. Pits, p. 178.
reported to be in the public Library at Cambridge.

After the Conquest, Since the Conquest
the Memoirs of our Bishops were taken by a great many Hands. Geoffrey (Prior
of Winchester about the Year 1100.) wrote a Panegyrical Account of them in
elegant Verse says De Gest. Pontif. lib. 2. p. 246.
Will. of Malmesbury; who himself more largely commented upon them in Prose.
His four first Books were published by Fol. Land. 1596.
Sir Henry Savil, from a very faulty Manuscript; and his Edition was Copied
more faultily in that of Fol. 1601.
Francfurt. In these we have all that could be had out of the many old
Catalogues which swarmed in our English Monasteries; together with what the
Author was able to inform us of his own Knowledge, touching his Cotemporaries.
Henry of Huntingdon's Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p. 694.
Letter, to his Friend Walter, describes the Prelates of his own Time, which
immediately succeeded to Malmesbury's; and it is done with all the heartiness
that becomes a familiar Epistle, and a Freedom inclining to Satyr. Ralph de
Diceto followed these with a Catalogue of his own drawing, from the coming in
of Augustine the Monk, to the beginning of King John's Reign: But there is
little in it worth the publishing. Joh. Eversden, a Monk of Bury (who died,
says Page 435.
Pits, about the Year 1636.) is said to have written de Episcopis Angliae, as
well as de Regibus: But Mr. Wharton could never meet with any such Treatise. He
found, he says, some of Mr. Joceline's Collections out of Eversden's Chronicle:
So that perhaps he is the same Man with that Johannes Buriensis, whom we have
mentioned in the Page 172.
First Part. We are also told of a like Book by one Nicolas Montacute, or J.
Pits, p 656, 657.
Manacutius; who is believed to have been sometime Master of Eaton School,
because (forsooth) most of his Works were in the Library of that College. What
good Things were heretofore in that Library, I know not: But, upon a Praefat.
ad Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 14.
late Search, nothing could be found that bore this Author's Name; save only a
pitiful Treatise (at Lambeth) de Pontificibus Romany, not worth the reading. I
fancy somebody's quoting this under the Title de Pontificibus (simply) has
given occasion to Bale and Pits, who collected and wrote in haste, to
Naturalize all his Bishops. Polydore Virgil's Book, or Id. Ibid.
Scrowl, of our English Prelates, is boasted of in our Seminaries beyond Seas:
And (his great Antagonist) John Leland assures us, he had taken mighty care to
collect their Remains, Comment. in Cyg. Cant. voc. Antoninus Beccus.
Et majori [cura] propediem in ordinem redigam. He had many other grand
Projects in his Head, which came to nothing. John Pits likewise very gravely
refers his Readers (in many parts of his Book de Illustribus Angliae
Scriptoribus) to another of his own composure de Episcopis: which we are Hist.
and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 142.
credibly informed, is only a poor and silly Abstract of the first (and worst)
Edition of that which falls next under our Thoughts, and deserves to be
separately considered.

Francis Godwine F. God. wine.
(Son of Tho. Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells) was most fortunate in his
Commentary, as he calls it, on this Subject; being himself advanced to the
Episcopal Order Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 497.
for the good Services that (as Queen Elizabeth thought) he had done the Church
by that Book. It was twice published in 4to. Land. 1601, 1615.
English; equally full of the Authors and Printer's Mistakes. The Faults of the
latter Edition (especially) were so very gross, that they put him upon the
speedy dispatch of another in Latin; Comment. de Praesul. 4to. Land. 1616.
which came out the next Year. The Style of this is very neat and clean; and he
seems to have taken more Pains in polishing it, than in gathering together all
the Materials of his History. He quotes no Authorities; excepting (belike) that
Posterity should acquiesce in his singly, without enquiring any further. He is
particularly ungrateful to the Author of the Antiquitates Britannicae; from
whom he has borrowed (by the Great) his Account of the Sea of Canterbury;
varying only the Phrase, and that sometimes for the worse. The like Carriage he
is guilty of toward Bale, Camden, and others: But what is most especially
notorious, is his transcribing out of Josseline and Mason, what he pretends to
have had immediately from the Archives and Registraries, from the Year 1559, to
his own Time. He is also frequently guilty of Chronological Mistakes; a too
confident Reliance on the Authorities of counterfeit Charters in Ingulfus and
others; an uncertain Calculation of Years, beginning some at Michaelmas, and
others at Christmas, etc. as his Authors blindly led him: and lastly, a
contenting himself with false and imperfect Catalogues of the Prelates in
almost every Diocese. These are the Failures where with he stands charged by
Praefat. ad Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 17.
Mr. Wharton; who modestly assures us that a better Progress had been made in
these Matters by himself, within the compass of Eighteen Months, than by this
Bishop in Twenty Years. Our Oxford, 4th. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 496.
Antiquary further complains, that he Puritanically vilified Popish Bishops;
with a Design thereby to advance the Credit of those since the Reformation:
whereby he had given unlucky Advantages to William Prynne (the professed Enemy
of Episcopacy) who made ill use of his Book. I will not say that either of
these Censurers are mistaken: but I must observe to the Reader, that each of
them intended to have furnished us with a View of this part of our
Ecclesiastical History, of his own drawing; and therefore, like all new
Builders, they must be allowed to spy more Faults in the old Fabric, than
others can. The former has helped us to a noble Stock of old Writers upon the
Affairs of a great many of our Sees, from their Foundation, in his Anglia
Sacra: and the latter has given us almost an entire History of our Bishops, for
the two last Centuries, in his Athenae Oxonienses. These are good Materials;
and such as will direct to more of the same kind; whereof there are good store
in the Bodleian and Cottonian Libraries. We long only for a skilful Architect,
to put them into the Figure we desire. And (I hear) the Work is at last put
into the Hands of a Person, who wants none of those Helps or Qualifications
that are necessary to the Undertaking.

Hitherto we have mentioned only such as have written the History of our
Prelacy with an honest Intent, Inveetives.
to represent it to the World in its proper and true Colors: we have others
that have made it their Business to daub it with false Paint, endeavoring to
give such Pourtraictures of our Bishops, as might most effectually defame and
prostitute the sacred Order. The first of these was one Thomas Gibson, a
Fanatical Physician in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; who
entitl'done of his Treatises A History of the Treasons of the Bishops since the
Norman Conquest. Whether this was ever Printed my Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 109.
Author cannot inform me. The next was Sir John Harring ton of Kelweston; who,
soon after K. James the First's arrival in England, began to draw together some
malicious Remarks upon the Bishops of his Time; which he at last finished under
the Title of 8vo. Land. 1653.
A brief view of the state of the Church of England, as it stood in Queen
Elizabeth 's and King Jame 's Reign, to the Year 1608. It was presented by the
Author, in Manuscript, to Prince Henry; from whom the Presbyterian Faction
expected great Alterations in Church Government. After the downfall of
Episcopacy, it fell into such Hands as brought it to the Press; believing it to
be a proper Antidote against the return of the plaguey Hierarchis. The last of
this Gang was (that eternal Scribler) Will. Prynne; who raked together all the
Dirt that had been thrown at any of our Bishops, by the most inveterate and
implacable of all their Enemies; and hap'd it into a large Dunghil-Book
inscribed 4to. Land. 1641.
The Antipathy of the English Lordly Prelacy, both to legal Monarchy and civil
Unity: Wherein he pretends to give an Historical Collection of I know not how
many Hundreds of exercrable Treasons, Conspiracies, etc. of the British,
English, French, Scotch and Irish Bishops, against our Kings and Kingdom. But
-- it is time to rid our Hands of this Filth and Nastiness. The most ancient
Register Books and Records of our several Dioceses and Cathedral Churches will
less sully our Fingers.

S. ASAPH. S. Asaph.
The History of the Bishops and Deans of this Place was composed by the late
learned and industrious Mr. Wharton; whose Book was Historia de Episcopis et
Decanis Londinensibus; necnon de Episcopis et Decanis Assavensibus, a prima
utriusq sedis Fundatione ad. An. 1540. 8vo. Land. 1695.
published soon after his Death; as a Specimen of what his general Work (of all
the Dioceses in England) would have been if he had lived to have finished it.
To this Treatise (as well as to the other that is prefixed to it) there is an
Appendix of Authentic Instruments out of the Register Books, etc. According to
the Method first taught him by Dr. Burnet. In the Lives of the Bishops he
frequently quotes the Liber ruber Assavensis, an old Cartulary of that Church
of good Value.

BANGOR. Bangor.
Godwine De Praesul. p. 644.
mentions a Catalogue of the Bishops of this See, in the Archives of the Church
of Bangor; which I suppose was a very Empty one, since (upon the two first
Editions of his Book) he had not any thing to say of this Diocese.

BATH Bath.
and WELLS. What has been lately done for this Diocese, is already taken notice
of by Not. Monast. p. 195.
Mr. Tanner; whose Collections and References (let it be here observed, once
for all) I shall not repeat, but shall wish the Reader himself to consult his
very useful Book, saving only, that some of those Authors he barely quotes
(where I am able to do it) shall be set in the truest Light I can give them.
Let it be here also noted, that when ever he refers his Readers (as he does in
this place) to one or the other Volume of Anglia Sacra, they are there sure to
meet with a good view of such old Writers as have treated of the ancient
History of this or that Diocese; or else they have (at least) a composure of
Mr. Wharton's, very valuable for the Pains that Author took in adjusting the
true Chronological succession of our Bishops. Dr. Thomas Chandler (sometime
Hist. et Antiq. Oxon. par. 2. page 134.
Warden of New College in Oxford, and Chancellor of this Church) wrote a
Treatise, de Laudibus Bathoniae and Welliae; which, I suppose would afford us
some such Light as the same learned Person has given in those Lives, that have
been gratefully penned by him, and will be taken notice of in another place. I
guess the Historia de tempore Primaevae inchoationis Sedis Episcopalis
Wellensis, etc. which was made ready for the Press by the noble Publishers See
Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 66.
of the December Scriptores, is part of what we have had since from Mr. Wharton;
who also must be thought to have enriched his own Notes out of the Vid.
Praefat. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 51. 52.
great Treasure of Collections which was gathered and communicated to him by
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Matt. Hutton.

BRISTOL. Bristol.
This See, having only been erected by King Henry the Eighth, can have no
Records of any great Antiquity: but it is hoped its entire Story may be had out
of such Registers as are in the Hands either of the Bishop or Dean and Chapter
of the Church.

CANTERBVRY, Canterbury.
as in Justice it ought, has had the most and best learned Preservers of its
History and Antiquities of any Diocese in England. The first of these was
Archbishop Deusdedit, or Adeodatus; who is J. Pits, p. 109.
said to have recorded the Acts of all his Predecessors; which was no mighty
Undertaking, since himself was only the Sixth from Augustine. The eldest of
those Writers, whose Works are now Extant, is Gotseline the Monk; who (besides
the Life of Augustine, published by Mr. Wharton) wrote also those of the Six
following Archbishops. These are now in MS. in Vespasianus, B. 20.
Sir Joh. Cotton's Library: but (being only Collections out of Bid, with the
enlargement of a few Romantic Miracles) they have not hitherto been thought
worth the Printing. About the same time Osbern was Precentor of Christ-Church;
and (upon the Vid. Praefat. ad Ang. Sac. vol. 2 p. 9.
unhappy Fire, which destroyed most of their Records, A. D. 1070.) took a deal
of Pains in recovering the Histories of the Archbishops; several of whose
Lives were written by him, besides those we have in Print. Gervasius
Dorobernensis (that is, Monk of Canterbury) has left three good Treatises on
this Subject; which bear the following Titles; Inter X Script. Edit. Land. 1652.
1. Tractatus de Combustione and Reparatione Dorobernensis Ecclesiae. 2.
Imaginationes de Discordiis inter Monachos Cantuarienses and Archiepiscopum
Baldewinum. 3. Vitae Dorobernensium Archiepiscoporum. R. de Diceto's History of
these Primates was discovered in the Norfolk Library, after some others
(amongst whom he should have been ranked) were published: And 'twould not have
been any great loss if we had still wanted it; being Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p. 677.
very short, and mostly stuffed with Matters foreign to the Purpose. Mr. Pits
page 304.
sends us to the Library at Bennet College to enquire after a Manuscript Copy
of Archbishop Langton's Annals of his Predecessors: But he that runs on his
Errand, will find himself mistaken. There are, indeed, in that Library some
Collections out of the last mentioned Author's History of our Kings, which
relate chiefly to the Affairs of this See; the transcriber whereof had some
thoughts of Copying out St. Langton's History of Richard the First, and so
prefaced his Work with the Title of Annals Stephani Archiepiscopi: But he soon
quits that Subject, and so imposes upon a careless Catalogue-monger. The next,
in Order of time, was Tho. Spott, Spottey or Sprott, a Benedictine Monk of
Canterbury in the Year 1274. So Pits, p. 355. But Bale knew not when he lived.
whose Book has been vainly enquired after by some of our most Industrious
Antiquaries, and (particularly) by W. Somner, Pref. to Antiq. of Canterbury. p.
8.
one whom hardly any thing on this Subject could escape. The Truth is, Mr.
Somner seems to think 'twas rather a Chronicle of the City of Canterbury than
of the Archbishops; and, if W. Thorn (who was a Monk of the same House, in the
Year 1380.) either Epitomized or Vid. Pits, p. 355. et 529. V. etiam Thorn
inter X. Script.
Enlarged it, it may probably prove only the same with his History of the Bibl.
Cott. Vitellius, D. 11.
Abbots of St. Augustines. St. Birchington's Performance, is largely accounted
for by his late H. Wharton, in Praefat. ad Angl. Sac. vol. p. 18. 19, etc.
Publisher; who has assured us that nothing that either this Writer, or any of
the former can afford us has been omitted by the diligent Author of the Fol.
Land. 1572. and Hanov. 1605.
Antiquitates Britannicae. Archbishop Parker was generally reputed the Author
of this admired Book; till Hist. of Tithes, cap. 9.
Mr. Seldom transferred the Honor of it to (His Grace's Chaplain) Mr.
Josseline, who has since enjoyed it. I confess, I am far from being of AB.
Consecration, etc. of Protestant Bishops, p. 165.
Bramhal's Opinion, That the conclusion of the Preface proves the Acrhbishop
himself to have been the Author of that Book: But it does fairly intimate that
the Composer of it (whoever he was) did desire the World should believe that
most of his Materials were handed to him by that Learned Metropolitan; who was
also, he says, the Directer and Overseer of the whole Work. In the same place
the Hannow Edition is blamed for omitting Parker's own Life; which perhaps was
no fault in those that had the care of it. There were only a few Copies of the
First Edition (such as were designed for Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. page 588, 589.
public Libraries, and the accommodation of a few choice Friends) that had the
29 Pages, which make up that Life: so that 'twas not to be expected that the
Foreign Publishers should Print it otherwise than as 'twas commonly sold by our
English Booksellers. Mr. Wharton every where gives this Writer more respect
than any other he is pleased to cite: and yet he In notis ad Canon. Lichfield,
de Succes. Archiep. Cant passim.
observes a great many of his mistakes; and, I do not doubt but any skilful
Antiquarie will easily take notice of many and many more. So imperfect will
always be the most complete Works of any single Man For the Controversy betwixt
the Chapter of Canterbury and the Archdeacon, about the Right of Jurisdiction
Sede Vacant, see Bibl. Cott. Nero, c. 9. Galba, E. 4. Vitellius, A. 2. 8. D.
7. E. 4.
!

CARLISLE. Carlisle.
This remote and small Diocese has been heretofore so much exposed to the
continual Incursions of the Scots, (before the Kingdoms were happily united in
King James the First) that there are not many of it is ancient Records any where
now to be had: The only pieces of Antiquity, in the Bishops possession, are two
Register Books of four successive Prelates; Halton, Rosse, Kirkby and Welton:
and these will furnish us with little more than the History of one Century. The
Records of the Dean and Chapter go not much higher than their new Denomination
given them by Henry the Eighth; and are very broken and imperfect since that
Epoche. Out of these, and what other helps could be had from some Neighboring
and Distant Libraries, Dr. Hugh Todd (Prebendary of this Church) has made a
Volume of Collections which is lately placed in the Dean and Chapter's Library,
under the Title of, MS. in Fol.
An History of the Diocese of Carlisle; containing an Account of the Parishes,
Abbeys, Nunneries, Churches, Monuments, Epitaphs, Coats of Arms, Founders,
Benefactors, etc. with a perfect Catalogue of the Bishops, Priors, Deans,
Chancellours, Archdeacons, Prebendaries; and of all Rectors and Vicars of the
several Parishes in the said Diocese. My worthy Brother hopes that the
Additions which will hereafter be made to this Work, will (at last) make it
answer its Title; and I heartily wish I could do so too: But (to me) the
prospect is so discouraging, that I know not which way to look for such Helps
as would be necessary for the completing of so full and ample an Account of
our Church and Diocese. Our Sufferings in the days of Rapine and Rebellion,
equaled or exceeded those of any other Cathedral of England; and (after our
Chapter House and Treasury had been turned into a Magazine for the Garrison,
and our very Charter sold to make a Taylor's Measures) it can hardly be
expected that so many of our Records will ever be retrieved as are requisite to
finish out such a History.

CHESTER, Chester.
being another of King Henry the Eighth's Foundations, cannot have any great
stock of Records. Some notice may possibly be taken of its most early Times by
Mr. Vrmston; who wrote an MS. penes Tho. Brotherton Arm.
Account of the State of Religion in Lancashire (part of this Diocese) in the
beginning of King James the First's Reign.

CHICHESTER. Chichester.
Most of the ancient Records of this Church, were squandered and lost, upon the
City's being taken and plundered by Sir William Waller in our late Civil Wars;
and, after the Restoration, they never recovered more than three Books
belonging to the Chapter, and a Register or two of the Bishops. These do not
reach above 230 Years backwards: so that, the prime Antiquities of this See
(before the Episcopal Throne was removed from Selsey to this Place, and for
some Ages afterward) are either wholly lost, or in such private Hands, as have
hitherto very injuriously detained them from their right Owners. 'Till a
Restitution is made, we must content our selves with such poor Fragments as Bede, Malmesbury and others, will afford us of the first Foundation of the
Diocese by our Nothern Saint Wilfrid; who (with his Successors, in the same
Order that Godwine has given them) stands yet pictured on the backside of the
Quire. Here are the chief Remains of their History, as far as they are now to
be had within the Verge of their own Cathedral: to which if more shall be
added, by such Foreigners as are Masters of their dispersed Records; 'twill be
a very grateful (as well as just) service to the present Members of that
Church.

St. DAVID'S. S. David.
We have already noted the Disputes there are about Abbot Dinoth's Remonstrance
against the pretensions of Augustine the Monk; and we are told that he did not
only leave behind him his thoughts of that Matter in the forementioned
Protestation; but that he also wrote another Treatise, entitled, Defensorinm J.
Pits, p. 104.
Jurisdictionis Sedis Menevensis. Bishop Godwine quotes a Catalogue of the
Bishops of St. David's, not taken notice of either by Gyraldus or the Annals
Menevenses; which he De Praesul. p. 602.
says is in the Archives of that Church. There Is also an Anonymous Manuscript
in the Library at Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 56.
Magdalen College in Oxford which treats de Gestis and Ritibus Cler'
Cambrensis; and may probably afford some discoveries of the ancient State of
this Diocese.

DVRHAM. Durham.
The first Collecter of the History and Antiquities of this Ancient and Noble
Church, was Turgot; who was J. Seldon, Praef. ad. X. Script.
Prior, Archdeacon and Vicar General, of that Diocese. He was afterward
Bishop of St. David's: But, upon the death of Queen Margaret, returned to
Durham; where he died, A. D. 1115. and lies buried in the Chapter House. His
Book bears the Title, MS. in Bibl. Cott. Faustina, A. 5. see also AB. Usher's
Letters, p. 315. 321.
De Exordio and progressu Ecclesiae Dunelmensis; that is, from K. Oswald's Time
to the Year 1097. This was transcribed by Inter. X. Scrip.
Sim. Dunelm. mentioned in the former part of this Work; who also continued it
to the Year Praef. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 48.
1129. from whence it has been drawn downwards by Jeoffery de Coldingham, R. de
Greystanes, etc. There are still some latent Manuscript Histories of this
Church; which (if discovered) would undoubtedly supply a great many defects in
those that are already published. Prior Laurence (who died in the Year 1154.)
wrote a Treatise in Meeter, Vid. Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 787.
De Civitate and Episcopatu Dunelmensi. There are several MS. Tracts of that
Author's Composure, in the Libraries at Lambeth, Durham and elsewhere; and yet
we cannot hitherto learn where this is to be had. Tho. Rudburn, in the very
heart of his MS. in Bibl. Cott. Lambeth and Bened.
Historia Major, has a large History of the Bishops of this See, from the first
Foundation at Lindisfarn, to the Year 1083. which though mostly taken out of
Turgot and Simeon, has some remarkable passages never yet Printed. John
Wessington (who died Prior of Durham, A. D. 1446.) wrote a Book, Bibl. Cott.
Vitellius, A. 9.
De Juribus and Possessionibus Ecclesiae Dunelmensis; wherein, amongst other
choice Matters, it is proved that the Priors of that Church were always invested
with the Dignity and Privileges of Abbots. Sir H. Spelman Glossar. in voce
(...).
quotes some Synodical (or rather Consistorial) Constitutions made by Bishop
Lewis in the Year 1319. which certainly must be very learned ones, if they
answer the Account De Praesul. p. 121.
Godwine gives of that Prelate. The Cotton Library is hardly better stocked
with the Records of any Cathedral Church in England, than that of Durham;
whereof the chief is a large D^mitianus, 7.
Catalogue of their Benefactors, from King Edwine down to the Reign of King
Henry VIII. The beginning of the Book is in an old Saxon Character, as ancient
as the time of K. Aethelstane; in whose Possession it is very probable (from his
Name in the Title Page, supposed to be written with his own Hist. and Synops.
Bibl. Cott. p. 38.
Hand) it sometime was. There is also a Julius, C. 2. 6.
Miscellany Collection of a great many curious Particulars relating to St.
Cuthbert, and his Successors in that See; the Julius, D. 4.
Contests of the Prior and Convent with their own Bishops and the Archbishops
of York, about the Visitatorial Power; an entire Claudius, D. 4.
History of that Church, from its Foundation at Lindistarn (through all its
changes of Fortune and Place) as low as the death of Bishop Hugh, A. D. 1194.
with many other Vitellius, A. 9. 20. C. 9. D. 20. E. 1. 12. Vespesianus, A. 5,
6. Titus, A. 2. Domitianus, A. 7. 8. Faustina, A. 5, 6.
remarkable Fragments of its History. There Is also in the Bishops Library at
Durham, a MS. Collection of the Antiquities of this Church, transcribed by the
Directions of Bishop Cousin; wherein there is a different Account of some
Particulars from what we have in the Rites and Monuments, published by 8vo.
Land. 1672.
Mr. Davies. Nor is this last mentioned Piece such an ignorant and pitiful
Legend, as a very Wh. Kennet, in vit. Somneri, p. 21.
worthy Person has represented it; since there is no where extant so full and
exact an Account of the State of this Cathedral, at the suppression of
Monasteries. The Author seems to have been an Eyewitness of all that passed at
that time; and his Descriptions of such Matters as are still remaining, appear
to be so nicely true, that we have great Reason to credit him in the rest.
Besides these, there are now in the Possession of the Dean and Chapter, a great
many Authentic Records, Original Charters, Endowments, etc. which will enable
one to furnish out a much more complete History of this Church, than has yet
appeared: And I hope the Ingenious and Learned Dr. John Smith, now Prebendary
of that Cathedral, will think the Undertaking most proper for himself.

ELY. Ely.
That History of the Church of Ely which was partly published by Sir William
Dugdale, and wholly by Mr. Wharton, is not the Work of Thomas and Richard,
whose Names it carries; but an Abstract, by a nameless Author, out of their
much larger Volumes, which still remain in Bibl. Cott. Domitianus, A. 15.
(...). A. 1. Claudius, C. 9. New, A. 15, 16. (...). Vespasians, A. 19.
Manuscript. Some parts of the former have been printed, out of other Copies,
by L. D' Achery and Dr. Gale; if those Learned Gentlemen be not mistaken (as I
suspect they are) in their Conjectures. Dr. Brady In Praefat. ad Hist. Angl
vide etiam Bibl. Cott. Tiberius, B. 2.
quotes a Survey of all the Manors belonging to this Bishopric, taken in the
Year, 1248. but does not direct us where to find it. That S. Birchington (or
Brickington, as he calls him) wrote a Catalogue of the Bishops of Ely, P. 910.
Mr. Pits is very positive: But how he fell into that Mistake (wherein he is
followed by Vossius) has been discovered by a late H. Wharton, Praefat. ad
Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 20.
Writer, of much better Credit. He probably conjectures that, staging over the
Margin of one of our Learned Church-Historians, he met with this Quotation,
Antiq. Brit. p. 246, 248 Edit. Hanov.
Steph. Birch. Catal. Episc. Eliens. and thence presently concluded, that
Stephen must be the Author of the Catalogue there cited: Whereas the Historian
referred his Readers to two several Manuscripts ( Birchington's History of the
Archbishops of Canterbury, and an ano^ymous Catalogue of the Bishops of Ely)
for the proof of what he had there advanced.

EXETER. Exeter.
There is in Bodley's Library an old Latin Mass Book in Saxon Characters; in
the end whereof we have many Particulars of the Life of Bishop Leofric (who
gave the Book to his Cathedral) as his settling the Episcopal See at Exeter, A.
D. 1050. etc. It gives us also a Catalogue of the Relics that Church was
possessed of at the time when this Book was written. John Grandeson (who died
Bishop of this See, A. D. 1369.) is J. Pits, p. 500.
said to have written Martyrologium Exoniense: for a Manuscript whereof we are
advised to consult the Library at Bennet College. John Hooker (or Vowel,
Chamberlain of Exeter, where he died, A. D. 1601.) wrote a lean Catalogue of
the Bishops of that See; first published by him in Quarto, and afterward
inserted into Edit. Land. 1587. page 1300.
Ralph Holinshead's Chronicle. It begins with Eadulph, whom he unaccountably
calls Werstant, and ends at Bishop Woolton; who was consecrated in the Year,
1579. There Is no want of Materials for the composure of a much fuller History:
Since the Registers of a good many of the Bishops ( Stapleton, Brantingham,
Stafford, etc.) are cited by Hist. de Episc. and Dec. Land. etc.
Mr. Wharton; and many more pointed at by Mr. Ta^^er.

GLOUCESTER, Gloucester
being a Diocese of Henry VIIIth's Erection, cannot have any Records, relating
to the Sea it self, more authentic than that which acquaints us with the Bibl.
Cott. inter Codd. nondum in loculo^ reposit. Number. 9.
Erection of St. Peter's Church into a Cathedral: But there are many Venerable
Remains of Ecclesiastical History, which are to be had in the Register-books of
those Religious Houses and Parochial Churches which were then brought within
that Jurisdiction. Out of these Dr. R. Parsons (the present worthy Chancellor
of that Diocese) has collected two MS. Volumes; which are also digested into so
good a Method, that they well deserve the Title of a Complete History. The
first of these he styles Memoirs of the ancient Abbey and present Cathedral of
Gloucester: wherein he gives an Account of the Foundation of the Great Abbey of
St. Peter's in this City, and the Succession of its Abbots, down to the
Dissolution; with the History and Succession of the Bishops, Deans,
Chancellors, Archdeacons and Prebendaries, ever since the dismembering of it
from the Sea of Worcester. This Work was happily undertaken at the Request of
the late Mr. Wharton; who designed to have obliged the Public with it, in some
future Volume of his Anglia Sacra. We are not in despair of seeing the good
Services that were intended our Church by that Learned Person, fully finished
and brought to Perfection by some other able Hand: So that, it is to be hoped,
we shall not long want the Benefit of such successful Labors. His other Volume
bears the Inscription of A Parochial Visitation of the Diocese of Gloucester;
wherein the Matters treated on are chiefly Ecclesiastical, though some Affairs of
a Civil Nature are also intermixed. The Observations that occur in this are
partly owing to the Author's own View and Enquiries, made in the several
Parishes; and partly to such Helps as could be had out of the Registry at
Worcester, and his own at Gloucester.

HEREFORD. Hereford.
That there were anciently several good old Register-books belonging to this
Cathedral, is beyond dispute. Sir H. Spelman Glossar. in voce Panagia.
quotes one of 'em; and we have heard of several others, besides that of Bishop
Hist. Episc. and Dec. Londin. and Assav.
Booth. The Library and Archives here fell under the like Misfortunes, during
the Ravage of our late Days of Usurpation, with those of other Cathedral
Churches: being made a very improper Prey to a Fanatical and Illiterate Army of
Rebellious Blockheads. Amongst these Silas Tailor was an Officer of a more than
ordinary Fancy and Respect for Books and Learning; and, having gotten part of
the Ath. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 464.
Bishop's Palace into his Possession, thought it was also convenient to seize
as many of the Churches Evidences and Records, as he could possibly get into
his Clutches. With these (and many of the like kind from the Church at
Worcester) he troop'd off, upon the happy return of our old English Government;
and near Twenty Years afterward, died with some of 'em in his Possession at
Harwich. His Books and Papers, together with the other few Movables he left
behind him, fell into the Hands of his Creditors; from whom (if any care was
taken to preserve them) it will now be a very difficult Matter to retrieve them.

LANDAFF. Landaff.
Bishop Godwine De Praesul. p. 618.
assures us, that all he says of the Archbishops and Bishops of this See, down
as far as the Year 1110. was taken out of an old Manuscript-Register of that
Church; which seemed to him to have been penned about that Time. This, he tells
us, was most particular in the Account of the Acts and Miracles of St. Teliau,
the second Bishop of that Diocese; and therefore I take it to be the very same
with that which is, now in Sir John Cotton's Library, and (for that very
Reason) bears there the Title of Vid. Praefat. ad Angl Sacr. Par. 2. p. 27.
Teilo. From (...) Council tom. 1. p. 381.
Sir Henry Spelman had the whole Account he gives us of the several Synodical
Decrees of diverse Bishops in that Church: As Mr. Wharton had also those good
Pieces which he afterward Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 667.
published, as being overlooked both by Godwine and Spelman. There Is yet
another Book, in the same Titus, D. 22.
Library, that affords a History or Chronicle of this Church; which seems to
have escaped the notice of both these diligent Antiquaries. It commences at
Brute, and ends A. D. 1370.

LINCOLN. Lincoln.
There Is a meagre Catalogue of the Bishops of this Diocese in the Cottonian
Julius, C. 6.
Library; which brings down the Succession of them from Birinus to John
Longland, who was Consecrated, A. D. 1521. It Is much the List of these Prelates
should be so complete; when our Vid. Godw. de Praesul. p. 388.
Historians are at a loss for the very Place where a good many of them (...)
Some Letters (from Pope Martin and his Cardinals) about the Struggle that
happened upon the Advancement of Rich. Fleming to this See, may be Bibl. Cott.
ribe^ius, B. 6.
had; but in the main, we are very deficient in all the parts of its History,
and shall hardly recover any great Matters more than its own Registries will
supply us with. What those are I know not.

LITCHFIELD. In the perusal of the History of this Diocese, Litchfield.
one great mistake (which has been unanimously swallowed by all our Godwine, p.
337. et 365. Ang. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 428, etc.
Church-Historians) is to be observed to our Reader: And that is, we are told
that (upon the subdivision of the Kingdom of Mercia into three Dioceses, about
the Year 740.) there was a Bishop placed at Leicester. We do indeed meet with
one Vid. H. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 247.
Totta, who is said to have been Episcopus Legecestriae, about that Time: But
Legercestria is the old name of Leicester, as Legecestria is of Chester. It was
therefore (in Truth) at West-Chester that the New Diocese was erected, and not
at Leicester; which is too near to Litchfield, were there no other Argument
against it. With these Cautions we are to peruse the two valuable MSS. in
Cleopatra, D. 9. Vespasianus, E. 16.
Sir John Cotton's Library; which have (in a great measure) been Printed in the
Anglia Sacra and are very probably Praefat. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 34. 35,
36.
ascribed to Tho. Chesterton and Will. Whitlock, two Canons of this Church. Of
the former of these there are several ancient Copies; and it is that venerable
Book which is quoted by many of our late Writers under the Name of Chronicon
Lichfeldense. These are the chief Registers of the old Records of the Church of
Lichfield, that are now Extant: Unless perhaps their Cartulary or H. Spelman,
Gloss. in voce Putura.
Black-Book, and the Monast. Angl. Tom. 3. p. 216.
Description of their Close (or College) be still to be met with. The little
that was to be saved out of the Ruins, into which this Cathedral fell in our
late Days of Confusion, was picked up by (one of the great Preservers of our
English Antiquities) Elias Ashmole Esquire late Garter King at Arms; and is now,
amongst many other of his precious Remains, in his Vid. Catalog. MSS. Oxon.
nuper Edit. Number. 7484. et 7496.
Musaeum at Oxford. This excellent Person had a Design to have honored the
Place of his Nativity, with the writing a History and Description of its
ancient and present State; and had collected a good number of choice Materials
for that Purpose.

LONDON. London.
I do not much lament Bishop De Praesul. p. 226.
Godwine's Misfortune, that his best diligence could not recover a right
Catalogue of the British Arc-bishops of this City. Whatever became of Theanus
and Theonus (the Alpha and Omega of those Sixteen Metropolitans) I should be
mightily pleased to hear that its History is entire since Mellitus's time; or
even that we had every thing mentioned in that List of Records, Registers and
other Books belonging to this Cathedral, which was Monast. Angl. Tom. 3. page
299.
delivered by Dean Cole to his Successor Dr. May, in the Year 1559. What or
where the Annals Londinenses are, Mr. Wharton (who Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 638.
quotes them) does not tell us: nor whether they treat only of the Affairs of
this Diocese, or (what I rather Suspect) present us with such a short History
and Chronicle of the Kingdom in general, as almost every one of our Monasteries
afforded. It Is enough that he has left behind him an elaborate 8vo. Land. 1695.
History of the Bishops and Deans of this See, of his own composure; wherein
(following the Method to which he had confined himself in his two larger
Volumes) he brings their Story down to the Year 1540. To this Treatise (as well
as that of St. Asaph, which is joined with it) is annexed an Appendix of
Authentic Instruments; and he has further let us know that (of the Prelates
before the Reformation) we have the Registers of Gravesend, Sudbury, Courtney,
Braybrook, Walden, Clifford, Gilbert, Kemp, Gray, Savage, Warham, Barnes,
Fitz-James, Tonstal, Stokesley and Bonner. The Sepulchral Monumnts of St.
Paul's Church were first drawn out and published by (Mr. Camden's grateful
Scholar) 8vo. Land. 1614.
Hugh Holland the Poet: But this was only a mean and dull Performance in
comparison of that more absolute one of Sir Will. Dugdale, in his Fol. Land.
1658.
History of that Cathedral from its first Foundation; extracted out of Lieger
Books and other Manuscripts, and beautified with sundry Prospects of the
Church, and the Figures of the Tombs. The greatest part of the Cartularies and
Records, referred to in this Book, were happily communicated to the Author by
one Ath. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 697.
Mr. Reading; who thereby encouraged his Zealous Engaging in the Work, at a
very proper and seasonable Juncture. For, soon after he had taken Copies of the
Inscriptions, a great many of the Monuments were defaced, and the Church it
self turned into a common Stable by the Rebel Army; as it was (within ten Years
after that) into a heap of Rubbish by the dreadful Fire of London.

NORWICH. Norwich.
There are not many Histories of this Diocese. All that Mr. Wharton Angl. Sac.
vol. 1. p. 397.
could pick up was out of a couple of General Histories of England, written by
Bartholomew de Cotton, and another (anonymous) Monk of that Church. He quotes
indeed a short Chronicle of Norwich in the same Library, whence he had the
former of these; But the late Publisher of the Catalogue of those Manuscripts
is mistaken if there be any such Book, in the Bibl. Cott. Vitellim, C. 9.
Place referred to. There is indeed, in Julius, B. 7.
another Class, a piece which bears the Title of Festa synodalia Norwicensis
Dioeceseos; which begins with St. Foelix the Burgundian, their first Bishop.
The oldest Register-Book which I have yet heard of in this See, is that of
Bishop Citat. in Hist. de. Episc. and Dec. Londin.
Bateman; the Magnanimous Founder of Trinity Hall in Cambridge. A short Account
of the Bishops and Deans of this Church (by Tho. Searle, A. D. 1659.) is among
the MSS. of the present worthy Bishop of the Diocese.

OXFORD Oxford.
is of so late an Erection, that it cannot want an absolute and entire History
of all its Prelates, since its Foundation by Henry the Eighth: And we have Vid.
Par. 1. p. 54.
already observed, that its Parochial Antiquities (preceding that Time) are
happily preserved by an Ingenious and Learned Person, who has spared no Pains
in Collecting (out of a vast number of Neighboring Records and Evidences)
whatever was worth the Treasuring up, and transmitting to Posterity. Anth. Wood
Collected the Sepulchral and Fenestral Inscriptions of the several Parishes in
the County of Oxford; which are now amongst those many Papers he left to the
University.

PETERBVRGH, Peterburgh.
was one of the most Rich and Flourishing Monasteries in this Kingdom; and was
turned into one of the poorest Bishoprics by Henry the Eighth. The most of
those many excellent Histories that concern this Place, in its Pristine State,
have been noted by Notit Monast. p. 160, 161.
Mr. Tanner; though some few have escaped his great Diligence. He has taken no
notice of two old Registers, given by my Lord Hatton to the Vespastanus, E. 21,
22.
Cottonian Library; nor of some ancient Faustina, B. 3.
Grants and Donations to that Monastery. He has also omitted Hugh White, Abbot
of Peterburgh: who in Leland's Character is, Comment. in Cygn. Cant. voce
Petropolis.
Rerum Petroburgi gestarum luculentus plane Scriptor. To these there is little
to be added, since the Foundation of the Episcopal See, of any great value;
saving what has been carefully preserved in Fol. Land. 1686.
St. Gunton's History, which will be this Churches Kennet's Life of Somn. p. 20.
everlasting Monument. Some Inscriptions are said, indeed, to have been defaced
before the Survey taken by this Author: but those, we Athen. Oxon. p. 319.
are told were also to be had amongst the Manuscripts of Franc. Thynne, who
Collected them in the Year 1592. 'Twas happy that Sir William Dugdale and Mr.
Gunton drew up their Collections at so seasonable and lucky a time as the Year
1641. For (within two years after that) in April, 1643. this Cathedral was most
miserably abused by Cromwell's Regiment; who, among other shameless outrages,
Dr. Patrick's Supplement to History of Peterburg, p. 337.
broke into the Chapter House, ransacked the Records, broke the Seals, tore the
Writings, and left the floor covered over with torn Papers, Parchments and
Seals.

ROCHESTER. Rochester.
The most venerable Monument of Antiquity that belongs to this Church, is the
Textus Roffensis; which may justly challenge a Respect more than ordinary. It
was written by Bishop Ernulf, who died in the Year 1124. And (besides the
Affairs of this Cathedral, which are accounted for by Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 329.
Mr. Wharton) furnishes us with the Laws of four Kentish Kings, ( Ethelbert,
Hlothere, Eadred and Withred) omitted by Lambard; together with the Saxon Form
of Oaths of Fealty and Wager of Law; the old Form of Vid. H. Spelman Gols. in
voce Excommunicatio.
cursing by Bell, Book and Candle; of Iid. ibid. voce Ordale, and apud E.
Brown, in Append. ad Fascic. Rerum Expetend. etc. p. 903.
Ordale, etc. I suppose this Book was wisely committed to the care of Sir Roger
Twisden, during the confusions of our late Civil Wars: For in his Custody I
find it often referred to by Sir William Dugdale, in a Orig. juridic. passim.
Work which he Composed during those Troubles. Hadenham and Dene's Histories
have been picked, and their choicest Flowers are preserved in the Anglia Sacra:
And the Sub hoc Titulo citatur Saepius in Monast. Angl.
Chronicon Claustri Roffensis is the same with the Textus.

SALISBVRY. Salisbury.
Somewhat of the History of the ancient Bishops of Sherburn may be had among L.
Noel's Bibl. Cott. Otho, D. 7.
Collections; and the defects of those (down to the Year 1357.) may be supplied
from the Chronicle of the Church of Sarum. This Chronicle begins at the
Creation; and has some Vid. Vsserii Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 73.
special Remarks touching the Affairs of our ancient British Church, wherein it
seems to be singular. The Registers also of several of their Bishops (as Citat.
ab. H. Wharton, in Hist. Episc. London.
Mortival, Wivil, Waltham, Medford, Aiscough and Beauchamp) are still extant.

WINCHESTER. Winchester.
There can hardly be any more said of this Ancient and Famous See than what we
have from Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 179. etc.
Tho. Rudburn and other Authors, lately published out of Sir John Cotton's
inexhaustible Treasury: Unless, for the more modern Times, we had that
Continuation of the Bishops, which was made by Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 380.
John Trussel; who brought their History as low as the Sufferings of Bishop
Curl (and his Order) in the beginning of our English Anarchy.

WORCESTER. Worcester.
As this Church was one of the most flourishing in the whole Island, under the
Government of our Saxon Kings; so it had the fortune to preserve its Charters
and other Instruments (relating to those Times) much better than its
Neighbors. In the Year 1643. Sir William Dugdale drew a Catalogue of no less
than 92 such original Donations, none whereof fell lower than the Reign of
Henry the First. To these there have been fifteen more (now in the Archives of
that Church, and not mentioned in the Monasticon) added by Vid. Catal. Libb
Sept. ad finem Gram. Anglo. Sax. p. 169, 170, 171. and 177.
Dr. Hickes; who also believes that among Mr. Lambard's MSS. (now in the
Archives at Canterbury) there are several Saxon Grants belonging to the Church
of Worcester. After these we are to have recourse to the Anonymous Compilers of
the Annals of this Cathedral, and the continuation of them by their learned
Publisher; who (by the way) Praefat ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 37.
tells us that Bibl. Cott. Tiberius, A. 13.
Hemming's Book has much more in it, than either he or Sir W. Dugdale have
given themselves the trouble of transcribing. John Rosse (the Renowned Hermit
of Guy's Cliff) is said to have written a Treatise, de Episcopis Wigorniae;
which I should not much have believed upon the single Credit of my first J.
pits, p. 683.
Author, had I not seen the Book it self quoted by (our late industrious
Naturalist) Doctor Hist. Not. Stafford, p. 407.
Plott. Some part of Mr. Abingdon's Collection of the Antiquities of
Worcestershire (mentioned in the former part of this Historical Library) is
also reported to bear the Title of, Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 88.
A History of the Bishops of Worcester: which I cannot but once more heartily
wish were committed to the Inspection and Care of the Learned Dr. Hopkins,
Prebendary of that Church; who (we Praef. ad Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p. 52.
know) is thoroughly versed in the Antiquities of his own Cathedral, as well as
in those of the English Church in General. I am well assured there are some
failures in it, which he is abundantly able to Correct. 'Twould do a deal of
right to the worthy Author's Memory, to have the Style (which in most
Antiquaries, is usually a little too Austere) new polished; and to have some
defects supplied, out of such Libraries and Ancient Monuments as did not fall
in his way.

YORK. York.
The first Historian of the Affairs of this Metropolitical See, was Albinus,
Alcuinus or Alcwinus; whose Poem ( de Pontificibus and Sanctis Ecclesiae
Eboracensis) was first discovered by Mr. Mabillon, and published by Inter 15
Script. p. 703.
Dr. Gale. He begins his Story with such an Account of the Ancient State of
that City, and the first appearances of Christianity among the Northern Saxons,
as Bede furnished him with; and concludes with the Death of (his Patron) AB.
Eanbald the first. The next (if indeed he deserve the Name) was Simeon
Dunelmensis; whose Epistle (to Hugh Dean of York, about the Succession of these
Archbishops, to the Year 1136.) is in several of our Bibl. Cott. Otho, D 7.
Coll. Ben. Eborac. etc.
Libraries. After these came T. Stubbs (or Stobaeus, as some are pleased to
write his Name) a Dominican Friar, and Dr. in Divinity about the Year 1373.
whose Chronica Pontificum are published amongst our December Scriptores. He is
highly magnified by Gesner, Bale and Vossius; and he deserves some part of the
Applause: But he had merited much more, if he had copied (or stolen) less from
Richard of Hexham. Archbishop Usher Antiq. Eccles. p. 25.
quotes a MS. History of our York Primates written about the Year 1460. which I
cannot observe to be the same with any of those in the Titus, A. 19. Cleopatra,
C. 4. Vitellius, A. 2.
Cottonian Library. However, here we have a large Claudius, A. 3.
Register of all the Affairs of St. Peter's in York; from the Reign of King
Henry the First, to that of Edward the First: to which is annexed a Catalogue
of the Prebendaries of that Church, and their several Corpses. Here is likewise
another remarkable Galba, E. 9.
Register of the Acts of the Chapter, during the vacancy of both the
Archbishopric and Deanery; Commencing the 6th of January, A. D. 1396. To
which is subjoined a Third (of the Dean and Chapter, as Guardians of the
Spiritualties) upon the Death of Archbishop Rotheram, A. D. 1500. In other
hands we have the Registers of Inter Cod. MSS. D. Com. Clarendon.
Greenfeld, Melton, Thoresby, Scroop, Apud. H. Wharton, Hist. Episc. Land.
Bowet, Rotheram, and some other Archbishops; as also the Monast. Ang. Tom. 2.
p. 57. and Tom. 3. p. 164.
Doomesday and White-Book of St. Peter's, with many more Records, in the
possession of the present Archbishop, or his Chancellor, and the Dean and
Chapter. Out of all (or most) of these very Voluminous Collections have been
lately taken by Vide Praefat. ad Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 52.
Dr. Matthew Hutton (descended from an Archbishop of this Province, of both
his Names) and Mr. Torr, a great Favourer of these Studies; by whose Beneficial
Labors, we hope, the History and Antiquities of this Church will effectually
be preserved: But whoever he be that attempts the whole History of the Diocese,
ought to know, that he may have store of choice Materials amongst Mr.
Dodsworth's Manuscripts at Oxford.

CHAP. VI.
Writers of the Lives of some particular Bishops, and other eminent Churchmen.
There Is no part of History more Instructive than that which falls under the
care of Biographers; if the Subject be rightly chosen, and the Author a skilful
Artist. The great Concerns of both Church and State pass through the Hands of a
Few; who only are acquainted with the true Spring and Cause of all those
Changes that inferior People admire and feel, but cannot comprehend. The
secret Memoirs of these Men of Business give a quite different prospect of
Things, than what we see in Mercuries and Gazettes; and they that have the
perusal of them (if otherwise qualified for the Undertaking) must also afford
an Account widely different from that of a Monkish Chronicle, where nothing of
moment (more than a great Frost or Pestilence, occurs for some Years together.
They that sit at the Helm, and are entrusted with the Mysteries of Government,
have all their private Affairs so interwoven with the Public, that they are
not to be considered asunder: So that he that can justly give the Features of
one of these, must be likewise able to present us with the exact Lineaments of
that whole Community whereof he was a Member.

Whoever attempts a Work of this high Nature, must come prepared with suitable
Parts and Judgment; such as will enable him to discover many considerable and
grand Truths from (sometimes) very poor and slender Hints. To this purpose, it
will be necessary that he have a good general Notion of the several Matters,
Men and Times, that will come under his Consideration; as well as that he be
perfectly acquainted with the Abilities, Inclination and Interests, of that
particular Person whose Picture he chiefly intends to draw. His Affections must
also be as clear and spotless as his Reason. No Bias of Love or Duty, of
Malice or Revenge, must govern or direct his Thoughts or Pen; nor must he be a
Zealot (or so much as a Party) in any of the Modish Factions of the Age he
treats on. He must have nothing in Common with the Man he describes; so as
neither to reap any Advantage by his Fame, nor to suffer any Damage by his
Disrepute. It Is true, the Remains of deceased Heroes (Ecclesiastical and Civil,
as well as Military) fall usually into the Hands of their dearest Friends and
Kindred; who are too often so unhappily tender of their Reputation, that they
will not entrust them with Strangers of the best Experience and Integrity. What
we have of such a Man's Story must come from These; who most commonly send it
abroad so tinctured with Prejudice (the Glories of their Friend or Patron being
so fulsomely daubed, and his Frailties so slovenly dashed and blotted) that it
makes only a very awkard Piece, how Good-like and Personable soever this
Gentleman himself may have been. Whereas, the best Service and the fairest
Respect that we can pay to the Memories of those that have been public
Blessings to the Religion or Government of their Native Country, is the taking
Care to have their Actions recorded by just and dis-interested Writers; who
have Sagacity enough to discern what is fit for Posterity to know, and Honesty
enough to transmit and represent it duly.

These are the proper Qualifications of those that take upon them the writing
the Lives of other People: And the Reader will be easily directed by them, how
to judge of such Performances. Thus, when he has learned the Relation there is
betwixt the Historian, and the Patriot or Confessor, he will be able to make
Abatements proportionably: He will see how to distinguish Truth from the
additional (garnishing) Devoirs of a Subaltern, a Nephew or a Cousin: He will
readily discover the Allowances that are to be given to Flesh and Blood, and in
what Particulars they have the upper Hand of Honor and Justice. In like
manner, where he finds a great Man's Life undertaken by his professed Enemy, he
will be sure to read it with a Curb upon his Faith: He will critically weigh
and examine his Author's Conclusions and Inferences; And, if he finds those
good and logical, he will yet suspend his Belief till Matters of Fact are
attested by some other (indifferent) Authority. And lastly, where Miracles and
Revelations are in Vogue and carry a Price, he will attentively consider
whether the Penman will not be a Gainer by having his Story credited: And
whether he is not in hazard of wanting some part of his daily Bread if it
miscarries. In such a Case, a complaisant Respect to the Fashions of a Country,
may prevail upon a Man to be silent and say nothing; but Reason will direct him
what to think.

By these Rules we are to judge of the Lives of those Saints which have been
taken notice of in some of the foregoing Chapters, as well as of those
Religious Persons that are here to follow; I mean, those good Bishops and other
pious Ecclesiastics (of a lower Form of Sanctity, and second-rate Merit) who,
though they have not the Honor to come in the Calendar, are acknowledged to
have done the Church very eminent Services in their several Generations. The
Lives of these are not very numerous: At least, they are but a few that have
come to my Knowledge. In the ancient British and Saxon Churches all that were
worth the having their Names registered by an Ecclesiastical Historian, are
Saints (of some degree or other) and are all to be had in the Catholic
Almanac: where Joseph of Arimathea, Venerable Vid. I. Pits, p. 142. and H.
Spelm. Gloss. p. 245. voce Fossa, etc.
Bid, Bishop Monast. Angl. Tom. 3.
Erkenwald, etc. (who are sometimes Saints, and sometimes only Confessors or
Reverend old Churchmen) have the Days of their several Obits assigned them.
Having therefore nothing more to write of the Lives of the Holy Men of these
Ages, I shall take my leave of them; with the Observation of a witty Th.
Fuller's Holy War, chapter 8. page 11.
Author on some following Times, which I think may be as applicable to these:
One may wonder, says he, that the World should see most Visions, when it was
most blind; and that that Age, most barren in Learning, should be most fruitful
in Revelations. After the Conquest we have several Ecclesiastical Champions,
that have had a very profound Respect paid them by their Cotemporary Writers;
and yet could never arrive at a legal Canonization. These (as many of 'em, that
is, as have had their Lives penned by such particular Historiographers as I
have heard of) were mostly either Archbishops or Bishops: To which a third
Class of inferior Clergymen shall be added; to be enlarged by those that have
better opportunities (than I have had) of making just and full Enquiries.

The Archbishops of Canterbury have always presided in the British Church
tanquam Papae alterius Orbis; Archbishops of Canterbury.
and therefore in their Lives, well written, we may justly expect the most
considerable part of our Ecclesiastical History. During the Contests betwixt
the Crown of England and the Court of Rome, it was commonly the mishap of these
Primates to side with the latter; which brought them sometimes into disgraceful
Circumstances with their Sovereigns; but made their Memories precious in the
esteem of those bigoted Monks, to whose Lot it fell to write their Elogies.
Hence we have already met with Anselm, Edmund and Thomas, among the Saints; and
must here mennion such of their Successors as have had particular Pens engaged
in their Service, though never so much as honored with (even the diminutive
Saintship) a Beatification. Simon Sudbury, who was beheaded by the Rebels in
Wat. Tyler's Insurrection, is the first that I can meet with of this kind: And
we have only a Fragment of his Life, written by one Angl. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 49.
William Chartham. It tells us, that 'twas prophesied such an untimely Death
should befall him, because (when Bishop of London) he met some Pilgrims on their
way to Canterbury, designing to pay their Devotion to St. Thomas's Shrine, and
advised them to let the Journey alone; assuring them Quod illa Indulgentia
plenaria quae apud Cantuarios fore sperabatur, nullius commodi fuerat vel
valoris. Such Doctrine as this in his Lifetime, and the sealing his Loyalty to
his Prince with his Blood at his Death, ought indeed to be remembered with
Honor. That of Henry Chicheley (the pious Founder of All-Soul's College in
Oxford) is written by Arth. Duck; and was lately published, with some others of
the like kind, by 4 to. Land. 1681.
Dr. Bates. John Morton's was written and published by 8 vo. Land. 1607.
Dr. Budden, Principal of New-Inn-Hall; who had, in this Primate, as noble a
Subject as any Historian could well treat on. He had approved himself a most
faithful Servant to Henry the Sixth, a true Subject to Edward the Fourth, and
an admirable Counselor to Henry the Seventh; who gained the English Scepter
(chiefly) by his Management, and had therefore good Reason to bestow a Crosier
upon him. Since the Reformation, so much of Archbishop Parker's Life as related
to his Consecration has been inquired into by several worthy Patriots of our
Church; provoked to it by the impudent and senseless Fable of the Nags-Head
Tavern. The first that engaged in this Controversy, was Of the Consecration of
Bishops in the Church of England, Fol. Land. 1613. and Latin, Fol. Ibid. 1625,
1646.
Fran. Wilson; who, from the Register-books of the Diocese of Canterbury,
discovered the Villainies (and stopped the Mouths) of those Romanists that had
first started this Slander. The Dispute was again renewed a little before the
Restoration of King Charles the Second; and then our Church's Cause was as
happily asserted by Bishop Consecration and Succession of Protestant Bishops,
8vo. Land. 1664.
Bramhal, afterward Primate of Ireland. In the late Reign, the University of
Cambridge thought it a proper Season to publish an Account of that whole
Procedure, from the Original Record in the Library of Bennet College; which
they ordered to be printed with two excellent 4to. Cantabr. 1688.
Sermons upon the same Subject, preached by Mr. Edwards, a Member of that
University. Archbishop Whitgift's many sharp Conflicts with the Nonconformists,
together with the other Occurrences of his Life, are recorded by Sir George
Paul; a Writer much commended by Bishop De Praesul. p. 223.
Godwine.

The Metropolitical Church of York, Archbishops of York.
has had several Prelates whose high Birth and Extraction (besides their other
personal Endowments) has advanced them to considerable Posts of Honor and
Trust in the State; and these will always invite the best Historians of the
Age to attempt their Characters. Geoffry Plantagenet, Natural Son to Henry the
Second, had great variety of Fortune; being promoted by his Brother King
Richard the First, and driven out of the Kingdom by (another of his brethren)
King John. His Story is given us at large by MS. in Bibl. Cott. Ben.
Gyraldus Cambrensis; who says he did not think fit to put its Author's Name to
it, there being (belike) some of his warm Truths in it, which the Times would
not bear. In the Angl. Sacr. vol. ^. p. 445.
Catalogue of his own Labors he tells us that 'twas a Book quod nec in
cunabulis aut celsitudine generis, nec in Divitiis aut Fortunae blanditiis spes
ponenda, exemplum praebens. Rich. Scroop, Brother to the Earl of Wiltshire, was
put to death (for his Gratitude and Loyalty to his lawful Sovereign and kind
Master, Richard the Second) by Henry the Fourth; against whom he conspired with
the Earl of Northumberland and others. His Declaration against the said Henry,
giving his Reasons why he cannot submit to his Government, has been lately
Ibid. p. 362, 369.
Published; as is likewise Clement Maydestone's History of his Martyrdom.
Cardinal Wolsey's purple will give him a rank with the greatest of our
Prelates, how mean soever the Circumstances of his Birth and Parentage may have
been; and the Figure that he made in the State, as well as the Church, during
his Rule and Government (rather than Ministry) in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, very justly challenged the pains of a special Historian: Such was
Cavendish, his menial Servant, who was also in good esteem with that King. He
has left us an impartial Account of his Master's Life; which has had several
4to. Land. 1590, etc.
Editions. Dr. Burnet Hist. of Reform. par. 1. p. 8.
quotes a MS. Copy, different from what we have in Print: And so does the Lord
Hist. of Hen. 8. p. 78.
Herbert; but whether this be not the same with the former I know not. We have
another History of his Life and Death, in elegant Verse, by Tho. Storer; who
was a Student of Christ-Church, and died (a famous Poet) in the Year, 1604.

They that know how many of our Bishops Bishops.
before the Reformation (not to mention other inferior Dignitaries of the
Church) bore the grand Vid. Chronic. Seriem Cancellar. etc. E^it. a D. Guil.
Dugdale.
Offices of Chancellours, Treasurers, Judges, etc. will readily believe that
most of those left such Memoirs as might easily have been framed into very
exquisite Histories of their Lives. And yet our Monks, to whom the Trust of
writing all our Historis was usually committed, were so much Strangers to
Affairs of this Nature, that we rarely find any thing among them that looks
this way. Their Business was to pick up, or invent, as many amazing Stories as
they could of the Exemplary Courage of some choice Prelates in asserting the
Papal Usurpations; of their extraordinary Sanctity; of their Benefactons to
some Church or Monastery; of their Miracles, etc. And with such Narratives as
these we shall find the Lives of most of the following Prelates are Stuffed and
Glutted. That of Gundulf Bishop of Rochester by a Angl. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 273.
Monk of that Church (his intimate Acquaintance) is the earliest of these; and
the rebuilding of the Cathedral, the Enlargement of the Monastery and the
Foundation of the Hospital at Chatham, were Acts of Piety that very well
deserved such a Respect. The like was done for Robert de Betun, Bishop of
Hereford, by his Chaplain (and Successor in the Priory of Lanthony) William de
Wycumb; who had a very noble Subject for the two Ibid. p. 299, etc.
Books he has left us, if we may believe William of Malmesbury. He pretends to
have known this Robert very well; and assures us that he was the most
familiarly entertained at the Court of Rome, of any of our Bishops of that Age.
We have only a Fragment of Gyraldus Cambrensis's Ibid. p. 351.
Life of Hugh Nonant of Norwich; and such as is hardly worth the mentioning. He
is somewhat more copious in his History of the Ibid. p. 420, etc.
Six chief Bishops of his own Age; to which we may add the Three Books he wrote
Ibid. p. 457. and Praefat. p. 22.
De rebus a se gestis^, since he was (at least) Bishop Elect of St. David's.
Robert Grostest of Lincoln was a Prelate of great Worth, a mighty Stickler
against the prevailing Crime of Symony and the modish Appeals to Rome; and we
have a full History of his Life by Ibid. p. 325.
Richard a Monk of Barden (or Burton in Hartfordshire) and another Anonymous
Writer. We have also a Letter from the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's for his
Canonization: But it appears, from many of his own Writings, that his Request
was not like to be granted; notwithstanding the fair Caresses that he had from
the Pope (who feared him more than he loved him) in his Lifetime. William of
Wickham, the great Founder of two famous Colleges in Oxford and Winchester,
could not avoid the having his Benefits carefully Registered by some of those
that daily tasted of the Sweets of them: And indeed there have been several of
those who have thus paid their grateful Acknowledgments to his Memory. The
first of 'em (I think) was Tho. Chaundler, sometime Warden of New-College; who
wrote the MS. in Coll Novo, Oxon.
Founder's Life, by way of Dialogue, in a florid and good Style. This is
contracted (by the Author himself, as is supposed) into a Angl. Sac. vol. 2. p.
355.
Couple of Pages; together with which is published a piece of his larger
Colloquy, wherein he touches upon the Life of (his Patron) Tho. Bekinton,
Bishop of Bath and Wells. He commends this latter Prelate's Skill in the Civil
Law; but says nothing of (what won the Heart of King Henry the Sixth) his
writing against the Salic Law of France. The next Writer of Wickham's Life was
4to. Land. 1597. and Oxon. 1690.
Dr. Martyn, Chancellor of Winchester under Bishop Gardener; who had the
greatest part of his Materials out of Chaundler's Book. After him, Dr. Johnson
(sometime Fellow of New-College, as well as the two former, and afterward
Master of Winchester-School) gave a short view of their Founder in Latin Verse;
which, being a small thing of it self has been several times Vid. Ath. Oxon.
vol. 1. p. 251.
Printed with other Tracts. Bishop Godwine is Praef. ad Angl. Sac. vol. 1. p.
19.
censured for having a little unfairly borrowed the Account he gives us of this
Prelate's Life (one of the best in his Book) from Mr. Josseline; without taking
any notice of his Benefactor. Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich (a more proper
Officer for a Camp than a Cathedral) had his active Life written by Angl. Sacr.
vol. 2. p. 359.
John Capgrave; who takes occasion to state the Case, how far a Prelate may
engage in Military Affairs. There Is no doubt but there may be some Junctures
wherein it is not only allowable (but a Duty) in every Man, that is able, to
bear Arms; and this Bishop's Suppressing the Rebellious Insurrection in his own
Diocese was so far from being a Crime, that 'twas highly commendable and
becomingly Brave. But his Achievements in Flanders and other Foreign Parts
(against the express Command of his Sovereign) were such extraordinary Efforts
of Lay-Gallantry, as are not easily to be defended: Nor do I see that honest
John ever thought of Apologizing for them. William of Wainfleet (Bishop of
Winchester and Lord Chancellor of England) was bred in Wickham's Colleges; and
did his Founder the Honor to Write very fairly after his Copy. His Magdalene
may vye with the other's two St. Mary's, being (Modestly) one of the richest
Seminaries of Learning in the whole World: And his magnificent Charity has been
celebrated by the eloquent Pen of Dr. Budden (the Writer of Archbishop
Morton's Life) who was a while Reader of Philosophy in that College. His Book
bears the Title of 4to. Oxon. 1602. and Land. 1681. inter Collect. D. Bates.
Guilielmi Pateni, cui Waynfleti Agnomen fuit, Wintoniensis Ecclesiae
Praesulis, and Coll. Beatae Mariae Magd. apud Oxon. Fundatoris, Vita Obitusque
A Treatise much applauded by Godwine, who (nevertheless) seems not to have
perused it: For he calls the Author William Budden, though his Name was certainly
John. Richard Hall Doctor in Divinity (who died at Joh. Pits, p. 803.
St. Omers, in the Year 1604.) wrote the Life of John Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester; who could hardly be called a Cardinal, since his Head was off before
the Red Hat passed through Calais. This Treatise was gravely quoted and
referred to by Tho. Fuller, before (as I suppose) he had seen it: Since he
seems to Apologize for his oversight by telling us, that 'twas a Hist. of
Cambr. p. 94. 99.
Book which, when in Manuscript, he prized more for its Rarity, than (since
it is Printed) he trusts for its Verity. A more modern H. Wharton, Angl. Sacr.
vol. 1. p. 382.
Author mentions the Life of the same Bishop written by George Lily; which, I
guess, is no more than one of the short Characters in his Elogia virorum
Illustrium. John Jewel's (of Salisbury) was composed by one that was a great
Admirer of his Performances against Harding and other Papists, Lawrence
Humphrey; out of whose 4to. Land. 1573.
copious Tract in Latin another small English Account of his Life was
afterward drawn by a 8vo. Land. 1685.
Person of Quality, as the Author was pleased to Style himself. These are all
the Writers, that I know of, which have attempted the History of any of our
particular Prelates, before the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; which is as low
as my Enquiries are to come. I do not question but that, upon a diligent Search
into our English Libraries, a good Number may be added to them; though I cannot
hope they will ever prove either so many, or so exact, as those that have been
written of the Bishops since the uniting of the Kingdoms.

There are few inferior Clergymen that have had the Honor done them to be
remembered in any special Discourses on their several Lives; Inferior Clergy.
though many of 'em had the chief Places of Trust and Honor in the State
conferred upon them. Within the compass of six or seven Reigns, after the
Restitution of the Saxon Line, we have one Abbot, two Deans, six Archdeacons
and a Dignitary of St. Paul's, Chancellours and Keepers of the great Seal; not
to mention others in somewhat lower Stations. I know not whether that these
Men, having engaged themselves in the Management of secular Affairs, were
thought to desert their Clerical Functions, or for what other Reason, they seem
to have been out of the Road of the Monkish Historians: Or, at least, they
never looked upon them as Persons that equally deserved their Respect, with
such as had entirely devoted themselves to the Church's Service. Not one of
them, as far as I have hitherto learned, have had their particular Histories;
nor should we have known that some of 'em had ever lived, but from the public
Records of the state. In short, I have only a couple of Lives to begin the
Account with in this Class (for that of Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon, by
Bibl. Cott. Tiberius, A. 8.
Capgrave, is not worth the Readers notice or Mine;) and they both fall within
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and the single Diocese of Durham. The former of
these is that of Dean Whittyngham, one of the sorry Translators of David's
Psalms; whose Life the Oxford Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 34.
Antiquary tells us he had in Manuscript. The other is that of (our Northern
Apostle) Bernard Gilpin, Rector of Houghton; who had his 4to. Land. 1628. and
inter Collect. Dr. Bates,
Life written, in elegant Latin, by his grateful Scholar, Dr. George Carlton,
Bishop of Chichester. There Is one passage in this History which has been ill
applied by some of its Readers. The Refusal of the Bishopric of Carlisle has
been interpreted as an Instance and Argument of the good Man's mean opinion of
the Order of Episcopacy: Whereas (not to mention the extraordinary Humility
wherewith he is noted to have been endowed) they that know the values of that
Bishopric, and the Rectory of Houghton, will easily apprehend there might be
other Motives to incline one to Modesty upon such an Offer.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Histories, Chronicles, Cartularies, etc. of our English Monasteries.
THE great Usefulness of the Leiger Books and other Monastic Records is so
apparent to any Man that has had the least acquaintance with them, that I need
not much insist on so known a Subject. The most Eminent of our Historians are
visibly indebted to them for their chief See the Pref. to Tanners Notitia, p.
22, 23.
Materials; and it is from hence that they are enabled to clear the Descents and
Pedigrees of many Noble Families; the Tenures of Estates, the Ancient Customs
of Counties, Cities and great Towns; the Foundation and Endowment of Churches,
etc. For how sparing, or defective, soever the old Monks might be in Recording
the Public Affairs of the State, we are sure they were extremely diligent in
noting down those of their own Monasteries: Whence it is that the Histories of
those Cathedrals, which were anciently in their Possession, are the most entire
of any in the Kingdom. This sufficiently appears from the late Collections of
the Publisher of Anglia Sacra, who soon furnished out one Vol. I. De
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Ecclesiarum quas Monachi possiderunt.
Volume of this sort of Writers, but was forced to patch up the second out of a
more incoherent Medly of Shreds. He would certainly have driven very heavily in
the succeeding ones that he had promised; since ('it is plain) his best Fund was
already exhausted. Nor are these Registers only more particular and full in
Matters relating to their own History, than that of the Public; but they are
also much more Authentic and Credible in these. They have always been allowed
as good Evidence in our Courts of Judicature; and do often effectually
determine such Causes as have been thought to labor under in extricable
difficulties. Their Authority, indeed, is not so Venerable in those Passages
that concern the Grandeur, Privileges and Immunities, of their respective
Houses; where the private Zeal or Interest of the Penman may be suspected to
have transported him a little, beyond the exact Limits of Truth. The Monks are
rarely so straitlac'd, as to boggle at an Officious Lie; and therefore, where
the Subject will admit of such a pious piece of Knavery, they are to be read
with Caution and Judgment. In reporting the several Grants of their Founders
and Benefactors, with the Number and Boundaries of the Acres they gave, we may
readily and safely trust them: because an interpolation in such a Case would be
hazardous, and what might probably destroy an old Title instead of creating a
new one. But when a Story comes to be told that may advance the Repute of the
whole Fraternity, or discover the extraordinary Sanctity of a single Brother,
we are to look for its being set off to the best Advantage; and the Historian
uses us kindly, if he Romances only a little. I am apt to believe (says Father
Critic. Hist. of N. Test. par. 1. p. 20.
Simon) that these Letters [of Christ and King Agbar] were really found in the
Archives of the City of Edessa: But we ought not too easily to give Credit to
the first Originals of Churches. Every one strives to advance their Antiquity
as much as is possible; and they make no scruple (on such Occasions) to
counterfeit Acts, when they have none that are true.

Mr. Whelo^ In Notis ad Beda Hist. Eccles p. 260.
quotes an old Saxon Schedule of the endowments of our ancient Monasteries
before the Conquest, Saxon.
which (he says) is in the same Volume with King Aelfred's Paraphrastical
version of Bede's History in the Cottonian Library: and yet the learned
Publisher of the Catalogue of those Manuscripts, takes no notice of any such
Tract, in the place Bibl. Cott. Otho* B. 11.
where (if at all) it ought to have been mentioned. We are also told of an
Historical Account of the Benedictines in England, from King Edgar's time to
the Conquest; which is as high as that Order could be traced in this Kingdom.
For, whatever may be argued to the contrary, it is very plain that our first
Saxon Monks knew nothing of St. Bennet's Rule; but lived under the Discipline
brought from Ireland, which was very much different from what was afterward
introduced by St. Dunstan. If Augustine himself was of this Order, and planted
it at Canterbury, (which is much questioned by very Learned Men) it is
demonstrable the Rules were soon forgotten or laid aside, even in the southern
Parts of the Island; and, in the North, Columbanus and the Men of Hy were the
Founders of all our Monastic Schemes.

After the Norman Invasion, we had several Members of particular Monasteries
that applied themselves to write the Histories of their own Houses; After the
Conquest
but few that had any such concern for the Honor of their Orders in general.
The first I can hear of, was Henry Vid. Hist. Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. ad ann. 1381
and 1391. and lib. 2. p. 61.
Crump, a Cistertian Monk (about the Year 1380) and Dr. of Divinity in the
University of Oxford; who wrote an Account of the Foundation of all the
Monasteries of England from the time of St. ^irin (the first, Bishop of
Dorchester) down to that of Bishop (...): But it is to be feared this is now
lost; since it could not be found by See Mr. (...) Pref. to his Notitia, page
8, 9.
one whom hardly any thing of that kind could escape. After him John Boston (a
Monk of St. Edmondsbury, who will be remembered hereafter on another Occasion)
Collected the Histories of the Foundations of his own and some other Religious
Orders; which, I suppose, was done in those three Books which bore the Title
of, J. ^it^, p 393.
Speculum Coenobitarum. The next Writer on this Subject, was William Buttoner
(who is also named Buttonius, Id. page 649, 8^1, 8^1.
and William of Worcester) who is said to have written, De Civitatibus,
Monasteriis, Abbatiis; deque Longitudine and Latitudine eorum: which Treatise
we are assured is in the Library of Bennet College. I am very confident that
the Topographical Description of England, which has been already mentioned in
the first part, is the whole of this Gentleman's Labors; and that this
Treatise has been sub-divided into (...) deal of lesser Tracts (such as his
Itinerary of Bristol, History of Osney, etc.) by the same Powers that sliced
the Man himself into three several Authors. Sir Henry Savile did certainly make
a draught of a future History of the English Monasteries: but is supposed to
have laid aside those Thoughts, upon John Speed's intermixing something of that
Nature in his General History. The Annual Revenues of the Abbeys, etc. in Speed
were had from Sir Robert Cotton; whose Bibl. Cott. Cleopatra, E. 4.
Copy has a double Valuation, of computed and clear Profits: whereof the former
is only given by Speed, and the latter by Dugdale. The Reason why the former of
these Writers is so frequently mistaken, in assigning the right Counties to the
several Monasteries, was because he followed the List brought in by Cromwell's
Commissioners; who were chiefly sollicitous in learning the Value and Income,
without being too nice in the Topographical part of their Account. This is what
we have from a very Hist. and Synops. Bibl. Cott. p. 39, 40.
learned Pen: To which let me add what another T. Tanner, in Praefat ad Notit.
Monast. page 5, 6, 20, 21.
worthy Person (who has been very happy in his searches into these Matters) has
further told us. That Catalogue, he observes, was drawn up by William Burton,
out of Leland's Papers and the Original Book of Valuations; which Book differs,
indeed, from that ancient Copy which Sir William Dugdale transcribed from the
Cottonian Library. Nor are these to be reconciled by deducting of Reprises; as
appears from the History of those in Dugdale's Warwickshire, where all those
common Burdens (of Pensions, Corrodies, Alms, etc.) are summed up: so that he
inclines to the Opinion that there were several Rates taken of our Monasteries,
upon various Surveys and at different Times; especially since he meets with
some Valuations in Leland's Notes, that will not agree with either of these.
Richard Broughton (who has been once remembered before) wrote a small Book of
indigested Tales; which he entitled, Monasticon 8vo. Land. 1655.
Britannicum; or, A Historical Narration of the first Founding, and flourishing
State of the Ancient Monasteries, Religious Rules and Orders of Great Britain,
in the Times of the Britains and Primitive Church of the Saxons, etc. This was
printed a dozen Years after the Death of the Author, by some of his Friends: so
that it is probable we have it much more imperfect than he intended; and in such
an unfinished Condition, as the mistaken Kindness of Executors too frequently
send things abroad.

The same Year was published the First Volume of the famous Monasticon
Anglicanum: Monasticon Anglicanum.
to which a Fol. Land. 1661, 1673.
Second and Third were afterward added. The two former of these were (as the
Title-Pages will inform us) owing to the joint Labors of Sir Will. Dugdale and
Mr. Dodsworth: who had also the Assistance of a great many other eminent
Antiquaries and Well-wishers to our English History. These were indeed chiefly
the Work of R. Dodsworth, whose Father was Register at York; and Dugdale had
only so much share in it, Vt Authoris alterius Titulum optime meritus sit, as
Sir John Marsham In (...). ad vol. 1.
expresses it. That is, as the Oxford-Antiquary Ath. Oxon, vol. 2. p.
explains it to us, He took care in the Methodizing and Publishing of them; in
Correcting the Sheets at the Press, and in Composing very useful Indexes.
Accordingly (though Dodsworth was dead before the printing of the First Volume,
yet) he has the glory given him, in the Title, of the principal Author of both
Tomes. The former of these gives us the Records of the Benedictine Monasteries,
and (their Offspring), the Cluniacenses, Cistertians and Carthusians: And the
latter affords those of the Canons Regular of St. Augustine, Hospitalers,
Templars, Gilbertines, Praemanstratenses, and the Maturines or Trinitarians. We
have in them the Remains of all those Orders, digested into a good Method;
without any thing intermixed, either by the Collector or Publisher. The Latin
Pieces are printed off exactly as they found them; and those in Saxon (as also
Leland's English Notes) were translated by Will. Somner. The Collector ought to
be reckoned amongst those worthy Benefactors to the Public, that have made it
their Business to preserve our ancient Historians; such as Twisden, Fell, Gale,
etc. Great and many are the Advantages which all the several Branches of our
History (not only in Ecclesiastical, but Civil and Martial Occurrences) will
derive from this Work: And hardly a private Family (of any Consideration) in
the Kingdom, but will here meet with something of its Genealogy and Pedigree.
He is most scrupulously exact in transcribing the ancient Records: So that, the
bald Latin, barbarous Expressions, and other Deformities of the Monkish Style,
are to be reckoned Beauties in him. By the Catalogue of the Monasteries, in the
end of the First Volume, it appears how far the Industry of this Writer has
exceeded that of the People employed by Henry VIII. to bring in a List of all
the Religious Houses in this Nation: many being added (as more might have been,
in almost every County) to the Schedule by them transmitted into the Exchequer.
And yet the old Register-Books, that are cited in the Monasticon, have a deal
more in them than is there made use of. Sir William Dugdale, (on second
Thoughts) transcribed many Things into the Additamenta of the latter Tome;
which both he and Mr. Dodsworth had overlooked or did not (at first) think
Material enough. The Third Volume was published under the sole Name of Sir.
William: though Mr. Wood does not question (he Ath. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 700.
says) but, in this also, he was very much indebted to Dodsworth's Collections.
He seems the rather to suspect such a thing, because many Records were
communicated by himself, which are not duly acknowledged as they ought to have
been; and he verily believes the like good Assistance was given him by Sir Tho.
Herbert, though his Benefaction is also disregarded. These Three Tomes were
lately Fol. Land. 1693. See Mr. Tanner's Praef. p. 7, 8.
Epitomized or Abridg'd by some modest Gentleman or other, that did not think
fit to put his Name to his Work: which might have been of some good use, if a
little more care had been taken of the Numerals; which direct to the Pages in
the Monasticon it self, and (being frequently mistaken) do not only render the
Book useless, but very dangerous. Besides, we are so far from wanting any
Abridgment of these Tomes, that we rather complain of their too great
Conciseness; and could wish there were some more added, out of such
Leiger-Books and Records, as never came to the knowledge of either of the
worthy Authors of these Three.

Toward the furtherance of such an acceptable Service as this, T. Tanner.
we have had an excellent Manual, given us by Mr. Tanner; whose 8vo Oxon. 1695.
Notitia Monastica does not only afford us a short History of the Foundation
and chief Revolutions of all our Religious Houses, but presents us also with a
Catalogue of such Writers (noting the Places where we may find them) as will
abundantly furnish us with such further Particulars as we shall have occasion
for. The forementioned Compilers of the Monasticon Anglicanum took care to make
the like References; and to let the World know from whose Hands they had the
perusal of the Records of this or the other Monastery. But, as many new
Discoveries have been made since their Time, so several of the Books they met
with have changed their owners; and therefore their Defects are not only here
supplied, but the present Proprietors of what they mention much better
ascertained. Some Volumes indeed, and several single Charters and other
Instruments, are still appropriated to their old Masters; where it is not known
how, or to whom, they have been lately transferred. And this may possibly prove
an obliging piece of Service to the Executors, Administrators or Legatees, of
the Persons so mentioned; who will be hereby directed and encouraged to make
Enquiry after their unknown Chattels, and to claim them wherever they shall
find them. This industrious Author has superseded some Pains I had long since
taken to the like purpose; and whereof I should have given the Reader an
Account in this Chapter. The Informations he has here, are beyond what I could
have afforded him; and I hope (upon a second Edition of the Book, which I much
long for) will be yet a great deal fuller. 'Till that can be had, give me leave
to offer a slender Taste of the large Editions we may look for from the Author
himself. In the Cottonian Library alone there are Histories and Register-Books
of the following Monasteries; which (for want of such a Catalogue as we now
have) had not come to his Knowledge.

ABINGDON. Julius, A. 9. Claudius, C. 9. St. ALBANS. Otho, D. 3. Nero, D. 1. 7.
Julius, D. 3. Claudius, D. 1. BARDNEY. Vespasian, E. 20. BINHAM. Claudius, D.
13. CANTERBURY, Christ's Galba, E. 4. -- St. Augustine's. Tiberius, A. 9. Otho,
B. 15. DAVENTRY. Claudius, D. 12. DELACRES. Nero, C. 3. DERBY. Titus, C. 9.
DUNSTABLE. Tiberius, A. 10. St. EDMUNDSBURY. Tiberius, B. 9. Claudius, A. 12.
ELY. Tiberius, A. 6. Vespasianus, A. 6. GLASTONBURY. Vespas. D. 22. HULM, Nero,
D. 2. HUNTINGDON. Faustina, C. 1. KIRKSTEDE. Tiberius, C. 8. (...). E. 18.
LEICESTER. Vitellius, F. 17. LENTON. Otho, B. 14. MALMESBURY. Faustina, B. 8.
PARCO-STANLEY. Julius, C. 11. Vespas. E. 26. PIPEWELL. Caligula, A. 13, 14.
RAMSEY. Vespasian, E. 2. READING. Vespasian, E. 5. 25. Domit. A. 3. ROCHESTER.
Domitian, A. 9. Vespasian, A. 22. Faustina, C. 5. SELBY. Vitellius, E. 16.
SMITHFIELD. Vespasianus, B. 9. SOUTHWARK. Faustina, A. 8. STONE. Vespasianus,
E. 24. WALSINGHAM. Nero, E. 7. WESTWOOD in Com. WIGORN. Vespasian, E. 9.
These are the most Eminent of those Writers that instruct us in the general
History of our Monasteries; though (as a very D. Smith, in Hist. and Synops.
Bibl. Cott. p. 38.
learned Person has observed) we still want a more copious Notitia than any of
them have hitherto seemed to have thought on: such an one as should give us a
just account of the Foundation of those Houses; the Men of Learning that
flourished in them; their Rules, Interests, Contests, etc.

There are others that have taken great Pains in writing Histories of some
particular Orders of Monks, Benedictines.
to which themselves have had some special Relation; and these, moving in a
lesser Circle, had leisure to make more nice Enquiries, and more ample
Discoveries. Amongst them the Benedictines may justly claim the Precedence; as
being so much the Darlings of Saint Dunstan, and St. Oswald, that perhaps it is
true (what one Reyner^ Apostolat. Bened. p. 11.
of them asserts) that, from King Edgar's Reign to the Conquest, there was not
a Monastery in England, but what was Modeled according to this Rule. Will.
Gillingham J. Pits, p. 552.
of Canterbury (about the Year 1390.) is said to have written De Illustribus
Ordinis sui Scriptoribus; and, if we could meet with this Treatise, we should
not much lament the loss of his other De Rebus Cantuariensibus. Edward Maihew
(sometime Scholar to John Pits) published a little Book under the 8vo. Rem.
1619.
Title of Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis St. Benedicti Trophaea; wherein he
takes frequent occasion to quote his Master's Manuscript Treatise of the
Apostolical Men of England, now kept as a precious Rarity in the Archives of
the Church of Liverdune. He is commended for his Modesty in the Account he
gives of their Writers; honestly quitting his Inclinations to serve a Vid. Vss.
rij Hist. Eccles. Brit. p. 216.
Party, where he observes Truth to be on the other side. The Obits and
Characters of the English Benedictines, of greatest note since the Reformation,
were penned by Tho. White alias Woodhop, a Monk of Doway; where he died of the
Plague in 1654. A Manuscript Copy of this was in Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 415.
Mr. Wood's possession; and I suppose, is now (among those Books that he
Bequeathed to the University) in the Musaeum at Oxford.

But the chief of our Historians of this Order, C. Reyner.
was Clement Reyner; whose elaborate Book is Entitled, Fol. Duac. 1626.
Apostolatus Benedictinorum in Anglia, sive Decerptatio Historica de
Antiquitate Ordinis Congregationisque Monachorum Nigrorum in Anglia. His
Business is to prove that the Order was brought hither by Augustine,
Archbishop of Canterbury; and he is thought by some of our W. Semner, Antiq.
Canterb. p. 153.
best Antiquaries to have effectually proved his Point, and to have fairly
Answered all the Objections against it. He is said to have had great helps from
the Collections made by John Jones (or Leander de Sancto Martino, as he named
himself) Prior of St. Gregory's, and Public Professor of Divinity, at Doway;
who sojourning sometime in England with his heretofore Chamber-fellow
Archbishop Laud, had frequent access to the Hist. and Spnops. Synops. Bibl.
Cott p. 38.
Cotton-Library: where he transcribed whatever he could find that related to
the History and Antiquities of his own Order. Others say that the most of the
Collections out of this Library, which were used by our Author Reyner, were
made by Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 515. and vol. 2. p. 388.
Augustine Baker, another Monk of Doway; who left several Volumes (in Folio) of
Select Matters, very serviceable toward the Illustrating of this and other
parts of our English History. However it was, Sir Thomas Bodley's Library was
thought the most proper Magazine to furnish out Artillery against the Man that
had already seized on that of Sir Robert Cotton; and to this purpose Father
Ibid. vol. 1. p. 473.
John Barnes (a Brother Benedictine, but of different Sentiments with Reyner)
betakes himself to Oxford, and there Composes a sharp Refutation of the
Apostolatus. This was very ill resented by those of the Fraternity, and other
Members of the Roman Church: And they had some reason to be Angry at one of
their own Body's using the Book more Scurvily than any of the Protestant
Writers had done. There are several Learned Foreigners, in France and Flanders,
that have lately made very Voluminous Collections of the Acta Benedictinorum in
General; wherein are some Tracts written by Englishmen, and such as wholly
treat on our own Historical Matters. These have been occasionally mentioned in
other parts of this Work: And my Design will not allow me to consider them any
further.

The Cistercians Cistercians.
may be reckoned one of our own Orders: For, though they came not into this
Kingdom 'till almost a Hundred Years after their first Formation, they were
founded by Robert Harding an Englishman. Hugh Kirkstede (or rather Kirkstall)
was a Monk of this Order, about the Year 1220. and collected the Memoirs of all
the English that had been of it; which he Dedicated to John Abbot of Fountains.
This is attested by V. J. Pits, p. 297.
Leland; who acquaints us further, (that in the Library at Rippon) he saw his
Book entitled Historia rerum a Monachis Cisterciensibus gestarum. Cent. 3. cap.
81.
Bale tells us that he was greatly assisted in this Work by Serlo, Abbat of
Fountains, about the Year 1160. And, because there appears to be a good
distance betwixt the reputed Times of these two Writers, he assures us that
Hugh lived very near a hundred Year. I am apt to believe that Serlo was the
Vid. Monast. Angl. Tom. 1. p. 854. b.
sole Author of another Treatise (ascribed to this Monk) De Origin Fontani
Coenobij; and that this is the true bottom of Bale's fine Contrivance.

The Canons Regular of St. Augustine pretend to be Founded by that famous
Father (and Bishop of Hippo) whose Name they bear: Canons of S. Augustine.
But they are of no great Antiquity Here, all our Historians agreeing in this
(though they disagree about the precise time) that they came into England since
the Conquest. The first of their Historiographers was Jeoffrey Hardib, Canon of
Leicester, and Privy Counselor to King Edward the Third, in the Year 1360.
who was an eminent Preacher, a great Divine, and (amongst many other things)
wrote J. Pits, p. 492.
De rebus gestis Ordinis sui. The next, and the last that I know of, was John
Capgrave, who was sometime Provincial of the Order; and he allotted one his many
Volumes the Subject Id. p. 672.
De Illustribus Viris Ordinis S. Augustini.

The Dominicans, Mendicants.
Franciscans and other Mendicant Friars, having had no Lands, had no occasion
for Leiger-Books: But I know not why we should not have better Remains of their
History, Penned by themselves; since 'twas no part of their Vow, that they
should so far renounce the World, as not to have their good Works had in
remembrance. The Story of the settlement of the Order of St. Francis in England
(being confirmed by Henry the Third in the Year 1224) is written by Tho.
Ecleston; whose Book, De adventu Minorum in Angliam, is in MS. in Bibl. Dec.
and Capit. Ebor. and alibi.
several of our Libraries. Mr. Pits page 442.
says he wrote also another Book De Ordinis impugnatione per Dominicanos:
Which, I am afraid, is only a part of the former; for they had Battle given
soon after their first Landing. Their History afterward is pretty well
accounted for, by Inter Opera ejus, Tom. 1. Duac. 1665.
Fran. a Sancta Clara; and we have a formal Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1.
p. 68. 71, etc.
Register of that Colony of them that was seated in London, with some Fragments
of those of other Places. The Records of the University of Oxford, with those
in the Neighborhood, have afforded us a diverting View of their frequent
Bickerings with the Dominicans in our public Schools; which for an Age or two
make up a good share of the Annals of that Place.

The Carmelites Carmelites.
have likewise had some few of their Fraternity who have taken the pains to
enquire into the History of that Order: of whom William of Coventry (about the
Year 1360.) wrote J. Pits, p. 493.
de Adventu Carmelitarum in Angliam. Bale quotes some of his Words; and Writes
as if he had seen his Book. About a Hundred Years after this, Will. Green (a
Cambridg-Man) collected out of the most of the Libraries in England the noted
Exploits of the great Men of this Order; which he afterward published under
the Title of Id. p. 662.
Hagiologium Carmelitarum. And lastly, Robert Bale (a Carmelite Friar at
Norwich, and afterward Prior of Burnham, where he died, A. D. 1503.) wrote Id.
p. 686.
Annals Breves Ordinis sui. It Is much that this Gentleman's namesake, the
famous Mr. John Bale, never penned any thing of this kind: For he was also a
Carmelite of Norwich, and assures us (in the Account he gives of his own dear
Self, in the Tail of his Writers) that the Libraries of that Order were the
chief Treasury out of which he had his Riches. Perhaps he Mr. Tanner says he
has seen his Collections for such a purpose.
did Write some such Thing: but did not afterward think fit to own the
Respects he once had for those Antichristian Locusts, as he there most
greatefully calls them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Histories of our Universities and Writers.
WHAT Sir John Marsham (...). ad. Monast. Angl. in fine.
says of the old Monks of this Isle, may be well applied to the Zealous
Antiquaries of our two Universities, Illos in illustrandis suorum Natalibus
Antiquitati plus quam Veritati incubuisse. In the days of Henry the Eighth,
during the Storm against Abbeys and Colleges, the Controversy was seemly
enough. For, whilst nothing but Ruin was within their view, such a concern was
as natural as it is for decaying Families to value themselves on their
Pedigrees: But, in their flourishing condition under Queen Elizabeth, it might
have been hoped that the Members of both would have found themselves better
Employment. This the contending Parties in that Reign seem to have been
somewhat sensible of; and therefore the most violent and fierce of 'em declined
the owning of their several Brats, the affixing their Names to Pleadings and
Apologies. The Truth is, the greatest part of what was offered on either side
was so aerie and vapid, that 'twas fit only for young Sophisters, or Men that
had left the School for thirty Vid. J. Caii, de Antiq. Cantab. lib. 1. in
princip.
Years, to argue at such a rate: whereas the grave and residing Doctors were
justly ashamed of such Practices, and (for some time) modestly played their
Puppets from behind the Curtain. What was done for either of these Noble
Seminaries by King Sigebert or King Aelfred may possibly endure the Canvasing:
But when the contesting Antiquaries begin to be so hardy as to launch farther
(into the vast and dark Ocean of the Times of Iren or Rydychen and Caer-grant,)
I think the wisest Course is to divide the Laurel, and to call in King Hist.
and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 3.
Bladud to be Founder of our first University at Stanford. Thus the pitching of
our Tents in a third place ends the Controversy; and we may quietly, and at
leisure, draw off our Colonies, to Oxford or Cambridge, as we have occasion.

Some Writers we have that have behaved themselves with tolerable indifferency
in treating of these Matters, Both the Universities.
and have honestly inquired into the true History of the gradual Advancement of
Learning in this Kingdom; recounting whatever remained of the ancient State and
Condition of it in either of our Universities: But the most of those that
pretend to write of both without prejudice, are too manifestly biased in their
Affections, and seldom fail of giving the Precedence to the place of their own
respective Education. John Ross (the Warwick Antiquary) has been already
observed to mix a deal of this kind of History in that which he wrote of the
Kings of England: And it is certain he also designed a particular Treatise of
the Antiquities of our Universities. This very Treatise (though he acknowledges
'twas an imperfect Copy that came to his hands) is frequently quoted by John
Leland; and yet Mr. Wood Id. ibid. lib. 2. page 77.
believes it is now lost, as confidently as his Predecessor ( Brian Twine)
thought it never had a being. I presume his other Tract, Contra Historiolam
Cantabrigiensem, was only a Fragment of this Fragment; and therefore, if the
one be irrecoverably gone, there is little encouragement to look after the
other. Amongst Master Leland's own Works we have also one that bears the Title,
J. Pits, page 743, 744.
De Academiis Britannicis; which was once in such forwardness as that himself
spoke of it as of a piece that would suddenly appear abroad: Comment. in Cyg.
Cant. voce Granta. Vid. and ibid. voc. Isidis vadum.
Quin Grantae gloriam accuratius in Opusculo, quod de Academiis Britannicis sum
propediem editurus, collaudabo. I cannot see how this Expression could give any
Foundation to Tho Key, Assert. Antiq. Oxon. p. m. 5.
one of our Queen Elizabeth's Antiquaries to assert that if this Book were
published in that entire Condition in which its Author left it, it would
infallibly stop the Mouths of those that contend for the Antiquity of
Cambridge: But I think 'twas a sufficient Reply to such a Supposition, that,
John Caii, De Antiq. Cantab. lib. 1.
If the Sky should fall we should as infallibly catch Lar^s. John Pits prefaced
his Account of our Writers, with a small History of our Universities; which he
desired might be taken notice of in the Title of that Work, inscribed by
himself, Pits, p. 817.
De Academiis and Illustribus Scriptoribus Angliae There Is nothing in him, on
the former head, but what he has Epitomized out of some of those that wrote on
the same Subject a little before his Time: from whom he borrows all the new
Light he pretends to give, De Academiis, tam Antiquis Britonum, quam
recentioribus Anglorum. About the same time (as I guess) lived Robert Hare;
Fuller's Hist. of Cambr. p. 15.
who was an Esquire of good Worship and Wealth, and a great lover and preserver
of Antiquities. He carefully Collected the precious Monuments of both
Universities; caused them fairly to be transcribed, and freely bestowed a
Duplicate (or double Copy) on each of them. This industrious Gentleman was
sometimes a Member of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge; and therefore,
though he pretends to give a fair History of the Privileges of Oxford; yet he
Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. Lib. 2. p. 386, 390. and Lib. 1. p. 83.
inclines too much (upon occasion) the other way. In Howes's Edition of Fol.
Land. 1632.
Stow's Chronicle we have an Appendix or Corollary of the Foundations and
Descriptions of the three most famous Universities of England, viz. Cambridge,
Oxford and London. The Story of the two first of these, we are told, was
compiled by John Stow, and continued by his Publisher: and it is not much that
we owe to the pains of either of 'em, since the whole is only a lean Tract of
half a dozen Pages. There Is, in the Hist. Ox. lib. 1. p. 42.
Archives of Bodley's Library, a Poetical Piece, entitled, Britannia
Scholastica; which was written by one Robert Burhil, about the beginning of
King James the First's Reign, and Treats of the prime Antiquities of our two
Universities.

The zealous stickling for Seniority in the last Age did this Service to both
our famous Nurseries of good Learning, that many of their most ancient Records
were hereupon inquired out and carefully preserved; which may be as beneficial
to our English History, as some officious Forgeries (on the same occasion) are
injurious to it. We have no less than Bibl. Cott. Faustina, C. 7.
one and twenty several Volumes relating to the Antiquities of the University
of Oxford; as Charters, Orders, Statutes, Decrees, Letters, etc. the last
whereof bears this Title. About the Burghesses for the University; and what may
be answered in case their Right of sitting in Parliament should be impugn'd.
These are all in Manuscript; and are the Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p.
203, and alibi.
Fountain whence some of our best Printed Accounts have been derived. Amongst
the latter kind the Historiola Oxoniensis is looked upon the most Authentic;
and (as such) has had In princip. Assert. Antiq. Oxon. Thomas Key, Hist. Oxon.
lib. 1. p. 4. etc.
several Impressions. It Is only a short Fragment of a single Page in Octavo;
wherein we are told that the Britains began an University at Grekelade, which
the Saxons removed to Oxford. This is the Sum of that little Narrative; which
(though it is found in some of their Manuscript Statute-Books, as old as the
Reigns of Edward the Third and Henry the Fourth, yet) is not much insisted on
by Mr. Wood, who was sensible that it was Penned too carelessly to be of any
great use in the grand Controversy. John Ross seems (soon after this) to have
written particularly of the Antiquities of Oxford; besides the Treatise he left
upon the two Universities in common: for such a Book of his Leland refers to,
though he gives the Author of it the tart Character of Comment. in Cygn. Cant.
voc. Isidis vadum.
Vir majoris long Diligentiae quam Judicii. It Is perhaps the same which we
elsewhere meet with under the Title of J. Pits, p. 683.
Contra Historiolam Cantabrigiensem. About the same time (or, it may be, a
little sooner) William Wircester, Worcester or Buttoner, wrote his Polyandrum
Oxoniensium, etc. wherein he gave a List of all the eminent Persons that had
been educated in this University; which might possibly be had amongst See his
Apolog. lib. 2.. 144.
Brian Twine's Collections. The first Champion that appeared in the Cause
against Cambridge, was Tho. Key, Master of University College; who, having for
some time been employed in the Registrary's Office, was the best acquainted
with the public Instruments and Records. His 8vo. Land. 1568. and 4to. Ibid.
1574.
Assertio Antiquitatis Oxoniensis Academiae was written in Defense of this
University, in opposition to what had been advanced (two years before) by the
public Orator of Cambridge; who, in an Harangue to Queen Elizabeth, had
affirmed his own Mother to be the Elder Sister of the two. That Princess coming
afterward to Oxford, the foresaid Treatise was hastily drawn up and presented
to Her in Manuscript: And, a Copy of it falling afterward into the hands of
Dr. Caius, it was published with his Answer; which will be further mentioned
anon. This usuage provoked the Author to take more leisure in Composing a
Reply, which he communicated to several of his Friends under the Title of,
Examen Judicii Cantrabrigiensis cujusdam, qui se Londinensem dicit, nuper de
Origin utriusque Academiae lati. Mr. Wood Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 137.
says he once met with a Transcript of this Book, and found some things in it
worth his observation: but he could not direct his Reader where it was
afterward to be had; and speaks so coldly of it, that the obscure owner (in
whose hands he saw it) does not appear to be worth the enquiring after. He
rather offers to our perusal the Mystical Oxon. of Oxonford, etc. by Henry
Lyte; which (he Ibid. p. 293.
says) is amongst Twine's Manuscripts at Oxford, and has several Crotchets in
it which may be serviceable to the Man that shall hereafter engage in these
weighty Disputes. To these fanciful pieces may be added the 8vo. Hanov. 1605.
Lauds Academiae Parisinoe and Oxoniensis, by the eminently learned Dr.
Alberic Gentilis; whose Panegyric on this University is penned with the like
accuracy as the other Works of that noted Author. After him follows Isaac
Wake's 4to. Oxon. 1607. and 8vo. Ibid. Saepius.
Rex Platonicus; wherein the Author (who was then public Orator, afterward a
Knight and Ambassador) elegantly describes the Entertainment given by the
University to King James the First, and occasionally intermixes the History and
Antiquities of the whole and all its parts. Brian Twine (Fellow of Corpus
Christi, and sometime Custos Archivorum to the University) made a more diligent
search into the History and Records of this place than any of the former; and
obliged the Lovers of these Studies with his 4to Oxon. 1608.
Antiquitatis Academiae Oxoniensis Apologia, which (in three Books) very amply
refutes all Dr. Caius's Arguments for the Seniority of his Cantabrigians. The
industrious Author intended another Edition of this Book: and, to that purpose,
had largely augmented an interleav'd Copy; which ('it is supposed) was lost
during those unhappy Confusions which at first retarded the publishing of it.
What is printed has been censured as T. Fuler's Hist of Cambr. p. 14.
an Heap, rather than a Pile; and the Writer himself declared to be no
methodical Antiquary: And yet (how strangely different are the Judgments of Men
of contrary Affections and Interests!) this is the Character we have of the
Book from another hand, Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 241.
In eo libro praeter Subactissimum Judicium, etiam varia Lectionis indicia
passim sparguntur. The same year, with this Apology, was published 8vo. Oxon.
1608.
Ilium in Italiam, written by John Sansbury of St. John's College; wherein are
the Arms of the several Colleges in this University, and Verses upon them. It Is
not much more considerable than what (not long before) was written at Rome by
Nich. Fitzherbert, a Reteiner to Cardinal Allen; and was there printed under
the Title of, 8vo. Rome 1602.
Oxoniensis in Anglia Academiae Descriptio. A Vid. Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 498.
slight Discourse on the Oxford-Antiquities, by way of Letter to a Friend, was
penned by Dr. Leonard Hutton; who died Canon of Christ-Church, A. D. 1632. and
left also behind him a Manuscript Treatise in Latin, entitled, Historia
Fundationum Ecclesiae Christi Oxon. una cum Episcoporum Decanorum and
Canonicorum Ejusdem Catalogo. Of the like Complexion with the latter of these
(Meager in it self, and of a narrow Subject) is Dr. Savage's 4to. Oxon, 1668.
Ballio-Fergus; which pretends to give a true History of all the great Men that
have been Members of Baliol College, whereof the Author was Master. This Writer
is observed to have had a Genius somewhat averse to the Business he was here
engaged in, being too much a Courtier to turn Antiquary: so that (having also a
very imperfect stock of Materials) 'twas no wonder that a great many Errors and
Defects were discovered in his Book; that Duns Scotus (for example) was
transplanted hither from Merton, and Bishop Tonstal wholly overlooked. The 4to.
Oxon. 1665. and Land. 1675.
Notitia Academiae Oxoniensis was the Work of the late learned Mr. Fulman; who
also began the History of (his own College) Corpus Christi, but did not live to
finish it for the Press. Above all, this famous University is chiefly indebted
to the indefatigable pains of honest Anthony Wood; whose Industry, joined with
Camden's Learning and Judgment, would have made a complete English Antiquary.
His Fol. Oxon. 1674.
Historia and Antiquitates Vniversitatis Oxoniensis gives abundantly more than
the whole Tribe of the forementioned Authors could afford us; and, in two large
Books, runs through every particular of her Story. In the former of these we
have her Annals, from the eldest date of her Records, down to the Year 1648.
wherein our ancient British Government, Religion, Liberties, Laws and Learning,
were all sacrificed together. The Confusions that ensued, and continued for
above eleven long Years after King Charles's Martyrdom, made a Scene too
Tragical; and therefore our Historian wisely dropped the Curtain before
Ignorance had entirely usurped the Schools, Blasphemy the Pulpits and Oliver
the Throne. The latter Book presents us with an Account of the Foundations,
Endowments, etc. of the Public Lectures, Library, Colleges and Halls; with a
List of their Benefactors, Governors and eminent Writers: To which is added a
Catalogue of the Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors, Proctors, Stewards and
Representatives in Parliament. This Work was first penned in English; and
translated into Latin by several Persons appointed by the Curators of the
Press: So that the Style is not very uniform, and sometimes the original Sense
a little mistaken and perverted. Some instances of these failures are given by
a late Bp. Barlow's Rem. p. 181, 183, 184.
Learned Prelate of our Church; who is a little too severe in his Reflections
upon the chief Publisher of these Antiquities. The Author himself complained of
several Athen. Oxon. vol. 2. p. 605.
Additions and Alterations, made without his Privity and Consent; and seemed to
hope that his own English Copy (the Language whereof, I dare say, was not over
Charming) would sometime or other Ibid. p. 28.
hereafter be Published.

The Black Book at Cambridge makes as considerable a Figure there, Cambridge.
as any of our old Statute-Books can do at Oxford; and it has also its
Historiola, which is equal (both for Matter and Authority) with ours. The whole
Volume is a Collection of ancient Charters and Privileges; amongst which this
short History was (in the last Age) inserted by Vid. Joh. Caii Antiq. Cantab.
lib. 1. p. (...)
William Buckenham, Master of Caius College, and Vice Chancellor of that
University. In this we have the Story of King Gurguntius's bestowing the
Eastern part of Great Britain upon Cantaber, a Spaniard; who (forsooth) had
sometime studied at Athens, and (after Caer-Grant was built by his Son
Grantanus) invited thence his old Friends Anaximander and Anaxagoras, to teach
Philosophy in this City. Centum sunt ibi (says Comment. ad Cygn. Cant. voce
Granta.
John Leland) praeterea ejusdem farinae Fabulae. Profecto nihil unquam legi
vanius, sed neque Stultius aut Stupidius. Missas igitur facio has Antiquitatis
delicias. Out of the same Book Hist. et Antiq. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 390.
Robert Hare borrowed his Catalogue of the Chancellors (or Rectors, if the
other Word should prove too young for the purpose) of this University; which
are most exactly continued from St. Amphibalus (who was Rector, A. D. 289.)
down to the Conquest. It Is J. Pits, p. 635.
reported, that a certain Historia Cantabrigiae was written by Nicholas
Cantelupe, a Welsh Gentleman; who died Prior of a Monastery of Carmelites at
Northampton, A. D. 1441. Archbishop Usher takes this to be the same with what
we have already observed to be in the Black Book; and therefore he Antiq
Eccles. Brit. p. 69, 112, 268.
frequently quotes Cantelupe's Historiola for the Benefactions of King Lucius
and King Arthur, to the University of Cambridge, Pelagius's studying there,
etc. Our later Antiquaries agree with this learned Primate; and allow this
Author, and that very Work, to be the first that appeared in defense of the
British part of her Story: And they further tell us, that here Hist. et Antiq.
Oxon. lib. 1. p. 36.
began the Quarrel betwixt the two Sisters, and that John Ross professedly
engaged on the behalf of Oxford. Indeed, Tho. Fuller Hist. of Cambr. p. 65. 66.
speaks of a Treatise concerning the ancient Privileges of this University,
which seems to carry a little more Age; being written by one Thomas Markant,
Fellow of Peter-House, and Junior-Proctor, A. D. 1417. This Book, he says, was
bestowed on the University by the Author himself; and, at his request,
carefully kept (for some time) in a locked Chest. It was afterward lost or
stolen; but recovered and restored by R. Hare. It was again lost; and recovered
by Matt. Wren, Bishop of Ely. A third time it is lost: And this Relapse (says
he) I suspect to be mortal. The Life of King Sigebert was amongst Comment. in
Cygn. Cant. voce Gran^a.
John Leland's many Designs; and broad Hints he gave that in it he would
discover the true Original of the University of Cambridge: But the bulkiest
Promises of such noted Writers, commonly prove the most abortive; Despair of
answering the World's raised Expectations, very much contributing to their
Miscarriage. The most learned Cantabrigian Antiquary that has yet appeared was
John Caius, Doctor of Physic, and Physician in Ordinary to Queen Mary; who J.
Pits, p. 756. and Fuller's Worthies, p. 275. 276. in Norwich.
was born at Norwich, and was the generous Founder of Caius College out of
Gonvil-Hall. His two Books 8vo. Land. 1568. and 4to. Ibid. 1574.
De Antiquitate Cantabrigiensis Academiae were written, in defense of the
Cambridge-Orator, against Tho. Key. The former Edition of them was under the
feigned Name of Londinensis: But in the second the Author himself thought it no
disparagement to own his Work. His first Attempt is to establish the lately
advanced Doctrine of his Mother's great Age and Seniority; which he endeavors
to do from the exemplified Charters of King Arthur and King Cadwallader,
together with those of the Popes Honorius and Sergius. This done, his next
Business is to overthrow the pretended Antiquity of Oxford; which (in his
second Book) he dispatches as effectually as he had done his former Argument.
He seems to have intended a much larger History of this University, than is
here given us: For (speaking Edit. 1586.
of the frequent Depopulations and Miseries of the Town, during the Wars
betwixt the Saxons and the Danes) he concludes, De quibus in libris nostris de
Historia Cantabrigiensis Academiae explicatius egimus. I am very confident that
a good part of the Collections which he made for this purpose, are still in
Bibl. Cott. F^ustina, C. 3.
Sir John Cotton's Library; where we are told of a Volume of Collectanea ex
antiquis Rotulis and variis Auctoribus de Academia Cantabrigiensi, ejus
Antiquitate and Privilegiis, cum multis Literis Originalibus ejusdem Academiae
ad Regem Henricum VIII. Thomam Cromwellum, etc. The same Year with the first
Edition of Dr. Caius's Book, was published 8vo. Land. 1568.
Regina Litera, sive, De Adventu Elizabethae Reginae Angliae ad Academiam
Cantabrigiensem; a Treatise of the same Nature with that of Rex Platonicus
(afterward) at Oxford. In the same Queen's Reign, wherein the Civil Wars
betwixt our two Universities were the most violent, was Printed a Impress.
Cantabr. per Them. Thomasium.
Catalogue of the Rectors and Chancellors of Cambridge, from Mauritius (in the
Time of Constantine the Great) to the Year 1585. written by Matt. Stokys,
Beadle and Registrary of that University. Since his Time the only Person (as
far as I know) that has published any History of this place (for I do not think
Sir Simonds D'Ewes's 4to. Land. 1641. Vid. and Hist. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 30.
Speech deserves such a Name) is Tho. Fuller; who was pleased to annex his Fol.
Land. 1655.
History of the University of Cambridge to that of the Churches of Great
Britain; and most People think they ought not to be separated. He begins
(modestly) at the Conquest; and ends at the Year 1643. for the like Reasons
that prevailed with our Oxford-Antiquary to break off Five Years after. The
Foundation of the University by King Sigebert, he had discussed before; in the
Body of his Cent. 7. lib. 2. ad An. 631.
Church History: And the potent Arguments he there produces have been nicely
examined and considered by Hist. and Antiq. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 35, 36, etc.
Mr. Wood. Parker's Citat. a Tho. Fuller, in Hist. Cantab. p. 31, etc.
Sceleton Cantabrigiense does not promise any great Matters in its Title: and
Mr. Hatcher's Ibid. p. 139. And in his Worthies frequently.
Catalogue of the Fellows of King's College (tho it may have some things of
Note in it, yet) is of too confined a Subject to deserve any more than the bare
nameing in this Place.

It had been a happy thing if all those that, Writers.
with so much Industry and Application, have inquired into the first Originals
of our two Universities, had bestowed as much of their learned Pains in
following down the Histories of such eminent Writers as have flourished in
either of them: For (as hereby they might severally have done as much Honor to
their respective Mothers, so) this had been the most effectual Course to have
endeared themselves to Posterity, and to have made their Labors for ever
valuable. We are extremely indebted to those pious Princes and generous Heroes
that (either in the East or Western Parts of the Kingdom) have afforded us such
noble advantages of Education, in all sorts of Learning, as no other Nation can
pretend to; and perhaps we cannot be more injurious to their Memories than by
clogging their true Story with Fables, Fancies and Forgeries. Instead therefore
of raking in their Ashes and rifling their Sepulchers to prove them Men of
Gigantick Stature, instead of refineing upon their History till we have turned
it into Romance, we should pay them more grateful and real Honors if (being
content with such Remains of them as we know are Genuine) we employed more of
our Time in letting the World see what use has been made of their Benefits; how
much the several Branches of the unforbidden Tree of Knowledge have thriven
under the Influences of their Charity; what mighty Numbers of great Doctors and
Masters (in all Faculties) have been fed at their Expense, and flourished by
their Bounty. It Is true, our Universities were not always the sole Fountains of
good Literature in this Island; many of our eminent Writers having had their
Education in Monasteries: But (since St. John of Beverly has been made a Member
of that at Oxford, and venerable Bede a Student at Cambridge) I wish they had
ranked all our ancient Men of Knowledge on one Hand or the other, provided they
had given us full Accounts of their Persons and Labors. I think we may
(without Vanity) affirm that hardly any Kingdom in the World has outdone
England, either in the Number or Goodness of her Authors; and that, even in the
darkest Ages, our Lamps shone always as bright as any in our Neighborhood.
When School Divinity was in Fashion, we had our Doctores Subtiles,
Irrefragabiles, etc. and, as Learning grew to a better Ripeness and Stature, we
had plenty of good Books in other (as useful) Sciences.

The first that attempted the History of our Writers was John Boston, J. Boston.
a Monk of St. Edmundsbury, A. D. 1410. who, having J. Pits, p. 593.
viewed most of the Libraries in England, drew a Catalogue of all the British
Authors, and gave short censures upon them. He could hardly have flourished so
early as Pits here speaks of, if his Progress was (as a later T. Gale, in
Praesat. ad 15. Script. p. 1.
Writer informs us) in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh: But we shall not
quarrel with him for such small Mistakes as this. He ought indeed to have been
a little better versed in the Story of his great Grandfather; for the three
following John's (Leland, Bale and Pits) handed from one another what was first
borrowed from him. Archbishop Usher Th. Fuller's Worthies, p. 166. in Lanca^.
Vide etiam ipsum Usher. de Script. Vernac. p. 124.
had the most curious MS. Copy of his Book: And our Oxford Antiquary Hist. and
Antiq. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 58.
cites another (smaller) Catalogue of the same Author's Composure. Whether
Alanus de Linna (Prior of a Carmolite Monastery at Lyn in Norfolk, A. D. 1420.)
did Vid. J. Pits, p. 603.
enlarge this Catalogue or the other, I dare not determine: Possibly, he only
made an Index to them; as he did to Bale, Edit. Wesal. fol. 185.
forty other Volumes in the Library at Norwich.

The next that thought this Matter worth his consideration was John Leland; J.
Leland.
who was indeed an extraordinary Person, having (besides his being a great
Master in Poetry) attained to a good share of Knowledge in the Greek, Latin,
Welsh, Saxon, Italian, French and Spanish Languages. In the Year 1534. King
Henry the Eighth gave him a Commission to Search all the Libraries of England,
and to make what Collections he thought Good: in which Employment he Spent Six
whole Years. He afterward turned Protestant, and was siez'd with a Frenzy;
losing (says my J. Pits, p. 743.
Author, very uncharitably) his Understanding with his Faith. In this Condition
he died at London, A. D. 1552. leaving a vast number of Historical Treatises
behind him. Amongst these, the most valuable (at least, that which we are now
chiefly concerned to enquire after) is said to have been entitled De
Illustribus Britanniae Scriptoribus; containing the Lives and Characters of
most of the eminent Writers of this Kingdom. This Work is now in the public
Vid. Ath. Oxon. vol. 1. p. 69.
Library at Oxford; where it makes the fourth Volume of his Collectanea (being
354 Pages in Folio) given by Will. Burton to that University.

John Bale J. Bale.
was a Suffolk-Man, sometime Scholar in Jesus College in Cambridge; and
afterward a Carmelite Friar in Norwich. He was (as he Cent 8. cap. 100.
says) converted from Popery by the procurement of Thomas Lord Wentworth; though
(in truth) his wife Dorothy seems to have had as great Hand in that happy Work.
In the Year 1552. he was made Puller's Worthies, p. 60. 61. in Suffolk.
Bishop of Ossory in Ireland: But, returning from Exile in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, he did not think it advisable to go any more into that Kingdom;
contenting himself with a Prebend of Canterbury, where he died, A. D. 1563. His
Summarium Illustrium Majoris Britanniae Scriptorum was first presented to King
4 to. Ipsw. and Wesal. 1549.
Edward the Sixth; and contained only five Centuries of Writers. To these he
afterward added Fol. Basil. 1559.
three more; and made several Corrections and Additions throughout the whole
Book. The Ground-plot of this Work (as has been observed) was borrowed from
Leland; and the chief of his own Superstructure is malicious and bitter
Invectives against the Papists. The Character which a late learned Person gives
of him and his Writings is too just H. Wharton, in Praefat. ad. Angl. Sac. vol.
1. p. 31. and 47.
Veritas Balaeo Parum curae erat, dummodo Romanae Ecclesiae Inimicorum Numerum
augere posset. And again, Clausis plerunque oculis Scriptorum Anglicorum
aetates definivit. Some have thought his making H. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p.
210.
Books of some little Saxon Epistles excusable, and what would admit of an
Apology: But, if we mark him well, he is continually multiplying the Writings of
all his Authors at a very unsufferable and unjustifiable rate.

In Opposition to Bale's hard Treatment of the Romanists came forth J. P's 4
to. Paris 1619.
Relat. Histor de rebus Anglicis, J. Pits.
Tom. 1. etc. which is the same Book with that usually quoted by the Name of
Pitseus de Scriptoribus. This Author Stuy'd in New-College in Oxford; and was
at last Dean of Liverdune in Lorain, where he died, A. D. 1616. Though he quotes
Leland with great Familiarity and Assurance, it is very probable he never Athen.
Oxon. vol. 1. p. 345, 346, etc. and Hen. Wharton, Praefat, ad Angl. Sac. vol.
1. p. 15.
saw any such thing as his Collectanea de Scriptoribus; but that his only true
Author, for all he pretends to bring out of that Storehouse, was John Bale
himself. His Latin is clean enough; and his giving an Account of some eminent
Popish Writers, that lived beyond Sea in the beginning of the Reformation, is
an acceptable Piece of Service. Mr. Wood has taken the pains to Correct a great
many of his Mistakes; and might have noted some hundreds more. He must needs
have been too much in have to write accurately, who, even in the Catalogue he
gives of his own Uncle Page 775.
Nich. Sanders's Writings, is guilty of so gross an Error as to reckon the
Treatise entitled, 4 to. Land. 1573.
Fidelis Servi subdito infideli responsio among that infamous Writer's Works,
when on the contrary, the Book was written against him, and he is the Subditus
Infidelis mentioned in the Title Page.

Our Writers of these two last Ages have been pretty well accounted for by A.
Wood.
the late industrious Anthony Wood; whose Fol. Land. 1691. and 1692.
Athenae Oxonienses give us a large Collection of Reports (good and bad) of the
most minute Circumstances of almost all the Authors that have flourished in
either of our Universities since the Year 1500. The Writer of these two Volumes
(or his Friend, who penned the Prefaces for him) thought it convenient to
excuse the extraordinary Respect he paid to the Members of the Roman Communion;
telling us that he had found those the most communicative, as (on the contrary)
the Fanatics were generally the most reserved and morose. Some fancied there
were other secret Reasons for these mutual Civilities betwixt the Gentlemen of
that Persuasion and our Author; who, by his long conversation amongst them, was
thought to be a little too deeply tinctured with their Principles. 'Twill be a
difficult Task to prove him a Papist from any thing that he has here advanced;
since in some places he falls as foul on those People, as his Praises of 'em
are extravagant in others. The truth is, His Books are little more than a Medly
of Notes and such Informations as were sent in from his several Correspondents;
without being digested into any other method than the throwing them under that
particular Author's Name, to whom they chiefly related. It Is no Blemish on his
Memory to observe that he had his share of that Peevishness and Austerity (both
in his Style and Manners) which is commonly incident to Antiquaries; and thus
much we ought gratefully to acknowledge that he has furnished us with a larger
Stock of useful Materials than perhaps any one Man of this Age has Collected.
If he was too sullen among Courtiers, he paid sufficiently for all the Liberty
he took; and it is illegal to object a Crime for which a suitable Penance has
been already enjoined and performed.

It were highly to be wished that we had a general Account of all our Writers
done with the like accuracy and exactness as those of Oxford (for the last 200
Years) are in these two Volumes; T. Tanner.
but in somewhat better and more polite Air: And I think I may boldly promise
the Reader that this will be abundantly performed by Mr. Tanner, who has
diligently compared Leland's Original Manuscript with the scandalously false
Copies that have been given of it by Bale and Pits. He has Corrected
innumerable Errors in all the three; and has made those many and large
Additions to all that they could tell us, that we shall have reason to look
upon the Work as entirely new and his own. The obliging Pains that have been
taken by this worthy Person on that Subject have rendered him better qualified
to give an Account of our English Historians than I can pretend to be; and I
wish I had early enough thought of recommending the Task to him: But his great
Candor, in remarking the Omissions and Mistakes in my former Part, encourages
me to hope that he will as kindly review this; and then I shall not question
but they will both become more serviceable than (without such an Assistance) I
could ever have made them.

The End of the Second Part.
AN INDEX OF THE Authors in the Second Part.
The Capital Figures refer to the Preface.

A.
Abbo Floriacensis Page 52. Abingdon 151 Adalard 51 Adam 75 Adeodatus 118
Aelfric 45, 51, 54, 57. Albanensis 24 Albert, Pruss 74 Alcuinus 152 Alfred,
Malmsburiensis 47 -- Beverlac xxvi, 55 Alford 71 Allen xxiv Andreas xlv
Anglicus 22 Aquaepontanus 85 St. Asaph 27 Ashmole 141 Asketel 55 Avesbury
xxxviii Augustine 5, 33 Ayscue xxxii
B.
Bacon xlvii, 74 Baker 196 Bale 160, 201 Barden 169 Barnes xxxix, 21 Basire 20
Battely xvi Bid 34, 47, 48 Benedict xxxvi, 26, 78 Beulanius xvii, xx Biondi
xliii Birchington 121, 132 Blaneford xxxviii Blegorede xxi Blesensis xxxvi, 59
Boseham 76 Boston 182, 225 Bracland 76 Brady xxxii, xlii Bramhal 164 Bravonius
57, 60 Bridferth 50 Bridgewater 85 Britannus xvii, xx British Laws xxi Brom
xxvii Broughton 11, 184 Budden 163, 172 Burhil 207 Buriensis 108 Burchardus 51
Burnet 88, 98, 104 Burton 184 Burtonenses Annals 63 Buttoner 182, 209
C.
Caius xiii, 210, 212, 219 Cambrensis 26, 28, 52, 75, 165, 168 Cantabrigiensis
Historiola 217 Cantelupe 218 Capgrave 31, 171, 175, 199 Cardiffe xxii Carlton
176 Carnotensis 73, 77, 79 Cavendish 166 Caxton xxiii, 31 Chancey 84 Chartham
162 Chaundler 170 du Chesne xxxv Chesterton 140 Chettel 55 Clapham xxxii Clara
200 Clarentius 44 Clerk xlviii Colman xi Corbet xiv Cousin 92 Cotton xiv, 12,
144, 183 Coventriensis 200 Cressy 72 Croylandensis, Will. 52 -- Faelix 54 --
Roger 78 Crump 181
D.
Daniel 47 Davies 130 Dene 148 Dent xiii Devisiensis xxxvii Deusdedit 118
D'Ewes xv Diceto xxxvi, 107, 119 Digges xlvii Dinoth 6, 126 Dodsworth 154, 185
Dorobernensis 119 Drayton xi Duck 162 Dugdale 66, 90, 143, 184, 185
Dunelmensis, Laur. 49, 128 -- Simeon 128, 152 -- Reginald 49 -- Nicolas 74
Dunstable 24
E.
Eadmerus 47, 57, 59 Ecleston 199 Eddius 58 Edwards 164 Egwine 44, 47 Elerius
30 Eliensis, Tho. 53 Elmham xlv Elwamus 4 Enderby xxiii Enquerrant xliv Ernulph
147 Ethelwold 106 Eversden 108 d' Ewes 222 Eveshamensis xli, 77 Eulogium xxxi
Exoniensis 77
F.
Felix 54 Fenn 85 Fitzherbert 213 Fitzstephen 77 Folcard 55, 57 Fox 81 Fridegod
59 Froissard xxxix Fuller 91, 222 Fulman 214
G.
Gardener xvi Gemeticensis xxxv Gentilis 211 Gibbon 85 Gibson 113 Gillingham
193 Godwine 109 Good 23 Gotseline 48, 118 Gourmelene 25 St. Graal 7 le Grand 99
Grandison 79, 133 Green 200 Greystanes 128 Guntan 146
H.
Hadenham 148 Hales 78 Hall 172 Hardib 198 Hare 206, 217 Harmer 101 Harpesfield
67, 82 Harrington 113 Hatcher 223 Hayward xxxiv, xlvii Hegge 49 Hemmingford
xxxviii Hemming 60, 150 Herbert 188 Herd xlv Herman 52 Heylin 53, 92, 94
Heywood xlvi Hildyard xvi Holland 143 Hooker 133 Hopkins 151 Hoscham 77, 79
Humphery 173 Huntington 44, 107 Hutten 213 Hutton 154
I.
James 80 Ingulfus 55 Johnson 170 Jones 195 Josceline 27, 28, 106 Joseph of
Atimathea 2 Josseline 111, 121, 171 Iscanus 77 Junius 43
K.
Key 212, 220 Kirkstall 197 Kirkstede 197 Knighton xli Kynder xiv
L.
Laire xiv Landavensis 26, 28 Langhorn xxiv Langtoft xxxvii Langton 78, 119
Lantfred 58 Lavingham 39 Leland 109, 205, 219, 226 Lichfedense Chron. 140 Lily
173 Linna 226 Linwood 64 Livius xliv Lloyd 15 Londinensis xxx, 220 Lowth 100
Lucius 3 Lydgate 25, 51 Lyte 211
M.
Mackenzie 14, 16, 17, 20 Maidstone xl, 166 Maihew 194 Malmsbury 46, 60, 107
Marcellinus 56 Markant 219 Marsham xii, 17 Martyn 170 Mason 111 Maurice xxii
May xxxv, xxxix Medvinus 4 Mela x Merlyn xviii Monmouth xxvi Montacute 108
Moryson xlvii Mushens 86
N.
Nennius xvii, xx Neve xv Noel 148 Nothelmus 47
O.
Ocland xxxi, xlvi Odo 59 Ogilby xi Osbern 51, 52, 118 Osmund 47 Oxenedes xxx
Oxoniensis Historiola 208
P.
Paris 24, 55, 64, 74 Parker 121, 222 Parsons 69, 82, 134 Paul 164 Philip,
Monachus 55 Pits 109, 194, 206, 220 Pliny x Pluto 63 Pollini 88 Porter 46 Powel
xxiv Proctor xlvi Prynne 112, 114
Q.
Quadrilogus 79
R.
Ramsey 54, 56, 57 Ray xiii Regina Literata 221 Reyner 195 Ricemarchus 23, 26
Rich 74 Rievallensis 28 Ripponensis 59 Rishton 87 Robinson xxiii Rocking 76
Rosse 150, 204, 209 Rudburn 128, 149
S.
Saints, British 21 -- Saxon 44 -- English 73 Salisburiensis 73, 78 Salopiensis
29 Sancta Clara 200 Sanders 86 Sansbury 213 Savage 214 Savil 183 Schelstract 20
Schaffhausen 29 Searl 144 Seldom xi Serlo 198 Slatyer xxxii Smith 70, 131
Solinus x Somner 44, 67, 120 Speed 183 Spelman 15, 40, 66, 90 Spott 120
Stanyhurst 28 Stapleton 38, 79 Stephens 60, 77, 90 Stillingfleet 17, 100 Stokys
222 Stonestreet xiii Storer 166 Stow 207 Strabo x Strype 104 Stubbes 152
T.
Tanner 50, 116, 189, 232 Tailor 136 Taxston xxx Teilo 138 Teukesbury 78, 79
Textus Roffensis 148 Thorn 120 Thynne 146 Tinmuthensis 30, 31 Tood 123 Torr
xvii, 154 Trokelow xxxvii Trussel 149 Tuke xxxi Turgot 127 Turner xvi Twine 212
Twisden 89
V.
Vade 79 Varillas 99 Virgil 109 Vitalis 62 Unwon 24 Vowel 133 Urmston 125 Usher
xxiii, 12
W.
Wade 79 Wake 212 Wall xlv Wallingford xxix Wantner xiv Warner xxxi Wendover
xxix Wessington 128 Wharton 111, 115, 116, 142, 178 Wheloc 37, 38 White 146,
194 Whitlock 140 Wilson 45, 163 Wintoniensis 107 Wood 111, 145, 128, 215, 231
Woodhop 194 Worcester 182, 209 Worthington 85 Wulstan 53, 58 Wycumb 168
Books Printed for Abel Swall, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's Chuch-Yard.
CAmden's Britannia, newly Translated into English with large Additions and
Improvements, and Maps of every County, engraved anew. Folio.

Thesaurus Geographicus, a new Body of Geography, containing the General
Doctrine of that Science, and a particular Description, Geographical,
Topographical and Political of all the known Countries of the Earth, with Maps
engraven in Copper. Folio.

Monsieur L. E. Du Pin's History of Ecclesiastical Writers, containing an
Account of the Lives and Writings, and an Abridgment of the Works of the
Primitive Fathers, and all Ecclesiastical Writers from the time of our Savior,
to the end of the Ninth Century. Folio, seven Tomes.

The Evangelical History, or the Life of our Savior Jesus Christ,
comprehensively and plainly related. Adorned with Copper Cuts. Octavo.

The Evangelical History, Part II. being the Lives and Acts of the Holy
Apostles. Illustrated with the Effigies of the Apostles, and a Map of their
Travels, engraven in Copper. Octavo.

The Essays or Councils, Civil and Moral, of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam,
and Vicount of St. Alban; with a Character of Q. Eliz. now added in this
Edition. Octavo.

The History of the Revolutions in Sweden, occasioned by the Change of
Religion, and Alteration of Government in that Kingdom. Translated from French,
by J. M. Octavo.

Travels through Germany, Bohemia, Swisserland, Holland and other parts of
Europe, describing the most considerable Cities and Palaces of Princes. By C.
Patin, M. D. of Paris. Englished and Illustrated with Cuts. Octavo.

C. Jul. Caesaris Comment. cum Notis and Interpretat. Joan. Goduini in usum
Delph. Octavo.

P. Ovidij Metamorphosaeon. Interpret. and Notis illustravit D. Crispinus in
usum Delph, recensuit J. Friend, Oxon. Octavo.

P. Virgilij Opera, Notis and Interpret. illustravit Carol. Ruaeus in usum
Delphinij. Octavo.

Eutropij Historiae Romanae Breviar. cum Notis and Emendationibus Annae,
Tannaq. Fabri Filia, in usum Delphini. Octavo.

The English Historical Library, Part I. A short View and Character of most of
the Writers now extant, either in Print or Manuscript, which may be serviceable
to the Undertakers of a General History of this Kingdom. By W. Nicolson. Octavo.

Now newly Published,
Archaeologiae Greciae: Or, the Antiquities of Greece, containing an Account of
the Civil Government of Athens. The Religion of the Greeks, etc. By John
Potter. M. A. and Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxon. Illustrated with Sculptures.
Octavo.

To be Published by the end of this Month of June, 1697.
The Lives and Characters of the Ancient Greek Poets. By Basil Kennet of C. C.
C. Oxon. Adorned with their Heads in Sculpture. Octavo.

C. Crispi Sallustij Opera quae Extant. D. Crispinus Notis and Interpretatione
illustravit in usum Delph. Octavo.

FINIS.

