The Duke of NORFOLK'S Order about the Habit the Ladies are to be in that
attend the Queen at her Coronation.
His Majesty having been pleased to Command the Attendance of the Peeresses of
England upon the Queen Consort at her Coronation; And it being for the Honor
of so great a Solemnity, that They all be in the same Habit, with Distinction's
of the Ranks of those that Wear them: I have, by His Majesty's Command, Ordered
a particular Direction to be Printed, whereby every one may know in what manner
They ought to appear.
THE Train of a BARONESS, a Yard on the Ground, the Ermin Cape to be Poudred
with Two Bars, the long Mantle to be Edged round with Ermin Un-poudred an Inch
broad, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet, as well as the Mantle, made
straight-Body'd, and Clasped before, Edged with Ermin Two Inches broad, and
Scallop'd down the sides from below the Girdle, with a Train a little shorter
than the long Robe, Sleeves of Velvet (Scallop'd, Edged with Ermin, and Fringe
of Gold or Silver,) to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap to reach only
a little above the Rim of the Coronet.

A VISCOUNTESS to have her Train a Yard and a Quarter upon the Ground, the Cape
Poudred with Two Rows and a half, the long Mantle to be Edged with Two Inches
of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet as well as the Mantle, and
straight to the Body, Clasped before, Edged with Ermin Two Inches broad, and
Scallop'd down the sides, with a Train something shorter than the Mantle,
Sleeves of Velvet (Scallop'd, Edged with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver,)
to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap to reach a little above the Rim
of the Coronet.

A COUNTES'S Train to be a Yard and half upon the Ground, the Cape Poudred with
Three Rows of Ermin, the Mantle Edged with Three Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat
to be of Crimson Velvet, close Body'd, Clasped before, Edged with Ermin Two
Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the Sides, with a Train half a Yard, Velvet
Sleeves, Scallop'd and Edged with Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver, the Cap
to reach only a little above the Rim of the Coronet.

A MARCHIONESS, to have her Train a Yard and Three Quarters upon the ground;
the Cape Poudred with Three Rows and a half of Ermin, the Mantle Edged with
Four Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be of Crimson Velvet, close Body'd,
Clasped before, Edged with Ermin Two Inches broad, Scallop'd down the Sides,
with a Train about half a Yard, Velvet Sleeves, (Scallop'd and Edged with
Ermin, and Fringe of Gold or Silver) to reach a little below the Shoulder, the
Cap to reach only a little above the Rim of the Coronet.

A DUTCHESS'S Train to be Two Yards upon the Ground, the Cape Poudred with Four
Rows of Ermin, the Mantle Edged with Five Inches of Ermin, the Sur-coat to be
of Crimson Velvet as well as the Mantle, close Body'd, Clasped before, Edged
with Ermin Two Inches broad, and Scallop'd down the sides, with a Train about
half a Yard, Velvet Sleeves Edged with Ermin, Scallop'd and Fringed with Gold
or Silver, to reach a little below the Shoulder, the Cap only to reach a little
above the Rim of the Coronet.

The Petticoats to be of Cloth of Silver, or any other White Stuff, either
Laced or Embroidered, according to every ones Fancy.

The Mantles to hang back, being fast'ned on each Shoulder with Cords of Silver
or Gold suitable to their Fringe, with a Tassel of the same, hanging one of
each side down to the Wast.

The Sur-coats to open before, that the Petticoats may appear.

NORFOLK and MARSHALL.

Printed by Not. Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, 1685.


