DELAY OF REFORMATION PROVOKING Gods further Indignation.

Represented in A SERMON Preached at WESTMINSTER to the Honorable House of
COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at their late solemn Monthly Fast, April 29.
1646.

By JAMES NALTON Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of Leonards Fosterlane,
London.

LEVIT. 26.23, 24. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me:

Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your sins.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the sign of the Brasen-Serpent in
Pauls-Churchyard, 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Noble SENATORS:
I See You are pleased to have not only Bezaleel's and Aholiab's Ex. 31.2, 6
(choice and skillful workmen in that reverend Assembly of Divines) employed
in purging and beautifying the house of God; but you will have some other poor
Laborers also set on work, to bring stones and mortar to the building. And
truly, had not I looked above my self, at that great God, who when we are
faint and feeble, does gird us about with strength 1 Samuel 2.4.
, The weight of the work, together with the sense of my own extreme
unfitness, to carry the Name of God before such an Auditory, might have
overwhelmed me with sinking discouragments: But if Gods power may get glory by
my weakness, I will rejoice in my Infirmities 2 Cor. 12.9.
. I hope, there is none shall have so low a conceit of my poor parts or
pains, but I my self shall have a lower.

The mark I levelled at in this plain homely piece, now presented to your
view, was the pressing and promoting the Work of Reformation, which how it
has been retarded (since we entered into that Solemn sacred League) I need not
tell you. Sure I am, if either Atheists or Papists, Neuters or Heretics,
Sectaries or Seducers, Hypocrites or carnal Gospellers, can do the Devils
work, viz. either persecute the Woman, or stifle her Child in the birth, or
devour it as soon as it shall be born Rev. 12.4.
; this Malechilde of a long expected, much desired Reformation, shall never be
brought forth to light. But look about you, for God looks on you, nay, God
looks within you; He exactly views (as my Text will tell you) every one of
you, how you Act your parts on the Stage where he imployes you.

The Lord has helped you to carry on your Work (the preservation of a poor
distressed distracted Kingdom.) Therefore he now expects that you should help
him to carry on His Work, even That for which you have lifted up your hands to
the most high God. Let it never be said of any of you (sitting in that
honorable Assembly) what was said of the Nobles of Tekoah, Neh. 3.5.
They put not their necks to the work of their Lord. God forbid, that occasion
should be given to fasten that complaint on any of you which the Apostle
utter's with some regret, Phil. 2.21.
All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Certain it is,
the more we seek our selves, the more we lose our selves; the more we deny our
selves, and our own ends, and our own honor, the more will God honor us both
in our persons and in our places. O that the zeal of Gods house might even eat
you up Joh. 2.17.
! O that your hearts were so fired with a burning Love to Jesus Christ, and his
Government, that you might say with David, Psalm. 132.4, 5.
I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I
find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

Never was Parliament so lifted up to heaven in extraordinary discoveries of
Gods providence and protection, which have been as a Pillar of a cloud by day,
and a Pillar of fire by night, to conduct you through the Wilderness of a
Bloody War, bringing you from Shittim to Gilgal Mic. 6.5.
, even to the skirts of Canaan: Therefore that which Joshua spoke to the
Israelites, when (upon the fresh memorial of God's miraculous mercies toward
them) he renewed a Covenant between them and their God, Josh. 24.25, 27.
This Stone shall be a witness to us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord
which he spoke unto us. The like may I say to you; All the Mercies, Victories
and Deliverances vouchsafed to you; all the Promises, Protestations, Covenants
and Engagements lying on you, will witness either for you, or against you, at the
great day of your Account.

The Lord Jesus Christ still stand by you; Let his everlasting arms be always
under you, and so establish your hearts in his truth and fear, that he may
delight in you as polished shafts in his own quiver, and happy instruments of
further advancing Temple-work, the completing whereof will be to you a Name of
Renown, and to us the joy of our hearts, and the crown of our hopes. It is and
shall be the constant prayer of

The weakest and unworthiest of them that serve you in the Gospel, James
Nalton.

A SERMON PREACHED TO the Honorable House of COMMONS on the Monthly Fast Day,
April 29. 1646.
JEREM. 13.27. I have seen thine Adulteries and thy Neighings, the lewdness of
thy Whordome, and thine abominations on the Hills in the Fields: Woe unto thee,
O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be?


THIS Text may well be called an awakening Trumpet, sounding a loud alarm in
the ears of an impenitent, unreformed people: Many warnings had God given to
Judah and Jerusalem, before they felt that fatal blow in the Babylonish
Bondage: One among the rest is proclaimed in this Chapter, ver. 14. I will dash
them one against another, even the Fathers and the Sons together; yea, I will
dash them in pieces like bottles of Wine, ver. 12. (Alas, alas, poor England in
this bloody intestine War has made a sad Comentary on this mournful Text:)
Upon this warning God calls them to a deep Humiliation, ver. 18. Say unto the
King and to the Queen, humble your selves and sit down: Great ones and Nobles,
Senators and Statesmen in a day of Humiliation, must forget their greatness,
fit down in the dust, and lie low before the Lord, as well as the meanest of
the people: They (notwithstanding this Summons) are so far from Humiliation,
that they are entertaining thoughts of self-justification, ver. 22. Wherefore
come these things upon me?

Hereupon the Lord deals more sharply with them, evidently convinces them of
their sinfulness, and severely threatens them for their stubbornness, I have
seen thine adulteries and thy neighings, etc.

The Text will spread it self into three Branches. I. An undeniable
conviction; I have seen thine adulteries, etc. II. A dreadful commination; Woe
unto thee O Jerusalem. III. A patheticall expostulation; Will thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be?


I have seen thy guiltiness: God will have every mouth to be stopped, and all
the world to become guilty before him Romans 3.19.
.

In the second, he foretells their misery (now ready to fall upon them) that
they might tremble at it, and be affected with it; God would have his people
deeply apprehensive of the sad signs and symptoms of his displeasure.

In the third, he reasons the case before he proceed to execution; God had
rather glorify his mercy in our reformation, then his justice in our ruin and
condemnation.

Let me first break up the Text in the terms of it, and then deal out the
observations.

I have seen thine adulteries:] The great sin that God charge on them, and
whereof he does convince them, is Idolatry, which is here aggravated, 1 By the
Titles given to it. 2 By the several circumstances of it.


The Titles.
First, the Titles are these, it is called adultery, whordome, abomination.

First, Idolatry is called adultery and whoredom, because it is a sin that
defiles the conjugall Bed, cuts the marriage knot between God and his people,
and provokes the Lord to give them a bill of divorce: Jer. 3 8.
When backesliding Israel committed adultery, I put her away and gave her a
Bill of Divorce.

Secondly, it is called abomination, the Hebrew word coming from a Root (...)
, which signifies to loath or detest, as being that sin which God most detested
and abhorred.

And there is an Emphasis in the Affix [thine] thrice repeated in the Text;
Thine adulteries, thy whordome, thine abomination.

Observe here, all the idolatries and abominations practiced on the Hills, in
the Fields, and in the Villages round about Jerusalem, they are all charged
upon Jerusalem; they are thine abominations; why so? Because Jerusalem was the
Metropolis, or Mother-City of the Kingdom: There sat the Sanhedrim, and there
were the Courts of Justice Psalm. 122.5.
; they had power in their hands to suppress these abuses, but they did not
make use of their power for that purpose; therefore (says God) they are thy
sins, and shall be put upon thy account.

When Magistrates are careless in suppressing abuses, these abuses shall be
charged upon the Magistrates: When the people gathered Mannah on the seventh
day, the Lord charge the sin upon Moses Exodus 16.28
, though Moses himself was not guilty: The Lord said unto Moses, How long
refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws?

The Circumstances.
Secondly, the Circumstances aggravating their Idolatry are four.

First, it was a sin not once, but often committed; thine adulteries, in the
plural number: And a sin, the ofter it is committed, the greater it is, as a
cloth dyed red, if it be dipped again, it is dyed yet redder.

Secondly, it was a sin committed with greediness an great delight,
therefore it is expressed in this term, Neighings; a brutish transgression
has a brutish expression; and it is observable;

Wicked men by sinful courses become bruit beasts, unmanning themselves,
losing not only their conscience, but their reason also: So was it with this
people here in the Text, They were mad upon their Idols, as it was said of the
Caldeans Jer. 50.38.
: Even as mad as pamperd, frolic horses are in the heat of their lust: Yea,
the same Hebrew word (...)
which signifies to neigh, signifies also to shout for joy, as Ier. 31.7. Sing
for gladness and (...)
shout among the Nations, where the same word is used: So that it was a sin
committed with great delight: And this is certain, the more delight we take in
our sins, the less delight God takes in our souls.

Thirdly, their hearts were so taken up with this sin, that God had no room
there, like an unchaste woman, that thinks of nothing but her lustful Lovers
Quemadmodum mulier impud^ca nihil aliud cogitat quam spurcos suos amatores
Calv. in locum.
: This is implied in the word Lewdness, or the (Thought) of thy whoredom; so
the word (...)
properly signifies, and so judicious Calvin renders it Cogitationem
scortationis tuae.
.

Fourthly, they committed this sin in public view, not only privately in a
corner, but on the hills and in the open fields, Upon every high hill, and under
every green tree, they wandered and played the harlot Jer. 2.20.
: Impudency in sin is one of the highest aggravations of sin: Were they ashamed
when they had committed abomination? Nay they were not at all ashamed, neither
could they blush Jer. 8.12.
.

Now (says God) I have seen all this with an eye of Jealousy, and an eye of
justice, I have seen it to censure it, I have seen it to revenge it, for so it
follows

Woe unto thee O Jerusalem:] As if he should say, O unhappy Jerusalem, that art
so desperately sinful, and do not yet repent nor reform to this day! great
misery and calamity do I denounce against thee, as one devoted to destruction.

Will thou not be made clean?] I know the words are diversely read by
Interpreters; but quotation of Authors is a Thief in an Auditory; Some read
the words without a question thus, Thou shall not cleanse thy self hereafter
Septuag. Hoeron. A. Montan.
: But this reading suits not so well with the last words (...)
, After how long yet?

Some read them thus, Thou will not be cleansed by turning after me: Thus
mistaking a vowell in the Hebrew word, for it is not (...) After me, but (...)
After, or hereafter.

But the sense is plain enough, as reverend Calvin (an Interpreter, instar
omnium) does well express it; Will thou not be made clean? As if he should
say, Is thy heart sohard that thou can not yet repent nor reform, after all
exhortations, invitations, woes and warnings? The pressing, piercing
interrogation adds great strength to the expression (...).
.

When will it once be?] or, After when yet? or, How long yet? Post quantum
adhuc tem poris? Jun.
that is, how long will thou continue unreformed? How long shall I wait till
thou be cleansed? how long will thou delay and take time with me from day to
day?

The words being thus opened, many observations might be thence deduced, but I
will not pluck every cluster that this fruitful bough does hold forth.

There are three special points (suitable to the three parts or branches which
I named even now) that will draw forth the strength of the Text. Doct. 1. God
takes precise and special notice of all the sins and abominations of a people
that are in covenant with him. Doct. 2. These sins and abominations provoke
him to express his anger in dreadful Comminations. Doct. 3. Those dreadful
Comminations denounced against a people, call for a speedy Repentance and
Reformation.


I shall begin with the first point as it lies in order:

God takes precise and special notice, etc.

For the proof of this, the Scripture is abundantly plain and pregnant: I have
seen this people (says God) Deuteronomy. 9.13.
and behold it is a stiff necked people: Stubbornness of heart is not obvious
to man's eye (for God, and only God, knows the hearts of all the children of
men, says Solomon, 1 Kings 8.39.) yet God takes notice of it: The Lord tells
this Prophet Jeremy, speaking of the dissembling Jews; Jer. 16.17.
Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is
their iniquities hid from mine eyes: We may think to thrust God out of our
sight ( When God is not in all our thoughts Psalm. 10.4.
) but we cannot thrust our selves out of Gods sight: Te mihi latere possum, non
me tibi.
The Elders of Israel, because they committed wickedness in the dark, every
man in the chambers of his Imagery, therefore they said, Ezekiel. 8.12.
The Lord sees us not: But Gods takes away this Covershame, Jer. 23.24. Can
any man hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says the
Lord; Do not I fill Heaven and earth, says the Lord; Darkness hides not
from him, but the night shines as the day Psalm. 39.12.
.

God has an eye of omniscience, he knows not only our works and ways, but the
inward frame and temper of our hearts; Prove. 15.11.
Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more then the hearts of the
Sons of men: And if the very windings and shufflings of our treacherous hearts
are obvious to his eye, then certainly our outward actions and enormities are
much more conspicuous and apparent: Does not the Apostle say, All things are
naked Heb. 4.13.
and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do: Mark the expression,
(...)
for it is fuller then one word can render it; it is a metaphor from a Beast
whose skin is flayed off, and cut up by the chine bone, that you may see all
his entrals, which the Heathenish Priests in their Sacrifices were wont to do,
when they did (to use Lucian's words) Lucian de Sacrif.
(...), i. e. exactly view and take notice of them; the Lord sees our very
reins, as if the thoughts and secret workings of our hearts were unbowelled
before him.

Object. But does not our Savior say concerning wicked men, Depart from me, I
never knew you Matthew. 7.23.
; It seems then that God does not know all men, and all things upon the earth?

Ans. God knows not the wicked with a knowledge of approbation (for so he knows
the righteous only Psalm. 1.6.
) but he knows them and all their actions with a knowledge of observation: The
whole frame of their hearts, and all that their heart frames Genesis 6.5.
, all their desires and designs, intentions and inventions, plots and
practices are observed by his alsearching eye, and shall be accounted for
before the Tribunal of Christ at the great day.

because he has an eye of jealousy: He is a jealous God Exodus 20.5.
, very apprehensive of any conjugall unfaithfulness, and ready to revenge it:
As a tender husband, the more dearly he loves his wife, while she is loyal to
him, the more grievously he is offended if she prove treacherous: This is that
which God complains of by his Prophet, Ier. 3.20.
Surely as a wife trecherously departs from her husband, so have you dealt
trecherously wiih me, O House of Israel: And God makes this an aggravation of
their offense; Ier. 31.33.
They brake my Covenant, though I was a husband to them, says the Lord.

so he has also an eye of justice, having appointed a day wherein he will judge
the world in righteousness Acts 17.31.
, and bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or evil Eccl. 12.14.
: And the Prophet makes this one reason, why he observes and takes notice of
all the ways and works of the Sons of men; Ier. 32.19.
Thine eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

But this point will not need so much confirmation as application.

instruction, there are two lessons hence arising, by way of inference, which
may much conduce to our Humiliation in the presence of God this day. The first
is this, Gods patience toward us is infinite: The second this, Our presumption
in sinning against him is intolerable.


Patience and long-suffering, which Heaven and earth, men and Angels may stand
amazed at; that the Lord of glory (whose power and purity, omniscience and
omnipresence, justice and jealousy do dazzle the eyes of the very Angels)
should see all the abominations committed under the Sun, hear all the
execrable oaths and blasphemies that are belched out against him, observe the
insolency, scorn and rage of presumptuous sinners, that set their mouths
against the Heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth Psalm. 73 90
; yet does not all this while set the world on fire about our ears, or
thunderbolt us from Heaven, or take us away with the stroke of his hand Job
36.18.
.

Do but consider these (...) remarkable things in God. A piercing eye, and A
powerful hand.


The one to spy, the other to punish; and withal seriously weigh that
infinite and unconceivable holiness and purity of his nature, that he cannot
endure iniquity Hab. 1.13.
; and then break out into admiration and say, O infinite patience and
long-suffering! that thou, O God, should support us in our being at that
very time, when we are fighting against thee by our provocations and
rebellions! whereas did thou withdraw thy hand but one moment, we should drop
down to hell. Would any King endure to see a Traitor abuse his Titles,
villifie his person, revile his children, contemn his laws, and do as much
as in him lies to cast his Crown down to the ground? yet this our God endures
with unwearied patience: May not we say with the Prophet, Lam. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: Oh that we could now
begin to admire the boundless, bottomless Ocean of that mercy and loving
kindness which swallows up all our thoughts, and will be matter of
gratulation and admiration to all eternity, saying, Micah 7.18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever because he delights in mercy.

presumption in sinning against him is intolerable; because all our sins
admit of this aggravation, that they are committed full in the face of God,
Isa. 65.3.
It is a people that provokes me to anger continually to my face: This is that
which may prick our hearts, and wound our souls in all our confessions and
humiliations, when we can say with David, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee have I offended, and done this evil in thy sight: Thou
have been an eyewitness of all my stubbornness and undutifulnesse, of all my
treachery and hypocrisy, of all my wanderings and backslidings.

This was one thing that let the Prodigal blood in the heart-veyne, and stroke
him with penitential remorse, viz. That in his wandering from his Father, he
went into a far Country Luke 15.13. v, 18.
, as thinking to be out of the reach of his Fathers eye; but when he returns,
he bewailes this, ver. 18. I have sinned against Heaven and before thee: Mark
the phrase, Before thee; he looks on his sin, as committed in his Fathers eye
all the time: It were an intolerable impudency for a wife to dally with a
stranger in the presence of her husband, or for a villain to offer violence to
a Queen while the King looks on, ( Will he force the Queen also before me in
the house, says Abasierus concerning Haman Ester 7.8.
) Or a Thief to cut a purse in the Face of the Judge sitting on the Bench; or
for a Subject to set the Crown on another head, when the King himself is
standing by: Yet thus deal presumptuous sinners with the Lord every day; and
is not this a provocation intolerable?

What an aggravation was that of Nimrods sin Genesis 10.9.
; he was a mighty Hunter before the Lord; so desperately bold was he in his
boystrous tyranny, that he was not afraid to act it before the Lord: And are
there not some that dare call Heaven to record for there fidelity in the public
cause of Religion, when God and their own conscience know the contrary?

Are there not some like Ephraim, of whom God says Hos. 12.7, 8.
, He is a cunning Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, and he
loves to oppress; yet (as if he would mock the God of Heaven to his face) he
says, I am become rich, I have found me out substance, in all my labors they
shall find no iniquity in me that were sin: As if he should say: God makes me
prosper, though it be in a way of injustice and oppression, therefore he has
no quarrel with me at all.

Oh the horrible, hellish Atheism that does possess our hearts! Are ye
offended at the harshnesse of the expression? Ye must know, there is an Atheist
in affection as well as in opinion; Job 21.14.
They say to the Almighty, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways: There is an Atheist in practice as well as in profession; Tit. 1.16.
They profess they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate: Are there not many of us that
profess we know God, and in our tongues dare not deny him, yet in our life and
conversation carry our selves, as if God had but the eye of a picture, without
life or motion in it: Are there not many of us who make of the great God of
Heaven (with reverence be it spoken) no better then a Baal, a sleepy,
senseless, careless God, that neither regarded iniquity, nor rewarded duty?
Are there not many who (as much as in them lies (put out the al-seeing,
al-searching eye of his omniscience, and cut off the arm of his revenging
justice, as if he would neither see nor censure any of their transgressions?

If pilfring Achan had thought that the eye of the Lord had followed him (as
Elisha told Gehazi, that his heart went along with him, when he received the
present at Naamans hand 2 King. 5.26
) durst he have stolen the wedge of gold, and Babylonish garment, and so have
transgressed in the cursed thing? If those two loose professors Ananias and
Sapphira, could have reasoned as holy Job did, Job 31.4.
Does not the Lord see my ways, and count all my steps? durst they have lied
unto the holy Ghost? If traitorous Judas had thought the eye of his Master had
watched him, durst he have nibled money out of his Masters bag? If we in our
actings for God, our seekings and services, did but really think that the frame
and temper of our spirits, our very ends and aims are as obvious to the eyes
of God, as our actions are to the eyes of men; were we but fully persuaded of
this, that he observes whether we be sound at heart, or rotten at core; durst
we lie unto the Lord and cozen the world, and in the end cozen our own souls?
But we think it not, I say it again to our shame, we think it not: We have
poor low thoughts of God and of his greatness, majesty, power and glory; we
are ready to think wickedly of God, That he is such a one as our selves Psalm.
50.22.
: In stead of raising up our thoughts to God, we pull down God unto our
thoughts: This is our Atheism, this is our Presumption; let us see it, and
bewail it, and be humbled for it.

exanation.
Let the second Use be for Examination: Take occasion to enter into the Closet
of our own hearts, to see how the case stands between God and us: This should
be a day of self-scrutiny and self-reflection, wherein we should smite upon Ier
31.19.
our thigh with Ephraim, and be ashamed, -- yea even confounded before our God:
It should be a day wherein we should plough up our fallow ground Ier. 4.3^
, ransack every corner of our souls, and turn the inside of our hearts out
unto the Lord.

Let us therefore search our hearts, and sift our lives, whether there be not
those sins and abominations among us, which the Lord beholds with an eye of
jealousy: True it is, that Kingdom killing sin of Idolatry (which God so
deeply charge on them in the Text, is in a great measure suppressed among us;
and, blessed be the Lord, who has put it into the heart of this honorable
Parliament, to purge out the dregs of that leaven, which the Lord hates in his
very soul, and to pull down that proud oppressing PRELACY, and those prelatical
popish Innovations, which were the props and pillars of Idolatry:) But are
there not other God-provoking, Heaven-daring, wrath-procuring sins yet unpurged
out, which in the sight of God are very odious and abominable? May not God
speak to his Ministers concerning England, as he does to Ezekiel? Ezekiel: 16.2.
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations: Let me instance in some
particulars.

swelling pride, and that is one abomination; for every one that is proud in
heart, is abomination to the Lord, says Solomon Prove. 16.5.
: We have yet as lofty looks and scornful carriages, and ambitious
aspirements, pussing at Superiors, trampling on Inferiors, high conceits of
our selves, low conceits of others, as we had before this bloody war began: God
has pulled us down in our estates but he has not pulled down our pride; we
are brought upon our knees, but our hearts are not humbled.

Hypocrisy among us? which is another provokefull abomination; for the
Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, says the Scripture Job 36.36.3.13.
: Now we are for the generalla hypocritical Nation, and therefore a people of
Gods wrath, as God spoke of the Jews, Isa. 10.6. We are a Nation full of wit,
and therefore full of craft and guile; God may say of us as he did of Ephraim;
Hos. 11.12.
Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: We
can give good words (they cost us nothing) just as the Israelites did, whom the
Psalmist mentions; Psalm. 78.34. -- 37.
When he slew them, then they sought him, they returned early and enquired
after God, etc. But they did but flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto
him with their tongues, for their heart was not upright with him, neither
remained they steadfast in his Covenant: Here is a lively Image or
representation of our double-dealing with our God in the time of our straights:
We do not seek God for God, but for our selves; we do not so much serve him,
as serve our own turns of him; we pretend a willingness to be reformed, but
when it comes to the quick, to take Christ's Yoke on our neck, to have purity
of Ordinances and power of godliness meet together; to have strictness of
Sabbaths and strictness of conversation kiss each other; to have plain
powerful convincing heart-humbling, soul-healing preaching, now we shrink and
draw back, and are afraid of a refining Reformation; this argues the dishonesty
of the heart.

The truth is, we would feign have Religion and our lusts together, we would
have a Reformation that might suit with our own humors, ends and interests,
and make Religion a shoe fitted to our own last; is not this to be
hypocritical in our ends and aims? We come to hear Sermons just as they did
in Ezekiel's time; Ezekiel. 33.31
Son of man, this people sit before thee as my people, they hear thy words,
but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness: So at this day, many of you will give us
the hearing, but ye will do what ye list: Ye come to judge the Sermon, not to
be judged by the Sermon (as the Apostle speaks in the like case, Jam. 4.11. If
thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge;) Ye would have
witty Sermons and reproof at a distance, and love not the jewel of
plain-dealing: Look as men commend the sweetness of Rosewater, but start and
turn away if they be bespinkled with it; so ye love to hear the truth, and
commend it, but like not that it should touch ye, or come too close unto you:
Ye come (on such days as these) to hear your ways reproved, but have no serious
purpose to have your ways reformed; we may preach what we will, ye will
practice what ye please.

Is not this a piece of hypocrisy which the Lord abhors?

impenitency and stubbornness under Gods corrections? Me thinks I hear the
Prophet Jeremy complaining of us as he did of the Jews in his time; Ier. 5.3.
O Lord thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces
harder the a rock, they have refused to return: There is a spirit of
insensiblenesse (...). Romans 11.8.
seized upon us, that we do not lay to heart one of the sorest of Gods plagues,
one of the sharpest of his arrows; this man-devouring, land-destroying sword,
that has eaten so much flesh, and drunk so much blood, and is not yet put up
into the scabberd: We are like the Drunkard that Solomon speaks of, Prove.
23.34, 35.
that sleeps on the top of a mast, and lies down in the midst of the Sea;
they have stricken me (says he) and I was not sick, they have beaten me, and
I felt it not: Oh how provokefull is this to our God, and to the eyes of his
glory, to see us a people so stupid, so senseless, so locked up in our own
hearts, that neither sins nor miseries, nor means, nor mercies, nor word, nor
sword can work upon us!

Ye shall read of some of Gods servants recorded in Scripture, that have been
more affected with an evil threatened, then we are with a judgment inflicted:
Look on godly Josiah, he has his heart tender and melting, when he heard the
words of the Book of the Law 2 Kin. 22.11
: Look on Habakuk, he has his belly trembling and lips quivering, and
rottenness entering into his bones Hab. 3.16.
: Look on Isaiah, his loins are filled with pains, pangs took hold on him, as
the pangs of a woman that travelleth, he was bowed down at the hearing of a
hard vision, he was dismayed at the seeing of it Isa. 21.3.
: These holy men were deeply affected with a calamity, that was but like to
come upon them, but we are not sensible of a dreadful judgment that is
already come upon us: I pray God a deep fleep from the Lord be not fallen on
us, such a one as fell on Saul and his Army 1 Samuel 26.12
, when the Lord purposed to deliver Saul into David's hand; 1 Samuel 26.12
for we bear off all Gods blows with head and shoulders, as Jerusalem did, when
she said, Ier. 10.19.
Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous, but I said, Truly this is a
grief, and I must bear it; as if she should say, It is a burden and I must
bear it as well as I can: Do but examine our thoughts, consider our speeches,
look into our houses, observe the general deportment and carriage of men under
this heavy judgment of a Land-wasting war, and you may see that literally
fulfilled in our times, which the Prophet speaks of concerning Israel; Isa.
42.25.
He has powered upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of Battle,
and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it burned him,
yet he laid it not to heart.

injustice and oppression yet among us? And this is a crying abomination; James
5.4.
The cries of the oppressed enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts: Yet how
many poor oppressed ones cry and cry again, but are not heard, nor remembered,
nor relieved; They have debts due unto them, but are ready to strave for
non-payment, they are distressed, but have no helper.

Nay, are there not some that make no conscience of paying debts, because they
are under protection.

O that God had no cause to utter that complaint which he does by the Prophet
Isaiah; Isa. 59.14, 15.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a far off, Truth is
fallen in the streets, and Equity cannot enter; and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him, that there was no judgment.

Where the course of Justice is stopped, it is not for me to enquire, look YE to
that, to whom it belongs (for God looks for it at YOUR hands, whom he has
called Psalm. 82.6.
Gods, and he will one day call ye to an account, and say, 58.1.
Do ye indeed speak righteousness O Congregation? Do ye judge uprightly O
ye sons of men?) Only this I say, Stop the course of Justice, and ye stop the
course of a River that will overflow all Bounds and Banks, and drown the
Country round about.

If the cries of the oppressed be not heard, our prayers and humiliations will
not be heard; so says the Lord expressly, Amos 5.21, 24. compared.
I despise your FAST days, and I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies,
unless Judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

murmuring and repining at the passages of Gods providence in these days of
trouble, that God might justly swear Number. 14.29 30.
Your carcases shall fall in the Wilderness, and ye shall never see the Land
of Canaan: Are we not extremely unthankful in receiving mercies? and
shamefully barren in improving mercies? May not it be said of us, as it was
said of the ungrateful Israraelites, Psalm. 106, 21 22.
They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous
works in the Land of Ham, and terrible things by the red Sea: Even so is it
with us; we have in a manner forgotten the mervailous things that God did for
us at Edgehill, at Newbery, at Marston-moore, at Nazeby, famous Nazeby, never
to be forgotten while we have a tongue to speak the praises of our God, for
THERE Psalm. 76.3.
did God break the Arrows of the Bow, the shield and the sword, and the
battle: Selah. There did God so break the power and pride, and rage of the
enemies, that he dealt with them as he dealt with Pharaob, Ezekiel. 30.21
Son of man, I have broken the Arm of Pharoh King of Egypt, and lo it shall
not be bound up to be healed, to put a rowler to bind it, to make it strong to
hold the sword: Yet all these mercies, miracles of mercies, and glorious
Victories have been made scarce nine days wonder. Nay worse then this, We have
provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea Psalm. 106.7.
: that is, In the sense and under the fruition of special mercies, and
extraordinary deliverances vouchsafed to us: We have not been bettered but
rather made worse by Mercies and Victories bestowed on us: Gods gracious
favors have been fuel to feed our pride and covetousness, and contention,
etc. Showers of mercy have made the weeds of corruption grow the faster: Such
dunghilly hearts have we, that the more God shines on us with his mercies, the
more we putrify; the better he has been to us, the worse have we been to him,
and the more he has loved us, the less has he been beloved of us; and do ye
thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise Deuteronomy. 32.6.
?

What an intolerable provocacion must this needs be? This unthankfulness and
unanswerablenesse of heart to Gods gracious dealings and dispensations, it is
Obex infernalis, (as one calls it) a hellish stop or bar to future favors: A
man that is about to pour in some precious oil into a glass, if he see the
glass cracked, he stays his hand, and says, I will pour no oil into this
glass: An unthankful heart is a broken glass.

notorious contempt of Ministers and Ministry among us at this day? Heretofore
ye could say of Ministers that were faithful, Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things? But now they grow out of credit and esteem.

Yea our very calling begins to be questioned and brought to the bar; and (say
some) Ye take too much upon ye, ye Sons of Levi Number. 16.3.
; Too much state and power, too much honor and holiness, in appropriating
these administrations to your selves, wherein all the people might partake with
you. I dare boldly say, never was there in any age or Nation under Heaven, a
greater contempt cast upon this Ordinance, then there is at this day,
especially by subtle and undermining Sectaries and Seducers, who cast dirt upon
the very paps which they have sucked, villifying those Ministers and that
Ministry, whereby they were first enlightened.

To whom I say in the words of the Apostle, Acts 13.41.
Take heed ye despisers, and wonder and perish: Ye read of a Damsel possessed
with a devil, that cried out concerning Paul and Silas (who were Ministers of
Christ) Acts 16.17.
These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation: The Devil himself durst not speak irreverently or contemptuously
of the Ministers of the Gospel: Contempt of the Ministry therefore is a
grievous provocation, which God will not put up at our hands; For when they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
THEN the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy 2
Cor. 36.16
.

Now does not God see all these sins and provocations; and if he see, will he
not censure? I know the uncovering of this sink of our abominations is
unpleasing to you: Every unwelcome truth (though it proceed from the Father of
lights) is looked on as a bastard, no man will own it till it be laid at his
own door: But when God comes to charge these, or any of these abominations
upon the conscience, then ye will begin to entertain those sad and serious
thoughts that holy Job did; Job 34.14.
What then shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I
answer him? It is a small matter for me (a poor mortal man like your selves)
to reprove you, but when God reproves you, and sets these things in order
before your eyes; how will ye hold up your heads before your Judge?

Exhortation.
Let a word of exhortation therefore be welcome to you: Two duties there are
which this Doctrine presses on every soul here present; the Lord help us to
put them in practice.

David could feelingly say, my sin is ever before me, he might more hopefully
pray, Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities Psalm. 51.3 9
verses compa^ed.
: Certain it is, if we discover our sins, God will conceal them, if we
conceal our sins, God will discover them Si tu tegas ille reteget, si tu
retegas ille teget.
; if we forget our sins, God will remember them; if we remember our sins, God
will forget them Obliviscere benefactorum and Deus reminiscetur; Reminiscere
peccatorum, and Deus obliviscetur.
: Better it is for us to see our sins here, and judge 1 Cor. 11.31
our selves for them, then that God should see them hereafter, and pass
sentence against us, to our everlasting horror and confusion.

(...). Ephesians. 5.15.
as in his presence; learn to eye and observe him at all times, in all
actions, in all companies, on all occasions: Thus did Abraham Genesis 24.40.
, He walked before God: The Lord, before whom I walk (says he) will send his
Angel with thee, etc. He did walk in Gods eye and presence all the day; And
thus should we do: Neh. 5.9.
Ought We not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of our
enemies? Now if we did thus, what a curb or bridle would this be, to restrain
us from sin and sinful courses?

I have read a story of a Religious man, who being desirous to reclaim an
unchaste woman from her lewd and sinful conversation, took this course with
her; He came to her, pretending to have some wanton dalliance with her, so it
might be with all secrecy; she thereupon led him from room to room; but he
still made many doubts, least at this window, or that keyhole, this crevis or
that cranny, some or other might chance to peep in and espy them together; at
length she brought him to the inwardest room in the house, where (says she) I
am confident that none, upon my life, can possibly pry in, or take notice of
any thing that we do: Whereupon he told her with weeping eyes, No bolts nor
bars can keep God out, no walls nor doors can hinder his piercing eyesight; and
what shall we gain (says he) by shunning the eyes of men, when the eye of our
God is still upon us?

It was good council that a Rabbin gave to one of his Scholars: There are
three things I would have thee remember all the day long: An Eye that sees
thee: An Ear that hears thee: A Hand that Registers all thy Actions.


So say I to thee (O secure, sin-sleeping soul) if thou can find one hour
wherein Gods eye is not upon thee, take that hour to be secure and sinful, to
be merry and mad, to do the Devils work with diligence, or Gods work with
negligence: but if God's eye be always on thee, let thine eye be always
toward him, as the eyes of a maiden are unto the hand of her Mistress Psalm.
123.2.
: If he watch over thee, do thou watch with him all the day long, and say of
every place where thou come, what Hagar said of that Well, which she called,
Genesis 16.14.
Beer-la-hai-roi, that is, The Well of him that lives and sees me.

I have been somewhat large in the first point, the other two I shall dispatch
with a quicker hand.

THese sins and abominations provoke him to express his anger in dreadful
Comminations; Woe unto thee O Jerusalem: thus God is said To roar out of Zion
Joel 3.16.
; yea, so to roar, that he makes the Heavens and the earth to shake and
tremble; he is said to swear in his wrath Psalm. 95.11.
; to be angry with the wicked every day; to whet his sword, and bend his Bow,
and make it ready Ps. 7.11, 12.
: How many curses and comminations does God de nounce against impenitent
sinners? As, that they shall be Cursed in the City, and cursed in the Field;
cursed in their basket, and in their store, Deuteronomy. 28.16 17. etc.
etc. cursed in all they have, and all that they put their hands unto; yea, God
threatens that he will curse their blessings Mal. 2.2.
; he will make their wealth to be their woe, their pleasure their poison, their
flourishing their perishing, and those things which should be for their good,
shall be traps and snares, and thorns, and occasions of falling,

Reasons. Because sin is to the Lord infininitely 1 Provokefull. 2 Odious. 3
Injurious.


First, it is so provokefull, that it is frequently called a provocation Psalm
95.8. Nehem. 9.18.
, as being that wherewith God is exceedingly grieved Genesis 6.6.
fretted Ezekiel. 16.43
, vexed Isa. 63.10.
, burdened Amos 2.13.
, resisted Acts 7.51.
, for all these expressions the holy Ghost uses to set forth the provokefull
nature of it.

The Rabbis have a Proverb, That every sin makes God's head ache.

But we may add somewhat more, and say, sin is not only a head-aking, but also
a kind of heartbreaking unto God; it is that patheticall expression which God
himself uses, Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish heart, which has
departed from me.

Anger in God, is a Will or Inclination to punish sin, arising from the
detestation of sin: That as man expresses his anger in his countenance by
frowning, in his speeches by threatening, and in his actions by punishing; so
does the Lord discover his anger also in the same manner; he frowns on the
wicked, and sets his face against them Psalm. 34.16.
; he threatens them with dreadful denunciations Jer-21.5.
, and executes the judgments which he has threatened Psalm. 9 16.
.

provokefull, so it is very loathsome, therefore called in the Text
Abomination: No carcass or carrion so loathsome in our sight, as sin is in the
sight of that God, who cannot behold iniquity Hab. 1.13.
: Hence is God said to loath the sinner, Zech. 11.8.
My soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me; and he tells his own
people, Levit. 26.30
My soul shall abhor you.

Yea, so loathsome is sin, to his pure and perfect nature, that he hates it in
his own children, as well as in stangers: It is true, it is not a hatred
redounding to their persons, yet he hates sin in them, though he do not hate
them for sin: At the same time, when he dearly loves the person of a Believer
he deadly hates the sin of a Believer: As when David committed adultery, the
Text says, The thing that David had done displeased the Lord 2 Samuel 11.27:
: Though David's person was accepted, his sin was abhorred.

odious, so is it also very injurious to the God of Heaven: In the least sin
that can be committed, we do the greatest injury (for the kind of it) unto
God, that can be expressed; because in every sin there is an infinite Majesty
offended, an infinite Justice wronged, an infinite patience provoked, an
infinite mercy abused, and therefore an infinite punishment deserved.

Besides, in sin we often arise to a despising of God; Wherefore have thou
despised the Commandment of the Lord, says God to David 2 Samuel 12.9;
; Yea, to a despiting of God. We read of some that do despite to the spirit of
grace Heb. 10.29.
; yea further, to an interpretative domineering or insulting over God; Thou
have made me to serve with thy sins (says God Isa. 43.24.
;) sin makes God a servant, and man a Master: Nay yet more (if more can be
said) sin rises (with reverence be it spoken) to a dethroning of God, it
strikes at his Crown and dignity, even to un-God him, if it were possible;
Must not all this make God exceeding angry?

for instruction.
First, it will serve for our Instruction in two particulars.

Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up in my Treasures Deuteronomy. 32.34
? True it is, when God is pacified, then it is better falling into the hands of
God, then into the hands of men, for his mercies are great 2 Samuel 24.14.
: But if his wrath be once kindled, then the sinners in Zion shall be afraid,
fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the
devouring fire, who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings Isa. 33.14.
?

O the desperate folly and madness of presumptuous sinners, that dare stretch
out their hands against God, and strengthen themselves against the Almighty (as
the Scripture elegantly expresses it Job 15.25, 26.
.) That dare run upon God, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
Bucklers; that dare kindle that fire, that burns to the lowest hell Deuteronomy. 32.22
: Little do these men think how infinite the wrath of God is: Infinite I say
in Intension. Extension. Satisfaction.


First, it is infinite in Intension; for who knows the power of thy anger,
says Moses Psalm. 90.11.
; it passes the apprehension of men and Angels: That which is spoken of the
glory reserved for Saints, is as true of the wrath reserved for sinners; Eye
has not seen it nor ear heard it, neither can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive it 1 Cor. 2.9.
: it must needs be so, being the anger of an infinite God: A dart out of a weak
man's arm will wound the body, but when it is shot out of a strong Bow, and
with a strong arm, then it wounds deeply: How infinite then will that wrath
be, which seizes on Vessels of wrath? When Mountains and Mil-stones of
vengeance shall be thrown upon them, and that by an omnipotent hand and
outstretched arm, and fury poured out.

Secondly, it is infinite in Extension or Duration; it extends to all eternity;
for the wrath of God is the very fuel that feeds the fire of hell (the breath
of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it Isa. 30.33.
) now, that fire is an eternal fire Jude ver. 7.
; so long as God shall be God, so long shall that fire burn, and that is for
ever; yea (if it were possible) more then ever, even evermore.

Thirdly, it is infinite in Satisfaction: Nothing can satisfy or appease that
anger but an infinite price, even the precious blood 1 Pet. 1.19.
of Jesus Christ; which being the blood of a person that is God as well as man,
is therefore called, The blood of God, Acts 20.28.

Hearken therefore thou poor miserable mortal worm, that make it a small
matter to kindle the infinite wrath of that God who is a consuming fire Heb.
12.29.
. Know thus much, if God be angry, Angels stoop, Devils tremble, the Earth
melts, and the very Heavens are rolled up as a scrowle of parchment: Who can
stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is poured forth like fire, and the rocks are thrown down
before him Nah. 1.6.
: And if the denouncing or menacing of Temporal judgments be so dreadful,
what will the suffering of Eternal judgments be? What will it be to suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire? Thou art now ready to fancy to thy self, a God
made all of mercy and compassion; but if thou saw but the shadow of Gods wrath
on a damned soul in hell, it would make thy heart ache, thy joints quake, and
rottenness enter into thy bones.

Your iniquities have separated between you and your God Isa. 59.2.
.

Sin in this respect is far worse then any cross or calamity that can befall
us; it is worse then sword or famine or pestilence, or sorrow, or sickness, or
poverty, or persecution: For afflictions do not separate us from God: I am
persuaded (says the Apostle Romans 8, 31.
) that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, not
things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God: But sin can do us that mischief, which neither crosses nor losses,
nor death, nor devil can do.

Whence is it then that we hug this Viper in our bosoms?

Oh that our eyes were open to see sin as God sees it, and then we should loath
sin as God loathes it.

Exhortation.
Secondly, here is something for exhortation.



First, learn to justify the Lord in all his threatenings and executions.

Give him the glory of his justice in all his Administrations.

The Lord has of late been sore displeased with this Nation; He has frowned on
us in his anger, yea, he has so roared, that he has made the whole Land to
tremble: He has showed his people heavy things, he has made us drink the Wine
of astonishment Psalm 60.3.
: But in the midst of all these sad signs and symptoms of God's displeasure,
the Lord may say to us as he said to Jerusalem; Jer. 4.18.
thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee: and we may say to
God as Ezra does in his penitential Lamentation; Ezra 9.10.
Now O our God, what shall we say after all this? for we have forsaken thy
Commandments: As if he should say, We can neither accuse thy severity, nor
excuse our own iniquity.

God delights not in thundering threats, nor breaking blows, nor severe
proceedings against his people; He does not afflict willingly L^m. 3.33.
or from his heart, as the Hebrew phrase carries it; showing mercy is his
proper work, Judgment is his strange work Isa. 28, 21.
; therefore when he comes in a way of judgment, he is said to come forth out
of his place Micah 1.3.
, implying thus much; That then he is in the place that he delights in, when he
sits in the Mercy-seat Micah 7.18.
.

Ye read of a shaving Razor where with God threatens his people, Isa. 7.20. but
the Prophet tells ye, it is a Razor that is hired, as if God had no Razor of his
own, he delights not to have it or to use it.

It is Bernards observation, that God is called Pater misericordiarum, the
Father of mercies, because mercy naturally proceeds from him, and is willingly
bestowed; but he is never called Pater vindictae, the Father of revenge,
because that is unwillingly inflicted: Look as Bees give honey naturally and
sting only when they are provoked; so it is with God, sweetness flows from
his inward disposition, harshnesse only from outward provocation; therefore
complain not of God or his indignation, let us complain of our selves, and of
our own provocations.

viz: To tremble at Gods direful denunciations: If the Lion roar, all the
Beasts of the Forest tremble: Shall God be angry, and shall not we fear and
fall down before him? Shall God threaten both by his Word and by his Works?
His Word specifying what judgments we have deserved; his works of severity on
others, telling us what we may justly expect for our miscarriages; and shall
not this threatening awake us? shall his Rods be not only shaken over us, but
wasted on us and yet we stiffen our necks and harden our hearts against his
fear? God forbid: Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my
presence, that have placed the Sand for the bound of the Sea by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it Jer. 5.22.
? Fear ye not my Word? Fear ye not my Rod? This is certain, the more we
triumph in prosperity, the more we shall tremble in adversity; the less we
fear Gods Rod, the more we shall feel it, either here or hereafter.

for Imitation.
Thirdly, this Doctrine may be improved for imitation both to Ministers and
Magistrates.


First, Ministers by Gods own example, may threaten impenitent sinners.

They may come with a rod, as well as in love, and in the spirit of meekness 1
Cor. 4.21.
; they may be sharp in reproving sin, foretelling danger, and denouncing
judgments: When the wicked are brazen faced in sinning, Ministers may be as
brazen sac'd in reproving: Behold (says God to Ezekiel Ezekiel. 3.8.
) I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong
against their foreheads; fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks: We
may spit fire and vengeance in the faces of obstinate and unreformed sinners.

Let no man slight this way as too legal, crying out These are legal
Preachers, etc. For our Savior himself trod in the same path, denouncing
dreadful woes against impenitent sinners: Mat. 11.21.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites; which is seven times repeated in one chapter Mat. 23.13,
etc.
: And where do you meet with a more terrible soule-shaking Commination, then
that of our Savior in the same Chapter? ver. 33. Ye Serpents, ye generation
of Vipers, How can ye escape the damnation of hell? Look upon Saint Paul's
manner of preaching; though there was never any Minister of Christ more
Evangelicall then he, yet he could speak to sinners as a Son of thunder, as
well as in a still voice: Did he not thunder and lighten when he made Felix
tremble Acts 24.25.
? Does he not tell sinners of the terror of the Lord 2 Cor. 5.11.
? and the dreadfulnesse of his wrath? That he shall come in flaming fire to
take vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And that such shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power 2
These. 1.8.19.
.

Can Ministers have a better pattern for their Preaching and practice then holy
Paul, and the Lord Jesus Christ himself?

Secondly, for Magistrates, Gods Vicegerents here on earth; they may and must
show their just indignation against offenders and offenses.

When God has put authority into your hands: First, ye must threaten
offenders; thus did Nehemiah; he Neh. 13.21.
testified against Sabbath Breakers, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the
wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on you: It may please God your
threatening may prevail to prevent much sin, as Nehemiah's did: But if
threatening will do no good, then ye must proceed to Act what ye speak; thus
did he to obstinate and unreformed sinners; I contended with them (says he
Neh. 13.25.
) and cursed them; that is, pronounced a curse against them that had taken
strange Wives; yea, I plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God to
reform what was amiss. Nay, for your encouragement, ye have a greater then
Nehemiah, to be a pattern to you, in the execution of Justice upon Delinquents;
ye have God himself for your example; for see what God speaks by the Prophet
Zachary Zech. 1.6.
My words and my Statutes which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they
not take hold of your Fathers? What he pronounced in a way of commination, he
made good in a way of execution. The Lord is known by the judgment that he
executes Psalm. 9.16.
. It is true, He threatens before he strikes, but he will strike as well as
threaten: so must ye do likewise.

The Magistrates sword must not be like a George on Horseback, always
threatening, never striking; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; therefore he must not bear the sword
in vain Romans 13.4.
. But where headstrong Obstinacy is added to gross Impiety, he must act with
just severity, in suppressing sin and sinners, Turning the wheel upon the
wicked Pro. 23.26.
, and cutting off those rotten members that are incurable.

But I use all this heat to the inflaming of your zeal; for no other end, then
what was Gods end in my Text, The sinners reformation. And this lets me in to
the consideration of the third and last point which I propounded to ye, which
is this:

Gods dreadful Comminations against sin and sinners, call for a speedy
Repentance and reformation.

First, they call for a Reformation: Will thou not be made clean?

Secondly, for a speedy Reformation: When will it once be?

For the proof of this Point, the Scripture is abundantly plain and pregnant.
When God had threatened a dreadful Judgment against his people, saying, Thus
will I do to thee O Israel Amos 4.12.
; that is, I will deal with thee according to thy deserts; I will take you
away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hookes Ver 2.
. He makes this use of this sad Doctrine; Because I will do thus unto thee,
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: Meet me by repentance and Reformation, and
meet me speedily, lest it be too late Currat poenitentia ne praecurrat
sententia.
. Do in this case as a King does going to war; If he have but ten thousand
to meet his enemy that comes against him with twenty thousand, he sends an
embassage, and desires conditions of peace Luke. 14.31 32.
. So do thou; If thou be not able to match me by thy power (which is
impossible; for, How can thine heart endure, or thine hands be strong, in the
day that I shall deal with thee Ezck. 22.14.
?) then meet me by thy penitential Reformation; send prayers, and tears, and
sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed: send a deep detestation of
sin, a fresh indignation against sin, a renewed Resolution to forsake
sin; send these (I say) as Ambassadors to desire conditions of peace, lest I
break thee with breach upon breach, and run upon thee like a Giant Job 16.14.
. And what means the Prophet Isaiah by that quick and smart speech of his
Isa. 21.12.
? If ye will enquire, enquire ye, return, come: as if he should say, What ye
do in the business of Repentance, do quickly; as Moses said to Aaron in the
like case Number. 16.46.
, Take a Censer and put fire therein, and Incense thereon, and go quickly
unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for them. We may see the evidence
of this truth in the grounds of it.

My spirit shall not always strive with man Genesis 6.3.
, says God, concerning the sinners before the flood. The spirit may strive a
great while with stubborn unreformed wretches, but he will not be always
striving: God patience may sometimes be so tired out, that he may say of a
people, as the Prophet Jeremie did of the Jews in his time; Jer. 44.22.
The Lord could no longer hear, because of the evil of your doings, and
because of the abominations which ye have committed. He may sometimes be so
pressed ( even as a Cart is pressed under sheaves Amor 2.13.
) that the axle-tree of his patience may be broken, and then He shall be
suddenly consumed that would not be speedily reformed Subitotollitur, qui diu
toleratur.
. Nay yet more, Gods patience may sometimes be so abused, that he may be angry
with his own children, and say to them as our Savior said to his Disciples,
Mat. 17.17.
How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you?

Behold, I frame evil against you (says the Lord) and devise a device against
you; Return ye now every one from his wicked way, and make your ways and your
doings good Jer. 18.11.
.

give up a people to their own hearts lust Psalm. 81.12
: to give them over as desperate and incurable, and to say in his just anger
and indignation, Rev. 22.11.
He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. When Jerusalem became as a boiling
pot, whose great scumme went not forth out of her; (judgments would not
mollify her nor bring her to repentance) the Lord is extremely angry, and tells
her plainly, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Oh
how doleful and desperate is such a Condition! which of us do not trembles at
the apprehension of it?

Now this Doctrine may be thus improved:

of Reprehension, or Complaint.
First, It frames a Bill of Indictement against us, who have had warning after
warning, threatening upon threatening, blow after Blow, yet are an impenitent and
unreformed people to this day.

Has not God trained us up in the School of Instruction for many years
together? No Nation under heaven has had so many faithful Watchmen, so many
painful, powerful Preachers as England has had. No people upon earth has
lived under such sweet showers and sunshine of the glorious Gospel of Christ
as we have done.

Has not God trained us up in the School of Correction? Sometimes he has come
with the Beesome of Pestilence, which has swept away thousands, and ten
thousands in our streets; sometimes he has smitten us with blasting and
mildew, dearth of corn, and cleanness of teeth, in many places of the
Kingdom; and to go no further, we now lie under a sharp Iron whip, a bloody
unnatural intestine war, which has made the whole Land to tremble; we have
been a moath-eaten Kingdom almost twenty years together, for still we were
wasting and declining, but in these four last years God has bin as a Lion
tearing us to pieces, Hosea 5.12, 14. Alas, alas! Our young men have been slain
with the edge of the sword, our Widows have bewailed the loss of their
husbands, our Orphans have bewailed the loss of their Parents, and h^^ stink
of our Camps have come up into our nostrils Amos 4, 10.
: We have had sad and mournful messages, of Villages plundered, houses fired,
Brethren imprisoned, Women abused, estates devoured, whole Counties wasted; yet
after all these verbal and real warnings, after all this sorrow and smart,
and wrath, and blood, our dross and scumme is not taken away, our leprosies
yet abide upon us; there is yet as much swearing and lying, deceiving and
dissembling, as much pride and covetousness, self-seeking and self-confidence,
discord and dissension among Brethren, as there was before the war began; so
that God may justly and angrily speak to England as he does to Jerusalem in the
Text, Will thou not be made clean? when will it once be? Yea, the Lord may
justly take up that complaint of us, which he does of the Jews in Jeremiah's
time; Ier. 6.28.30
They are Brass and Iron (base and drossie metal, good for nothing) the
bellows are burnt (the lungs of my messengers are spent with speaking to them)
the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for their
wickednesses are not plucked away, (all the pains and labor that has been
spent about refining of them is lost;) Therefore reprobate silver shall men
call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

Blush O Heavens, and stand amazed O Earth, that a people should have so many
instructions, corrections, warnings and awakenings, woundings and breaking
blows, yet should remain so unreformed! God speaks in anger, yet we hear
not; roares from Heaven, yet we fear not; smites us with his rod, yet we feel
not; yea, stroke upon stroke, yet we lay it not to heart: For this should our
eyes drop down tears, and we should in the bitterness of our spirits cry out
with Ezra, Ezra 9.15.
Behold O Lord, we are before thee this day in our trespasses, for we cannot
stand before thee because of this.

Exhortation.
In the second place, let a word of Exhortation take hold on your hearts, (and
what I preach to others, the Lord grant I may practice in my own soul) Let us
study a particular Reformation in our hearts and houses; let us do as God
advises Jerusalem; Jer. 4.14.
O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: Let
every one of us do as Jacob did, when God called upon him to pay his vows,
which he made in the days of his distress, Genesis 35.2. Then Jacob said unto
his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange Gods that are
among you, and be clean, and change your garments. Oh that Joshuah's
resolution were fixed and fastened on the hearts of all that hear me this day;
Josh. 24.15.
As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. The City would soon be
clean, if every man would sweep at his own door.

Motives. Think with your selves therefore, that ye see God waiting that he
may be gracious to you Isa. 30.18.
. He waits till ye meet him with repentance, that he may meet you with
deliverance. If ye were but fitted for mercy, he would bestow a full mercy on
you. Think that ye hear him this day wooing, entreating, inviting, beseeching
you to come in, and stand out no longer, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if
God did beseech you by us, etc 2 Cor. 5.20.
. O admirable and unheard of condescension, that the Ceator should beseech the
creature, that the King of eternity, whose glory is lifted up above the heavens
Psalm. 8.1.
, should entreat worms and dust to be reconciled.

Nay yet more, Look on God not only entreating, but expostulating or
reasoning the case with you, as he does with Ephraim Hos. 6.4.
, O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O England how shall I deal with thee?
Have ye been unclean, and will ye be so still? Are your former iniquities and
provocations (before the war began) too little for you, but that you will
add iniquity to iniquity, and rebellion to rebellion? As the tribes of Israel
reasoned in the like case; Josh. 22.17, 18.
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed
until this day; but that ye must turn away from following the Lord, and make
him wroth with the whole Congregation?

Lastly, look upon God not only expostulating with you, but also lamenting
your folly and loss; Isa. 48.18.
O that thou had barkned to my Commandments! then had thy peace been as a
river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. It is Chrysostoms
observation upon my Text, that when God was now about to punish them, he does
pity them (...), Chryso. in locum.
; he does as it were weep over them, and compassionately mourn for them; When,
O when will it once be? just as a tenderhearted father that has but one
Son, and that Son untoward and untractable, he takes the Rod into his hand,
but withal he has tears in his eyes, saying, How shall I scourge thee my
Son? How shall I give thee up (to Ruin) O Ephraim! How shall I deliver thee
(into the hand of thine enemies) O Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, and my repentings
are kindled together Hos. 11.8.
?

Does all this nothing move us, nothing melt us? Are we in love with wrath, and
death, and danger? Are we willing to perish? to be made a hissing, a reproach,
and an astonishment to all other Nations? Know ye not that one sin unrepented,
unreformed will do us more mischief then all our enraged Enemies can do us?
One sin in forcing the Levites Concubine to death (it is one of the saddest
Stories that ye meet with in all the Scriptures) occasioned the slaughter of
LXV. THOUSAND MEN Judges 20.
; and that is more (I believe) then the sword has devoured in this Kingdom
these three years. Know ye not that without Reformation there will be no
Pacification? Ye read in Isa. 9.12. that though the Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind had devoured Israel with open mouth, yet Gods anger was not
turned away but his hand was stretched out still. But why would not God be
pacified after all that calamity which fell upon them? the reason follows,
verse 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do
they seek the Lord of hosts. So long as we have a rebellious hand to stretch
out against God, so long will God have a revenging hand to stretch out against
us: If he do not bend us, he will break us. Nay yet more, without
Reformation, we can expect nothing but a desolation, Be thou instructed, O
Jerusalem (says God Ier. 6.8.
) lest my soul depart from thee (or be difioynted from thee, as the Hebrew
phrase emphatically expresses it (...)
) lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited. Observe here, though a
people be as near to God as the Arm is to the shoulder blade, yet if they do
not hear the rod, and learn instruction, and be reformed, He will be loosed
or disioynted from them, cut them off from his hand, and make them desolate.
And tell me (Sirs) are ye willing to tire out Gods patience that does preserve
you? when ye stand but upon one bough of a tree, (Gods forbearance or
long-suffering) which bough if it were broken or cut down, ye should fall into
all woe and misery, both here and hereafter, Are ye willing to cut down that
bough? Will ye observe lying vanities, and forsake your own mercy Jonah 2.8.
? Will ye provoke God to say in his displeasure, I will stretch out my hand
against thee and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting Ier. 15.6.
? Oh give God leave to glorify his name in your Reformation, rather then in
your ruin and desolation.

Quest. It may be you will say unto me, What is that Reformation that is
required, and so earnestly pressed upon us this day?

Answ. I answer briefly, It is the purging away of whatsoever does defile the
Soul.

As Error in opinion. Inordinacy of Affection. Sinfulness in Conversation.


For the first, Do ye think Errors in judgment small matters, or trifles
not to be regarded? Know ye not that they are exceeding Dangerous in their
Nature. Damnable in their Effects.


First, they are dangerous, because they bewitch the Soul: O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth Gal. 3.1.
; yea, they corrupt and defile the soul: I fear (says the Apostle 2 Cor.
11.3.
) least your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ:
Errors and Idolatries agree in this, they are both of them the defilements of
the conjugall Bed; they make professors turn Strumpets, and cease to be loyal
Spouses of Jesus Christ: Yea moreover, they hinder the growth of grace in the
soul; as the worm at the root of the tree hinders the growth of the tree, or
weeds sprouting up with the corn, hinder the growth of the corn: Hence is
error compared to a Canker or Gangrene 2 Timothy 2.17
which consumes the flesh; so does error consume or eat out the heart of
grace: Oh that sad experience did not set seal to this truth! but we see it
daily (and may grieve for what we see;) That many Christians, who formerly have
bin forward professors, and have seen some beauty in spiritual things, and
tasted of the heavenly gift, yet when once they are caught in this snare of
error, they lose the savor of grace, and fearfully fall either from the
profession, or from the power of godliness.

Secondly, they are damnable in their effects: For it is well observed by
Divines Master Hildersam on Ps. 51. p. 704. and others.
, That corruption in judgment is as bad, nay worse, then corruption in
manners, especially where the mind has been enlightened with the knowledge of
the truth. Leprosy in the head was of all other Leprosies the most dangerous
and destructive: Lev. 13.44.
The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean (says the Lord) his plague is
in his head: He was unclean if he had the Leprosy in his hand or feet; but if
it were in his head, then he was utterly unclean. Look as the Soul is the
excellency of man, so the intellectual part is the excellency of the Soul; It
is the Candle of the Lord, as Solomon calls it Pro. 20.27.
; a light set up to direct the whole man in the way that he should walk in:
Now as our Savior reasons in the like case, If the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness Mat. 6.23.
? So here, if the mind and judgment be corrupted, how great is that
corruption? In God's fear therefore, let all errors be avoided, as Satan's
snares (for so the Apostle calls them 2 Timothy 2.26
) wherein he entangles the understandings of seduced men.

For the second, viz. Inordinacy of Affection; such as sinful fears, sensual
delights, carnal contentment, creature-confidence, self-love and
selfe-seeking, earthly mindedness, and the like; they must all be renounced,
if we our selves would be reformed. It is a golden Rule of the Apostle (the
Lord give us hearts to walk by it) in 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. Let them that weep be
as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and
they that buy as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as
not over-using it (...), Rerum fluxarum immoderatum usum damnat, Beza in locum.
. When a Picture is pasted to a wall, if you offer to pluck it away, you tear
it in pieces; but if you set it in a frame, you may remove it as you please:
So, when our hearts are glewed to creature comforts, we lose our hearts in the
use of them, and tear our hearts in parting with them; But, if our hearts be
set in a holy frame of spiritual Moderation, we shall neither over-joy them,
while we have them; nor over-grieve when we come to want them.

For the third, viz. Sinfulness of conversation: This must be abandoned; It is
not enough to bewail the Sins that ye have committed, but ye must also
forsake the sins that ye have bewailed; He that confesses and forsakes his
sins shall find mercy Pro. 28.13.
. All Gross sins must be forsaken in practice; Let them not be once named
among ye, as becomes Saints Ephesians. 5.3. See Isa. 30.22
. The least sins (even sins of thought) must be forsaken both in Affection
by loathing of them, and in Resolution by striving against them; cleaving unto
God with full purpose of heart Acts 11.23.
; and hating every false way Ps. 119.128
.

Quest But how, or by what Means may the work of Reformation be carried on,
both in public and private, in Church and State, in our hearts and houses?

Answ Let us carefully and conscienciously make use of these Means:

humbled to the dust for our former failings; and particularly that our Spirits
have not been upright or steadfast with our God; that we have not paid the Vows
which we made unto him in the day of trouble: Like little children, while we
were under the rod, we made fair promises; but the rod (in a great measure) is
removed, and yet we are not reformed.

Look often on our Covenant, and take heed of breaking with that God who
keeps Covenant with us, Neh. 1.5.
and accurately eyeth and observes all the juglings of our hearts. Who among us
do not tremble at the story of Zedekiah, of whom God speaks thus (after he
had broke his Covenant which he had made with Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
Ezekiel. 7.15.16.
) shall Zedekiah prosper? shall he escape that does such things? or shall he
break the Covenant and be delivered? No, even in the midst of Babylon shall he
dye.

Memorable is the story of Vladislaus King of Hungary Turkish History, p. 297.
, who having made a League with Amurath the Turkish Emperor for ten years;
upon the persuasion of a Cardinal called Julian, who absolved him from his
Oath; he brake his League: Hereupon coming to fight against Amurath, He for a
while prevailed, and had like to have got the victory; but Amurath seeing the
great slaughter of his men, plucked the writing out of his bosom, wherein the
League was contained, and holding it in his hand with his eyes lift up to
heaven, said; Behold thou crucified Christ, This is the League that thy
Christians in thy Name made with me, and now have violated; If thou be God (as
they say thou art) Avenge the wrong done to thy Name and unto me: Instantly
after, in the very same Battle was Vladislaus, that had broke the League,
slain, and his Head carried on the point of a Lance through their Cities, as
a token of the Turks Trophee. Now is it so dreadful a sin to break
Covenant with men; What is it to break Covenant with that God, who can cast
Soul and Body into hell fire? Certainly, if we break our Covenant, our
Covenant will break us.

get more publicknesse of spirit, to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 137.5.
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. Let all
private interests be drowned in public concernments; look as when public
men have a private spirit, it is a great curse unto a Kingdom; so when private
men have a public spirit, it is a great blessing: let that be our honor which
was David's, Acts 13.36.
to serve our generation: to be be useful in the times and places whereinto
God has cast us.

study unity and unanimity, that in the cause of God and Gospel ye may all
have one heart, and one hand, and one mind, and one mouth: Do as the Tribes
of Israel did in a public cause, Judge. 20 8.
They all arose as one man. Sure it is, there is not one plot or project
wherein the Devil more labors or bestirs himself, then this, How he may cast
in a bone of Division, blow the coals of contention, and break the band of
unity among Brethren: Therefore look how far any man nourishes the spirit
of discord and dissension in his breast, so far (I dare tell him from the
Lord) he is Isntrumental to the Devil: Boards joined together make a Ship,
disioyned, they cause Shipwreck: Agreement among Christians builds up
Jerusalem, disagreement pulls it down: In the building of Solomon's Temple,
there was no noise; neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron was heard
while it was in building 1 Kings 6.7
: O that in setting up the building of Reformation (for which we have lift up
our hands to the most high God) there might be no noise of jars or janglings,
crossings or thwartings, envyings or hart-burnings.

Get your hearts fired with a burning love to Christ, and an enflamed zeal for
his honor, and advancement of the work of Reformation, that ye may be fervent
in spirit (...), seething hot, Romans 12.11.
; a peculiar people zealous of good works Tit. 2.14.
: and remember this for your encouragement; If every thought of your hearts
were a rapture, and every word an ecstasy, and every action a sacrifice; If ye
had a thousand lives to spend for Christ, and ten thousand estats to lay down
at his feet; If ye did spend and were spent in his service, He is able
abundantly to recompense you both here and hereafter; Your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15.38
.

To draw to a conclusion.

Let me wind up the three Doctrins on one Bottom, Particular Application to
the Members of the Honorable House.
and so address my speech to you (Noble SENATORS) whom God has honored, and
betrusted with so great a Work, as the steering of our Ship in a storm, and
the settling of a poor tottering, trembling Kingdom: Ye have heard, That God
See's all our Provocations 1 Point.
. That God Breath's out against us his comminations 2 Point.
. That God Cal's aloud for speedy Reformation 3 Point.
.


I beseech you as a poor Messenger of Jesus Christ, lay these things to heart,
and apply them to your own Souls.

For example: First, Does God see all your ways with an impartial eye? (for
he accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor Job 34.19.
:) Then give me leave to propound that question to you which the Prophet Oded
did to the men of Israel, 2 Cro. 28.10. Are there not with you, even with you,
sins against the Lord your God? I come not hither, either to accuse or to
censure any of you: (There is a witness within you will do the one; there is
a Judge above you, will do the other:) But ye will suffer me to entreat you,
to Beseech you by the Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering to him at that great
day, To be true to your own spirits, to look into your own hearts, and to
watch over your own ways, that ye give no occasion to the Lord to say, I have
seen the provocations of these or these Parliament men.

Take heed therefore, lest (by the dignity of your places) your hearts be
lifted up above your Brethren: and remember, the greater your places are, the
greater must your reckoning be.

Be careful (...) (to use the Apostles phrase Gal. 2.14.
) to tread with a straight foot, to walk uprightly according to the truth of
the Gospel: Remember that speech of Job, Job 13.27.
Thou look narrowlly to all my paths, thou fettest a print upon the beeles
of my feet. If ye do but tread awry, or step out of that way that God has
appointed you to walk in; Shall not God search this out? for he knows the
secrets of the heart Psalm. 44.21.
?

Let there be none among you, that drive on your own particular designs, and
serve God and his cause no further, then they serve your own ends and
interests: Do not spare those whom God would not have spared; (It cost Ahab
dear when he spared Benhadad 1 Kings 20.42.
; God tells him, Thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people.) Do not discourage those whom God would not have discouraged.

Beware lest out of Cowardice or carnal fears, out of sinful compliance and
conformity to the wills of men, ye TOLERATE what God would not have TOLERATED;
for I conceive it worthy the consideration of the wisest, whether the Devil
would not think he had made a good bargain, and gained well by the
Reformation, if he could exchange the Prelacie for an Universal Liberty.

Take heed, lest there be any found among you, that are zealous for vindicating
Civil Liberties, but when Church Government comes to be settled, ye shrink and
start, and withdraw the shoulder, as being afraid of a Reformation that will be
too strict.

Ye have of late caused the Scriptures to be searched, desiring that the mind
of Christ in point of government, and what therein will bear the stamp of
divine Authority, may be represented to you: And ye have done exceeding well in
this matter, the Lord of heaven prosper you in your proceedings; But let me put
you in mind of a sad Story that ye meet with in this Prophecy, Jerem. 42. The
people come to the Prophet very demurely, Jer. 42.3, 5.
Desiring that God would show them the way wherein they should walk, and what
he would have them do, and they make a solemn profession and protestation,
ver. 5. The Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not
even, according to all things, for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee
to us. Well, the Prophet does inquire, and brings them a Message that they do
not like, ver. 10. viz. That they should abide in the Land of Judah, and not
go down to Egypt. What say they to this Message? You may see Chap. 43.2. They
are extremely angry with the Prophet, and give him the lie to his face; Thou
speak falsely; The Lord our God has not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt
to sojourne there. Whereupon the Prophet tells them plainly, Chap. 42.20. Ye
dissembled in your hearts when ye sent me to the Lord to inquire for you.

Observe here, If the Prophets counsel had suited with their own Principles,
ends and interests, then they would have followed his advice: but because it
did not, they scornfully reject it.

Now God forbid that there should be any among You that should thus double and
dissemble with God in your inquiry; But if there be any such among ye, or if
this or any of these secret sins before named, do cleave to your hearts or
lives; I testify to you in the presence of God, what Moses did to the
Reubenites Neh. 32.23.
; Behold, ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find
you out.

Again: Do our sins yet threaten us with a Woe? Then let me beseech you
(Honorable and Beloved) study to be so many Moseses to stand in the breach
Psalm. 106.23
, between God's wrath and a sinful people. I know it is Christ alone that can
do this meritoriously (for Moses in this was a type of Christ) but ye may do
it instrumentally, as Phinehas did by executing judgment, Numb. 25.11.
Phinehas the son of Eleazar, has turned away my wrath from the children of
Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them.

Shall I speak my fears to you? Truly I fear, Though God has brought us to
the skirts of Canaan, to the Havenmouth of our deliverance, yet we are still so
unreformed, that we lie under that Woe which is denounced against the
Cherethites Zeph. 2.5.
, viz. That the word of the Lord is against us; even that word which I spoke of
before in Isa. 8.12, 13. His anger is not turned away, because we turn not to
him that smites us. Now if the Word of God be against us, it is more then if
France, and Spain, and Germany and all Christendom were against us.

Therefore that Gods anger may be turned away by a speedy Reformation; do ye
endeavor to promote it with all your might; follow the example of that godly
King Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 31 21.
Whatever he did in the service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in the
Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.
Say to that God who has been your shield and buckler (to whom ye stand
infinitely indebted and engaged) as Elisha did to the Shunamite 2 Kin. 4.13
; Behold, thou have been careful for us with all this care (in preserving us
from the rage of those that rose up against us) What is to be done for thee?

Remember the eyes of the Kingdom are upon ye; nay, the eyes of all
Christendom are upon ye, as a Parliament saved by the Lord, near unto him in
the bond of love, and the Bond of a Covenant. O did ye but live up to the
height of your mercies and engagements, what a renowned Parliament would you
be? Therefore Do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem Ruth 4.11.
? Think with your selves ye hear the whole Kingdom crying to you, as the man
of Macedonia did to Paul, Acts 16.9.
We are desperately sick with sin as well as misery, Come heal us, come
help us. Ye have the broom of Reformation in your hand; for the Lord Jesus
sake do something to cleanse us; sweep the Church as well as the Commonwealth.

To this end, take order that Obstructions may removed; ye in your wisdom can
find them out.

Take order that Ministers may be encouraged in their work: Thus did godly
Hezekiah, 2 Chro 31.4
He commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the
Priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.
Let those that are faithful have such honorable (...). 1 Timothy 5.17.
maintenance, that their persons may be fenced from contempt: He spoke as an
Oracle in your House, that said, Sir Ben. Rud.
A scandalous maintenance is the cause of a scandalous Ministry. Do not starve
the Nurse lest the Nurse starve the Child. Let there not be one penny of that
which is called the CHURCHES REVENEW, diverted to any other use, then for
setting up of a godly conscientious Ministry, in those places especially,
where the people are ready to perish for lack of vision, and (were they but
sensible of their own misery) would cry out as the Prisosoners at Ludgate,
Bread for the Lords sake, Bread for the Lords sake.

TAKE ORDER That errors and heresies be discountenanced and suppressed; stop
the spreading of this Gangrene, before it overrun the whole body of the
Kingdom: O that I might make it my request to this honorable Senate on my
bended knees, that ye would take some speedy course to stop this Flood-gate
least we be drowned; for the Lord Jesus sake, show us that favor that the
earth did to the woman, when the Serpent cast water out of his mouth as a
Flood, to drown her, the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the flood
Reve. 12.15 16,
.

TAKE ORDER That our differences may be compounded.

Here let me turn my Exhortation into a Lamentation; O that we had some
mourning Jeremie's, that could do as he did in this Chapter Jer. 13.17.
; My soul shall weep in secret places for your pride (for only by pride comes
all our contention Pro. 13.10.
) and mine eye shall weep sore and run down with tears: O that we could
quench this flame of contention with our tears! but since we cannot, Lord
Jesus do thou quench it with thy blood.

As concerning the present difference lying before ye, I will not undertake to
loose that knot: Blessed be God, ye have an Assembly of as reverend, learned,
pious judicious Divines to consult with, as this present Age can afford: Only
let me beg two things at your hands; Bear with me, it is the first time that
ever I spoke to you in this place.

First, Be not jealous of your friends that have stood by you, and stuck to
you, and have strengthened your hands in God as Jonathan did David's in the day
of his distress 1 Samuel 23.16
.

Let us speak our hearts to you: God and our consciences will witness for us,
that we seek for Purity more then Power; and if Christ's honor may be advanced,
though in the ruin of our own, we do rejoice and will rejoice: In brief, if
ye give us a power more then Christ gives us, it is our sin to accept it; if ye
give us less, take heed least God be angry.

The second thing I beg is this, Hasten a settling: We know ye are going on, yet
because the Church of Christ is running to confusion, bear with us if we be a
little impatient of delay, and cry out as Sisera's Mother did Judge. 5.28.
; Why is the Charet so long in coming? why tarry the weels of the Charet? or
as the Text sounds in your ears; When, O when will it once be? Do not say as
the people said in Haggai's time Hag. 1.2.
, The time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built; for this
made God so angry, that he did not bless, but blast their labors till this
were done Ver. 9.
.

To conclude, remember ye judge not for man, but for the Lord who is with you
in the judgment 2 Chro. 19.6
; your authority is from him, your support is by him, and your account must be
rendered to him; therefore protect the oppressed, punish the offender; encourage
the godly, discourage the profane: Be an eye to the blind, a foot to the lame,
a father to the poor, and the cause ye know not, search it out, as holy Job
did Job 29.15, 16.
.

In one word, be so valiant for God, so courageous for his truth, so zealous
for his glory, so vigilant in your places, so wise in your deportment, so
impartial in your proceedings, so constant in your Covenant, so faithful to
your trust, that the eye which sees may bless you, and the ear which hears
may give witness to you, That the wisdom of God is in you to do judgment 1
Kin. 3.28.
.

If it be thus (and O that it might be so) then not only we, but all the
Churches of Christ about us, will bring in their votes, and say, This is a
Parliament that the Lord has blessed, This is a Parliament that the Lord has
crowned.

FINIS.

