TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, And every individual Member
thereof.

THE DECLARATION OF DANIEL NODDEL Solicitor for the Freeholders and Commoners
within the Manor of Epworth, in the Isle of Axholm, in number about 1200
besides new erected Cottages, on the behalf of himself and all the said
Commoners: discovering the plot and design of Master John Gibbon and his
fellow-projectors to gain a possession of the said Freeholders ancient
inheritance in their commonable grounds there, contrary to law.

Printed at London, and are to be sold at the seven stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door, 1653.

The Declaration of Daniel Noddel Solicitor for the Freeholders and Commoners
within the Manor of Epworth, etc.
Right Honorable,
YOU are under God, the supreme power of this Commonwealth of England, and the
grand Trustees thereof, to preserve the lives, liberties, and estates of all
the people therein, according to law; and therefore I come unto you, and lay
before you once more the cause concerning the livelihood of many thousand men,
women, and children, within the Manor of Epworth, in the Isle of Axholm, for
whom I have been entrusted now almost eight years as Solicitor, and as the
case now stands, am bound in conscience not to keep silence, lest by that means
destruction come upon them and me through ignorance.

I make no doubt but your honors have all heard of a pretended great Riot some
years past. committed in the said Isle, for that has been cried up into the
late Act of Oblivion, wherein there is an exemption from pardon touching the
pretended Ryots in those parts; but I am persuaded that you have not heard half
so much of the proceedings that have been at law by the Freeholders there, for
the recovery of their ancient right to 7400 acres of commonable grounds, (being
the ground in controversy between the Freeholders, and certain Undertakers,
who now term themselves participants in the Level of Hatfield-chase) but are no
part of the said chase, of which about twenty years since the Freeholders were
dispossessed by force of Arms, under color only of the late Kings illegal
Patent, by those great Ryoters the first Undertakers, or rather projectors,
when diverse of the Commoners were murdered and shot to death, and many wounded,
who did but turn again (as worms trod upon will do) in the just defense of
their undoubted right of possession, when they could have no proceedings at
law, Replevins being forbidden them by order of the Exchequer; and the
possession wrested and held from them by Star Chamber orders; their persons
many of them being imprisoned, and many enforced by Pursuivants and Sergeants
at Arms to lie from their habitations in the fields under hedges, being usually
termed rebels, and threatened to be hanged at their doors, and plagued with
multitudes of Star Chamber process; some forced to fly out of the kingdom at
that time, having their goods illegally distrained, and sold for issues out of
the then King's Bench, others to sell and morgage their lands to purchase and
unjust peace against the villainous and tyrannical forcible entries, and
intrusions, arrests, and imprisonments brought upon them by the said
participants contrary to law.

No, Right honorable, The plot and design of the Undertakers (especially that
Machiavel Master John Gibbon, who both is Solicitor for himself and his
fellow-projectors) is not to tell you of those things, but to keep you
hoodwink't (I desire to use it with reverence) to the intent you shall but
only see an ugly shape of a late pretended Riot, held forth before you in a
most partial, wicked, and erroneous report of Master Say and Master Henry
Darley (two members of the Committee (at the least of fifty) of the late
Parliament, for the Isle of Axholm, and Master Gibbons great coached and
feasted friends) for by that report of theirs, your Honors shall never see the
title of the Freeholders to the said lands, nor the proceedings that have been
had at law, whereby they have recovered them. No, these must all lie whist and
damped with the great noise of a Riot, and throwing down houses, though built
upon the Freeholders own ground, and with their own wood, which the projectors
and their tenants got and dug out of the said grounds, and were fitter for
dog-kennels (as my friend Master Spittlehouse has set forth) then to come in
competition with those great Ryots committed by the projectors at their first
entrance upon those grounds, in the horrid massacres, forcible entries,
intrusions, imprisonments, and oppressions aforesaid. I say, the said report
will present only to your eye the mention of a Riot, nothing at all of the
title and proceedings at law; for that Master Say and Master Darley would not
suffer to be made forth, when it was offered by the Freeholders; neither durst
Master Gibbon and the rest of his fellow-projectors produce any, although they
set forth and tell the late Parliament in their petition, the lands are settled
upon them by good assurances, and that it will so appear upon the examination
of the business: and although the whole matter of the petition was referred to
the Committee, which was also the Committee for Sir. Arthur Haselrige and
Primate, with some addition of late Members to it. And therefore because Master
Gibbon and his fellow projectors having now no remedy either in law or equity,
are got into a By-way (a Riot, the only fig-leaf to cover their nakedness) to
gain possession in those grounds which they never yet legally had; and by
delusion (if possible) to draw in your honors extraordinary power to effect it,
insinuating as if the whole drainage in those parts, containing 60000 acres
lying in the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, will for want of a
settlement be overthrown, and so aim at an Act of Parliament, and therein to
hedge the ancient inheritance of the Freeholders in the said grounds; through
which the Undertakers did but at their first coming into those parts, desire to
cut a drain, because else they could not drain Hatfield-chase, and many other
Manors, as is cleared by the proofs.

I do again humbly entreat leave to tender the Freeholders title, and to clear
up the same more fully to your honors, against any information of Master Gibbon
or his counsel whatsoever; humbly beseeching you, on the behalf of all the
Freeholders and Commoners, to secure the same and their possession unto them,
for no other end, but as your honors shall direct, by way of a just and
equitable improvement, for their own and the Commonwealths good, against the
violation of those that against law and equity endeavor to usurp a possession.
And next thereunto, I shall humbly and truly inform your honors of the
proceedings, that have of late years been in your ordinary Courts of Justice,
concerning the grounds in question.

And lastly, Shall set forth the Participants petition in the late Parliament,
verbatim, whereby they hope (now all their hopes are gone both in law and
equity) to gain a possession merely upon the score of a Riot committed by some
few of the inhabitants, upon which petition the report of Master Say, and
Master Darley, which is to come before you, is grounded.

The Freeholders title is as follows.

The Freeholders and Commoners within the Manor of Epworth, in the Isle of
Axholm, have time out of mind had common appendant to their several tenements,
for all manner of cattle, levant, and couchant thereupon, at all times of the
year, in and through all the wastes and commonable grounds within the said
Manor (whereof the grounds in controversy are the greatest part, and was
always of the best nature) and in confirmation of this their ancient right,
Sir John Mowbray, sometime Lord of the said Isle, having made an approvement of
a great part of the said grounds to himself as Lord, did about three hundred
years since, grant unto the Freeholders by an ancient Charter in French, but
here translated into English by William Riley, keeper of the Records in the
Tower, as follows.

THis Indenture between their thrice honored Lord Sir John Mowbray, Lord of the
Isle of Axholm, and of the honor of Brember, of the one part; Rawlin of
Brumham, William of Brumham, Roger of Brumham John of Thetilthorp, Thomas
Melton, Jeoffery Laundels, Vincent Bavant, John Gardner, John Cutwulf, Rich. of
Belwood, and John at Hagh his Tenants of the Isle of Axholm and all the Tenants
and resiants within the said Isle, on the other part, witnesses, That all the
said Tenants and resiants have supplicated their said Lord Sir John Mowbray to
have remedy of diverse claims touching their right, and diverse debates and
grievances to them made by the Ministers of the said Lord Sir John Mowbray;
upon which supplication it is agreed that the said Sir John Lord aforesaid has
granted for him and for his heirs to the said Rawlin, William Roger, John,
Thomas, Jeoffery, Vincent, John, John, Richard, and John, Tenants aforesaid*
and to their heirs and to all having their estate or parcel of their estate,
and to all the other tenants and resiants within the Isle of Axholm, and to
their heirs, and to all that hereafter shall have their estate, all the things
underwritten. That is to say, That the said Sir John nor his heirs shall not
approve any waste, Moors, Woods, Waters, nor make or shall make any other
approvement of any part within the said Isle of Axholm. And that the said
Rawlin, William Roger, John, Thomas, Jecffery, Vincent, 33. Ed. 3. Note that at
that time the Freeholders had had Common time out of mind.
John, John, Richard and John, and their heirs, and those that shall have their
estate, or parcel of their estate, and all other Tenants and Resiants within
the Isle of Axholm, shall have their Common, which is appendant to their
Free-tenement, according to that which they have had and used time out of mind.

And also that the aforesaid Rawlin, William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffery,
Vincent, John, John, Richard and Joan, and their heirs, and all those which
their estate, or parcel of their estate shall have, and all other the tenants
and resiants within the aforesaid Isle, may dig in the Moors and Marshes,
Turfs, Trees, and Roots, found within the Soil of the said Moors and Marshes.
And that one pound, containing one half acre, be made at the cost of the said
tenants, and maintained hereafter by the said Lord and his heirs in Belton-car,
and one other in Haxey-car, containing as much, and that they be made in places
for the most ease of the said tenants. And that no chase of beasts of commoners
be made but once a year, and that the said Beasts be not otherwise driven but
to the Pound of the Pasture where they shall be taken, and there the beasts of
the said Tenants to be delivered by the tenants aforesaid, or by their
servants: and saving always to the said tenants, and to their heirs, and to
their servants, that they may take their beasts and receive them in the Drift,
or before the drift, so that the drift of beasts of strangers be not thereby
disturbed.

And that in the severalities of the said Lord adjoining to the places in which
they have Common, which are open and not enclosed, no beasts of the said
tenants and Commoners be taken nor impounded, but easily driven out. And that
the said tenants and resiants, and their heirs, and all those which their
estate, or parcel of their estate shall have, may dig and take Turf or other
Earth, for the walls of their houses, and for all other necessaries of the said
houses, and for to enclose the walls of their Messuages or Mansions. And to dry
Flags in all the said wastes, for to cover the ridges of their houses and
walls; and for bringing of Trees to repair the river of Trent, where cause of
repairing is, and to make them new. And that the said Rawlin, William, Roger,
John, Thomas, Jeoffery, Vincent, John, John, Richard and John aforesaid, and
all other the Tenants and Resiants, their heirs, and all those which shall have
their estate, or parcel of their estate hereafter, be not for the future
amerced or grieved for default of not appearing to ring their swine. And that
they may put hemp to be rated in all the waters of the Isle, (except the Skires
which are severed to the said Lord Sir John Mowbray) and that the said Lord nor
his heirs, nor his Ministry make no molestation nor grievance to the dogs of
the forenamed Tenants and Resiants aforesaid, nor to their heirs, nor to those
which shall-have their estate, or parcel of their estate; and if they do, the
Tenants shall have their recovery at the common law. And that the aforesaid
Rawlin, William, Roger, John, Thomas, Jeoffery, Vincent, John, John, Richard
and John, Tenants aforesaid, and all the other Tenants and Resiants, their
heirs, and all those which hereafter shall have their estate, or parcel of
their estate, may fish through all the waters and wastes of the said Isle,
without impediment of the Ministers of the said Lord Sir John Mowbray, except
the Skires aforesaid. And also that they may dig Turf, and all other manner of
earth, in all the wastes aforesaid, to carry and improve their land at their
pleasure. And that none of the Tenants aforesaid, or of their heirs, or of
those having their estate impeached of Trespass by the Ministers of the said
Lord, be amerced for Trespass without answer given in Court; and then by their
Peers to be fined and taxed if they be amerciable. And the said John grants
that all the Tenants and their heirs, and all those which shall have their
estate, which are bound to enclose the Woods of the Lord, may take Underwood to
make them new hedges, or to repair them, as much as shall be necessary, That is
to say (...) This blank place cannot be read in the Deed.
in the places of the said Woods (...) of the said Tenants, their heirs, and of
those which shall have their estate, without being impeached or grieved by the
Ministers of the said Lord Sir John Mawbray. And the said John grants for him
and his heirs, that all the things and Articles aforesaid be of effect and
force in the law, as well to those which are generally named Tenants, and their
heirs, as those which shall have their estate, or parcel of their estate, as to
those which are named by proper names, and their heirs, and those which shall
have their estate, or parcel of their estate. And if in the Articles aforesaid,
there be any point, which may have diverse interpretations or intendments, that
it shall be taken to the best advantage of the names or of the Tenants
aforesaid, and of their heirs, or of those which shall have their estate, and
not otherwise.

In witness whereof, the Parties aforesaid have interchangeably put their
Seals. Given at our Manor of Epworth the first day of May, in the year of the
Reign of Edward the Third, after the Conquest, thirty three.
The testimony of ancient witnesses in depositions upon record in the
Exchequer, make it clearly appear, that all things have gone according to this
Deed within the said Manor till now of late, that the projectors usurped a
possession against law. Upon that Deed, when I first undertook to Solicit this
business for the Freeholders, I took the several opinions of Sir Robert
Berkeley, Master Maynard, and Master Hale, not making any of them acquainted
with the others opinion, because I would be certain of the validity of the said
Deed; and the chief question I put in writing to them was, whether the Deed did
debar the King of improvement, to which I had their several judgments it did,
Sir Rober Berkeley giving it thus under his hand, which I have yet to show:
says he,

I think it does, if the Lord Mowbray had estate in Fee. For as I conceive it
is more then a covenant, and makes the improvement by the King unwarranted by
Merton or any other Statute.

To. Berkeley.

Master Hale gave his answer (which I have also under his hand) thus: says he,
I conceive the Deed is a real discharge and binds the lands into whose hands
soever it comes, and consequently the king cannot improve. He further adds,
That he conceives the benefit of this Deed extends to all the tenants, as well
those that are not named, as those that are named, and gives his reasons.

1. Because the Lord cannot enclose against those that are named, and
consequently there can be no improvement against any.

2. Which he says he principally does rely upon, because it is a real
discharge of the wast of that liberty of improvement, which the statute gave
him; and that though tenants be not a sufficient name of purchase at this day
in point of interest, it is in point of discharge.

Math. Hale.



Master Maynard gave his opinion, that it past an interest, and therefore the
King could not improve against it.

It is clear by several inquisitions upon record in the Tower, First, That the
said Sir John Mowbray dyed seized of all the said Isle; and namely,

In bundello Escaet. de Anno Regni Regis Edw. tertii quadragesimo tertio, par.
2. number. 7. sic continetur. Inquisitio capta apud Kirton in Lyndsey die Sabbati
prox. ante festum Annunciationis beatae Mariae virginis, Anno Regni Regis Edw.
tertii post conquestum quadragesimo tertio, coram Waltero de Kelsey Escaetore
Domini Regis in Com. Lincol. virtute brevis Domini Regis eid. Escaetori direct.
and huic inquisitioni consuti per sacramentum Richardi de Belwood,
This Belwood and Melton are two named in Deed of Mowbray.
Willthelmi de Burnham, Johannis Fowler, Thome de Melton, Johannis Tanchard de
Eppworth, Will. Gray de eadem, Will. Bellingham de eadem, Will fili^^ Gilberti
de eadem* Will. Elers de edem, Johannis Bird de eadem, Henrici With de eadem,
and Roberti de Swynton de eadem, Jurat. qui dicunt super sacramentum suum, quod
Johannis de Mowbray Chivalr. defunctus, obiit seisit de Insula de Axhol^. etc.
Et dieun^, quod Johannes, filii praedicti Johannis de Mowbray est filius and
haeres predicti Johannis de Mowbray Chr. defunctus pro^inquior, and est aetatis
quinque Annorum and amplius. In cujus rei testimonum predicti jurat huic
Inquisitioni sigilla sua apposueris. etc.



In bundello Escaet. de Anno sexto Richardi secundi, nu m. 58. (...) continetur
sic. Inquisitio capta apud Gaynsburgh die Martis prox. post festum sacrae
Petronellae virginis, Anno Regni Regis Richardi secundi post conquestu^ sexto
coram Will. de Skipwith Escaetore domini regis in com. Lincol. virtuta brevis
dict. Domini regis eidem Escaetor direct. per sacramentum Roberti Sheffield de
Butterwick, etc.
Qui dicunt super sacramentum suum, quod Johannis Mowbray Chr. obiit seisit de
Manerio de Epworth cum pertinent. ut de feodo in Insula de Haxiholm, etc. post
cujus mortem dominus Rex Edvardus aevus Regis nunc seisivit manerium predictum
cum pertinen. etc. ratione minoris aetatis Johannis Mowbray commit. Nottingham
fill. and haered. dict. Johannis Mowbray Chr. qui mortuus est etc.



The long continued race of the Mowbrayes, Dukes of Norfolk also appears in the
Tower to be Lords of the said Manor, and how John Lord Mowbray, father of this
John that made the Deed, being in rebellion with those Barons that accompained
the Duke of Lancaster, who was beheaded at Pomfret, was amongst all the rest of
the Lords in that insurrection, restored by Act of Parliament Ann. 4 Ed. 3. to
all his lands. And how Elizabeth. dowager of Thomas lord Mowbray, who was
grandchild to this John that made the Deed, had her assignation of dower
through all the Manor of Epworth, Ann. 2. R. 2.

The manner of keeping this Deed, has been in a Chest bound with iron in the
Parish Church of Haxey being the greatest town within the Manor, by some of
the chief Freeholders, who had the keeping of the keys, which chest stood under
a window, wherein was the portraicture of Mowbray set in ancient glass, holding
in his hand a writing* which was commonly reputed to be an emblem of the Deed
till now of late, that the glass was broken down; this also appears in the
depositions in the Exchequer.

That the said Mowbray did in his time approve to himself much of the wastes as
lord ^ppeareth by many ancient Deeds, bearing date before this Deed, yet extant
in the Isle; whereby after he had enclosed the same, he granted to others those
enclosures.

The Freeholders had a Trial, Verdict, Judgment, and Execution upon it in
Micaelmas Term, 1651. at the Exchequer Bar, by order of that Court, in the name
of Thomas Vavasour a gentleman of an ancient family, son of Henry Vavasour, son
of Thomas Vavasour the Grandfather, son of Henry Vavasour the great
Grandfather, who married Jeane one of the daughters of Robert Ait-hall, to whom
by partition made between her and Elizabeth and Mary her sisters, the same
place called Belwood did come, Robert Ait Hall was son and heir to Oliver
Ait-hall, who was son and heir of Margery one of the daughters and coheirs of
Thomas B^ltoft, and Emott his wife, to whom by partition with Elizabeth her
^ister the said place called Bellwood came. Emot was daughter and heir to
Richard de Bellewood who is one of the eleven specially named in the said Deed
of Mowbray and lies intombed in the Parish Church of Belton, in a Tomb called
Belwood Tomb; so as it is clear the said Thomas Vavasour, in whose name the
Freeholders had their Verdict, has both the same estate that Richard de
Bellewood now about three hundred years since had, derived to him by Deeds
under seal; and is also of blood unto him lineally descended from him.

This is the first Trial that the Freeholders could ever obtain in twenty years
time; at which Trial it did also appear by the testimony of ancient witnesses,
that the Freeholders had also common in gross, against which no improvement can
by law be made, neither was this trial had before there was an hearing in
equity of an English bill, which the Participants exhibited in the Exchequer to
stay the Freeholders suits at law, which bill was four or five years in
hearing; and the Decree made upon the full hearing thereof in Feb 1650 does
establish the possession no otherwise with the Participants, then it was when
that bill was exhibited, which was but in Trinity Term, 1646. at which time
there was four thousand acres of the said seven thousand four-hundred acres in
controversy in the possession of the Freeholders, and that decree gives way to
go to Trial at law for the rest; and therefore I desire that the equivocation
of Master Say and Master Darley in the third folio of their report, as to the
possession by that Decree may be observed when the report shall be brought in.

And now may it please your honors, I shall truly inform you of the proceedings
at law, in a brief thus, viz.

In Hillary Term, 1645. the Freeholders commenced their suites at law against
the Participants, to try their title to the said lands.

In Trinity Term following, viz. 1646. (and not in 1642. as the Participants in
their Petition to the late Parliament falsely suggest) the participants
exhibited an English Bill in the Exchequer to stay those suites at law, and to
have the possession of the whole seven thousand four hundred acres in
controversy established with them.

Quere, Whether Mr. Say has not concealed this Decree from the Committee of
the Counsel of State, and vide the Decree, and Mr. Says equivocation thereupon
in folio 3. ^^h's report touching the possession.
In Michaelmas Term, 1650. that Bill came to full hearing, and the Decree then
made does establish the possession no otherwise with them, then it was when
that Bill was exhibited.

Where pray Note, That about four thousand acres of the said seven thousand
four hundred acres had been then about five years before the Bill was exhibited
in the Freeholders possession, in which case all restitution of possession,
under color of a Riot, is by law excluded.

Note also, That Decree gives way to the Freeholders to go to trial at law for
the rest.

There being now about one hundred charged as Ryotors, It is humbly submitted,

Whether all the rest of the Freeholders and Commoners, being above a thousand,
shall suffer the loss of their possession so left unto them as aforesaid by the
said Decree, upon the full hearing of the Participants own Bill in equity, and
afterward wholly recovered by the Freeholders at law, upon a Verdict, in the
name of one that was no Ryoter.

And two things there are observable touching that windemill mentioned in the
Act of Oblivion, wherein the inhabitants are exempted from mercy, as touching
the Ryots committed in the Isle of Axholm

The first is, That it was taken in execution at the suit of the said Vavasour,
foreighty pound costs, and twelve pence damages given unto him by the Jury, and
the money was paid.

The second is, that a tenant to the Participants, who was owner thereof, did
in his heat of blood, presently after it was thrown down, bring his action of
trespass at law against a Freeholder in the Isle for throwing down that
windemill, three houses, and one barn: to which the Freeholder (being
defendant) having pleaded, the Participants durst neither let the plaintiff
(their tenant try the cause himself, nor let the Defendant try it, prays upon
record to discontinue their own action, and to pay the Defendant costs (lest he
should try it) which they did accordingly, and paid forty shillings costs to
the Defendent.

Right honorable, now I have informed your honors of the le^al parr, give me
leave, I humbly beseech you on the Freeholders behalf to lay down before you
their equitable part to the grounds in question, no otherwise then was proved
before the late Committee of Parliament by many witnesses no way interested if
Master Say have taken the depositions, or rather returned them aright, as they
were or ought to have been taken, whereof to this day the Freeholders never had
copies, a though Master Gibbon long since had copies delivered out; Nay, it is
like I shall prove Master Say delivered out the very Original to him to copy
forth, by which means Master Gibbon and his friends quoted such witnesses,
whose depositions made best for them upon the margent of the report or a copy
thereof thereby to delude the Honorable Committee of the Council of State, and
left out many of the witnesses whose testimonies make against them, and by
concealing the Decree and other writings in Master Says hands, and other the
means aforesaid, have obtained a second report; of all which I am bound in
conscience to inform your Honors, lest by silence, ignorance destroy this
cause, and lose the Freeholders possession, which must needs attend those
reports to your Honors, if nothing else should appear but the ugly shape of a
pretended Riot; for by Master Says report only, the plot is so laid, that
your Honors cannot possibly see the truth, and the Freeholders have cause ^o
fear an Honorable and brave Worthy, seeing nothing but a pretended Riot (and
being joined with Master Scob^l your Clark, as of the Committee of the Counsel
of State, and never knowing how the proceedings at law are gone) has been
misled to sign a report, which whether it be contrary to law and equity, as to
the Freeholders loss of possession in the said grounds, or not, is humbly
submitted to your honors when it shall come to your view, being compared with
the depositions, which on the Freeholders part (if rightly taken by Master Say,
whereof they have just occasion to doubt) will clearly appear to be thus in
point of equity, viz.

1. That the grounds before the pretended draining, which the Participants took
from the Freeholders, was most of it worth fifteen shillings and twenty
shillings an acre per ann. and ten shillings an acre one with another
throughout.

2. That it did feed all manner of Cattle, fat for the Butcher.

3. That the very best ground was taken from the Commoners.

4. That the Freeholders cannot keep half the cattle winter and summer, Thomas
Tailor, Thomas Far, Isaac Chapman, Thomas Todd, Thomas Philips, William Maw,
John Brown, Robert Dyneley, Esquire. John Clarke, John Jervise, and others.
levant and couchant, upon their several tenements as they could before that
pretended draining.

5. That they are compelled to joyst their cattle out in foraign places, and to
turn their Meadow grounds into pasture.

6. That diverse of the Freeholders sold their estates in the Isle, and provided
themselves habitations elsewhere in foraign places, merely because of
oppressions in these particulars.

7. That the Participants have taken away the very heart of the ground.

8. That the South part of the Manor of Epworth, left to the inhabitants, is
as subject to be surrounded with waters since the pretended draining, as it was
before.

9. That the ground before the draining was better in Summer for the
overflowings of waters that had been in Winter.

10. That the Participants at their first coming into those parts, did but
desire to cut through the Manor of Epworth, to drain Hatfield Chase, and many
other Manors that lie on the West of the said Manor, Thomas Far, Timothy
Ellis Clarke, Thomas Todd, and Thomas Tailor.
into the river of Trent that runs on the East. And that without cutting
through the Manor of Epworth, Hatfield Chase, and those other Manors could
not be drained.

11. That when the projectors gained their possession, diverse of the Commoners
were murdered and shot to death, Timothy Ellis Clarke, John Tompson, William
Wells, Thomas Far, John Francis.
and terrified and affrighted from their habitations by Sergeants at Arms, and
Pursuivants, and enforced to lie in the fields under hedges, and many wounded.

12. That the Participants have been at no more charge in the Manor of
Epworth, then cutting a drain of four miles: Thomas Tailor. Thomas Todd.
And that they have stopped up some ancient Sewers that were as useful in the
Manor.

And now grave Senators, though the business be clear in law for the
Freeholders, and that there should be also all the equity that could be
imagined for them in it; yet if Master Say have been such a man to mince,
conceal, omit, and wrest the testimonies of the Freeholders witnesses in the
depositions, either as he was Chaireman in the first penning of them, or in the
returning of them in to the honorable Committee of the Council of State, and
withholding any essential writings, or denying any to be made out that ought
and was offered by the Freeholders to have been made forth in this matter
(which the Freeholders doubt not but to prove, having once copies of
depositions, as Master Gibbon long since had from Master Say) I say in this
case, though the case was never so good, and before never so righteous Judges;
yet being lodged in a report so partially and wickedly drawn up, as this of
Master Darley is, and presented to your honors in no other shape and form then
Master Say has dressed it, I cannot but see how ruin and destruction should
unavoidably fall upon those that before God, and in the eye of the law are
clear. And therefore I beseech you blame me not, though I have presumed thus to
write, for it concerns many thousands, men, women and children, for whom I have
been entrusted now almost eight years as Solicitor, and it concerns also my
self for this cause sake very nearly, as your honors may perceive by that last
plotted and contrived device of Master Gibbon and his participants (when it was
clear that neither law nor equity would relieve them) in their petition to the
late Parliament, which follows verbatim.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The humble Petition of the Participants in the Draining of the Level of
Hatfield Chase, in the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, whose names
are hereunto subscribed, on the behalf of themselves and others,
Shows,
THat the Petitioners, and these under whom they did claim, did about twenty
four years since, at the expense of near two hundred thousand pounds, drain and
lay dry sixty thousand acres of ground in the said Level then drowned, and of
small value, and made the same worth ten shillings, twelve shillings, and
sixteen shillings the acre. And as a recompense for their said charge, hazard
and travel in so public a work* the proportion of about twenty four thousand
acres of the said lands; whereof seven thousand four hundred acres of the wastes
of the Manor of Epworth was part, was settled upon them by good Note that the
Participants notwithstanding this, durst not produce either their Patent or any
other pretended assurance at the time of the examination; neither were the
Freeholders suffered to make forth their title, done by it.
assurances in the law, as will appear to your honors upon the examination
thereof, and are too long here to insert: and according to the said assurances,
the Petitioners had quiet and peaceable possession of the lands, and so enjoyed
the same for many years, and divided, improved and planted the same, and in
particular, upon the seven thousand four hundred acres of Epworth, built a
Church, This Church is yet unpaid for, the man that built it, was un.
and about one hundred and sixty habitations and have constantly paid the rent
of 1228 l. per ann. which was then reserved upon the said whole proportion, and
now payable to the State for ever.

That in the year 1642 in time of the war, some of the inhabitants of the
Manor of Epworth, by the instigation of one Daniel Noddel an Attorney at law,
did rise in tumults, and laid wast about four thousand acres of the said seven
thousand four hundred acres; demolished the buildings and destroyed the crops
of corn and Rapeseed, growing thereupon: for redress whereof, and establishing
their possession the petitioners exhibited This bill was exhibited for stay of
the Freeholders suits at law in Trinity Term, 1646. when the Freeholders had
had possession above four years before.
their bill in the Court of Exchequer, who granted several Injunctions, and
made several Orders to the Sheriffs for quieting the possession; but the
tumults growing too great to be suppressed by the ordinary Courts of Justice, the
petitioners had recourse to the Parliament, who were pleased to make several
Orders They never had any order of Parliament, but out of the House of Lords
upon a supposed Riot, which being heard at the Lords Bar, the parties
complained on were dismissed, and are now for that very thing complained on.
therein for relieving the Petitioners; which likewise were contemned, and the
petitioners by force still kept out of the possession of the said four thousand
acres.

That the Ryoters seeing them go unpunished for their former insolences and
rebellions against the law and government of this State; and having now got the
countenance of Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, and Major Wildman, did in October
1650. whilst the cause was hearing in the Exchequer, rise in tumult, and
destroyed the Corn and cropps growing upon the residue, being about three
thousand four hundred acres of the said seven thousand four hundred acres;
whereof the Court being informed, granted a This writ gave no power to the
Sheriff, but against such as were parties to a decree in the Exchequer, in the
twelfth year of the late King, which Master Gibbon dare not produce, and those
which then put down the banks, did it in a peaceable and legal way, and were no
parties to that Decree.
Writ of assistance to the Sheriff, to quiet the possession, who comes upon the
place, and is there resisted, and in his presence the fences thrown down.

In Hillary Term 1650. the Court upon full hearing, By this Decree the court
does establish the possession no otherwise with the Participants, then it was
when the Bill was exhibited, at which time the four thousand acres
aforementioned in this petition, had been in the possession of the Freeholders
near five years.
Decree and establish the possession with the petitioners, which decree coming
to be published on the place (having now the influence of Master Lilburn, these
ryoters with high and reproachful language, contemn it: and being advised to
give obedience, or else the Parliament must be acquainted with it, they
answered it was a traitorous order, and that they would obey neither Barons nor
the Parliament, and that they could make as good a Parliament themselves; and
that if the Parliament sent forces against them, they would raise forces and
resist them and then proceed to demolish the houses of the town of Santoft with
a And was not the wind emill, and all the houses worthy to be removed (though
not in that manner) when there was neither law nor equity they should stand?
Alas poor commoners! the fault (if any) was in this, that (after twenty years
time you could have no trial, and Master Gibbon saying you should never have
any so long as you were quick) I say the fault of a few of you was in this,
that you did it by force, for which I hope there is mercy to be had.
windemill and deface the Church. The houses were built of the Freeholders own
wood, taken out of the ground.
, all built by your petitioners and their tenants. Then your petitioners
applied themselves to the Council of State who were pleased to send an order to
the Sheriff of the County of Lincoln on the petitioners behalf, but during
those transactions the ryoters in contempt of authority and law brake the
houses, fetch away the tenants cattle and impound them, and would admit of no
The Participants dare not try the cause, either by Replevir or otherwise at
law; if they will, we offer it when they will.
Replevines, but forced them to redeem them at what rate they pleased; and
proceeded to demolish all, both houses and barns and all other buildings, and
destroy all the corn there growing, and fetch away the materials of those
buildings by force. to the damage What damage can be done to those that have no
title?
of the petitioners and their tenants in the whole forty thousand pound.
besides the damage to the Commonwealth in general, by destruction of so many
habitations and plows for tillage and husbandry.

The whole proportion of seven thousand four hundred acres within this Manor
being thus laid wast, the said Lilburn, Wildman and Noddel, with diverse of the
Ryoters ride and view it, and then they make agreement with diverse of the most
notorious ryoters, that for two thousand acres of that land to be given to
Lilburn, where he would make election, and 200 to I refer this to the
contradiction of the Participants own witness in the depositions, and upon a
fair examination shall produce many witnesses, that there was no such agreement
made, and God will one day reveal it, whether any such agreement was made, and
how the witnesses were in that point wrested.
Noddel, Neither is there the least proof, that the 200 acres were given to me
upon any such score, if the depositions were truly taken, whereof yet I never
had copies.
they would defend them against all fines and other troubles concerning the
Ryots before mentioned, and defend them against these petitioners for the other
five thousand two hundred acres. And presently after this, they took the same
two thousand two hundred acres into their possession, worth at least 1600 l.
per an. and so made at the charge of the petitioners, and have contracted to
let proportions, and have entered upon one house, and reedified the same, and
keep possession thereof. And on the 19. of October last, being the Lords day,
Lilburn with a great number armed came to the Church, and there forced away the
Minister and congregation, saying, He should not preach there unless they were
stronger then he; and now makes it a place to lay his hay, and a slaughter
house to kill Cattle in. And during his abode in the Country, practiced with
the inhabitants of other Manors to do the like as Epworth had done, saying
that decrees were illegal. And to make the present Goverument odious, speaks
high reproachful and seditious language against the Parliament and present
government, as will appear upon examination.

The Petitioners most humbly beseech your honors to take into your
consideration,

1. The great disobedience to the Parliament and Courts of Justice, and
contempt of present Goverument. 2. The great damage to the Commonwealth in
general, and in particular to your Petitioners and their tenants, to the value
of at least forty thousand pound. 3. The consequence of such unparalled and
rebellious ryots, and to direct such a way for the Petitioners reparation and
damage, and future preservation of this level, as to your grave wisdom shall
be thought meet.
And your Petitioners shall pray etc

This petition being signed by Master Gibbon, and four or five more, who term
themselves participants; It is humbly desired on the Freeholders behalf,
whether any besides Master Gibbon (who is only the visible prosecuter) will so
own it, as to be answerable for those great expenses that the inhabitants have
been and are drawn in this business: and that the manifold illegalities
extravagancies and incertainties therein may be considered, especially herein,
that under the charge of these general words [some inhabitants of Epworth] many
persons are now mixed together in the report, as ryoters, without knowing their
particular charges, which certainly is contrary to all proceedings at law,
which has provided so wisely and tenderly for the lives and estates of all in
this Commonwealth, that in things criminal every man ought to have his
particular charge given, as touching the matter of crime, the time when, place
where, and the person by whom it was committed, with his name and surname, his
addition and place of abode; to the intent the party accused may make his legal
defense thereunto: but in the report of Master Say and Master Darley, all are
wined so confusedly together, as every man has just occasion to say it was
impossible for him to make his defense, Nay it was so carried on by the late
Committee of Parliament, that when some of the honest party of that Committee
had made an order that every person should have his particular charge given in
writing, the very next day after, it was again over-voted and nullified; so
that Master Luke Robinson that honest Gentleman, who was of that Committee,
then said it was in vain for to fit.

And howsoever for my own particular, I may lie under censure by reason of this
petition, and the proceedings thereupon, yet it will be for your honors, to
cause the depositions to be thoroughly perused, as well on the Freeholders part
as on the other, whereby you will then come to know how Master Say and Master
Darley have in ten line, locked up and imprisomed the truth of above twenty
witnesses which the Freeholders had attending here in London about a
twelvemoneth since, near half a year before they could be examined, and yet
Master Gibbons witnesses in a months time at the most, had a quick dispatch,
and Master Say and Master Darley have stretched out near two hundred lines in
the report out of their depositions for the Participants advantage; and you
will then come to know (if Master Say have dealt fairly in taking the
depositions) how the witnesses on both sides are related, and whether those
Master Gibbon produced were not tenants and farmers to the Participants, and
swear in expectation to receive damages from the inhabitants, and the several
ages of the witnesses on both sides, and how long they have known the grounds.

And now after I have shown both the legal and equitable part of this business
on the behalf of the Freeholders, according to proof upon record; I beseech
your honors give me leave to take notice of Master Gibbon throwing dirt at the
Freeholders, and of Master Say and Master Darley, how ready they are in their
report to mention the least unbeseeming word that any particular inhabitant
has spoken, but altogether omit to make out the inhabitants defense, wherein
it was clearly made appear how they have Witnesses Robert Dyneley, John Barnard
Esquire. Timothy Ellis, clark, and others.
raised and maintained at their own charge two foot companies for the
Parliament for a long time in the Isle, and afterward both at Belvoir and
elsewhere in England, and diverse of them since in Scotland did good service.

And for my own particular, I have this to say to their report, they have past
my defense very slightly over, which I refer to the depositions: and since Mr.
Say has been so cruel as not to afford me the benefit which the house of Lords
did, but that my own constrained examinations to interrogatories in the
Exchequer must be used against me (a thing the house of Lords refused) I
beseech you let all my examination be taken notice of, as well as that part they
make use of to do me hurt. For Master Say (as a cruel man) though I and the
other persons with me, were after a months imprisonment here in London, upon a
full hearing of Council on both sides, at the Bar of the house of Lords,
dismissed for that very offense mentioned in their report; yet is it revived
and made use of again, and though I offered to prove the dismission by several
witnesses, yet would not Master Say admit thereof, because the order of
dismission was not to be found; and therefore the just and honest defense that
might have been made thereunto, had it been before any competent Judge, cannot
by the report appear to your honors: and though I desire not to recriminate
yet I submit to any, whether it was not as fit Master Say and Master Darley
should have reported the several proofs that are against Master Gibbon,
Marmaduke Hardy and Ric. Glue cross examined.
whereby his readiness of inclination to the King of Scotts appears, expecting
through his prevalency to be revenged against the inhabitants, and giving forth
words, that he will raise three hundred men with horse and Arms in his
assistance; I say, whether that was not as fit to be reported as some words
they do report; howsoever, Rich. Glue. William Wells, Thomas Todd.
it is their injustice they have not afforded me the benefit of the Cross
examination of the witnesses that swore against me, or the benefit of the
restimony of those that were brought for me, purpose to make their threats good
against me; but I conclude with this, God forgive them.

And one thing (May it please your honors) I crave leave to publish for my own
vindication against the impudence of Master Gibbon, who before the honorable
Committee of the Council of State taxed me with perjury, in an Affidavit I once
made in the Exchequer, upon the reading whereof, he said, Baron Thorpe affirmed
upon the Bench it was false, which Affidavit being made upon occasion of an
order which Master Gibhon strongly labored for (after the verdict which the
Freeholders had in Master Vavasours name) to reinforce the Decretal order of
Febr. 1650, mentioned in Master Says report; in the drawing up thereof, the
Clarks on both sides attended at Baron Thorp's Chamber with the draught of it,
and then Baron Thrope with his own hand first inserted an exception in the
order as to Vavasour, who had obtained a verdict in affirmation of his right:
whereupon the Clarks at that time departing with the order, Baron Thorpe at
another time sent for the order again and struck those words forth which he
had formerly so inserted concerning Vavasour. This being the substance of my
Affidavit, and I being in the Country when it was read in Court, do not know
whether Baron Thorpe said it was false, or not, otherwise then by hearsay. But
if he did say so (as Master Gibbon taxed me he did) I do here affirm that Baron
Thorpe did make that alteration of the order in his study within his chamber in
Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet (Master Hillary and Master Pain, the two
Attourneys in the cause, being persent, and I in the room behind) and if he do
deny it, he may as well deny his daughter in law (his wives daughter, the widow
of Master Abraham Vernat, who was a Participant, and 2 Captain in Arms for
the late King against the Parliament) I say he may as well deny her to claim an
interest in the grounds in question, as part of her fifth part for her
maintenance.

I beseech your honors blame me not, for it is truth I write, and it is my
credit I live by; and though I be endeavored to be rendered odious and
clamorous by Master Gibbon, yet I am entrusted by the Country, and the cause is
of consequence to them, and so is my credit to me; and if I bring you any thing
but truth, let me answer for it.

I should not have been forward thus to have vindicated my self against Master
Gibbon, if his estate had been answerable; but finding him a listed prisoner in
the upper Bench, and upon the several Executions Outlawries after Judgment,
and mean process, he is charged as follows, viz.

1. With Execution to satisfy George Shires Esquire, one thousand two hundred
pounds debt, and nine pounds damages.

2. And with Execution to satisfy Sir John Littcott Knight, six hundred pounds
debt, and six pounds damages.

3. With Execution to satisfy Thomas Squire, two hundred pounds debt, and
thirty shillings costs.

4. With Execution at the Suit of Richard Read, for four and forty pounds debt.

5. With Execution at the suite of William Willett, for two hundred pounds
debt, and thirty shillings costs.

6. And at the suite of William Denton, and Katherin his wife, Executors of
John Bert, for two hundred pounds.

7. And at the suite of Richard Lane Gentleman, for two hundred pounds.

8. And at suite of William Brown Esquire, in trespass upon the case, for a
thousand pounds.

9. And at suite of James le Roy for fifty pounds.

10. And at suit of Jessenben Sabbatt for fifty pounds.

11. And at suite of James Leonards for thirty pounds.

12. And at the suite of Henry Cromwell, and Dame Elizabeth his wife, late
named Elizabeth Lucy, for four hundred pounds.

13. And at suite of Thomas Drinkwater for six hundred pounds.

14. And at suite of the same for sixty pounds.

15. And again at the suite of the same for sixty pounds.

16. And at suite of the same for sixty pounds.

17. And at suite of the same for sixty pounds.

18. And at suite of the same for sixty pounds.

19. And at suite of Edward Dixon Esquire for an hundred pounds.

20. And at suite of the Lady Katherin Dyer widow, for two hundred pounds.

21. And at suite of John Curson for two hundred pounds.

22. And in Execution at the suit of Edward Dixon for an hundred pounds.

23. And at suite of Henry Cromwell, and Elizabeth his wife, late named
Elizabeth Lucy for four hundred pounds.

24. And at suite of the Lady Dyer for two hundred pounds.

25. And at suite of Barth. Hall for eight hundred pounds.

26. And at suite of John Marsham and Ferdinando Marsham for fifteen hundred
pounds.

27. And with Execution at suite of Edward Dixon Esquire for an hundred pounds
debt and seven pounds damage.

28. And with Execution at the suite of Barthol. Hall Esquire for eight hundred
pounds debt, and one pound one shilling costs.

29. And with Execution at the suite of John Marsham, and Ferdinando Marsham
for fifteen hundred pounds debt, and seven pounds and one shilling damage.

30. And upo^^ Judgment at the suite of I sanbar Savatt for twenty three
pounds four shillings and six pence.

31. And with an Order from the Commit of Revennue for several sums.

32. And with Execution at the suite of Sir Edward Fish Baronet, for two
hundred pounds debt, and one and twenty shillings costs.

At the suite of Humphrey Schalcross for debt, one thousand pounds.

34. At the suite of the same for four hundred pounds debt.

35. At the suite of Francis Williamson Knight, in a plea of trespass upon the
case, damage five hundred pounds.

36. At suite of Benjamin Thornton Esquire for an hundred pounds.

37. At the suite of Sir John Lucas for eight hundred pounds.

38. At suite of Sir Thomas Dawes for a thousand pounds.

39. At suit of Henry Williams alias Cromwell Esquire, and Dame Elizabeth
Ferrys, lately called Elizabeth Lucy his wife, for four hundred pounds.

40. In Execution at the suite of Sir Thomas Dawes for five pounds costs
according to the Stature.

41. Again, at the suite of Henry Williams, alias Cromwell

Esquire, and Dame Elizabeth Ferryes, etc. for four hundred pounds.

With execution at the suit of Isanbar Savatt for twenty three pounds four
shillings and six pence.

At the suite of Thomas Lyng Gentlem in for forty pounds.

With execution at the suite of Sir Thomas Dawes for four pounds.

And with an Outlawry after Judgment at the suite of Rachel Cambell widow and
others for two thousand and one pounds debt, and thirty one shillings damage.

And with an Hebeas Corpus upon an Outlaty, at the suite of James Cambell in a
plea of debt.

And with an Outlawry, at the suite of Michael Fawkes, 200 l.

And upon a Judgment at suite of Thomas Squire for two hundred pounds, and
thirty shillings costs.

And at the suite of John Alkins in a plea of trespass.

And at suite of Robert Johnson in a plea of trespass.

And besides all these he was to pay in to the Committee for public debts the
last Saturday, but has not, one thousand three hundred and odd pounds.

And now because I know he that is a Machiavell will tell all his creditors,
that it is the pretended ryoters in the Isle of Axholm, that holds his land
from him, that should pay his debts, I shall first show you how this Master
Gibbon has sold and conveyed as much lands upon the dramage* within the level
of Hatfield Chase and parts adjacent* in the Counties of York, Lincoln and
Nottingham, as for which he has received above threescore thousand pounds; and
namely he sold.

To John Godbold then Sergeant at law William Say* Note, Mr. Say a fit
Chaireman and Reporter.
Edward Walrond, and Mich. Hutchinson of the middle Temple Esquires* land
there, for which he received twenty eight thousand pounds. Vide the conveyances
enrolled, dated 5. Dec. 1637. and others.

Note that Master Say sells all his part again to Hugh Awdley of the Inner
Temple London Esquire, and others therein named, and joins Gibbon named with
him, whereof much is of the land in controversy; and having received his money
or securety for it, enters into warranty to make good the sale. Vide the
inrolment in Chancery, 6. Martii 1649.

Item, Gibbon sold to the said Hugh Awdley and others, land there, for which he
received twenty three thousand pounds. Vide the several enrolled Conveyances in
the year 1650.

Item, Gibbon sold to Francis Russel Esquire, etc. land in that drainage,
though none of it of the land in controversy, for which he received two
thousand and five pounds. Vide the enrolled Conveyance, Anno 14. Car.

Item. Gibbon sold to Sir Edward Osburn the Manor of Hatfield, for which he
received ten thousand pounds.

Many other Conveyances there are, upon which he received several great sums,
as between Gibbon and Osburn. 12. Car. Gibbon and Vernatt, 12. Car. Gibbon and
Gerard, 12. Car. Gibbon and Johnson, 13. Car. Gibbon and Master of the Rolls,
and Richer, 13. Car. Gibbon and Cambell. 14. Car. Gibbon and Hampe, and others,
14. Car. Gibbon and Mercalfe, 14. Car. Gibbon and Manwood, 14. Car. Gibbon Io.
and Gibbon Nic. 15. Car. Gibbon and Shering, 16. Car. Gibbon Io. and Arthur
Samuel, for land in the Forest of Galtry, and Gibbon and Sir Abraham Dawes, for
land there also, 16. Car. Gibbon and Gale Robert, 18. Car. Gibbon and Nokes,
19. Car. Gibbon and Shering, 19. Car. Gibbon and Lechmore, 19. Car. Gibbon and
Nokes, 22. Car.

So many indeed are the vast, gross, and small sums, that this man has
received, wasted and spent, that I am confident it is not in the power of
himself to enumerate, muchless in me, that can but only tell what those reports
speak forth that are extant: and truly had there not been a necessity, laid
upon me, out of duty to the country for whom I Solicit, and my self (Master
Gibbon himself giving the occasion) I should have been sparing thus to have
writ.

Upon consideration of all which, I humbly submit it on the behalf of the
Freeholders, whether it be not a thing fit that some of those that pretend
themselves Participants in the ground, should not make their visible
appearance, and own the prosecution of this business, as well as Master Gibbon,
who stands thus outlawed, and in that respect ought not to have the benefit
of the law in things just, how much less in things vexatious and unjust? and
being a man of this condition, from whom can the Freeholders expect reparation,
having no other visible prosecutor but Master Gibbon, and the general name
Participants; and who they are, it is not known, but Master Gibbon it is well
known stops his creditors mouths with the noise of his hopes of these lands:
and what will not they every one do, but drive on their own designs, thereby to
make good their desperate debts as much as possible they may? for can it be
thought, that if Master Cambell have a friend, he will not engage him as much as
he can? and that if Sir John Litteot have a friend he will not do the like? and
so of all the rest of his creditors (but thanks be to God, I find a change; I
believe no such friendship of that kind, will find acceptance amongst your
honors) my desire is but to discover the truth, and that too by matter of
record, wherein I may soon be found a liar if I do not: the Decree of Febr.
1650. proceedings at law, and the Depositions (if rightly taken by Master Say,
whereof I desire copies as well as Master Gibbon has had) will decide the
business, as to the possession which he hungers after, and by delusion has
made a stop unto: and when I had discovered the truth, and studied how to bring
it to you, I could not tell possibly how to do it at present better to prevent
danger, as the case stands, then this way, and by lodging the Freeholders
petition in the hands of the Lincolnshire Members, which is humbly desired to
be called for, when the business is reported: for what order the honorable
Council of State have made in it or how or when this business may come before
your honors, I cannot certainly tell, although it is now above a month since
something was done in it; and the Freeholders have good hope that care is taken
for them by the honorable Council: but all that I can learn at the Office is,
that Master Thurl^ has taken the care of drawing it to himself; but I most
humbly beseech you all (as the safest refuge every Freeholder in England in
this case has to fly unto) to take care of it, for there is much of the
Freedom of the laws and liberties of England, in my judgment, either to be
preserved of lost in it.

And now I have thus written, I am at quiet (being as confident of Justice as
ever I was in my life from any) a comfort I wanted the last Parliament: and
truly if I should be asked the reason, I am able to say no more then this, That
I verily persuade my self the fear of God is amongst you, to distribute
righteousness to all the people of this Commonwealth, and in particular, to
this long oppressed people within the Manor of Epworth, that could never
obtain a trial at law this twenty years (justice being formerly obstructed by
orders of several Courts) and now of late, although within this right years,
they had two several days by special order, first in the Common Pleas, and
then in the Exchequer set down for trial, and several Juries returned; yet
before Michaelmas Term 1651. (being the third time they had a day set down, and
a Jury returned) they could not obtain it; and then also Master Gibbon
endeavored to make good his several sayings, that the inhabitants should never
have a trial so long as they were quick (as is proved) for the Jury was then
adjourned from day to day at the Exchequer Bar, and staid in town near a month
before the trial was permitted to go on; yet in conclusion the Plaintiff being
no ryoter was permitted to go on, but Master Gibbon and his Council departed
the Court, and being able to make no defense, let the verdict go by default,
purposely that he might have this to say, That the Participants made no
defense. And I have this to say more for them, that although the cause should
be tried never so often, they will never do otherwise; and have this found by
experience, that a multitude shall never be righted so long as their remedy
lies by suites of this length and continuance (if pretense of riot by a few
shall take away the possession of all) for it is not possible but some of the
ruder sort will grow disorderly, and endanger both themselves and those that
deal for them upon which score the Star Chamber formerly took away their
possession, making the people ryoters, whereas the projectors were indeed the
ryoters, both in the sight of God and the ey of the law and I hope may in time
be so looked upon; now the people themselves have testified their willingness
under their subscribed hands, to join with the present Lords of the Manor in a
legal improvement of the said grounds for their own and the Commonwealths good;
and are ready, if there be any thing due either in law or equity to the
Participants to yield it to them: and as to matter of pretended riot, they
hope, in case your honors take cognizance of it, you will be pleased to let
every man complained against have his particular charge, and then he that
cannot nor defend himself, having once a legal way prescribed to do it* must
suffer, if there be no more pardon to be had then the Act of Oblivion of the
late Parliament gives unto him.

I have thus far discharged my duty to God and my Country in the place I stand
employed, the great God of heaven direct your honors, that this cause may come
before you with a right understanding of it, which the report of Master Say,
and Master Darley can never bring; and against which, as partial, wicked, and
most unjust, many thousands of men, women, and children, within the Isle of
Axholm, have as just cause of complaint, as ever had people in any cause
whatsoever. All which I own under my hand, and upon a reasonable time given,
shall be ready, either to make good, at least in the substance, or suffer.

Daniel Noddell.

FINIS.

