EVANGELIUM REGNI.

A joyful MESSAGE OF THE KINGDOM.

Published by the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ, and sent forth unto
all Nations of people, which love the Truth in Jesus Christ.

Set forth by H. N. and by him perused anew, and more distinctly declared.

Translated out of Base-Almayn.

O, how lovely are the feet of the Messengers which publish the peace, preach
good tidings, and evangelize the salvation!

Isa. 52. b. Nah. 2. a. Romans 10. c. The Evangely of the Kingdom shall be
preached unto the world, for a witness unto all people: and then shall the end
come.

Matthew. 24. b. I saw an angel fly through the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Evangely, to publish unto them which sit and dwell upon the earth,
namely, unto all heathen, generations, languages, and people.

Apoc. 14. a. Imprinted at London. 1652.

THE PREFACE.
COnsider on the Eccle. 3. a. Mat 16 a.
Time O all ye People, which love the truth of Jesus Christ.

2 Presently in Psa 118 c
this day of the love, and of the appearing Mat. 24. c d Luk 17. c. Acts 2. a.
of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Resurrection Esa. 26. c. 1 Cor.
15 f*
of the dead (wherein the Law, the Prophets, and all that is written of Christ,
becomes fulfilled) is this Joyful Message of the Kingdom; Luk 24. e
out of the hearty mercifulness and love of God the Father; Evangelized unto us
all, and sent especialy, by the holy spirit of the love of Jesus Christ; unto
all lovers of the Truth: as also Mat. 24. b
published in all the world* for a testimony unto all people, a^^ording to the
scripture: To the stirring up of all ^nderstandings* unto the true knowledge of
the godliness in Jesus Christ, and to an everlasting, concordable, and Esa. 32.
b 54. b. 57. b. 66. b. 2 Pet 3. b.
steadfast peace upon the earth, according to the promises

3 Let every one respect well this 2 Cor. 6. 2 Heb. 12. b.
proffered Grace: for even now in the last time, the Lord sends his Angel or
Messenger before him, for Mal. 3.2. Mat 11. b.
to prepare his way, and Mat 24 b Apoc. 14.^.
to publish an everlasting evangelie unto all generations, languages and
people, according to his promises, to the intent that they all should now
withdraw them from the Esa. 1. c. 55 a. Ezekiel. 10. c. 33. b.
iniquity, turn them to the family of the love of Jesus Christ, God his mercy
seat, and even so to their preservation in the godliness; show fortst upright
Mat. 3.2. Act. 2. d 3. c*
^epentance for their sins: the Ezekiel. 7. a 1 Pet 4. a.
end shall come.

4 And albeit that we have set forth these present testimonies; O ye lovers of
the truth of Jesus Christ; to an Evangelie of the Kingdom* and publish to a
joyful message, that the God of heaven hat^ showed mercy on all people, for
that they should repent them, and stand go^d-willing unto his requiring,
declared his great Mal. 4. a.
Daylight of the upright righteousness; through us, his elected ones, in the
world, out of heav^n from his right hand, and brought it ov^r the whole earth,
for to Act. 17. d.
judge the ^ame with righteousness, yet are not therefore these present
testimonies, alone the Evangelie of the Kingdom, which was promised to be
published in the world, and unto all people: but also all the Testimonies which
the God of heaven has brought forth through his holy ones, and through his
elected Minister H. N.

5 For all those same, are also evangelical testimonies of the Kingdom, and of
his declaring. All which testimonies are also new in the last time; held forth
to a true ^lass of righteousness, before the children of men, to an everlasting
E^a. 5^ c. Luk 2 ^. Ephe. 2. c.
peace upon earth, unto men which are good of will, according to the promises.

6 For that cause; O ye lovers of the truth; if ye now this day hear his
voice, and that this grace and love of God the Father, and Christ, become to
your preservation in the godliness; proffered unto you, so hard^n ^^a. 9^. b.
^eb. 3 b. 4. b
not then your hearts, that ye bide not without the rest of the Lord, which is
prepared from the beginning, for the people of God, and for all repentant
sinners, and is appeared now in the last time, according to the Scripture.

Take it to heart.
A Joyful Message of the Kingdom of God and CHRIST.
The First CHAPTER.
HN Through the Grace 1 Cor. 3 15
and mercy of God, and through the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ;
Io^. 6. f. Act 17. d. Ephe. 2. a.
rais^d up by the highest God, from the death, according ^o R^. 8. c. d.
the providence of God and his promises: anointed with the Holy Ghost, in the
E^h. 4 b.
old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ; I^h 14.17 Apo. 21. a.
God^d with God in the spirit of his love: made heir with Christ* in the
heav^nly goods of the riches of God ^ illuminated in the spirit with the
heavenly truth, the true John 1. a. 1 John 1. a.
light of the perfect being: ^lected ^o a Minister of the gracious word (which
is now in the last time rais^d up by God, I^r. 33. b.
according to his promises) in the most holy service of God, under the
obedience of 1 Cor. 13. b.
his love, for Apoc. 14 a
to publish in the last time; out of the same grace and hearty mercifulnes of
God, and through the same holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ; good tidings
or a joyful message of the Kingdom of God, unto all people which Esa. 42.61. a.
^it in darkness, and have a desire or longing after the true light, and to
bring unto the believers, a great light of the true being of Jesus Christ, and
the glorious day of his godly clee^nes: as also to expre^^^, that God has
pitied the generations of mankind, and that Jesus Christ has not left us Ioh
14. b.
as orphans: but as our faithful Father; for to beget us Ioh. 3.2.
anew, out of the safe-making water or doctrine of his service, and out of his
holy spirit of love, also Esa 11.32. a. Ier. 23. a. 33. b.
to judge us with his righteousness, and to bring us into his rest; is come
again unto us, according to his promises, to the end that they all; which love
God and his righteousness, and Christ and his upright being* might presently
enter into the true Heb. 3.4. a
rest, which God has prepared from the beginning, for his elect; and Mat. 25. d
inherit the everlasting life.

2 For that cause, all lovers of the truth, and all souls which Mat 5 a.
hunger and thirst after the righteousness, and become assembled obediently unto
the service of the love of Jesus Christ, shall presently, according to the word
of the Lord; eat of the Ioh. 6.7. d Apo 2 b. 7. b 21. a. 22. b.
bread of life, and drink out of the fountain of living water, and become
satisfied.

3 Unto the same God which has prepared all this for us, and brings it to
us, out of the bosom of his love, be laud, Rom 11. Apo. 4. b. 5. b. 7. b.
honor, praise and thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.

Superscription.
of what Nation and Religion soever they be, Christians, Jews, Mahomites or
Turks and heathen, with all divided people: Eccl. 33. b Apo. 14. a.
of what condition or dignity soever they be: Pastors of the Religious, or
Fourders of Religion: Understanding ones, or expert in the godly wisdom: well
learned, exercised and eloquent in the holy Scripture. High Magistrates, and
renowned Potentates, noble of lineage, rich or mighty of estate, rulers of
commonalties, together with all people. Let every Nation then have among them,
so many manner of grounds, beliefs, religions, ceremonies, and services, as
they will, wherein they love God his truth, and the righteousness.

5 The grace and peace, from God our Father: the refreshing or Romans a. Ephe. 4
c.
renewing of the mind, from the naked or 2 Cor. 3. b.
uncovered face of our Lord Jesus Christ: and the Ephesians. 4.5. c.
communalty of holy ones and their uniformity of being with the holy spirit of
the love of Jesus Christ, becomes presently published, proffered, and brought
unto you: And to all the same, ye are also this day called and bidden: namely,
ye all, which love the truth unto godliness, and have a desire to do the will
of the Lord, and to humble your selves obediently, to the service of the love
of Jesus Christ and his requiring.

Mat. 25. d
separate them the one from the other.

7 For it shall now in this day, be seen and evidently perceived, that all good
willing ones to to the good, shall assemble them unto the good, (namely to the
communalty of the love, wherein the Lord has manifested and set his light, and
where his Mal. 4. a.
Sun of righteousness, the true heavenly daylight, shines) enter into Sap. 3.
a. 5 a. Heb. 3. b 4. b Apo. 21. a.
the rest of the Lord, and obtain the everlasting godliness, and that they all
which are evil of will, and hardened in the iniquity, shall make them up with
their good thinking wisdom, ther-against: and b^ing the eternal 2 Pet. 2* 3, ^
damnation over themselves, like as there is written thereof.

Therefore comes there presently great grace, unto all good willing ones: Romans
2. a.
but unto them that refuse the grace, also are evil of will, and love the
darkness Ioh. 3. b.
more then the light, great severity or indignation.

9 For behold, in this present Day, the Esa. 3. b. Mat. 24. d. 25. d. Jude 1. b.
glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the many thousands of his
saints, becomes manifested: which has set himself now upon the seat Esa. 16.
b.
of his Majesty, for to judge in this same day, which the Lord has ordained or
appointed; Act. 17. d.
the whole world with equity, and with faithfulness Zach. 8. a.
and truth, according to his righteousness.

10 For that cause; O all ye which dwell upon the earth; fear now the Lord,
the most highest: and giv^ him alone, all honor, laud, and praise, Apoc. 14 b
for the day of his judgment is now come, that it might now, in the same day
of the true judgment of God and Christ; become Luke. 22. c
all fulfilled in Christ, whatsoever is written of him.

11 OH, that they now all had such an 1 Pet. 5 a.
them, with Mat. 11. a.
humble and Act. 4. c.
single minded hearts; under the gracious hand of the Lord, and stood
obediently and concordably 1 Cor. 1. a. 2 Cor. 13. b. Phil 3. b.
minded, to the holy and gracious word, so should then assuredly, every one
right well perceive by experience, that God had opened now in the last time, a
great door of grace, unto all faithful and good willing hearts, Apoc. 12. b
and declared and brought the salvation of the everlasting life unto them, and
that the same grace bideth altogether Pro. 1. ^. Mat. 7.29. b Esa. 59. b.
closed to, before all Romans 2.2.
unbelievers of the word and his service of love, before all wavering minded
ones and decliners from the same service, and before all such as have neither
lust nor will, unto God, nor unto his love, the salvation of the everlasting
life 1 Cor. 2. a.
unknown, and this Joyful message of the Kingdom (which is now in the last
time, through the holy and gracious word; published Mat. 24. b. Apo. 14. a.
in all the world, before the destruction or 2 Pet. 2, 3 a.
perishing of the wicked world; to an everlasting Ap. 7.21. a
rest for all the children of God, and to the preservation of m^n, which hope
on God) covered Esa. 29. b. Mat. 11.13.
or secret.

Christ, which in his mystery, is the perfect cleernesse of God, and the true
light of Christ himself; be 2 Cor. 4.^.
covered or secret before any man: So is it then secret, before them that
perish, and are turned unto themselves and their knowledge, as also are
captived with the minds of the unbelieving world.

13 FOr that cause, O ye good willing hearts; Romans 13. b Ephe. 5. b.
Awake now all out of the sleep of your sins: and hear and believe the
out-flowing living voice of the love of Jesus Christ, which Christ in this
present day lets be heard through his holy spirit, and elected Minister H.N.
upon the earth.

14 Happy is he, that can now in this perilous time, endure the voice of the
true light: also hearing the gracious word of the Lord, which becomes
witnessed forth, and administered with the same voice, Job. 3.6. ^.
believes it: and Psalm. 95. ^. Heb. 3. b.
har^neth nor d^praveth not his heart, in this same day, but becomes assembled
unto Christ, and unto the family of his love, Amen.

The Second Chapter.
SEeing now then that out of Mat. 1. b.
mystery of the heavenly Kingdom of God, his righteous Mat. 25. d Act. 16.17
d. Jude 1. b.
Judgment, and the coming of his Christ now in the last time; in the Eze. 37*
b Io^. 5. c. Rom 8. b. Phil. 3. b.
Resurrection of the dead, is declared unto me (as an elected Act. 9. b. Romans
9. c.
vessel, house, Io^. 14. c. Apo. 21. a.
or dwelling of God) and given me to know or understand the same: and that I,
through the service of the love of Jesus Christ; declare forth again the same
mystery of the riches of God, upon the earth: and minister the gracious and
living word of the lord (which I have received out of the true light and Esa.
2. a. Mat. 4. a.
heavenly Jerusalem, to a Ioh. 15. c. Act. 1. a.
witness of the truth, from the mouth of God himself) in his name and according
to his will, to the preservation and blessing of all generations of the earth,
which believe thereon, according to the promises: So were it likewise very meet
and right, that they all which will now bide preserved in these Amos 5. b.
Mich. 2. a. Mat. 24 b. 2 Timothy 3. a.
perilous times; Mat. 10 c. Luk 10. b.
gave ear unto me, in the gracious word of my heavenly father: turned their
hearts, with all good willingness to the love and her service; unto the 1 Pet.
1. b.
obedience of the gracious word: and ran not forth in ignorance, according to
their Deuteronomy. 12. a. Ier. 7.9.18. b.
good-thinking or imagination of the knowledge: and that also they all, which
hear to day this voice or witnessing of the holy spirit of love, Psa 95. b.
Heb. 3. b.
hardened not their hearts, nor yet took offense at the Ministra^ion of the
gracious word: but stood well-minded to the lovely and upright being of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to his love: respected well this same day, to the Eze.
36. c 2 Cor. 7. a.
purging of their heart and mind: and even so en^red with the children of God;
into the Heb. 3* 4 b
res^ of the Lord.

2 Which rest: even till unto this same day, is Heb. 4. b.
left unto the children of God, or reserved for them, to the end that the same
should now in the last time be inherited, of all and in all them, that have
minded the peace, and the upright amiable life.

Ephe. 5. b.
awake now in the spirit ye Lovers of the truth; and diligently search or
thoroughly measure this same spirit, which to the Romans 8. b. 1 Cor. 15. c. 1
These. 4. b.
making alive of all the Dead that are Apo. 14. b.
deceased in the Lord; is proceeded from God: and marvel not at any of this
same, but Ioh. 5. ^. Act. 17. b.
search or scanne the Scripture, whether that it make not mention of the same.

4 But certes, this new miraculous work of God, whereof we witness; has God now
in this his holy day of love, begun or taken in hand with us, his elected
ones, wherein the Scripture* becomes fulfilled in this present day like as
there stands written.

5 Behold (says the Lord) Esa. 43. b. c
I will do a new thing, and it shall now appear; whereby ye shall well
perceive, that I make ways, in the desert, and rivers of water in the
wilderness.

6 Again: Esa. 57. b.
a spirit or wind shall blow forth from my face: and I will make wind.

7 Presently has the Lord prepared Esa. 40. a. 57. b. 62. b.
his way in the desert: and caused Esa. 35.41 b 43. c. 44 a
a living River to run there-thorow, that all thirsty, may drink of the living
waters.

8 FOrasmuch now, as that the River gives Ioh 3 a.
wind or Spirit of the Almighty blows: So cannot I refrain nor keep
silence: but must needs, through the powers of the same; make manifest even out
of burning love, the secret mystery of God, which is given me Mat. 13. b.
to understand out of the heavenly truth; in the obedience of the love of Jesus
Christ; unto the lovers of the truth, and unto the diligent searcher^ of the
Scripture: as also expres or declare to them, the counsel and will of the most
highest, with the accomplishing of the service in his Sanctuary (like as the
Scripture speaks thereof) and witness the same before their ears.

9 Whosoever now therefore, seek the Ier 29 b. Eccle. 2 b.
Lord with whole heart, they shall now easily find him, if so be that they
Ioh. 3. b. c
believe and obey the holy word of grace, Mat. 24. c.
administered now in this present time.

10 Unto all them that presently knock, and would gladly be let in, through
Ioh. 10. a.
the right door, for to Psalm 5.138. a.
walk in the house of the Lord, it shall now Mat. 7. a. Luke 11. a.
be opened, and they shall be let in. They shall also dwell with the Lord, and
eat with Christ and his holy ones; the Io^. 6. f. Apo. 2. b.
bread of life which is come unto us from Heaven; in the Lu. 14.22
Kingdom of God the Father, the lovely heavenly being.

Psalm. 46. a. Pro 8. a. Eccl 33. b.
ye great Lords or mighty of estate, and ye rulers of communalties; and let
this same enter into your ears, all ye people. For I will make relation of the
things that Mat. 13. b Romans 16. c. Ephesians. 3.2. Col. 1. c.
are hidden before the world, and declare the same, from the beginning till
unto this new or Ps. 118. a. Ier. 31. d. I^^l. 2. c. Act. 2. a. b.
last day, which is presently appeared and come unto us, according to the
Scripture.

The Third Chapter.
O Sion, Esa. 62. a.
for thy sake I will not keep silence, and for Ierusal^ms sake I will not leave
off, until that her righteousness rise up, as a shining light or clernesse,
and her salvation burn as a Cresset, that the heathen may see thy
righteousness, and all Kings thy glory

2 For this is the day of thy glorifying, and of thy joyfulnesse, O thou holy
hill of Sion: and the day Esa. 60. a.
wherein Jerusalem becomes seen glistering, and where-over the Lord with his
light and glory, will shine for evermore, according to the promises.

3 Now shall the Law be taught Esa. 2. a. Mich. 4. a.
out of Sion, and the word of the Lord witnessed out of Jerusalem.

4 For this is the day of promise, Ps. 118. c.
the day which the Lord makes: Let us now rejoice, and be glad therein.

5 This is the day, in the which the Lord has prepared his seat unto
judgment, Psalm. 9. a. 96. b 98. b. Esa. 2. a. ^. ^ 11, 12. a. 16 b. 32.42. a.
Ier. 23.33. b Dan. 2 c. 7. Mal. 4. a. Mat. 25. d. Act. 17. d.
that he might judge the earth with justice, and govern the people uprightly*
and accomplish therein, all which he has spoken in times part, through the
mouth of all his holy Prophets.

Pro. 2.4. a
learn therein, wisdom, and holy understanding: and walk even so Ephesians. 5. a.
Psalm. 91. a.
in the light of the same, that ye may be able to endure, as children of the
light of his cleernes, and the light of his lovelines, and Ioh. 11. b.
not stumble in the midday.

7 In this day, says the Lord; Psa. 50. a. Esa. 55. a.
I will not keep silence, but will cause my word to be heard continually
therein, that the children of men run not forth any longer with Ier. 7. c. 11
a. 13. b. 15. b
their good-thinking; according to the imagination of their knowledge.

8 For out of this light of my holy day, shall my word, says the Lord; Esa. 2.
a.
continually proceed, according to the truth, Psa. 19. a.
that it may be heard, even unto the end of the world. And I will let the
children of men see, how that they all [namely they that Ioh. 3. b 8. a 12 c.
hear nor believe not me and the service of my holy word, under the obedience
of my love; neither yet love my true being, nor stand submitted to the same,
for to become Ioh. 15. a Romans 11. b. Ephesians. 3. b.
planted thereinto] do err, in their wisdom, and Scripture learnednesse, and
Ier. 8. a.
go about with lies.

9 BEhold; I, says the Lord, will take in hand a wonderful work; like as I
have heretofore spoken thereof, through my servants the Prophets, and promised
to perform the same. Esa. 13.32. a. 43 c. 60 a Ier. 23.33. c. Eze. 11. b.
36.37. b. c.
Through which work of mine, says the Lord; the man which hungreth and
thirsts after the true Righteousness* shall not be able to comfort himself
any longer with lies, nor to put his trust therein; neither yet shall the
Scripture learned, or such as set forth their own Opinions out of their own
Spirit, drive or teach the People any longer according to their good thinking;
but every one shall not choose but acknowledge, that my word is Ioh. 6. f. 142,
17. b.
the Truth and the Life.

10. For lo, I bring forth now my Day so clear, as Isa. 60.61. a.
a light of my Glory to the Lighting of the whole World 2 P^t. 9. b.
with Righteousness; my living Word, Ioh. 6. c.
as a true Bread of Life, to Matthew. 5. a.
the satisfying of all hungry souls; my true Being or Perfection as a Apo.
12.51. a
Kingdom of Heaven, full of all lovelyness, pure beauty, and undisturbable
Powers; and my Service of Love, as a naked or uncovered Truth* All which is my
Spirit, where through the Man is led Ioh. 16. b
into all Truth; to the end, that now in this my holy day* Isa. 4. a. 11. b.
12.2.
my Righteousness might in the obedience of the requiring of my Love, break
forth and obtain the Victory upon the Earth: and that all people may love the
upright Righteousness, and live peaceably in Ephesians. 4. ^
all Love.

11. AWake Ephesians. 5, b.
now therefore, ye Lovers of the Truth; so shall Christ then illumina^e you;
Anoint your eyes Apo. 3. b.
with Ey-salve, and ye shall see the pure and glorious cleerness of this last
or newest day, which God himself has appointed or ordained, for to judge in
the same Act. 17. d.
the compass of the Earth with Righteousness; that one Man Jesus Christ, in whom
he has decreed it: which holds forth the Belief before every one, inasmuch as
God has raised him from Death.

12. See, and consider; This is the Day of Renewing, the very Ps. 118. c.
newest Day; to the Honor and Glory of the supreme God: and to a great Joy and
Gladness for us all, which love the Righteousness.

13. Clap Psalm. 47.
now your hands together with Joy; yea all which love the Righteousness, in the
Peace of Christ: Sing and shout now unto God with a joyful noise.

14. For the Psa. 47.96 Ecc. 43. a.
Lord (the most highest) is terrible and a great King on all the earth.

15. For now in this Day of his Love, He has prepared his Ps. 9.45. a 93 a.
Esa. 16. b.
Seat unto Judgment, that the Earth Psalm. 96.98. Isa. 32.42. a. Ier. 23. a.
33. b.
and the People should be judged uprightly.

16. From henceforth shall he (whom God has foreseen and elected thereto) sit
upon the Lord his seat; Ier. 23. a. 33. c.
which shall think upon Equity, and require Righteousness.

17. Whose Seed, Ps. 89. d.
the Lord shall make to endure for ever; and his Seat shall be like the Days of
Heaven.

18. Through the same and his service, the Righteous Ps. 92 b
shall now in this Day flourish like a Palm tree; He shall increase or grow up
like a Cedar tree on Libanus.

19. And all they that are planted in the House of the Lord, Ps 92. b.
shall wax green in the Courts of our God; and flourish or blossom in the old
age of the holy understanding; as those that are fat and lusty, or well
prepared, for to publish that the Lord is just.

20. Now shall Ps. 106. c.
the Righteous see their

21. For now in this Day, the Ier. 30. d.
City of the Lord shall be builded in her old place or former estate; and the
Temple of the Lord, or Tabernacle of his Dwelling, shall stand like as it ought
to stand; namely, Lu. 17. c. John 14.17. Apo. 21. a
inwardly in us, in the Being of the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ.

22. Have now a good regard hereunto, ye wise and understanding ones, which
receive the righteousness into your Hearts; and ye all which daily search the
Scripture: and consider, how that all what the Scripture says, shall in such
wise become fulfilled or accomplished.

The IV. Chapter.
Genesis 2. a
set, till unto this last Day of the perfect glory of God: In the which the
former Kingdom becomes declared and brought again (in all loveliness of the
upright Being) unto the Man, according to the Promises.

2. From this former Kingdom (full of all Righteousness, Love, Peace, and
Amiableness) the man has (from the Beginning) turned away his heart, and Genesis
3. Sap. 1. b.
fell away from, or was disobedient unto the word of God; the upright life of
his true light.

3. In which falling away of the man and in the turning unto himself, and unto
his taken on darkness; it is become manifest and known that the man (which
walks therein and becomes not turned again unto his God; nor Ioh. 15. a 17
c. Ephesians. 3. b. 2 Pet. 1. a.
incorporated into the true Christ of God) has the Ier. 17. b.
most crafty and subtilest heart among all that lives and dwells upon the
earth.

4. The which may now evidently be perceived by diverse people, which vaunt or
give forth themselves for Christians, and as i^luminated Men, that 1. Tim. 1. a,
are Masters of the Scripture* namely how crafty, subtle, and Isa. 1. a. 59. b
Ier. 9. a.
perverse of heart, and how Romans 1.11 b Ephesians. 2. a. 4. b
darkened in their understanding that they yet are.

5. And what a perverse Nature they find oftentimes in them* that will I good
willingly leave unto themselves to consider of; to the end that (if the Lord
vouchsafed the same) they might judge themselves therein; and even so
understand or well perceive, that no man (how wise or understanding soever he
be in the knowledge of the Scripture) can by any means comprehend or
understand 1 Cor. 1.2. b
the Wisdom of God: nor yet Ioh. 14. b.
see, know, find, nor receive the Gifts of God, nor the powers of the holy
Ghost, but only they that stand good willingly and obediently 1. Reg. 15. b 1
Pet. 1. b
submitted under the Word of life, which proceeds and has his outflowing
from the quarter or place where the Sun (the true Isa. 2 a. 60. a.
day light of the most highest) shines.

6 For that cause consider now well on the then certainly perceive, that all
such are yet Romans 1 c. Ephesians. 2. a. 4. b.
strangers unto the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ: and that they all
likewise are mingled with wyliness, subtilty and falsehood; and are without the
body 1. Cor. 12. a Ephesians. 4. b. 5. c
of Christ, or without the upright Christianity.

7. If then these (which notwithstanding seem to be wise and understanding, and
can prate much of spiritual and heavenly things) be yet strangers unto the holy
spirit, and unto the true love* and utterly without the body of Christ, or the
true Christianity, and held Captive with a wicked nature; so consider then how
wide and far estranged that the brutish world, and all that are Enemies or
Resisters of the Doctrine of love, must yet needs be from the same Christian
being; and with how many manner of falsehood and wicked nature they are yet held
captive.

8. If ye now ponder this same according to the truth, and thoroughly measure it
all by the being of upright Christianity; so shall ye then verily begin well to
perceive, that it is now the dangerous and horrible time of desolation, whereof
Dam. 8.9 c. Oze. 4. a. b. Mich. 7. a 4 Esdr. 9.12.15, 14 15.16. Mat. 24. b 2
Tess. 2. ^. b 1 Timothy 4. n. 2 Timothy 3.4. 2 Pet. 2.3. a.
the Scripture (in many places) witnesses: in which also few shall be saved or
preserved; for that all understanding has now so utterly Genesis 6. b
corrupted his way in the knowledge, and cannot well therefore Zep. 1. a
submit it self single mindedly (with humbleness of heart) in all 1 Pet. 1. b.
obedience of the word, and Subjection unto the love, with us little ones, and
God his elect.

9. Whilst we now daily perceive this* same 1 John 1. a.
with the word of life; and milch with Isa. 66. b.
the breasts of the love, and of the holy understanding, for to give suck
therewithal unto the young Children which is born out of the seed of the
gracious Word, and his doctrine or testimonies; and out of the service of the
holy Spirit of the love, and to nourish them up unto the Ephesians. 4. b.
old age of the holy understanding of Christ; so comes now verily that woe upon
us, whereof Christ has heretofore Mat. 24.
spoken: woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck at that
time; etc.

10. For we are great with child* Isa. 26. b
and cry aloud like unto a woman with child, when as she at the time of her
travel is ready to bring forth. Isa. 53. a. Rom 10. b.
But who hears us? or to whom is the arm of the Lord known? verily unto few:
because many of them are Isa. 5. c.
wise in their own conceit, and will judge the godly truth out of their
knowledge; or persuade themselves, that they (with their prudent understanding)
Ier* 7. b c. 8. a. 18. b.
see rightly into all things: and for that cause need not to harken unto the
word of grace (which God has brought unto us out of his true light, neither
yet to humble them unto the service of the same.



12. Therefore may we now in this perilous time rightly say, with the Prophet
Isaiah, that it goes also with us (in the presence of the Lord) like Isa. 26,
b.
as with a woman with child, which (through fear or smart) cries out in her
travel: for we are with child, and travel in birth, and we are so full of
anguish and woe, that we can scantly draw our breath.

13. Howbe^t, although all this come upon us; and that we daily pass through
this ^ame, and must be fain to endure or suffer much falsehood at our
adversaries hands, Isa. 26. b.
yet cannot we therefore help the earth, for that the Inhabitors of the world
will not fall down or humble themselves; nor yet forsake or leave the falsehood
of the unrepentant unregenerated men.

14. For that cause our hope stands now in this day very little, on many
Inhabitors of the world: for of them there shall few come which shall mean or
adjoyn them unto the love and the requiring of her service, with all their
heart; and yet many fewer, which shall Matthew. 14. b.
persever therein unto the end.

15. Therefore hope we with joy, much more, on the appearing of the dead, Apo.
14. b.
which die in the Lord, or are dead in him; to wit, 1. Cor. 15 c. 1 Thessalonians 4. b.
that they in their Resurrection from the death, shall livingly come before
either meet with us. For all the dead of the Lord, or members of Christ, shall
Isa 26. c. Ezekiel. 37. b.
now live, and rise with their bodies; and we shall assemble us with them, and
they with us (to one body in Jesus Christ) into one lovely being of the love,
and be all together concordable in the love and peace of Jesus Christ.

16. Behold ye dearly beloved; with those Christ) shall in their appeaing or
manifestation, Ap^. 4. b. 5. a. b.
reign with the lamb (which has made us Kings and Priests) upon earth.

17. This see and know we now nakedly and truly: Therefore have we (which are
now in this day of love, adjoined and incorporated into the body of Christ)
here in our 1 Thessalonians. 4. b.
Consolation amoag each other, and set our Comfort much more, on the righteous
which are dead, then on the living ungodly.

18. For this is now the day of the Glorious, pomp and triumph of Christ in his
coming, wherein Christ (to our consolation) meets 1 Thessalonians. 4. b. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
b. Iud. 1. b.
us livingly and in glory, with his former Holy ones: and makes manifest and
brings the word of the Lord, namely the former Kingdom (full of all Genesis 2.
a. Apo. 21. a b.
beauty and lovelyness) which God Matthew. 25. d. ^
has prepared from the beginning, for his elect, in his perfection, and in his
naked cleerness; and makes us heirs therein, together with all his holy ones.

19. In which Kingdom of everlasting perfection, all minds of pure hearts do
dwell and live ( Isa. 60. b. Ier. 23. a. 33. b. Mich. 4. a.
without fear) freely, lovely* and peaceably. Yea, therethrough becomes it
presently seen, how that the Lord 2 Thessalonians. 1. b.
glorifieth himself in his holy ones, and becomes wonderful in his believers.

Gen 3. a
falling away or disobedience of the man forth) the earnest love, which God
has always (till unto this same day) showed toward the man, through his
elected ministers, for to bring him again unto the heritable beauty of the
former Kingdom, from which he has turned him away; and how God in process of
time is approached nearer unto us in cleerness, with his true light, and has
now at the last (in the day of his love) declared Exodus 25. Heb. 9. b. c
the most holy of his tabernacle, in his absolute beauty and perfection, and
brought the same unto us, to the establishing of his promises.

21. What we had here more to say of the former Kin^dom and of his lovelyness,
beauty, Garnishing, and riches; and of the man's falling away, is nakedly
expressed and declared, in the glass of righteousness.

The V. Chapter.
BEhold and consider ye dearly beloved, Genesis 3. b.
set Enmity betwixt the Serpent (whose head is the sin) and the woman (which
consented to the sin) and betwixt the Serpents seed, and the Woman's seed, to
the treading down of the head of the Serpent: and how that the same promised
Enmity against the sin, and the sinful seed, had her beginning by the single
minded Abel; which Abel Genesis 4. a.
offered up his willing gift or offering (out of a good heart) unto the God of
heaven, and was slain by the wicked Nature of the sin, through the hands of his
Brother Cain; and how that Seth (after the death of Abel) was placed by God,
Gen 4 ^
to be another seed in the pla^e of Abel, to the establishing of the foresaid
promise of God: as also how that Seth (which is the second seed in the place of
Abel) and his seed, is the right stock or lineage, whereout the believers and
Children of God (namely, all they that have been enemies unto the sin) are born
or brought forth, to the establishing of the promises of God ^he Father.

2. But all other people or Generations which were born upon the earth without
the stock of Seth, and also they that walked not in the state of Abel
(according to the manner or ordinances of Seth) were not of the right stock of
Seth: but they were forain branches, which turned them away therefrom, and
were never prudent nor understanding in the godly wisdom; but very well in
their own self knowledge and good-thinking* wherewith they turned unto
themselves: and forsook even so the upright Childishness and Simplicity, and
the willing oblation or God service of Abel.

3. [ Abel signifies un^o us, a breath, or a young manhood: by whom there is
yet no more prudence, then a breath of God, which proceeds from God, and
breaths to God again. It signifies also, emptiness, or any what whereto
there is not yet any thing added of the ordinance of the Lord. Cain signifies
unto us, a possession, or one is possessed in bondship by the sin, or is
mastered or overwon by the same, and applies him not according to the word nor
law of the Lord. Seth signifies unto us, an ordinance or law, which requires
the upright Righteousness, and the entrance into the single minded and upright
being of Abel; which is an other seed or birth of God, that is ordained or set
for Abel (or in the place of the breath of God) and this is the true law of the
Lord, wherethrough it is set or ordained, that the upright being of Abel,
should remain in memory, till unto the perfection of the upright being of God,
which had gotten his beginning in Abel, after the man's faling away.]

4. Howbeit, although that many abode Abel) in the right stock and ordinance of
Seth: but followed their own goodthinking; Yet has there notwithstanding
always a seed which was the right stock of Seth, and had regard unto the
simplicity of Abel; remained over, Genesis 5. ^
which walked upright before God, till unto Noah [which name signifies unto
us, a ceasing or rest.

5. This Noah Genesis 6. a
lived uprightly before God, and walked (with his whose household) in the
upright ways of his Fathers; but all other people (which were not of the house
of Noah, or of the stock of Seth) forsook the Genesis 6 a. b.
example of the simplicity of Abel, and also the right ordinance of the life,
which was set or adjoined thereunto, through the seed of Seth.

6. Also they would not give any ear nor credit unto the word of truth, through
the Preacher Noah, Matthew. 18. a Mark ^^
for to turn them about to the State or simplicity of the child of Abel: by
which occasion they could no^ enter into the rest, nor yet remain alive with
the righteous Noah.

7. Therefore has God Genesis 6.7. a.
extended his mercy upon Noah, and chosen him (with his household) to a remnant
upon earth: and stretched out his indignation over all other people, whose
hearts stood not submitted to the turning about, Mat. 18.
to become as Children, nor to the word of truth.

8. And the Lord gathered together through Noah, all the Genesis 6.7. a.
souls which should main alive, and they entered with Noah into the Ark of the
Lord.

9. [Ark signifies unto us a Chist or Casket, wherein one shuteth up something
that he will keep close, or in secret.]

10. And all what remained without the Ark, that did the Lord cause to perish,
through the Deluge or Universal flood which fell upon them* and took them quite
Genesis 7. b
away: and so there came upon the earth, an end of all flesh. [ Deluge
signifies unto us, a pouring over with water.]

11. Now when as Noah (with his household) was remained over, so were there many
Genesis 9. a. b. 10. a. b.
generations and people born upon the earth, out of the Children of Noah; for
to replenish the earth again. But certain of the same generations, remained not
(like unto Sem) in the right stock of Noah out of Seth: but brake or turned
them off from the same, and from the ordinance and Doctrine of the same stock,
and implanted them into a foreign stock: and practiced even so (out of the
subtle Industry of their foreign stock) Genesis 9. c
wiliness, and craft or guile: like as the decliners always do, which turn them
away from the stock or doctrine of their leader, and follow their own spirit.

12. These generations or progenies of Noah, multiplied Genesis 10. a. b
them into many heathen or people, upon the earth. But many of them (which
persisted not in the stock of Noah and Sem) have not understood the mind,
council, and word of the Lord; nor the mystery of his work, much less then,
essentially known the same; but have followed their own council, mind, and
will, according to the imagination of their good-thinking wisdom. Wherethrough
also they turned wholly and altogether to themselves, and sought not Gen 11. ^.
to h^nour, to exalt, or magnify any other thing, but themselves, and their
own name.

13. Through which addicting of them unto their selfness, they practiced their
subtilty and i^geniousness, purposing to set up a Genesis 11. ^
memorial of their name; and would therefore make them a great strength or
fortress.

14. Now when as they had mingled their understandings together hereunto, so
begun they this work, with one manner of speech, mind, and purpose; and they
applied them boldly thereunto, for to accomplish (in such wise) the same: whose
Genesis 11. c.
purpose of work and one manner of speech, the Lord (through his word)
entangled; and scattered abroad the same people in all lands: and the place of
their work was named Babel [which signifies unto us, confusion, or a
Commixture, that is entangled with each other.]

Genesis 4. c.
seed of Seth, that upright stock. For all what desired to honor and exalt
God, and to magnify his name, as also walked uprightly before God, in all
respects like unto Seth (which is the second seed in the place of Abel; that
was the seed of Seth) according to the example of the simplicity of Abel,
wherein God had a good pleasure.

16. But who so turned them away from the right ways, and loved themselves, and
their own honor, those were fallen away Romans 11. c*
or broken off, from their upright stock, and became implanted into a foreign
one: and brought forth a strange seed, and strange fruits: Mat. 7. c.
which strange seed or fruits, God knew not.

17. But the right stock remained in his upright state: whose seed like unto
Abel, walked evermore uprightly before God: in such wise, that God has had
there through continually a light in the stock of Seth; and the righteousness a
seed upon earth: which light of God, and seed of righteousness, went not out,
nor decayed, or failed not, but increased in more cleerness and perfecter
righteousness, till unto this perfect light and absolute righteousness, which
is I^h 1. a Col. 1. b H^b. 1. a.
the very like being of God himself.

18. BEhold, In such sort has this upright seed (in the light and
righteousness of his God) had his procreation, to righteousness and life upon
the earth: namely, Gen 4 a.
from Seth (the second seed, in the place of Abel) Gen 5.9 c
till unto Noah and Sem.

19. From Noah and Sem, Genesis 11. b, c, 21, a, 25. c
until Abraham Isaac and Jacob: which Jacob (whom Genesis 32. c, 35. b
God named, Israel) begat the twe^ve Genesis 29. c, d,
Fathers of Israel; out of the which, God Genesis 49. a
chose him Judah.

20. From Judah un^il 1 Reg. 15.
David, the King of Israel and Judah.

21. From David the King, until 1 Esd. 3. a 2 Esd 5. a 3 Esd. 4.5. e.
Zorobabel, in the Captivity of Babylon,

22. From Zorobabel, until Mat. 1. b, c Luke 1. c, 2 b
Joseph, which had a Virgin to wife (out of the same stock of David) named,
Mary; of whom JESUS CHRIST (the Consummation of all the works of God, and the
perfect light of the godly cleerness) was born or brought forth. Of this we
will treat more Infra. 18.
at large hereafter.

23. WHat we now had here more to say of Abel, Cain, Se^h, and Noah: and of the
stock of the upright seed, of the multiplying of the heathen, and of the
building of Babel; is declared in the Glass of Righteousness.

The VI. Chapter.
AMong all these generations, Nations, and Noah; the upright stock of Noah and
Sem has always walked Gen 5.9. ^
upr^ghtly before God.

2. Whose Children also went forth evermore in all Simplicity and
righteousness, according to the example of the simplicity of Abel, and after
the manner of Se^h, Noah, and S^^, (...)
till unto Abram [which name signifies unto us, Old Father, or a glorious
F^^her, to wi^, one which has attained or is grown up to the Ephesians. 4. b
old age of the true and h^ly understanding, and therefore is meet to take him
a wife* and to beget Children, for to nourish them up also, unto such an old
age, to the end that there might continually be found upright Fathers and
Elders of the holy understanding; which multiplied them into such an upright
and holy generations, in all fruifulness to many thou^ands) on the earth. Abram
was also by the Lord named Genesis 17. a
Abraham; which signifies unto us, a Father of many people.]

3. THis Abram (which dwelled with

4. Whilst now his wisdom was born out of the right stock of Seth, Noah and
Sem, and far excelled the wisdom of the world, or the understanding of the
heathen; and that he even so had regard unto the upright being of God, and the
simplicity of Abel; and walked in the upright righteousness of his Fathers: so
was it also given Genesis ^8 b
him to understand the secretness of the works of God* Wherethrough he knew how
to distinct or divide the form of the everlasting and unchangeable being of the
supreme Godhead, from the form of the elementish things: and the word which
proceeds, or has his out flowing out of the living and almighty God, from
the word of men, which proceeds out of the man's ingeniousnes or imagination
of the knowledge.

5. In the same time of Abraham (the whilst that he dwelled among the heathen)
God had not upon earth any written services or Ceremonies; nor Temple, or
Tabernacle wrought with men's hands. And all generations of the earth, or
heathen, which were not of the right stock of the holy Fathers; walked in the
separation from God, Le. 26. b Deuteronomy. 27.28. c
in the cursing. And Genesis 8. c
God had compassion on all the generations of the earth, which for their
ignorances cause, and estranging from God,

6. For that cause God chose him Abram, and called Genesis 1^. a
him out of the Nations of the Heathen* as the principallest among all people,
(which was in the godly understanding, and in the simplicity of Abel, according
to the manner or ordinance of Seth, Noah, and Sem) nearest unto God, for to
understand the Lord his word and will; through whom God would take in hand, and
set forth some singul^r thing, to the blessing of all the generations of the
Heathen.

7 And the Lord spoke unto Abram: Genesis 12.
go out of thy Native Country, from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers horse;
and ^ourney into a land that I will show thee. And I will make of thee a great
people: I will bless thee and make thee a great Name; and thou shall be a
blessing: I will bless them, that bless thee; and curse them, that curse thee.
For in thee shall all generations of the ^arth be blessed.

8. Consider here now (ye beloved) how that the Lord calls and leads the
wisdom of the holy understanding, out of the foolishness of the heathen; and
his elected stock or upright Olive tree, out of all wild or unfruitful Olive
trees; for to plant the same, and his seed; in a good land, that it may
continually bring forth convenient fruits unto the Lord; to the intent that the
strange sprouts (grown out of the wild Olive trees) might even so be cut off,
and R^m. 11. c
graffed into this upright Olive tree; and bring forth good fruits out of the
sap or growing of the upright Olive tree. For in suchsort would God make Abram
great, that he might also be named Abraham, and a father of many heathen,
according to the promises.

9. Even thus does the Scripture testify Abraham great; and not that Abraham
(in the promises which were made unto him) should make himself great, or
multiply him into many people: but that it should all come to pass in such wise
as the Lord had promised him the same: like as there stands written: I (says
the Lord) Genesis 12.13. b, 15. b, 17.22. b.
will make of thee a great people. I will increase thy seed. This is the Lord
his own work, and not man's.

10. Now when as Abraham had heard the word of the Lord, and understood the
mind or will of God, so believed or trusted he the Lord in his word: Genesis 15.
a, 22. b. Romans 4. a Gal 3. a Iam. 2. c
and that was ^ounted unto him for righteousness. For in all this same, Abraham
stood wholly given over, and was with all single mindedness, obedient unto the
Lord in his requiring; without surmising any evil cogitations there over, or
making any suspicion of the knowledge touching the same.

The VII. Chapter.
Abraham dwelled in the land, which the Lord had showed him, and promised unto
his seed, for an everlasting possession: and that the promises (to the
Salvation of the heathen) were freely given unto him; so has God furthermore
(with his godly wisdom) dealt very prudently with Abraham and his seed: that
is, God has at all times revealed unto Abraham, and to the right stock of his
seed; in naked cleerness, Genesis 18. b
how that he is an eternal and living God; and which are (according to the
truth) his upright laws, Institutions, and rites: and of what manner, or which
is the upright Genesis 28. b, c,
house, or the true Seat, Temple, or Tabernacle, for his holy dwelling.

2. Of which true Tabernacle, the Lord has prepared or builded the forefront
in his true being, to a dwelling for his glory, and to the blessing of all men;
by the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, on the earth: namely in Genesis 17. b
the Circumcision, which God has ordained or set for an everlasting covenant,
between him and Abraham, and his seed.

3. This true forefront of the Sanctuary Ec. 9.2. b, 19. b
true fear of God: through which fear of God, the foreskin of the sinful flesh
was cut off, or laid away from the hearts of Abraham's household: and thus they
became separated from al iniquity, and from al disorder of the heathen or
uncircumcised, for to serve even so the living God alone in his sincere
righteousness and godliness.

4. For that cause, to the end that all they of Abraham's household, should
always serve the living God alone, in the fear of God; so was the Lord his true
Covenant of Circumcision to an everlasting and steadfast covenant, made thus
with Abraham, that the foreskin of all Genesis 17. b
them that be born in the household of Abraham, and are manly, should be cut
away from their flesh.

5. Behold, this Covenant of Circumcision, would God that Abraham and his seed
after him should bear (to a Covenant of God) Genesis 17. b
in their flesh for evermore.

6. And even so God made (through his Covenant of Circumcision) that there
should be always a difference had and known betwixt Abraham and his seed* and
the other heathen or uncircumcised people. Which Covenant of Circumcision God
made with Abraham when he had Genesis 12. a
called him out of the heathe^ship, and showed him the Genesis 17. a
land of promise, to an everlasting Inheritance for his seed, which should bear
the same Covenant in their flesh.

Abraham, and his seed in their flesh) gives us presently in this day a great
cleer^ess of his true being of the upright Circumcision Deuteronomy. 10
in our hearts; Ier. 4. a. Romans 2. c, Col. 2. b, Phil. ^, a.
and teaches or shows us (the whilst we are captived with the heath^nship,
either implanted into the heathenship, and 2 Cor. 3. b
bear yet the foreskin of the sinful flesh before our hearts) the departing
from all heathenish being, and from all 2 Cor. 6.7. a Apo. 18. a
ungodliness, or uncircumcision of all fleshly minds: as also the entrance into
the fear of God, whereout the right wisdom does spring: and how we shall go
forth therein till unto the Romans 6. a Col. 3. a
mortifying of all fleshly minds, through the 1 Pet. 1. b
obedience of the requiring of the godly word and his service.

8. This is verily the upright Circumcision, which comes to pass Col. 2. b
without the help of men's hands, and which is the everlasting and steadfast
Covenant, Gen 17. b
between God and Abraham and his seed. Through which true circumcision, the
upright seed of Abraham (which is of the faith of Abraham) is easily to be
known from the uncircumcised heathen or unbeleevers.

9. For the right stock of the seed of Abraham, bear the same upright
Circumcision, for an everlasting Covenant of their God, Genesis 17. b
in their flesh: to a token and testimony of their upright Righteousness; and
also, that the God of Abraham is their God, and they his e^ected people.

10. HEre out may we perceive (ye Deuteronomy. 10. b Ier. 4. a Col. 2. b
laying away of the sin in the flesh, is the upright Circumcision which God
regards: and that the same makes the right difference betwixt the
circumcised* and uncircumcised; or betwixt them that fear God, and them that
fear not God. For they that fear not God, and are not of the right stock, or of
the faith of Abraham; or else that have turned them away therefrom, and yet
nevertheless Mat. 3. b John 8. d
boast them to be the seed of Abraham, those can well bear the circumcision
outwardly on their flesh; but not (as Abraham) inwardly in the flesh.

11. Therefore there is not (as concerning the Righteousness according to the
inward man) any difference at all betwixt such Circumcised (which bear no more
but the circumcision outwardly on their flesh) and the uncircumcised heathen;
but they are both alike Romans 3. b
under the sin.

12. For the laying away of the sin in the flesh Romans 2.6. a Phil. 3. a. Col.
2. b* 3. a
(which is the upright Circumcision) makes unto us the right difference
betwixt the seed of Abraham, and the brutish or Uncircumcised Heathen, even as
there is said.

13. Which Circumcised of heart, bear God his true covenant of circumcision
Genesis 17. b
in their flesh; and express even so (through their upright Conversation in the
Ecc. 1.2. b
fear of God) that God has Genesis 12. a
called them out of the heathenship, as also led them into the forefront of his
true tabernacle, and planted them in his Sanctuary.

14. And this token of the true covenant of God, namely, the circumcision on
the foreskin of the heart [which is the Col. 2. ^
laying away of the sin in the flesh] and the walking in the fear of God, is
not left by the right seed of Abraham* but observed ( Genesis 17. b. 18. b
according to the word of the Lord) for evermore.

15. COnsider then, unto all those that Abraham, or of his seed and faith, and
bide steadfast therein, it is given to understand M^t. 11. c, 13. b Luke 8. a
the mystery of the work of God, which God always takes in hand and atchieveth
with Abraham, and with his right seed of the belief.

16, But unto them that are therewithout, and also unto all that fall away from
the stock of Abraham or his belief, either turn them therefrom, and cleave unto
any strange belief, which Abraham has not known, or that bind themselves
without the Righteousness of the faith of Abraham Esa. 5. c, 6. b Ier* 7. c*
11. a, 13. b 18 b 1 Cor. 1. b
on any self-wisdom, men's good thinking, Scripture learnedness, or on the
Imagination of their own knowledge, Mat. 13. b Act. 28. c
all things chance in similitudes, figures, or images, which they also honor,
serve, and greatly esteem: but of the mystery of the true being, 1 Cor. 2. b
they know not any thing at all.

17. Therefore it is all unto them, a dark speech or Parable, Isa. 28.29. b
Mat. 13. b Apo. 5. a
and a closed book, which no man (of all their wise Seers, nor Prophets, or
Teachers) can read, much less understand, or comprehend the Contents of the
same.

18. WHat we had here more to say of the departing out of the heathenship* of
the Gelatenheyt or free giving over of the upright Circumcision of the
forefront of the true Tabernacle of God, of the difference betwixt the seed of
Abraham and the heathen, and of the closed book (which is a book of life) is
rehearsed, with larger declaration, in the Glass of Righteousness.

The VIII. Chapter.
ABraham, which was endued with understanding in the godly wisdom, has (to a
memorial of the godly works of God, and of the things which are right and
reasonable to the Serviceableness of his household, or of the posterity after
him) brought forth writings or letters, wherein he witnessed or figured forth
before them the righteousness of the upright being, for a seal on their hearts;
to his end, that the posterity (the whilst they were yet young in the holy
understanding, and understood not the upright being) might have the Lord his
word, Institutions, and rites, and the events or things chanched concerning his
wonderful works, figured forth in the letter; and remember those same: and
might even so (with the service of the letter) be served, nourished up, Gal. 3.
c, 4. a
and sustained, in all good discipline, nurture and equity, Genesis 18. b
for to deal with that which is right and reasonable; until that the Ecc 6. b
Ephesians. 4. b.
old age of the perfect wisdom and Righteousness came unto them: the which is
the true light of Christ, or the heavenly truth, whereunto Moses, the law, and
the Prophets of God do lead, and which comes unto all the elect of God (from on
high) Rom 8. b
in their spirit: wherein it is given unto them (as to the children of God) to
understand Mat. 13. b John 14. b 1 Cor. 2. b
the mystery of the works of God.

2. Therefore Abraham (which walked and lived in the light or John. 8. c
day of christ, whereon all Scriptures given by inspiration of God, do witness;
and had a lust unto the seed of promise, to the blessing of all generations of
the earth) held Genesis 15* a
him steadfastly by the belief; the true Testament, whereout he hoped to obtain
the seed of Promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth.

3. Which true Testament, namely, the belief of the upright being of Abraham
which also was Abraham's sister, and Genesis 12. b, 16. a. 20 a
become his wife) is named Sara [which name signifies unto us, a Lady, or a
Princess which is free.]

4. THis Sara had a servetrice, which Abraham.] Genesis 16. a, ^, Gal. 4. c
Which Servetrice (through the belief of the true being) stands serviceable,
for to bring forth a serviceable seed unto the belief, whilst that she is yet
closed or barren.

5. And this Servetrice [namely, the service of the belief of Abraham, or his
law, either Ordinance] is also a Gal. 4. c
Testament of Abraham, which is called, the elders Testament, because the same
is administered through the belief, out of the light of the true being; by the
eldest in the holy understanding, and has the foregoing in the Procreation out
of the letter, and out of the obedience of the requiring of the serviceable
doctrine: which also Gal 3. c, 4. a,
cease* when as the belief brings forth out of the true light, which is the
godly being it self: whereunto the service of the word and of the letter does
likewise Heb. 7. b
reach. Nevertheless, albeit that the service of the word and of the letter,
re^cheth to the belief and true ligh^* ye^ appears not the righteousness out
of the service of the letter, nor out of his Ordinance although notwithstanding
the same be required therewithal, but Romans 3.4. b Gal. 2. b, 3. c,
out of the belief.

6. This servetrice of Sara, was Genesis 16. a Gal. 4.6.
named Agar, and she was a Servetrice out of Egypt (which signifies unto us, a
woman coming on out of Strictness, or which is stricting.)

7, But whilst that Sara (the belief of the true being of Abraham) was yet
closed, and brought not forth (but was inclined thereunto) Genesis 16. a
so desired she Abram (namely the old Father in the holy understanding) that he
would join him unto Agar, her Servetrice: and she gave him Agar to wife, for
that she might even so (out of her) obtain Children of the belief.

8. Abram therefore joined him unto Agar: and Genesis 16. a
Agar conceived or became with child, and brought forth a seed unto Abraham.

9. BEhold, this was a seed of the Service; Agar: whereof Genesis 16. a Gal. 4. c
Paul makes mention to the Galathians, how that Agar (in Arabia) is called the
Mount Sina.

10. Arabia signifies unto us, a pledge or sur^ty, which stands fast for
that which is promised, until that the promise be fulfilled. Sina signifies
unto us, Armor or a Shield, wherewith one furnishes him unto Battle, when as
he passes through the way unto the rest of the promises; and wherethrough one
is sustained against the enemies, and defended therewith, until that he come
unto the place whereas he inheriteth the rest, the peace, and all sweetness of
the land like as there is promised.

11. This Mount Sina, in Arabia (although it stretches even unto Jerusalem) is
Genesis 4. c d
not free, with his Children; but the belief (the free hill within Jerusalem)
is free with his Children: for the believers (which are born out of the belief
of the true being of Abraham, and Ephesians. ^. b
grown up in Christ in the holy and godly understanding) are the free Rom 8 c
Gal. 4. c
Children of the free woman, according to the Scripture.

12 But when as ^ow the time was ^come about, that the Genesis 18. b
fruit of the belief could live, so became Sara fruitful, and Genesis 21. a Gal.
4. c
brought forth unto Abraham, the true seed of promise, to the Blessing of all
Generations of the earth.

Genesis 21. ^
then was the Servetrice with her seed thrust out, or given leave to depart, as
one, whose service and seed was there no more needful to a service or help of
the beli^f; because the upright seed was born out of the belief: and for that
cause, the Servetrice with her seed, could have Genesis 21. b. Gal, 4. d
no Portion or Coinheritance with the son of the free woman.

14. This seed (born of the free woman) was named Genesis 21 a
Isaac, [which name signifies unto us, a laughing:] For Sara Genesis 18. b.
laughed when as she heard thet she should bear a Son.

15. COnsider here now the Mystery of the Scripture, of these two women, and of
either others service and procreation. For behold, I declare unto you this day
the truth, with naked speeches, and Ioh. 16. c.
not in similitudes or dark words; inasmuch as that God and Christ (with his
holy ones) is also declared (in the most holy) even so unto us.

16. Where now then this seed of the true Testament (after the Accomplishment
of the foregoing serviceable Testament) is born or brought forth, even there is
Christ, the belssing, Mat. 1. c 1 Cor. 1. c
the salvation, and the spirit of the Lord come: and where the spirit of the
Lord is, 2 Cor. 3* b
there is freedom. He that has ears to hear let him hear.

17. WHat we had here more to say of the promises to Abraham, of Sara (the free
woman) and of Agar (her servetrice) and of the seed of both their procreations,
is declared in the glass of Righteousness.

The IX. Chapter.
NOw when as Isaac (the upright stock of his Father Abraham) was grown up into
a good Ephesians. 4. b.
old age of the holy understanding, Genesis 24. g, 25. a
so took he a wife unto him, named Rebecca [which Name signifies unto us, one
that sets contention or debate.] And Rebecca conceived by Isaac, Genesis 25. c
and became with child with two Sons, which she bare unto Isaac.

2. He which she first brought forth, Genesis 25. c
was named Esau [which name signifies unto us, one that is working: he is also
named, Genesis 25. c
Edom: which signifies unto us, one that is earthly or bloody.] And this is
the first born after the flesh, of the seed of the promise.

3. Which first born may not inherit the heritage of the godly promises, nor
the covenant which God makes with his elected people.

4. Therefore God erecteth not his Covenant with him that is born after the
flesh, and is earthly or bloody: but wi^h him that is born after Ioh. 3 a Romans
8. b
the spirit, and is spiritual or heavenly. For that cause God has a good
pleasure in the second birth.

^ But the second Son (which was the second born next un^o Esau Genesis 25. c, 27.
d
was named Jacob, [which name signifies unto us, one that treads under foot,
and so k^epe^h the Victory. He was also named Genesis 32. c, 35. b
Israel; and signifies unto us, one that lordeth or surmounteth with God.]

6. Behold, this same which was born after Esau, his brother, in prudence and
holy understanding; and has brought the earthly or bloody being* under him:
obtained the Gen 27. c 29. d, 30.
blessing of his Father, and is become an heir in the promises of God, and in
the testaments of his Fathers.

7. VErily, these two sorts of people or Procreations (namely Esau and Jacob)
which Genesis 25. c
Rebecca bare unto Isaac, the seed of promise* and how that the greatest Genesis
25. c
must serve the lesser, make known unto us a great mystery to wit, that the
Righteousness of the law, with the great know^edge and diligent prudence of the
flesh, or of the earthly being (which becomes born out of the letter) shall
serve the little 1 Cor. 11. a
single minded simplicity of Christ, (which becomes Ioh. 3. a Romans 6.8. b
born out of the spirit or heavenly being) and be wholly subject thereunto:
namely, when as the spiritual birth has (through the coming of Christ) gotten
the dominion over the flesh.

Ioh. 3. a 1 Cor. 15. c
which becomes born according to the flesh, and has no inheritance in the
promises of the covenant of God the Father, nor in the Testament of the holy
Elders or Fathers; for that same becomes fulfilled therein: and has even so
(in his service) the foregoing unto the Inheritance of the same Testaments in
the very true being*

9. The second birth which appears thereaf^er (in the fulfilling or
accomplishing of the serviceable word, and of his requiring) by us in the Romans
12. a Ephesians. 4. c
renewing of our spirit and mind, is the Godhead, the truth, Ioh. 3. a, (...) 16
and spirit of God, or God his true being it self: yea, the same spiritual
heavenly being, is the Romans 8 b. 2 Cor. 3. b Romans 8. b Ephesians. 1. b Col. 1* b*
inheritance of all spiritual and heavenly goods, and the true seed of the
belief, that becomes born in us, a^cording to the spirit, and inheriteth the
promises of the Covenant of God the Father. And these two births (the one Romans
8. a
after the flesh, and the other after the spirit) are both out of the seed of
the promise, sown, engendered, or brought forth (in the letter, and through the
letter of the administration of the holy word and heavenly understanding, or
mind of the spiritual promises) in our memory, minds or thoughts.

10. But the knowledge of the letter, or Romans 8. a 1 Cor 2. b
understanding of the flesh out of the letter, and the obedience unto the same,
appears first, and takes the foregoing in birth: and diligently applies it
self therein, for to inherit the blessing of the promises. And whenas now this
foregoi^g birth (namely the knowledge of the letter, which stretches to the
obedience and accomplishment of the requiring of the gracious word and his
service of love) is become moving and forcible (to such a diligency) in our
minds and understandings, so inspect and understand we then at the first, the
testimonies of the spiritual and heavenly truth (which extend unto John. 6. g
spirit and life) none otherwise, but according to the flesh: and according to
the mind of our flesh, do we also seek after the same, or apply us thereunto,
for to obtain the same according to the flesh. And we suppose moreover, we shall
in such wise inherit the blessing of the promises of Christ. And this is in the
man, the knowledge of the letter, or Romans 8. a. b^
the mind of the flesh, which is named* Genesis ^.25. c. 1 Cor. 15. c
Adam, Esau, or Edom, and has (out of the administration of the holy word) the
f^regoing of birth in us: and is the 2 Cor. 5. b
knowledge of Christ after the flesh.

11. Now whilst or in the mean time, that the first born (with his earthly and
bloody mind) is hunting after or laboring for the blessing of the promiseg of
God and Christ, and yet notwithstanding inheriteth not the same, Gen 27. ^, d
so does then the second born hold him in stilness: and (following the counsel
of the wisdom) he obtains (through the prudence of the holy Ghost) the
blessing of the promises of the seed of Abraham* as also the prevailing over
the first or former born: and becomes even so the lord over the first born And
this is in the man, the mind or spirit of Christ, which is named, Genesis 25*
27.32. c, 35. b.
Jacob. or Israel* which obtains at last the victory and the dominion with
God, and also keeps the same: And to have obtained the same second birth, is
the 2 Cor. 5. b
upright knowledge of Christ after the spirit.

12. SEe, ye dearly beloved, and consider with spiritual understanding, the
mystery of these two Nativities or births; namely, the first (after the flesh)
earthly and bloody: Genesis 25. c
the second (aft^r the spirit) spiritual and heavenly: and, how that the
understanding of the first birth, would (according to his fleshly mind) Genesis
27. b, c
inherit the promises of Christ: and, how that the second birth (which is not
minded according to the flesh, but according to the spirit of the heavenly
truth) obtains the victory, bears rule with God, and brings forth the
name of Genesis 3^.35. b
Israel, or Christ it self.

13, WHat we had here more to say of Isaac (the seed of promise) of the birth
of Esau and Jacob, of the fleshly and spiritual birth, and of the knowledge of
Christ after the flesh, and of the knowledge of him after the spirit, is (with
larger Instruction) declared in the Glas^ of Righ^eousness.

The X. Chapter.
Jacob (the upright stock of his Fathers, Isaac and Abraham) walked uprightly
before God, in the ways of his Fathers: And G^n* 28 b,
God was with him, and was his God, light, life, and cleerness, in all
respects, even as God had been with Abraham and Isaac.

2* And God made manifest himself unto this same Jacob, and showed him in what
manner the house or tabernacle of his dwelling is; Genesis 28.35.
and gave unto him and his seed* the same promises which he had given and
promised unto Abraham and Isaac. And God erected his covenant with Jacob:
therefore called Jacob the place wherein the Lord appeared unto them, Genesis 28. c
Beth-el [which name signifies unto us, an house of God.]

3. Behold (ye dearly beloved) how clearly the scripture expresses unto us who
are God's elected people, and the house Lev. 26. b. 2 Cor. 6. b Apo. 21. a
of his dwelling* wherein he (as a living and glorious God) makes manifest
himself, lets his word be heard, and establishes his promises.

4. Jacob also won (with his service) Genesis 29. c, d
two wives, which were sisters germans. The eldest was named, Lia [which name
signifies unto us a Labourice.] This Lia had a Servetrice, which she gave
Jacob also to wife; and she was named Zilpha [which signifies unto us,
contempt.]

5. The youngest was named, Gen 29. d
Rachel [which name signifies unto us, a sheep.] This Rachel had a Servetrice,
which was named, Lilha; which name signifies unto us, a woman which is humble
or lowly; which Servetrice she Genesis 30. a
gave Jacob to wife, for that she (whilst she was closed) might through her
Servetrice, bring forth Children unto Jacob her husband.

6. THese four wives brought forth unto Jacob, Genesis 29. d, 30. a, b c
twelve Sons, out of which the twelve tribes of Israel are sprung or come
forth: and every Tribe was named, according to the name and stock of his Father.

7. Lia bare his first son, and called him Genesis 29. d
Ruben; and signifies unto us, a Son of the vision.

8* Again Lia bare him his second Son, and called him Simeon; and signifies
unto us, harkning.

9, Again Lia bare him his third Son, and called him Levi; and signifies unto
us, adjoined.

10. Again Lia bare him his fourth Son, and called him Judah; and signifies
unto us, a confessing, or thanksgiving.

11. But Bilha, Rachels maid, bare him his fifth Son, and called him Genesis ^0. a
Dan; and signifies unto us, a Judgment.

12, Again Bilha bare him his sixth Son, and called him, Nepthalim; and
signifies unto us, a making equal.

13. Then Zilpha, Lias maid bare him his seventh Genesis 30. b
Son, and called him Gad; and signifies unto us, Prepared, or Girded up.

14. Again Zilpha bar^ him his eight Son* and called him Aser; and signifies
unto us, Salvation, or Blessedness.

15. After that Lia bare him his ninth Son, and called him Issachar; and
signifies unto us, a Reward.

16. Again Lia bare him his tenth Genesis 30. c,
Son, and called him Zabulon; and signifies unto us, an Habitation, or
Dwelling place.

17. But Rachel bare him his eleventh Son, and called him Joseph; and
signifies unto us, Perfection: It signifies also unto us, Exalted: as that
^he Perfection is worthy Genesis 41. c.
to be a Ruler, and to govern Countries and People.

18. Again Rachel bare him his twelfth Son* and died, and Genesis 35. c.
called him Ben-nom; and signifies unto us, a Son of Sorrow. But Jacob his
father called him Ben-iamin; and signifies unto us, A Son of the Right hand.

19. MOreover Jacob with his whole house or Tribe, Genesis 46* 47.
came to dwell in Egypt; which name signifies unto us, Strictness, or Heaviness;
In which Land the Children of Jacob multiplied them into many people: And they
had not any other Ceremonies, but such as had been by their Fathers, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; namely, the ministration of the Circumcision. Which
Circumcision they bare (for a Covenant of God) in their flesh) to a true sign
that they were God's elected people, and did bear the laying away of the sin in
their flesh.

20. But whenas now these Tribes of Israel (in Egypt) multiplied them
exceedingly, and became great and mighty of People; so reigned the king of
Egypt over them with in justice; and this king of Egypt was named Pharao; Exodus
1. a, b,
which name signifies unto us, One that is making naked or wasting.

21. NOw whilst that these Tribes of Jacob were (by the king Pharao) sore
afflicted in the land of Egypt, and overlorded with injustice, Exodus ^. c,
so cried they unto the God of their Fathers; And the Iord remembered his
Covenant which he had made with Abraham, to wit, That he would be a Judge over
the seed of Abraham, Genesis 15. b, Exodus* 3. a, Acts 7. d,
in the land wherein they were oppressed. And he had compassion on the misery
of the children of Jacob; and chose them out (from among themselves) one man of
the Tribe of Levi, Exodus 3. a.
named Moses; which name signifies unto us, Fetched, or taken up out of the
Waters; Through whom God would lead his People out of Egypt, and r^lease them
from the violent power of Pharao.

22. And the Lord called this same Moses unto him, and Exodus 3 a, b*
sent him unto the children of Israel; and caused him to publish unto them the
grace of the God of their Fathers; and that the same God would lead them out of
the Strictness, deliver them from the violence of Pharao, and bring them into a
good land that flows with milk and honey.

23. Moreover the Lord prepared Moses an helper, which should witness and
manifest the word of Moses before the children of Israel, and before Pharao
king of Egypt; which Exodus 4 b. c, d. 5. a,
was also of the Tribe of Levi, and Moses brother, named Aaron; which name
signifies unto us, a Doctrine, or an hill whereout Doctrine is rec^ived, or
that is Teaching.

24. And the Lord wrought many signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, Exodus 7
8, 9, 10.
in the presence of Pharao, and of the children of Israel; but before Pharao,
to the hardening of his heart; and before the children of Israel, that they
should believe the God of their Fathers, understand and know the power of his
wonderful works, and humble them under him and his Word (which was showed unto
them by Moses and Aaron, out of the living word of the God of heaven) as also
be obedient unto the same.

25. All this wrought the Lord among the children of Israel, through Moses and
Aaron, to the end that they should witness and set forth the Lord's word and
will, with his Institutions and Rites, before the children of Israel.

26. BUt whilst now the children of Israel Ecc. 1. c, 2. b, 19. b.
Fear of God; the beginning or forefront of God his true Tabernacle; and did
bear the Gen 17, b,
Circumcision for a sign of the true Covenant of God (that they were the
Lord's people, and feared the living God) in their flesh, and were not yet
entered into the Holy of the true Tabernacle of God; so would God declare the
Holy by them, and bring them therein; and even so build among them the Holy of
his Sanctuary or true Tabernacle (to a great name of his glory, and to the
blessing and salvation of his people) also upon the earth. Exo. 3.12.13. Number.
13.14.
Therefore God caused some better and godlyer thing to be published (through
Moses) unto his people, then that wherein they stood comprehended; to the end
that they should set their hope thereon, and even so (for to obtain the Rest)
be obedient unto the word of the Lord; as also (to their releasing from the
violence of Ph^raoh) depart out of Egypt.

27. BEhold, in the same time did the Lord of Isra^l; and even so (to the end
that his great N^me, and wonderful power might also be known among all Heathen,
and he feared as a true God) Exo^. 15.16, 20, etc. D^ut. 4, 5, 6.
led his people Israel, through Moses and Aaron, with a mighty hand and
forcible Arm, out of the land of Egypt; and se^ forth, and taught them (through
Moses) his In^titutions and Laws, for to observe those same in the good land
whereinto the Lord would bring them.

28. In which time there was no more spoken unto them of the circumcision of
the flesh, bu^ of that which was nearer unto the consummation or perfection;
and of the inheriting of the good land which God had Genesis ^5 17. a,
promised unto the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob*

29. BUt when as now the Lord had led his people out of Egypt, and through the
wilderness, even unto the red sea (where they were pursued by Pharao) so Exodus
14. b,
opened the Lord the red sea before them, dividing it asunder, and brought his
people (through Moses and A^ron undamaged therethorow.

30. Bu^ Pharao with all his might and power, which entered also into the red
sea for to destroy the children of Isr^el* Exodus 14. c, 1 Cor. 10. a,
perished in the same; so that not one of all his Host escaped thereout, nor
remained alive.

31. The which signifies unto us in cleerness, the perishing or going under of
the ignorant or unknown sins, which (in the strictness reigned over Israel, and
burdned them very sore.

32. The red Sea signifies unto us, the Hope; namely, for the People of the
Lord, an hope to come unto some better thing; wherein the children of Israel
obtained room when they were persecuted; Exodus 15. a, b,
and which was opened before them, that they might pass therethrough; but
closed or stopped before their enemies which persecuted them, and went also
therein, with an hope to destroy the children of Israel, and so they were all
drowned therein.

33. Thus the children of Israel journeyed (through the protection of the Lord)
until they came unto the wilderness Sinai, unto Exodus 15, 16, 19 a,
Mount Sinai; which signifies unto us, a Thorny thicket, or a thorny Desert.

34. WHat we had here more to say of the multiplying of the children of Israel
in Egypt, and of their Departing Glass of Righteousness.

The XI. Chapter.
THe while now that the children of Israel became weary in their journey, they
Exodus 17. a Number. 13, 14. a, 16.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 1. c, d, 1 Cor. 1^ a,
murmured against Moses and Aaron, and also against the Lord: and became
likewise unwilling to enter into the good land: complaining, that they were
departed out of Egypt; wherethrough we may perceive and understand, that they
have turned away from the doctrine and requiring of Moses, as also from the
right stock of Abraham, and from his belief; and were turned into their own
knowledge and self seeking: and for that cause they Psalm. 78. c, d, 106. b, c,
knew, believed or understood not the works of God, his ways, Institutions and
laws, nor yet his word, in such sort as their Fathers ( Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob) had known, believed, and understood.

2. Therefore the Lord came down to the Children of Israel upon Mount Sinai,
and called unto him Moses and Aaron; Exodus 20 21. etc.
and caused his word to be heard exceeding loud of all the people; making
manifest unto them, how that he was the Lord. Deuteronomy. 5. a. b, 6.8 10. etc.
He taught them likewise, which or in what sort his law, Commandments,
institutions, and rites were, wherein their Fathers ( Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob) had lived uprightly.

3. Now when the Lord had caused them to hear his word exceeding loud, they
were afraid at the Sound of the same word, because they loved him not, nor yet
knew his voice. And Exo. 10. b, c. Deuteronomy. 5. c,
for that cause they would not the Lord but Moses should speak unto them.

4. HErewithal ( O ye goodwilling Number. ^^ c, D^^t. 1.2. b,
nor declare, nor make known his secrets, nor his council, mind, or will (of
that which he (either in the present time* or in the time to come) would do,
accomplish, or atchieve with them) unto such as had none other will, desire, or
love unto him, nor yet showed thankfuln^ss for all the goodness, love,
faithfulness, and mercy wherewith God informed or trained them: neither would
he set up or perform the service of his true being (according to his heavenly
truth) by them, nor yet Ps. 95. b Heb. 3* b, 4. b,
bring such unto his rest. For they could not (in their unbelief and
disobedience) comprehend or understand that which God required at their hands.

5. In like manner will the Lord now also (in these last days) not make
manifest his secret counsel, mind, and will, unto the unbelievers and
disobedient; but unto them Deuteronomy. 4. d Ier. 29. b, Sap. 1. a,
that seek him with all their heart, believe and obey his word in the requiring
of his service* and have a desire to do his will. The which cannot come to pass
by any man, but by them that have an unlust and unwil to themselves: and that
even so (for the Lord's cause) Mat. 16. c Mark 8. d Lu. 9.14. c
forsake, hate, and leave themselves, and all what they have learned and taken
on unto them.

6. BEhold, by such that love the wisdom of the Lord, his word and Instruction,
and his righteousness, will the Lord erect the service of his true being Ioh.
14. c Act. 1. a, 2. a,
make manifest himself, establish his promises, and Heb. 4. b Apo. ^2 a
bring them unto his rest; as also dwell, live and walk in them.

7. Therefore has the Lord (in times past) not made manifest or erected his
true service (according to the heavenly truth) or his being of perfect
righteousness, by the people which loved themselves, and were unbelieving
toward him and his ministers (wherethrough the wrath of the Lord came upon
them, and they might not ent^r in his rest) but has let them see the same
through Moses; Exodus 25. Ad finem vsque sic Leuit. a principio ad finem. Number. 3
4* 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18.
in images, figures, and shadows; and has even so set forth before them
(through Moses) the pattern, which was figured forth according to the very true,
to an example of the very true; and to a doctrine which reaches or leads to
the very true: witnessing there withal (before al eyes of godly understanding)
that the very true and perfect of the same, was with the Lord.

8. Which absolute or perfect being of the same example, pattern, and doctrine,
God would (in the time to come) bring in, plant, and Psalm. 69. d Isa. 11.92. a,
Ier. 30. b, Amos. 9. Act. 15. b Apo. 21. a
set up by the children of men which would believe God, and be good willing
unto the obedience of his requiring.

9. Therefore chanced not the services of the images and figures only for their
sakes which tempted God, and where unbelieving, but for our sakes; we which are
present^y 1 Cor. 10 b,
in the end of the world stirr^d up and goodwilling unto the true being of God,
to the end that they all (which Deuteronomy. 6. a, 10 b, ^0 a,
love the Lord with all their heart, and humble them under the obedience of the
love) might now Sap. 1. a, Mat. 11, c, 13. b Ioh 14. b, 16. c,
understand and know the Lord's love and godness (which he has unto man) and
the true being, or perfection of his lovely righteousness, out of the images
and figures; also Mat. 16. c
forsake and got out of themselves, and so live therein.

10. This same can we in the former figured example, comprehend and understand;
like as we may also behold in the images, that none other inhabiteth,
inheriteth or comes unto the Kingdom full of the glory and majesty of God, but
he that has an unwil or Esa. 66. a Psalm. 51. b
unlust to himself: and so cleaves (with whole heart) unto Christ, as is
abovesaid.

The XII. Chapter.
MOreover, the Lord has written his law, Exo. 2^. b, 31.32. b, ^4. a,
in two tables of stone and given them unto Moses, Exo. 25. a, 26. etc.
he showed Moses also all the sanctuary of his tabernacle; and gave him
likewise therewith, diverse convenient laws or ordinances, which he should set
forth before the children o Israel, which were ignorant of God's Law,
Institutions, and Rites, or of the convenient Ordinances of the Lord; to the
end that the Ordinances and Services of the Lord, might be even so all
prepared, according Exodus 25. a, 26. etc. Lev. 1, 2, 3, etc. Numb. 3, 4, 5.
to the same pattern which the Lord gave unto Moses upon mount Sinai; and so
the same prefiguration be observed with diligent service (for a steadfast
memorial of the same true Being) in the Priests office of Aaron, until that the
glory Numb. 14* c,
of God, and his love toward Israel should be brought through Christ; the
promises of God the Father (to the blessing of all generations of the earth)
declared, known, and established; and the true Being of the services of the
Images and figures (in the Spirit, and in all truth) erected, in the obedience
of the Belief.

2. And this forementioned service of the Images, Figures, and Shadows,
(wherein the perfection of the true Tabernacle of God, with his true services
of the spiritual and heavenly goods, was well to be perceived) had the
foregoing in his service; and became fruitful with the children of Israel, and
brought forth a serviceable seed of Righteousness (after the manner as is Genesis
16. a, Gal. 4. c, Supra a,
said of Agar) the which is the Elders Testament.

3. For the Belief (whereout the true and Sara. Which Belief is the true
Testament that brings forth Gal. 4. c
the free children of God according to the Spirit.

4. Thus the Lord joyneth him unto the service, for that the service might be
fruitful (to obtain yet (at the last) the seed of promise out of the Belief;)
and the children of the service multiplied into many, and became a great
people. Howbeit the Lord's promises were not established, nor his covenant
erected therewith.

5. For the same service was not the very true; but it was unto the people
which were yet captived with darkness, a foregoing light ( Heb. ^. a, b.
in Images and figures) before the face or perfect light of the Lord.

6. Which foregoing service had also 2 Cor. 3. a.
cleerness in his service; and for that cause it is also a Testament of the
holy Fathers (added unto the promises) Gal. 3.^, 4. a,
to a sustaining of the Lord's people in their youngness or ignorance, until
that the barren became fruitful, Genesis ^8
and that the fruit could live.

7. ACcording to this same manner, had this Testament (administered by the
Elders of the holy Understanding) the foregoing, and his fruitfulness with the
unillumi^ated until that the Belief (out of the power of God) became with
child through the holy Ghost and bare or brought forth a new man, or Luke 1.
c, 2. ^.
a new creature (according to the Col. 1. ^, H^b. 1. a,
being of the h^av^nly G^dhead) by the Believers: and illuminated them even so
in their spirit and mind, with the upright Ephesians. ^. c,
righteousness and h^liness. For this is the right pr^creatio^* to the Ioh.
^.^, To. 1^. a, E^h. 4 ^,
renewing of the spirit and mind of the believers; and is also the true new
Testament, which God has promised to erect with his people.

8. Which new Testament is the very true* that God himself witnesses in his
people, which are obedient unto him out of faith in the service of his word;
Luke 24. ^, Act* 1. b, 2. a,
and brings even so unto them in the spirit of their mind, the true
God-service of the spiritual and heavenly goods: and writes (according to his
god^y and heavenly Truth) his law, institutions and rites, Ier. 31. d, Heb.
8.10. b,
in the being of their inward mind.

9. In such sort works the Lord, the holy one in Israel; and brings forth
even so his children, sons, and daughters, servants, and handmaids; upon which
he (in these last days pours forth Joel a. b Act. 2. a, b
his Spirit, and remembers no more their sins: For they are a reconciled
people unto him, which do (in all) his Will.

10. BEhold and consider, such is the new Isa. 66. a Acts 7. c,
And for that cause it is with his children, heavenly, spiritually, and
livingly minded. Which children of the new Testament love not the world, nor
that which is in the world, inasmuch as that the new Testament is wholly and
altogether of God: also the love, the life, and the upright being of the holy
Ghost it self.

11. But the Elders Testament, is the serviceable word which is administered out
of the spirit and life of God, with unspeakable words, writings, 2 Cor. 3. b,
or letters: and which also figureth forth and expresses unto us (to wit*
serviceably in parables, and in Images or Figures, the new and very true
Testament; (which is heavenly, spiritual, and living, and endures for ever)
and brings the believers unto the same.

12. What we had here more to say of the Old and New Testament, and what either
others being in it self is; and of the bringing in and use of the imagelike and
figurative Services; is declared in the Glass of Righteousness.

The XIII. Chapter.
Moses, so elected he Aaron (which was of the tribe of Levi) and his sons,
Exodus 4.39, 40. Lev. 1, 2, 3. Numb. 3, ^, 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, etc.
to Priests or Elders, for to minister the figurative Tabernacle in his
service, with all that which was figuratively prepared thereunto.

2. Which Priesthood, with his Service (in such wise as Aaron ministered the
same) pleased God well, that it should have the foregoing unto the entrance of
the godliness, by the unilluminated people, which knew nor understood not the
verity of the true light; and even so always bide stable, and be ministered
among them, John 3. a, Romans 6. a,
till unto the new birth in the true light; to the end that the Priests or
Elders of the holy understanding, should daily set forth in their service or
Priests office unto which God had joined or added his promises) the Law of the
Lord, and the Testament of his covenant, before the unilluminated people, to a
memorial of the promises of God, and to a sustentation of them, Heb. 7.9. c,
whereout one yet hops for some better thing; until that the true (of that
which was ministered) came unto them in the Belief, to the Romans 15. a,
establishing of the promises: and that the same should then likewise (in true
cleerness) John 1. c, 1 Ioh. 1. a,
be seen and heard by them; as also (out of the power of the supreme Godhead)
spoken Luke 24. f, Ioh. 15. c, Act. 1. a, 2. a,
witnessed, or confessed of them: namely, the true light come out of Heaven, in
blessing, and with blessing, Genesis 14. b Heb. 7. a,
according to the manner of Melchisedech, And this same true light, is the
anointed with the holy Ghost.

3. Which anointed is named in Hebrew, Messiah; and in Greek, Mat, 1. b
Christus. He was also (in times past) called of certain Rabbis among the
Jews, the Lord's Sabbath, and they said that the same anointed, is the seventh
day in the paradise of God, Genesis 2. a, Heb. 4. b
wherein God rested from all his works: and is the perfection, The which is
also very true.

4. For this same Messiah or anointed, is the Sabbath day, Exo. 20. b Deuteronomy. 5 b,
which the Lord has commanded to be always had in remembrance, that we (when
the same comes) might rest therein, and hallow or sanctify the same: wherein
the law, the service of the preisthood of Aaron, Heb. 7.8. b
out of Levi, and the elders testament does cease, and has accomplished his
service.

5. For the same anointed which comes at that time Act. 1. b Phil. 3. c,
out of heaven (with his anointing of the holy Ghost; in the spirit, and is the
Col. 1. b Heb. 1. 2,
very like being of the Godhead it self, Psa. 110. a Heb 5.6.7 b, 9.10. b,
he is a priest of the most highest, higher and greater of dignity then Aaron;
because he bideth everlastingly, and is a minister of the spiritual and
heavenly goods, in the very true being.

Heb. 7, 8 a,
For Christ the honorable Priest, comes unto them from the right hand of God
the Father, out of the heavenly Being, which has or uses not his servce after
the manner or ordinance of Aaron; which is yet a teaching or requiring to
observe the Will or the Righteousness of the law of the Lord; but Heb. 6, 7, b,
after the manner or ordinance of Melchisedech, which brings with him the
Blessing, the accomplishing of the Law, or of the Lord's will, the salvation of
life; and the anointing of the holy Ghost, ( Ephesians. 1. b
to a pledge of the godly inheritance, and to an everlasting Col. 2. a Apoc.
21. a, b,
treasure or riches of God) and reigns in the righteousness of the same.

7. Melchisedech signifies unto us, One that rules in the Perfection; which
is called a Heb. 7. a
King of Righteousness. And in him is the fulfilling of the Law, and of the
service of the Prophets. Therefore the^e shall not one Letter, nor the very
least (...) fall from the Law, Matthew. 5. b,
until all come to pass.

8. OH alas! How grossly then have certain wise of the world, and Scripture
learned, overreached them herein? which have (without diversity) forsaken the
Law, and the service of the Elders Testament, and of the Priests office after
the ordinance of Aaron, and set back the same as a thing unneedful; not once
distinguishing unto whom the service after the Ordinance of Aaron is yet
necessary; nor yet with whom the same (at Gal. 4. a
the appointed time) cease or leaves of^.

9. But have all (for the most part) Mat^h. 24. c. Man. 13 c Luke 17. c
cried Christ, Christ, and we are Christians; and attributed to themselves much
freedom, ere ever the time of the appearing of Christ, or the 1 John 2 c,
anointing of the holy Ghost was come to pass, or fulfilled with them, in the
accomplishing of the old Testament.

10. Oh that they yet now awaked, 2 Cor. 6. a, Gal. 6. b, Heb 12 b
and took heed (in the word of the service of love) unto this gracious time;
and gave ear unto the same, that they might understand their safe making; and
so then be rightly, and according to the truth, brought to the true Being; that
is, unto Christ.

11. What we had here more to say of the foregoing service after the ordinance
of Aaron* or of the foregoing before the true light, of the Elders of the holy
Uunderstanding, of the Levitical Priesthood, of the Sabbath day of the Lord;
and of the Treasures of the Riches of God, is declared in the Glass of
Righteousness.

The XIV. Chapter.
Numb. 13. a,
men sent forth into the land of Promise, for to spy out the same.

2. But when as now these were returned out of the same land, Numb. 13. c, d,
14. a,
certain reported unto the children of Israel, that the battle (wherewith the
land was to be won) was very tedious; and that the land was invincible; or that
it was impossible to destroy the inhabitants: wherethrough the people became
unbelieving of the promses of the Lord, and dismayed in heart unto battle, and
were afraid of their enemies, which they (through the mighty hand of their God)
should have destroyed and rooted out: and they murmured against Moses and his
ministration.

3. Howbeit Iosue and Caleb (which had also spyed out the same land) Numb. 13.
d, 14. a,
brought good tidings; namely, that they could well win the same good land, and
destroy their enemies which dwelled therein.

Heb. 3, 4. b,
unbeliev^ng of the word of the Lord, and his promises; and unlustful to the
battle: and Numb. 14. a,
complained sore, that they remained not in Egypt, to the end they might have
died there.

5. And even so out of fear, and through unbelief and despair (to win the
battle against their enemies) they wished Numb. 14. ^,
that they might die in the wilderness: and that came to pass even so.

6. For all they that had murmured continually against the Lord, and bin
unbelieving and disobedient unto him, and the ministration and requiring of his
word, came not into the good land: but Numb. 14. c, Ios. 14. a, b,
Iosue and Caleb, which cleaved with all their heart unto the Lord, and
believed, and were obedient unto his word, inherited the same. Iosue signifies
unto us, a Savior: Caleb, the inward heart or mind.

7. HEreout we may perceive (ye dearly beloved) that the circumcision of the
resisters or disobedient unto the word of the Elders ( Moses and Aaron) was
(through their unbelief and murmuring against the Lord, and the Ministers of
his word, Ier. 9. c,
become an Uncircumcision; and that there was also no Ioh. 5. c,
love of God; but (in all) the love of themselves found among them.

8. Whilst then they bowed not, nor inclined the ears of their heart unto the
doctrine of the word, which was administered unto them by Moses and Aron: but
after (their own Deuteronomy 29. b
good thinking) were choosing this or that, or something else, even thus or even
so; so have they not known the truth, nor yet Mat. 13. b
understood the mystery of the works of God; For that cause also they were not
made free of the truth^ they entered not likewise into the holy of the true
tabernacle of God: nor have inherited the inheritance which God had promised
unto the seed of Abraham.

9. The which gives us to understand, that they are not Abraham's seed Romans 9.
a Gal. 3. a,
which bear only the circumcision on their flesh; but they that are of his
belief: for the believers N^m 14. c
inherited the good land.

10. Notwithstanding, the glory of God was not at that time erected in his
fullness, nor the promises fulfilled which the Lord had promised, to the
salvation and Genesis 17. a Psalm. 86. a
blessing of the Heathen.

Isa. 42. b, 53. b, 60. c, Eze. 39. 4 Esd. 1.2.
his righteousness among them, and even so (according to his promises) make
Abraham a father of many heathen, which should not be of the circumcision of
the flesh, but of Romans 9.11. a,
his faith.

12. But the murmurers and complainers (which bare always a care how it should
go with themselves; but thought very little on the glory of the Lord, or on the
magnifying of his holy name) Numb. 14. b,
fell all into the indignation of the Lord; and God showed no compassion on
them for their infidelity sake: And therefore they must then remain without the
Rest, Psalm. 95. b, Heb. 3. b, 4. a,
and die in the Wilderness.

13. But Iosue (a leader or guide of Israel) brought Ios. 3. a, b, 4. a, b,
the remnant of the people of Israel unto Jordan: which Jordan opened or
divided it self asunder before them, and so they went through the same, even
unto the borders of the good land. Jordan signifies unto us, a River of
Judgment: And it is the same River wherein John the Baptist Matthew. 3. a, Luke
3. a,
afterward baptized.

The XV. Chapter.
NOw when Israel was come into the Iosue Ios. 5. a,
circumcise again all the males. And the children of Israel took in (with
forcible hand) all the whole land.

2. And thus in process of time they Ios. 8.10. Iudic. 1.8 10 etc.
brought the people in sujection, and had many battles against their enemies;
until David the king, 1 Reg. 16. b, 2 Reg. 2.5, 8, etc.
of the Tribe of Judah, which vanquished and subdued (in battle) the enemies of
Israel, and of the Lord, with all his own enemies; 3 Reg. 1.2. b,
wherethrough his son Solomon inherited the Kingdom of Israel in peace, sat
upon the seat of David his Father: and ruled the whole land, and the people of
Israel (through the Godly wisdom) peaceably, and judged them uprightly.

3. This David was exceedingly beloved of the Lord; in such wise, that the Lord
said 1 Reg. 13. b, Act. 13. c.
that he had found a man, according to his own heart. And the Lord names him
also (in certain places of the Scripture) my Psalm, 89. c
servant David: the which signifies unto us, my service which is lovely,

David, has the God of heaven raised up by us, now in the last time, Ier. 23.
a, 33. b, Eze. 37. c,
like as the Lord promised the same, according to the Scriptures: and has
ordained him (in this day of his love) to be a ruler, which shall govern
wisely. He shall set up judgment and Righteousness again upon earth, that Judah
may now in this time be hopen; and Israel dwell undismayed, or without fear. For
his 2 Reg. 7. b, Psa. 89. d, 132. b, Isa. 9. a,
seed shall stand (from henceforth) before the Lord; and sit upon the seat of
David for evermore; like as there is written thereof.

5. Behold, this covenant has the Lord made thus (in times past) with his
servant David: Ps. 110. a, 132. b, Isa. 16. b,
and sworn to keep the same with him for evermore.

6. But now when as Solomon (which is the right seed of his Father David) has
inheri^ed in peace, 3 R^g. 1. d, 2. b, 9.10. 1 Par. 20. 2 Par. 1.9.
the Kingdom of Israel, and the seat of David his Father, so builded he at the
same time, an house or temple (within Jerusalem) unto the name of the Lord 3
Reg. 6.7. 2 Par. 3.4. Act. 7. c,
and also an house for himself, which was the house of Solomon: and all lands
and people humbled them under Solomon, and his godly wisdom.

7. Solomon signifies unto us, peaceable, or one which is rich of peace:
Jerusalem signifies unto us, a vision of peace, or of perf^ction.

8. O Ye dearly beloved; consider here Romans 11. d,
of his unsearchable wisdom: and behold in the Jmages and figures what they
show forth unto us.

9. Verily, they will now (in this day of love) express some singular thing
unto us; and declare in this last time (a great mystery. For (in this day)
they make known unto us, that it all (which they signify, or whereof they give
their cleerness) shall now in this Isa. 2. a, Ier. 23. a. 33. b, Eze. 37. c,
Joel. 2. c, Mic. 4. a,
last time be erected, according to the true being; and fulfilled Act. 2. b 3.
c,
or accomplished, according to the heavenly truth.

10. But in all this former beauty, and in the garnishing of the images and
figures (wherewith the Lord trained or informed he children of Israel, that
they might thereout know or understand the very true; so served they (at that
time) not the very true, which God required out of the imagelike or figurative
services; but they served the images and figures, and were subject to the
service of the Levitical Priesthood, after the order of Aaron. Which service
increased always (in glory) to the multiplying and greater Heb. 7. b, 8. a, 9.
b, 10 a, b,
respecting of the righteousness.

11. NOw after that Solomon was fallen Israel into two parts: 3 Reg. 12. b, 2
Par. 10.
and ten Tribes of Israel fell away from the house of David, and chose unto
themselves another king, named Jeroboam; which name signifies unto us, an
assaulting, or a tempting of the People.

12. Through this king which reigned over the ten Tribes of Israel, they
departed away from Jerusalem, from the Temple of Solomon, and from the services
of the Priests, after the order of Aaron and set up for themselves services and
images 3 Reg. 12. d,
at Beth-el and Dan; and so brought the holy places into desolation. They
instituted Priests also which were not of the Tribe of Levi* out of Aaron;
wherewith they observed the services falsely, and did that which displeased the
Lord; and were for that cause (at the last) vanquished by the king Salmanaser,
4 Reg 1^.
which came from Assyria; and by him led away out of the land, and are yet
estranged from the same, even unto this same day; in which the Lord will
presently bring them again to their heritage, (...)
and to the house of David.

13. Beth-el signifies unto us the house of God; and Dan, the judgment. (...)
coming from Assyria, signifies unto u^, a peace bound or knit together,
proceeding from the snares or sins which one ^ayeth to such a purpose, or
wherewith (...) assaulted or tempted; like as their first king 3 Reg. 12.
Jeroboam had brought in the same.

14. What we had here more to say, of the children of Israel; of their
disobedience against the Lord, wherethrough they in times past remained without
the rest; of their uncircumcision, or which is the uncircumcision of heart; of
Israel's casting out, and how long they shall abide cast out from the Lord, as
also when they shall be restored or set up again: is declared in the Glas^ of
Righteousness.

The XVI. Chapter.
BUt the Stock of David, and all what Judah and Benjamin, 3 Reg. 12. b,
kept themselves together, and held them unto the services of the Priesthood
out of Levi, according to the ordinance of Aaron like as the Lord had commanded
the same: which they observed at Jerusalem in the house of the Lord, prepared
by Solomon.

2. Howbeit, the tribes of Judah and Benjamin sinned against the Lord, and
estranged them even so through a confusion or commixture unto intanglement from
his law, and from the requiring of the same, wherethrough the Lord gave them
over also (at the last) into the hands of the King Nabuchodonosor, 4 Reg. 24. b,
coming from Babel; the which signifies unto us, a sighing or heaviness
through strictness; proceeding from a confusion, or from a commixture, which
has entangled or snared it self in it self.

3. This Nabuchodonosor of Babel, 4 Reg. 24. b,
utterly destroyed the temple of the Lord which Solomon had builded, 4 Reg. 15
a, Ier. 39.52. a, b,
and burned the same, and Salomon's house also; he brake down the walls of
Jerusalem, and carried away all the vessels of silver and gold (which were in
the house of the Lord) and the most part of the Citizens of Jerusalem 2 Par.
36. Eze. 24. a, b
into Babylon. Wherethrough the government of their King of Judah, with their
Psalms, Songs, and Mirth, was utterly laid down; the house of the Lord brought
in desolation* and the City of Jerusalem (as a ruinated City) made to heaps of
stones. Whereover Jeremy (in his Lamentations) greatly sighed, Lam. 1.2, 3, 4,
5.
wayled, and wept.

4. NOw when the tribes of Judah were led away into Babylon, so must they then
(for their sins or confusions cause, wherein they had mingled and bewrapped
themselves together) Ier. 39.
serve there the King, Nabuchodonosor.

5. But after that (or after the end of the reign of King Nabuchodonosor) there
reigned a King over them, which was not of Babylon, named Dan. 6* 9. a,
Darius, coming from Media and Persia.

6. Darius signifies unto us, seeking: or searching. Media, one which has
abundance, Persia, one which is parting, sep^rating one from another, or
unsnaring.

7. Under the might of this King Darius, of Media and Persia, it was licenced
the Jews to build again the City of Jerusalem, and the Temple of the Lord:
whereof Aggeus 1 Esd. 5.6 b, 3 Esd. 6. a
and Zacharias prophesied, and moved or exhorted the people thereunto. Which
building of the City of Jerusalem, and of the temple of the Lord. Ezechiel does
also clearly Eze. 40.41* etc.
describe or figure forth.

8. Aggeus signifies unto us, beautiful, or glorious: Zacharias, the
remembrance of the Lord: Ezechiel, one whch seaeth God, and also, a taking hold
of God.

Darius king of Media and Persia (according to the Prophecy of Aggeus,
Zacharias, and Ezechiel) was (...) A^g. 1, 2 a, b, Z^ch. 1, ^, 4, ^, ^. a, b,
etc
the City of Jerusalem (in all respects as she was before) and the House of the
Lord, with the Vessels of Silver and Gold, and all its ornaments (like as
Solomon had builded and garnished the same) set again each thing in its old
place. All which was 1 Esd. 3. b,
builded and accomplished by Zorababel, (a Prince in Judah of the house of
David) and by Joshua, an high Priest, of the Tribe of Aaron.

10. Zorobabel signifies unto us, One that has not b^wrapped himself in the
Commixture, or that is without Tangling. Joshua signifies unto us, a Savior.

11. From this time forth that Jerusalem was inhabited again of the Jews and
the Temple of the Lord consecrated by the Priests, 1 Esd. 6.9, 1^. 2 Esd. 8.9,
1^, 13. 3 Esd. 6.
so was also (like as Moses had ordained the same and as there was witnessed and
figured forth in the Letter) the Law, and services of the Priests and Levites,
very diligently observed. But all this came to pass under the might and
dominion of the heathenish kings.

Dan. 4.6.
heathenish kings and people, esteemed the God-service of the Jews to be a true
God-service; and they came unto Jerusalem Hest. 8.
to worship, and offer unto the highest God. And certain of the heathen did let
themselves also be circumcised, and became proselytes, or fellow companions in
religion, unto the Jews.

13. In such sort was the Law of Moses, with the ordinance of the Priests and
Prophets (so much as the Scripture mentioned thereof) read daily more and more
with diligence and ferventness, for to observe (according to the Scripture) in
most perfect manner, all what Moses had commanded.

14. Through this same zeal or diligence, which was used hereunto (wherethrough
the figurative services were (in most gorgeous manner) furthered or required;
and (for to be observed) set forth before the people) many people were therein
captived, so that they Isa. 1.43 c, Ier. 5. c, Oze. 5. a,
supposed that the figurative services were were the very self true
God-services; and that God was to be reconciled therewith; and marked not God's
counsel or will, because they respected not the cleerness of the very true
Being, whereof the images and figures gave Col. 2. b, Heb. 8.10. a,
their shadows: wherethrough also they understood Isa. 6. Mat 13 b
not the mystery of those same. For that cause they were yet bondmen, and
servants of the Lord, which were yet bound unto the same services; and not (as
children of God) Ioh. 8. d,
made free through the Truth.

15. Whilst now that they were yet servants, and not made free (through the
light of the truth) so knew they not likewise the truth, nor the mind or will
of their Lord; neither what the Lord did, or would accomplish: For a servant
knows not Ioh. 15. b
what his Lord has in mind, neither what he will do or leave undone.

16. But unto his Son ( Isa. 9.16. b
which sits with him upon his seat, and reigns with him, in wisdom and
righteousness) Mat. 11. c
he opens all the secret counsel of his heart.

17. These forementioned imagelike or figurative services, remained and stood a
long time in their Garnishing and great estimation: by which the Lord had
always a seed out of Aaron, which went daily (in the same services) before the
people, for to minister in the holy: and entered once in the year (when the
service had ended his course) into the most holy: Exo. 30. b Heb. 9. a, c, 10.
a, b,
and even so (out of the most holy) sanctified it all with the blood of the
testament, to the forgiving of their sins.

18. Which services, witnessed and showed unto them (in figures, and in secret
words or parables) the very true and spiritual services, which should in the
times to come be administered through the spiritual and heavenly Goods, 1 Cor.
13. b, (...)
in the face of the Lord; name^^ (...) the ^aked or uncovered clearness of
Christ in the Spirit; that is, in the inwardness of the believing men: and that
the same spiritual and heavenly services, should then also in like manner be
seen and known in all their cleerness; and the promises of God the Father (in
all blessing) accomplished and fulfilled, according to the Scripture.

19. Hereout we have easily to perceive, Christ, that as faithful servants of
the Lord, pass or wade through the servitude of the service and Letter, and
John 8.15. b,
obediently fulfill the same, and so become Romans 8* b,
born again to children of God.

20. What we had here more to say, of the right stock of Judah, or of the Jews,
or of their servitude under the Law, of their freedom, of their to coming
dominion, and whereto to the figurative services do serve, and when or wherein
they cease, or with whom they have ended their service, as also with whom they
are yet needful and necessary, is declared in the Glass of Righteousness.

The XVII. Chapter.
THis figurative service had in his state and Aaron (as Moses had commanded the
same) in all garnishing (according as the Scripture makes mention) the
foregoing in frui^fulness, Luke 1. a, b, c.
until John the Baptist.

2. For the genealogy of Aaron the Priest (out of the seed of Levi) had his
description (from the procreating of the Priesthood) until Zacharias and
Elisabeth his wife, of whom Luke 1. a, c,
John the Baptist (the true fore-goer) was born: which declares himself, not
in figures, but in the Mal 4. b, Mat. 11 b Luke 1. b,
spirit and power of God and goes before the face of God, for to bring (in his
service) all things again into their right state or form.

3. According to the same manner, after the genealogy of the kingly seed, has
the kingly seed of David (out of the tribe of Judah) his procreation, till unto
Joseph, and the Virgin Mary his wife; Mat. 1. b, c, Luke 2 a,
of whom Jesus Christ (which is I^^. 23.33. b,
the true king of the Jews, the true seed of David after the flesh; and after
the spirit the true Son of God and God's everlasting John 1. a, 8. b, 14.1^. a,
b,
light, li^e, and cleerness* the true Sap 7. c John 14.16
Spirit of the godly glory, and the lovely Being of the uncovered Face of God)
was born or brought forth: Whereunto all foregoing services, with the images*
figures, and shadows, do induce and lead, and cease therein; and Heb. 9. b, c.
10. a, b.
wherethrough the true God-service of the spiritual and heavenly goods, is
nakedly seen known, ministered, and inherited in full cleerness. It is very true.

4. NOw when as these forementioned Zacharias (at which Mat. 2. a, Luk 3. a,
time Herod (out of the power of Rome) was king over the lands of Judah) so
ministered Zacharias the Priest's office at the same time, according to the
ordinance of Luke 1 a,
Abia; that is, in such wise as the Father of the Lord would have it, or as it
pleased him. And Zacharias had a wife of the daughters of Aaron named Elisabeth.

5. Herod signifies unto us, a Mountain of glory. Rome signifies unto us,
Puissance or strength. (These Romans (not being out of Judah, but out of the
Heathen) were in the time of Zacharias, lords over the land of Judah.) Zacharias
signifies unto us, the memory, or remembrance of the Lord. Abia, the Will of
the Lord. Elizabeth, the Oath or Covenant of God.

6. And when as now Zacharias ministered the Priest's office before God,
according to the ordinance of Abia, and that he burned incense in the Temple of
the Lord; so remembered the Lord the Oath or Covenant of his promises; and sent
(at the same time) Luke 1. a,
his Angel Gabri^l (...) Zacharias, and evangelized unto him, that Elisabeth
his wife should bear him a Son, and his name should be called John; which name
signifies unto us* the grace mercy of the Lord. Angel signifies unto us, a
messenger or publisher Gabriel (which published the same) signifies unto us
the power or strength of God.

Gabriel witnessed yet further to Zacharias: unto thee, and unto many people,
there shall be joy in the birth of John. Luke 1. b
For he shall be great before the Lord, etc. He shall go before the face of the
Lord, Mal. 4. b
in the spirit and power of Elias; which signifies unto us, in the spirit and
power of God the Lord.

8. With these sayings, there is made known unto us by the Angel Gabriel, that
the foregoing of John before the face of the Lord, should not chance in
figures; but (according to the true being) in the spirit and power of God the
Lord: in like manner as Zachariis also witnessed of John when he was born, read
the first of Luke.

The XVIII. Chapter.
Aaron) brought forth a true foregoer, in the spirit and power of God the Lord;
or obtained him out of Zacharias, and Eilzabeth his wife: through whom he would
begin his work or Office, according to the true being; so remembered he also his
servant David [or his beloved service] and the oath, which he had sworn unto
him: 2 Reg. 7. b, Psalm. 89.110. a, 132. b. Isa. 16. b, Ier. 23. a, 33. b, Eze.
37. c
to wit, that his seed should sit upon his seat,

2. Whilst then the procreation of the seed of David (according to the
Genealogy) stretched even unto Mat. 1. b Luke 1. c,
Joseph (which was the right stock of the Kingly seed of David) and that he had
(out of the same house of David) a Virgin to wife, named Mary, which was
betrothed unto him, so has the Lord (according to his promises) also visited
the house of David, and Luke 3. c
sent forth from him his Angel Gabriel (into a City of Galilee named Nazareth)
unto the same Virgin Mary, which was espoused unto the man Joseph, of the house
of David, as is abovesaid.

3. Galilee signifies unto us, a turning or winding about: Nazareth
signifies, hallowed: Mary, a Doctress; Joseph, one that is perfect, or an
exalting or great esteeming of the perfection.

4. ANd Gabriel went in unto Mary: Luke 1 c
behold, thou shall conceive in the womb; and bear a Son: and shall call his
name, JESUS; which name signifies unto us, Savior.

5. This same (says Gabriel) shall be great, Luke 1. c
and be called a Son of the most highest: And God the Lord shall give unto him
the Seat of his Father David; 2 Reg. 7 Psalm, 89. d Psalm. 9. a, Dan. 2.7. c.
and he shall be a king over the house of Jacob for evermore, and of his
kingdom there shall be none end.

6. When Mary had heard these sayings of Gabriel, Luke 1 d,
she asked him how the same should come to pass, forasmuch as she knew no man.

7. Gabriel answered her, and said; Luke 1. d,
The holy Ghost shall come down from above, out of the height upon thee; and
the power of the most High shall shine about thee. Therefore shall also that
holy one which shall be born of thee, Isa. 8. a, Mat. 1. c,
be called the Son of God.

8. And Mary believed the word of the Lord and became with child by the holy
Ghost. And Luk 1. c,
rejoiced her in God, her salvation.

Gabriel which he used with Mary, that at the same time (when the holy Ghost
came (through the power of the most high) Luke 1. d,
upon the Virgin Mary, and procreated the true seed of promise) the time (of
the procreating of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh) turned it self
about; to wit that the holy and true seed of Abraham should not from
thenceforth be conceived of the flesh, but of the holy Ghost (through the power
of the most highest) in the Belief: and that the same should even so be born
out of the true faith of Abraham; for the seed out of the faith of Abraham, and
out of the pure Virgin Mary, is the true Ger. 21. b, 22. b, Romans 9. a, Gal. 3.
b,
seed of Promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth.

10. And thus (from that time forth) the genealogy of the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, cea^ed with the Believers. For the upright children of
the Belief (which had their Descent out of the seed of the faith of Abraham,
and of the pure Virgin Mary, as also from the holy Ghost) were known Romans 9. a,
to be the true seed of Abraham, because the same seed was the seed of the
promise of God the Father; and was likewise in his mind according to the
spirit, the likeness of God his Father; also Spirit and spiritual, of the godly
Nature and Being, and (according to the will of God) wholly minded with God.

11. AT the same time when Augustus the Emperor of Rome reigned and had made a
steadfast peace in all lands whereover he ruled; Luke 2. a,
so caused he a Commandment to go forth from him, that all the world should be
^axed, every one in his own City,

12. In which time, Joseph and Mary journeyed also unto the City of David,
named Beth-lehem* that they might be taxed there, seeing that they were of the
same City of David: And even there in Beth-lehem, Mic. 5. a, Luke 2. a,
Mary brought forth her first Son.

13. Augustus signifies unto us, a great estimation or respecting of the thing
that is glorious, holy, and increasing. Beth-lehem, an house of Bread.

14. AT the same time when Mary had brought forth her first Son in Beth-lehem,
an Angel Luke 2. b,
appeared unto the Shepherds in the field, which published unto them, all that
was chanced at Beth-lehem, to a great joy that should come unto all people. And
he said, This day is born unto you the Preserver, which is Christ the Lord, in
the City of David.

15. Christus is a Greek word, and is called in Hebrew Messiah, and signifies
unto us, Anointed, or the Oil of the holy Ghost, wherein the perfect Godhead
dwells and rests. Luke 2. c.
And he was circumcised the eight day, and named Jesus; that is, Savior; like
as the Angel Gabriel had said it before.

16. And this Child Jesus, born of the seed of David after the flesh, grew or
increased, and became Luke 2. c,
strong in the Spirit, and full of all wisdom; for the mercy of God was in him

Jesus in the Womb of Mary, and touching his birth! But if they all which
contended hereabout had known the power of God; and that also the mystery of
the mind and works of God, had Mat 13. b Ioh. 10. d,
bin given them to understand, so should they then verily not have contended
thereabout; neither yet many of them so grossly overreached them in their
Judgment, which they have witnessed and judged of the conception and birth of
Jesus, or of his incarnation.

18. For which cause, to the end that all understandings might be satisfied,
and much contention ended, we have (out of the light of the heavenly truth)
nakedly declared (according to the truth) the conception of Jesus, with his
birth, as also many secret works of God. He that has ears to hear, Luke 8. a,
Apo. 2. b, 3. c,
let him hear: and to whom wisdom is given, let him comprehend understanding.

19. What we had here more to say, of the conception of Jesus of the name Jesus
Christ, of his birth, and of the eight day, is declared in the Glass of
Righteousness, and in more other testimonies of our Writings.

The XIX. Chapter.
NOw when the time was fulfilled, that Mat. 11. b, Luke 16, b
till unto John the Baptist, which is the true minister and foregoer, Mal. 5.
b, Luke 1. b.
before the true light or face of God, that comes after John or his service,
with the holy Ghost) so has John ( Luke 5. a
through the commandment of God) had the foregoing in his service or office, to
the true God-service in the spirit, and (in all the coasts of Jordan) preached
and taught the baptism of repentance, to Mat. 3. a Mark. 1. a Luke 3. a, John
1. c,
the forgiveness of sins; to the end, that he might even so, in his service
(according to the word of the Lord, spoken before by the Prophets) bring all
things again into their right state or ordinance. Isa. 40. a Mal. 3. a, 4. b,


2. At that time the people (which feared God) were informed and taught with
other services, that were of greater force then the services of the images and
figures.

John begun his office; published the Kingdom of the God of heavens Mat. 3. a
to be at hand: and baptized the people in Jordan. with the water of repentance,

4, Jesus came also unto Jordan, for to be baptized of John, Mat. 3. b Luke 3.
c,
that all righteousness might be fulfilled through John and Jesus, which also
is called Christ.

5. COnsider and respect well now in understanding (ye dearly beloved) how John
ministered the office of his baptism: not that men should run forth with an
handful of water, and persuade themselves, when they have the elementish water,
that it is there with enough to be a Christian.

6. O no the Baptism of John is not in such sort: but he baptized them that
confessed their sins, and where the water of Repentance flowed (inwardly) in
the heart.

7. Behold, even thus [namely* in the confessing of the sins] has John Mat.
^3. a* Luke 3* a,
baptized the people (with the water of repentance) in Jordan which signifies
unto us, a River of Judgment.

8. For unto such (where the water of repentance

9. And even so after that, came Messiah or Christus [that is, anoin^ed] unto
them to the sa^e-making of their souls: wherethrough they were Mat. 3. b Luke
3. b, John 1. c, Act. 2. d.
baptized with the living waters of the holy Ghost, to the reedifying of the
Tabernacle of the living God [namely, the generation of mankind] wherein God
himself (with his glory) would (to a light of men) Leui. 26. b, Ioh. 14. c, 2
Cor. 6. b, Apo. 21. a
dwell, live, and walk, as an holy and true God, and everlasting life.

10. Wherethrough the man becomes Luke 1* g,
rightly released from the hand of all his enemies; and the comsummation or
perfection erected by him: whereof God has (from the beginning spoken* through
the mouth of all his holy Prophets, till unto the day or light of John,

11. Behold, were the man once baptized in suchwise, might then verilyboast him
to be a Christian, but not otherwise: for whosoever is not (in his mind and
spirit) one spirit with Christ, he Romans 8. a,
belongs not unto him.

Ioh. 9, 11. b.
night with them, so has no man been able, before this day of love (which is
the true light and the Glory of God himself) to understand nor distinct the
baptism of John, nor the baptism of Christ.

13. What we had here more to say, of John; of his baptism; and of the baptism
of Christ, is declared in the Glass of righteousness.

The XX Chapter*
John had (in baptising) made himself manifest, so has Christ (after the
baptism of John made himself also manifest; Mat. 4. c Mark 1. b
and preached and taught, the Kingdom of the God of heavens. But he taught, as
Mat. 7. c, Luke 4. d,
one that (in his doctrine) was mightier then the scripture learned after the
law of Moses.

2. For the people were taught (through Christ) with other tongues, and through
an other spirit; for there was preached and taught Isa. 32. a, c, 42. a, 57.60.
peace, and peace abundantly.

3. Wherethrough the mystery of the truth of God (whereon Moses in the law,
the scripture, and the prophets did wittness) was uncovered or made manifest;
Luke 2. d,
and it was with many great offense, to a fall; and with many great joy, to
restoring in Israel.

4. But whilst now that the word of Jesus had more efficacy and clearness then
the services of the Levites and Priests according to the ordinance of Aaron,
Mat. 4. c, Mark 3. a Luk 4.6* John 1. c, 6. f,
so have many people and devout men given ear unto the same Jesus, and believed
in him, and even so obtained Jesus Christ many disciples, which followed him in
his word and doctrine. Yet were there many of those same Disciples which Ioh.
6. g,
fell away, and turned them from him and his doctrine,

5. In which time, there were also many Luke 2. d Act. 1. a,
Kingdom of Israel should have been restored, according to the promses of the
prophets.

6. Likewise there were many that were offended at his word and doctrine; but
chiefly Matthew. 12. a, 15. a 21.22.23. a, b, c, Ioh. 6. d, 7.8, 9, 10, 11.
the scripture learned, which were the expertest or learnendst in the
scripture; and seemed to be the holiestq. Many of these could not away with him.

7 And although they were daily converversant with him, and heard his word,
which was the word of God his Father it self, as also saw his wonderful signs
which he did; Mat. 11 c, John 8. c, 10. d, 15. c,
yet believed they not, but were so much the more displeased with him.

8. Hereout we may evidently understand ye dearly beloved, that the wisdom, the
holy understanding, nor the holiness which God 1 Cor. 1.2. b,
regards, comes not unto the Disciples in the Scripture learnedness, nor in
the knowledge; but unto the Disciples in the obedience of the requi^ing of the
word, as also of the light of life, and of the godly truth, whereunto our
upright service of love, together with the Scripture and the Ceremonies which
are administered out of the true light of our most holy service of love) do
point and lead.

Jesus Christ himself is the very true holiness, and the Heb. 1. a Mat. 17. a
upright substance of God his Father (whereon we witness) so gave he also in
times past, like as presently, in his service such a cleerness from him,
wherewith he sufficiently witnessed and manifested who John 1. a, 6. c, 8. b,
14. c,
he was.

10. But forasmuch as the children of men were utterly Ephesians. 2.4. b,
estranged from the substance of the Being of God (like as in this present day
there are many estranged therefrom) so have they not known him, according to
his godly Being (like as he is a Christ of God) much le^s understood his word,
which is the John 6. g,
spirit and life of his Father.

11. Although he spoke or witnessed (before the ears of men) of the new birth
John 3. a, Romans 12. a, Ephesians. 4. c
or renewing in the spirit, of the turning about Mat. 18 a,
and to become as children of the Mat. 13 b,
kingdom of the God of heavens, of the bread Ioh. 6. ^,
that comes from heaven, of the John 1. a, 8. b. 9. a, 12. d,
light of the world, of the Ioh. 14. a,
way, the truth, and of the Ioh. 11. c,
resurrection and the life (all which he himself is) yet was it all covered
before their eyes (with the flesh of Christ, whereat many Scripture learned took
offense) and secret before the ears of their understanding; yea, and it
remained also all Luke 9 18. d,
covered or secret before his Disciples (although they were not offended at his
flesh and word) until that Christ had fulfilled Heb. 9. b, c,
or accomplished with them (through his death of the Cross his Passover, and
the true oblation and Godservice, in the holy of the true Tabernacle, and they
had imitated him therein, Romans 6. a, Phil. 2. a, 1 Pet. 2.4. a,
and that Christ after the Spirit, replenisht them out of his heavenly being
with his holy Ghost and so declared himself unto them according to the
spiritual form of his heavenly being. Act. 2. a


12. BEhold, until that time remained 2 Cor. 3. b,
the vail (which is Heb. 10 ^,
the flesh of Christ) before the most holy, so that they could not behold with
the eyes of their inwardness, the most pure beauty of the heavenly Being,
[namely, the naked cleerness of the most holy of the true Tabernacle of God)
nor the perfect lovelyness of the everlasting life of Jesus Christ, nor yet
understand the same according to the heavenly truth.

John 6* g,
Spirit and life, yet was notwithstanding their heart (so long as Christ after
the spirit was not declared unto them) captived with the love of Christ after
the flesh, and they understood all things for the most part, according to an
outward form or observation.

14. If now the right Disciples of Christ understood not the spiritual and
heavenly truth of Christ, before their Passover with Christ into the second
birth; how much less then understood they the truth of Christ which were
offended at his flesh, and at his word and doctrine, which also turned them
away from him, and would not be his Disciples. For verily, all they that were
offended at his flesh, and at his doctrine and works* and humbled not
themselves obediently under his Doctrine, nor yet assembled them unto him,
understood nothing at all of the spiritual and heavenly Testimonies of Jesu
Christ, nor of the kingdom of the God of heavens; and yet much less of the
salvation of men: even like as also yet in this present time all unregenerated
men (which show forth no upright fruits of repentance, nor become incorporated
into Christ after the flesh, with his like death, nor yet baptized in his
death, for to become renewed in the second birth from the death of Christ,
through the holy Spirit of Jesu Christ, in their Spirit and mind) understand
not any thing at all thereof, neither yet of the spiritual and heavenly
testimonies of the holy Spirit of the love of Jesu Christ; nor yet likewise of
all that which the Scripture speaks of Christ, of the coming of his glory,
and of his judgment over the living and dead. And for that cause there are
also now in the last time, so many which take offense at the appearing of the
coming of Jesu Christ, or of the son of maa, and at the ministration of the
word and doctrine of Jesu Christ after the flesh, as also contemn the requiring
of the obedience of his service of love, and turn them away therefrom.

The XXI. Chapter.
FOrasmuch now as that in times past, the Christ through the holy Ghost, was
yet unknown unto the upright and faithful Disciples of Jesus Christ, whilst
that they knew him not otherwise but after the flesh [namely, how or in what
godly and heavenly cleerness, that Jesus Christ is the Mat. 1. c, Luke 1. c,
only begotten Son of the most highest; the Col. 1. b, Heb. 1. a,
very like Being or substance of God his Father; the Ioh. 14. a,
way, the truth, and the life; the John 8 12.
light of the world, the Ioh. 10. a,
door of the sheep; the Ioh. 15. a,
right Vine, the Ioh. 6. d, e,
living bread of heaven, the John 11. c,
resurrection from the death, and the Ioh. 3. b,
new heavenly man.] So was it therefore needful that Christ should keep the
Pascha or Passover with them; which is called in Hebrew Ezekiel. 45. c,
Phase; the which signifies, the true Passover, which the right Disciples and
Believers of Jesus Christ do pass or go through in the following of Christ after
the flesh: and it is the true oblation or Godservice in the holy, to the
remission and purging of sins. Which Phase (as in a figure of the very true)
had been observed by the Jews in his figurative service, even until the same
time.

2. For that cause the Lord Jesus caused the same to be prepared him, for to
keep the Passover or Pascha (with his Disciples) in the true being; and Matthew.
26. c, Mark 14. c, Luke 22. b, John 13.16. b.
told them before of his

3. Therefore he gave them to understand, in what manner his passover should
be, to wit, that he (namely, Christ after the flesh) Matthew. 16. c, 17. c, 20.
b, Mark 8. d. 9. d, 10. d,
should be slain, and even so fulfill, perform, or accomplish (according to the
true Being) the true Godservice (with the gift or offering of his flesh) in the
holy [namely, on the true Altar of the holy offering; which is his Cross,
whereon he died in the Belief] whereof the services (after the manner of the
Levitical Priests office out of Aaron) in the holy, were figures, and became
even so fulfilled in the Passover of Jesus Christ.

4. Herewith Christ showed unto his Disciples, how or in what manner his flesh
must be offered and given over to a life of men; and Ioh 6. ^, f,
that they all even so, which (in the Belief of the safe-making from their
sins) ate his flesh, and followed after him even into the second Man. 19. d,
Ioh. 3. a, Romans 6. a,
birth, should have the Ioh. 10. b,
life in fullness, in all godly cleerness, according to the spirit.

5. NOw when he had set forth all this before them [namely, that the Father
would glorify his Son Christ, Ioh. 13. d, 14. ^, 17. a,
with the same cleerness which he had with the Father, ere Mat. 20. c,
drink the cup of his Passover with him] so began he then his Passover with
them, and gave them Mat. 2^. c, Mark 14. c, Luke 22. b
the bread (the which came from heaven, and was his true flesh out of the seed
of D^vid) to eat: and gave them likewise after that to drink; out of the Cup,
which is his passion; his true blood* which is his holy life of the new
Testament.

6. Thus have they eaten his flesh, and drunk his blood (which was given over
for many) to a Luke 22. b,
memorial, in what sort the death and suffering, or the Passover of the Lord
Jesu Christ is, till unto his renewing of the life; to the intent that they all
which believed in him, should follow him therein, and have the life of his
godly Being, in fullness, and that their joy might be perfect.



8. For even so kept the Disciples of Christ the Pascha with him, or the supper
of his passover; namely, that Christ after the flesh although he had given them
his body to eat, and his blood to drink) suffered among them the Matthew. 27. f,
Mar. 15. e Luk, 23. e Ioh. 19. d,
death of the Cross, and was buried: and they knew not of his declaring after
the Spirit, until that he was made alive again by his Father, and appeared unto
them in godly cleerness.

9. Even thus is Christ (in his Passover) gone before his Disciples and
believers, to the end that they all should also in such sort (with his body and
blood which they had eaten, or taken into them; 1 Pet. 2, 4. a,
follow after him in the same passover, remember Luke 22. b,
and confess his passion, ^uf^ering or death; and become even so implanted with
like death into him, or Romans 6 a, Gal. 3. c,
baptized in his death; until that they with the body and blood of Christ
(which they had taken unto them) were passed or gone through the same passover,
till unto the second John 3. a, Romans 6. ^. b,
birth of the making alive with Christ, in godly cleerness according to the
Spirit.

10. Behold, this is the right Passover Ioh. 16. a,
out of the flesh, into ^he Spirit; and out of the death or mortality, Esd. 2.
c d, 7. b, c
^ into the eternal life of everlasting immorta^ity; wherethrough the sin and
all destruction becomes vanquished. Oze. 13. b, 1 Cor. 15. f,


11. What we had here more to say of the doctrine of Christ, of his Disciples,
and of what sort they are; is declared in the Glass ^f Righteousness.

The XXII. Chapter.
NOw when Jesus Christ was found power of God his Father, raised up from the
death, and made alive again; and that he has Mat. 28. a, Mark 16. a, Luke 24.
d* e, Ioh. 20. b, e* 21. a, b, c.
showed himself (in his making alive) unto his Disciples, for that they should
steadfastly believe: so was he then wholly Act. 1. b
taken up from the eyes of their flesh, and he set himself according to the
Spirit, at the right hand of God his Father, in the heavenly Being: and entered
even so, as the true high Priest (when as the service had perfectly ended his
course (according to the true Being) in the holy) into the most holy. Heb 9. b,
10. a, b,


2. His Disciples therefore were mindful of all this, and what he had said unto
them; and remained Act. 1 b
within Jerusalem, waiting concordably (with supplication and prayer) for the
promises of the Father, until that Christ after the spirit Act. 2 a,
appeared unto them out of the heavenly Being (the most holy) in the holy, in
spiritual and heavenly powers, like as he (after the Spirit, and according to
the truth of the heavenly Godhead) is an everlasting and true Christ of God.

3. BUt when as now the time was come about that Christ declared his glory, and
the office of his high Priesthood (according to the Spirit) unto his disciples,
so Heb 9. b
sprinkled he by them, the holy of the true Tabernacle of God his father, with
his blood (which is the true Testament) to an everlasting remissiom of the sins
of his people (even like as the former described pattern does also (in the
figurative services) show forth the same unto us.) And this is his holy Spirit
that he Act. 2. a
poured forth upon his Disciples, to an everlasting steadfast Jerusalem ( Apo.
21 a,
descending from heaven) which is not prepared of men, but of God himself.

4. Behold, these Disciples of Christ, in as much as that they had followed
Christ Romans 6. a, Phil. 3. b. 1 Pet. 2.4. a,
in the death of his Cross, and were (in the second birth or in the renewing of
their mind) filled with the holy Ghost, have thus understood Ioh. 8. d, 17. a,
the truth of Christ, and rightly known Christ (like as he is a true Christ of
God) in the Spirit, and according to the Spirit.

5. But when as now Christ (with his holy Spirit, and with full cleerness of
God his Father) had gotten a living shape in his Disciples, then published they
the same wonderful works of God (which they had seen and heard, and which were
become known unto them through the power of the holy Ghost) in Jerusalem, Act.
2.3.4. etc.
and witnessed that the same should also so come to pass in the last days.

7. COnsider, ye dearly beloved, how that Christ (which were daily conversant
with Christ after the flesh, which also heard his word, and with whom Christ
spoke much of the mystery of the kingdom of God, and of his cleerness which he
had with his Father) could not understand the naked cleerness of God, nor
Christ in his true Being (like as he is a true Ioh. 1. a, 8. b, 12, d, e,
light, and the Col. 1. b Heb. 1. a,
very true substance of God his Father) nor yet (by any manner means of their
knowledge) Isa. 64. b,
comprehend, behold, nor inherit any beauty of the heavenly goods; and how that
it all remained covered before them until they had kept the Passover with
Christ (namely, in his death, burial, and resurrection, until that he ascended
from them into heaven, and that Christ had made manifest himself (in glory)
unto them (in a spiritual cleerness) out of heaven, (from the right hand of God
his father) with the Act. 2. a
pouring forth of his holy Ghost abundantly.

The XXIII Chapter.
Christ (which was shed forth into them, as a flood of living waters, out Act.
2 a
of the heavenly powers) they rightly knew Christ in the Spirit, even as he
after the Spirit, is a true Christ of God: and understood his services and
ceremonies according to the truth; and they had even so (through the same
Spirit) their 1 John 1. a.
fellowship with God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, in the heavenly
being: whereout they brought forth and published the Counsel, mind, and will of
God, and the Treasures of the spiritual and heavenly goods, to the salvation
and joy of all men, and to the inheriting of those same, unto them which Ioh.
17. ^, Acts 4. b,
believed in Christ, and held the Passover or Supper rightly with him. For
otherwise it could not come to pass.

2. Therefore no man knows Christ, nor Matthew, 11. c,
the Father, nor yet the upright services or ceremonies of Christ, for to
minister those same according to the truth, but such as are even so Ioh. 3. a,
Romans 8.12. a, Ephesians. 4. c.
renewed or born again through Christ (as we have declared) in their spirit and
mind; neither yet does it become any other to set forth any services or
ceremonies of Christ, nor to ordain any unto Priests or ministers of the word
nor to preach or publish the Evangelie, but such, or they that are Romans 10. b,
sent of Christ himself; for otherwise it is all false.

3. Ceremonies signify unto us, Services, which have Mysteries or Secrets in
them. Evangelie signifies unto us, a joyful message, which is published
(through Luke 1. b. Romans 1. b
the power of God, and operation of the holy Ghost) out of the heavenly Truth.

4. HEreout have we a great mystery to John 10. a,
day of Christ, or to have set them against the same: and how that many
(through the knowledge which they have taken on unto them out of the letter of
the Scripture) busy them to set forth the knowledge of Christ and his
ceremonies, which are not sent of Christ, but are yet utterly estranged from
him; much less then have kept the Pascha or Passover of his Supper, like as the
Disciples of Christ held the same with Christ.

5. For I say unto you truly, whilst that the Disciples of Christ which had
their conversation in times past with Christ after the flesh, and spoke mouth
to mouth with him; have not in their knowledge understood or inherited the
cleerness of Christ (although the Matthew. 13. b,
mystery of the kingdom of God, was brought and given unto them to understand,
neither yet could understand or inherit the same, before that the fiftieth day
(after the Passover of Christ) was fulfilled, that the heaven was opened before
them, and that the holy Ghost was Act. 2. a
shed forth upon them; so shall not likewise presently (which thing I testfiie
unto you for certain) the Scripture learned, nor yet any conceited disciples of
Christ (which have not kept or passed through with Christ after the flesh, the
Passover from Romans 6. a, 8. a, b.
death into life, and from flesh into spirit; nor in the following of Christ,
attained (through the powers of the holy Ghost) unto the John 5. e,
cleerness of Christ) understand the Matthew. 11. c, 1 Cor. 1.2. b.
cleerness of the word of Christ, out of the knowledge of the letter of the
Scripture; nor out of the imagination of their knowledge touching the spiritual
and heavenly things, much less receive or inherit his godly being of love;
neither yet also set forth, teach or minister his ceremonies and services,
according to the truth, nor publish the true Evangelie of Christ out of the
light of life.

6. FOrasmuch then as that the Scripture-learned, 1 Cor. 1. b,
Truth of Christ, nor attained unto, or gotten (without the Passover with
Christ) the John 5. c,
cleerness of his holy Spirit; so give I you then (ye good willing hearts) to
consider and judge what testimonies of the truth that the Scripture learned,
and the wise of the world can presently give forth, which believe not the love
of Christ, but resist the same with their disobedient knowledge: and what
counsel they can hold and decree, and after what Righteousness they can go
forth, which concordably agrees with the counsel of God, with the true
righ^eousness and single minded doctrine of Jesu Christ, with his true services
and ceremonies, and with the godly wisdom and the requiring of the love of Jesu
Christ; seeing that the same is all unpossible for them to do.

7. For if they turn them not about to the childish single mindedness; nor come
even so with humble hearts unto Heb. 5. a,
this stool of grace, whereof we witness, nor to the obedience of the requiring
of the same (to wit, that they be not assembled obediently according to the
requiring of the service of love, unto John 10. b,
the communalty of the love of Jesu Christ, but turn them away from the same,
and harden their hearts thereagainst) so shall they not understand the truth of
Jesu Christ, nor his right service of love, nor the counsel or will of God, nor
yet obtain or inherit, neither presently nor for ever, the true spiritual and
heavenly goods, but perish in much contention, and in their hardness of heart,
and unclean consciences, be estranged from the 2 These. 1. b,
face of Christ, die Ioh. 8. c,
in their sins, and be Matthew. 25. d,
condemned with the ungodly, which will not believe nor obey God's truth, nor
yet the love of Christ, in the fire of hell, and be constrained to bear the
curse of the ungodly; also bide separated from the cleerness of the upright and
virtuous Being of God and Christ: and not behold the amiable face of God in
righteousness.

8. LEt every one take it effectually to heart,

9. For I say unto you verily, the sun of this same day (shall not go down, or
leave off to shin, before all this come to pass, and that the world be judged
(through the judgment of Christ) Psalm. 96. b, 98. b, Act. 17. d,
with righteousness, according to the Scripture.

The XXIIII. Chapter.
NOw when the holy of the true tabernacle, with his services (according to the
Christ; and erected in his declaring and righteousness: and that the services
of the same holy [namely, the trespass offering, sin offering, and death
offering] were all likewise fulfilled with them; so became then also with the
disciples of Christ, the va^le (that was before the most holy) 2 Cor. 3. b, 4.
a,
removed from the most holy, and the Isa. 59. a, Ephesians. 2, b* Col. 2, b,
middle wall (which was betwixt them and God) taken away: and even so, in the
true righteousness, became the clearness and friendliness of the uncovered face
of God and Christ made manifest among them; and the fullness of the spiritual
and heavenly goods brought unto them.

2. For even out of the heavenly cleerness, there was (in the upright being of
Christ) uncovered among them the mercy seat of the true tabernacle of God Act.
2. Heb. 9.10. b,
in the most holy; namely, in the heavenly being: wherein God would (through
his Christ) gather together his holy ones (so many as followed after Christ in
the holy, and held the passover or pascha with him, like as his disciples had
(in the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood) holden or gone through
the same with him) for to make manifest now likewise at the very last [namely,
in this last time] with us little ones and God's elect, that same most holy of
the true tabernacle of God, with the glory of Christ and his holy ones (as the
most perfect) to an Isa. 33 c Sap. 3. a.
everlasting rest and peace for his holy ones upon the earth, and to bring unto
us in full cleerness) the communion of his love; Supra. 1. b, 5.
to the end that now even so at the very last [namely, how in this day of the
love of God the Father, wherein God declares and brings unto us his holy
goods Mat. 13. b 2 Cor. 4. a Col. 2. a,
and spiritual riches] his true tabernacle should (in all perfection) be
everlasting upon earth, Ioh. 14. ^, Apo. 21, a
to a dwelling, honor, and glory for him (the supreme God) and to an
everlasting blessing, joy, Isa. 35. c 51* b, 60. b
and salvation, for all men which assemble them thereunto) according to the
promises. For so it has pleased God, to the end that his will and the Judgment
of his righteousness, might be Isa. 42. a Ie^. 9. c, 23. a, 33. b, Mat. 6. b,
done and executed on earth, as in heaven.

3. Behold, in suchwise is God glorified in his holy ones; and Christ wonderful
in his believers. Let every one have a good regard thereon. 2 Thessalonians. 1. b,


4. IN all these wonderful works of God, Exodus 30. b, Levi. 10. d Heb. 7*9. b
was prepared (by Moses and Aaron) in images, figures, and shadows, and how
that the unilluminated people have bin served therewithal, till unto Christ,
the true light of life. And also how that God's elect and illuminated holy ones
(which are obediently gone through the passover of Christ, with Christ after the
flesh) and even so being departed out of the imagelike, and out of the
fulfilling of his requiring are entered into the true being of Christ, are
served with the spiritual and heavenly goods, and with the living word of
truth, in the upright being of the love of Jesus Christ

5. For that cause, consider now in this day on the wonderful works of God, how
that God (after the departure Genesis 12. a,
out of the heathenship) prepared the forefront of his true tabernacle (which
is the fear of God) with the Fathers of Israel (through the promses) Genesis 17.
a, b, 28. b,
in his Covenant of Circumcision.

6. But the holy (which is the belief of Jesus Christ) has he prepared Mat. 20.
b. Luke 22. b 23.24. c,
in the death or ^uffering of Christ, and in the baptism or washing in the same
death; namely, with the disciples of Christ, which were of the belief of
Abraham, and the upright believers of Christ, and passed over with Christ Romans
8. a, b,
out of the flesh into the spirit through faith; the which is the true Pascha
that we ought to keep with Christ, to a testimony that we believe uprightly in
him.

7. For the belief is the true holy, wherein Christ (to the vanquishing of sin)
is 1 Pe^. 2. c,
gone before us in the pass over of his suffering and death; Ephesians. 3. b Heb.
5.10. c,
and has prepared us the boldness, for to follow after him therein, to a new
and living way, through the vail that is through his flesh; to the end that we
should in the true holy (wherein Christ (if we enter into the same with him)
Isa. 59. a 1 Pet. 2. c,
bears our sins, and takes them clean a way from us) become Romans 6. a,
implanted into Christ, with the like death of Christ. For even so (through the
Heb. 9. b
oblation of Christ, and his death of the Cross, and to follow after him
therein, in the holy) we obtain the everlasting remission and purging of the
sins, and the making alive or Romans 6. a, 8. b, 2 Cor. 4. b Phil. 3. b,
resurrection from the death in Jesus Christ; as also the eternal life, with
all holiness and righteous: and inherit even so the true spiritual and heavenly
goods, with Christ in the heavenly being,

The XXV Chapter.
BEhold, this way to the everlasting life and heavenly being in the pass over
of Christ (wherein Christ with his disciples has gone before us in Heb. 9.10.
b,
the holy) is now likewise in this day of the coming of Christ, declared unto
us (like as unto the people in time past) for that we should now also with
Christ, [namely* when we have received Mat. 2^. c, Luke 2^. b Ioh. 6. c,
into us the body and blood of Jesus Christ] enter into the same way, keep his
supper or pass over with him (like as he has kept the same with his disciples)
and even so accomplish the true oblation or God-service in the holy; namely, to
lay of^, to mortify, and to bury the flesh, and all what is fleshly and wicked
of nature, either perverse, or has an earthly and fleshly or wicked and
perverse mind, Romans 6. a, Col. 2* b,
in the death of Christ, or to pass through the same in such sort, and to rise
again from the death, and be Eze 17. b Romans 8. b,
made alive with Christ (in the Romans 12 a, Ephesians. 4 c
renewing of our mind) in the upright spiritual being of Christ; to the intent
that it might even so now all be accomplished in us (through Christ) whatsoever
is Luke 22.^ c, 24. c.
written of Christ, and of all them that love him.

Christ in such wise (according to the word of his doctrine) in the holy, so
shall we then certainly in his Doctrine, know Ioh. 8. d
the truth of Christ, also evidently understand, that the same Imitation of
Christ in the holy, will lead or bring us to the accomplishing of the holy Heb
9. b
offering of Christ and his Disciples, to the perfect light or glorious day of
the love, and to the service of perfection, which is administered with the
spiritual and heavenly goods, out of the most holy of the true tabernacle of
God.

3. In which day of perfect light, we behold (with naked cleerness) the most
holy (which God has brought now Joel. 2. c, Act. 2. b,
in the last time (with all his glorious garnishing) unto us little ones and
God his elect, erected the same with us, and herited us wonderfully therein) in
his perfect Apo. 12. a, 21. a. b.
beauty and loveliness; and live even so therein, as true holy ones of God, and
Believers of Christ.

4. For behold, this same most holy of the true tabernacle of God, does God now
bring unto us, with himself, with his Christ, Mat. 24, d, 25. c, Iud. 2. b,
and with all the thousands of his saints, in godly triumph, to a righteous
Judgment upon earth, like as there is written thereof, according to the
promises.

5. COnsider now (ye dearly beloved) 1 Cor. 13. b,
perfection of his kingdom, with us little ones and God's elect: how that our
testimony and publishing of the joyful message, is of the same Kingdom: and in
what manner all the services and prophecies (which are gone out from God, and
added unto his promises) do lead hereunto, and rest or cease therein; namely,
in Romans 12. a, Ephesians. 4. c,
the renewing of the spirit and mind, in Jesus Christ, through the holy spirit
of his love.

9. The which we likewise (through the arm of our savior) do even so set forth
and express in cleerness before every one which hears us, or whom God
stirs into our way; namely, that the perfection is no earthly or fleshly
thing, nor any fleshly dealing or liberty, but the perfect power of God, and
the glory of Christ in his coming.

7. Which coming of Christ, is now declared unto us, that we might through the
same, be separated (in our spirit) from the death of sin; implanted into Christ
with his like, death and so Romans 6.8. b 1 Cor. 6. b 2 Cor. 4. b
raised up out of the death of Christ, and made alive according to the very
likeness of God (in the power of his holy Ghost) Ephesians. 4. c
in upright righteousness and holiness, to Romans 8. b Col. 2. ^,
coheires with Christ, in the treasures of the spiritual and heavenly goods; to
the intent that we should even so (not according to the flesh, or in the
uncircumcision, but according to the spirit, or in the laying away of the
foreskin of the sinful flesh) live and triumph in the heavenly Being with
Christ and all his Saints (which presently meet us, in all perfection of the
works of God, in this day of love, with Christian 1 These. 4. b, 2 These. 1. b,
triumph) everlastingly in all love* according to the promises.

8. BEhold, such is the perfect kingdom of God, and his most holy service, come
Evangelie of the glorious kingdom of Christ) Matthew. 24. b, Apo. 14. a
in all the world, under the obedience of the love of Jesu Christ.

For that same very true with his perfect beauty, love, and righteousness, has
the God of heaven (out of the fullness of his grace) declared and brought unto
us; and erected the same with us, now Isa. 2. a, Mic. 4. a.
at the last time (in the time of the last divided kingdom of Babel) to an Dan.
2.
everlasting peaceable kingdom for his holy ones, according to his promises.

10. And the upright righteousness of the same, and the true Joel 2. c Acts 2.
c.
holy Ghost, which is poured out therein with perfect love, and flows
abundantly therein, is the true most holy of the everlasting* Being of God,
whereout our upright service of the love is administered, and whereunto all
services and prophesies (which are gone out from God and his truth) do lead, as
to the right and very true perfection: and that same perfect good, and his most
holy service of love, shall bide for ever (with full declaration of the 1 Cor.
13. b,
very true perfection) in his service; to the end that the same most holy
perfect good, might (from henceforth for evermore) be declared upon the earth;
and all peaceable ones, with all they that love the peace in Jesu Christ, Isa.
13. a Ier. 3. b, 50. ^, Ezekiel. 3.7. e, Zac. 8. b,
a^sembled thereunto, according to the promises.

11. OH alas, how grossly have certain overreached them, which have (out of the
imagination of their knowledge, or out of the riches of their spirit) taken on,
set forth, Romans 1. c, 2 Pet. 2. b,
of fleshly dealing?

12. But verily, whilst that they were risen up before Ioh. 10. a,
this day of the coming of Jesu Christ (or ever the sun of righteousness arose
unto them in their steadfast obedience unto the requiring of Jesu Christ) and
inclined out of their knowledge after the flesh, unto the freedom according to
the flesh; so have they likewise taken the same freedom unto them, according to
the supposel or goodthinking of their elementish manhood; and missed the true
Sap. 5. ^,
light of righteousness; as also not known the Ioh. 8. d
truth of God, which makes free, much less then understood the same. No^ there
shall not any one know or understand the same (neither presently, nor for Sap.
1. a, Mat. 11. c 1 Cor. 2. b
ever) which is turned unto himself or his elementish manhood; and so takes on
any thing out of his knowledge or mind of the flesh, be it then what it is,
wherewithal he turns him away from the obedience of the requiring of the
service of the love of Jesu Christ.

13. For I say unto you verily, that no man comes through his knowledge unto
the truth of God, nor unto the true light of life, but only he which through
the Belief in Jesu Christ, forsakes himself in the obedience of the requiring
of the gracious word of the Lord, and his service of love; and so Ioh. 8. d,
bideth steadfast therein, till unto the Gal. 4. a
appointed time of the Father. That is, until that Christ after the spirit
(which is the living truth of God, and the true light of life it self) be come
unto him, and have his 2 Cor. 4. b, Gal. 4. b,
shape (as an upright Being full of all love) in him.

to the goodthinking of his own spirit, before the time (wherein the very true
is appointed to be inherited) neither respect, give ear unto, nor believe any
manner of knowledge which rises up in his own heart, much less which is held
forth before him by others, against us, and our ministration of the most holy
service of love or wherewith he is assaulted or tempted. But that he always in
his assaulting or temptation, Ecc. 7. b 1 Pet. 5. a,
humble him (with Sap. 1. a
singleness of heart) unto the 1 Pet. 1. b,
obedience of the requiring of the gracious word and his service of love: and
even so hear and believe the same sure prophetical word, in his service, and 2
Pet. 1. b,
take heed thereunto [seeing that now in the last time, the true love and the
upright Being of Christ, is administered and taught thereout] until that the
true light of the same word and service, and the perfect Being of God the
Father and Christ, come unto him, and arise in h^s heart, in the perfect Mat^^
24. d, 25. d, Luke 17.21.24. Acts 1. a, 2. b,
glory and power of God and of the holy Ghost, that he may live everlastingly
with God and his Christ, in all love. O yea, that come to pass even so.

20. What we had here more to say of the Supper and Following of Christ, of the
Holy and of his true Service or Oblation, and of the Altar in the Holy, and of
the Vayl before the most holy, is declared in the Glass of Righteousness.

The XXVI Chapter.
Christ and ministered in the belief, so were then the foregoing services (which
were the images, figures, and Col. 2. b Heb. 8.10. a,
shadows of that same) no longer fruitful with them: they ceased also among
them, with their services: and the true being of the promises (whereon (as on
the seed of the blessing) the foregoing services pointed, Gal. 3. c 4. a, Heb.
7. b,
and led threunto) was at the same time (to the Genesis 12. a, 17. b, 21.22. b.
blessing of all generations of the earth) Act. 2. c 3. b, 4. b. etc.
published by the same illuminated disciples of Christ (as the true seed of
Abraham) in all the lands of Judah, according to the promises.

2. There was also testified by them, that the righteousness of life was to be
obtained in Romans 6.
the death of Jesus Christ, through Act. 13.15. b, Romans 3.4. b, 5. a, 9. a, 10.
a, Gal. 2. b, 3. a,
faith, and not through the works of the law. And that the law of Moses, and
the services of the Priest hood of Aaron, Heb. 7. b, 8. a, 10. a,
ceased, and had ended their service with them, in the same service of Christ
of the very true testament.

3. HEreon we ought advisedly to consider (ye dearly beloved) for to understand
the Law of Moses, and the foregoing services of the Priesthood (after the
Ordinance of Aaron) ceased with the Disciples of Christ.

4. Not verily, through the bringing in or setting up of any other services or
ceremonies: nor yet through the knowing of a greater and truer Righteousness;
and that one should even so pass forth therewith, unregenerated or unrenewed in
the Spirit and mind, and so forsake the foregoing ministration and ordinance,
wherewith the Righteousness is required. O no, that is far wide; and whosoever
supposes that, he misseth the truth very fa^.

5. For the Law of Moses, the Images, Figures, and Shadows, with the Priests
office, after the manner of Aaron (which are all fulfilled and cease in Christ)
minister unto us out of the true light, an higher and perfecter cleerness;
namely, 1 Cor. 12. d, 13. d,
the perfect Being, and the renewing of Romans 12. a, Ephesians. 4. ^,
the heart and spirit: to wit, to be purged for a Tabernacle or House of the
living God, 2 Cor. 6 b, Apo. 21.
wherein God with his Christ, dwells, lives, and rests: wherein it
becomes then all fulfilled; and the costly Treasure of the heavenly and
spiritual goods, brought unto men, and from thence does it flow forth again,
John 17 d,
as waters of life.

9. BEhold, even thus, or to this end, had with the Disciples of Christ. And in
such a state (as being Acts 2. a,
replenished with the fullness of the holy spirit of Christ) have the former
services ceased with them, inasmuch as they had accomplished the requiring of
those same in Jesu Christ.

7. And verily, not through other services, nor through the knowing of any
thing better, truer, or perfecter, like as many conceited Christians suppose,
and Romans ^. c, Ephesians. 4. b,
say out of the blindness of their hearts, that the services of the old
Testament (after the Law of Moses, and Ordinance of Aaron) are all ended: and
that they therefore have now the services of the new Testament, and know the
new or the best and the true: and run forth even so therewithal, not once
distincting, that the fulfilling of the foregoing services which require the
very true, does not come to pass in the knowledge of the very true: nor yet
that the services of the new Testament, which follow or depend on the
accomplishing of the foregoing are services of spiritual and heavenly goods,
and bring a Romans 1. b, 1 Cor. 1. b,
power of God, in the spirit, to the declaring of the seat of God and Christ,
in the heavenly Being.

8. Therefore let us have a regard, how and wherein the changing and renewing
of the services came to pass: and how that the changing and renewing of the
same services, shall not now also in the last time come otherwise to pass (then
as is abovesaid, and as we have witnessed) Joel 2. c, Acts 2. b,
according to the Scripture. Therefore consider well.

9. WHen now the Law of Moses Rom 7. b,
the death) had ministered her Office, till unto the death of the sin, Romans 6. a,
in the death of Jesu Christ, then had the Law (which in her Service, required
the Righteousness, with writings and ordinances, and with correction and
Doctrine, and was likewise in her service, deadly over the sin) served out her
office, with the Disciples of Christ: and even so at the end or fulfilling of
the requiring of the same Law [namely, in the death or end of the sin] the true
spiritual Law, or heavenly Ordinance ( Romans 8. a, b,
which made them alive in Jesu Christ) came unto them: wherethrough the
foregoing service of the Law, was fulfilled and ceased with them.

10. Behold, when as now the Law of Moses was in such wise (as is said)
fulfilled or accomplished, and had no longer service with the death of the sin,
and with the Believers of Christ, which through the Law were dead unto the Law;
but the Spirit of Christ, which made the deceased Believers of Christ alive
again in righteousness, out Romans 8. b,
of the death of Christ; so had then also the Priesthood in his Images,
Figures, and Shadows, after the manner of Aaron, no more ministration with the
living in Jesus Christ, neither yet gave it any cleerness more with them,
because the heavenly cleerness of Christ, and his upright Being of love
(wherein the Disciples of Christ were comprehended) excelled far away all 2
Cor. 3. a, b,
cleerness of the figurative services.

Aaron changed also with the Disciples of Christ, and ceased by them; Heb. 7.
b, c, 8. a, 9. b, 10. a,
for with them there was a spiritual heavenly Priesthood appeared, in upright
righteousness: and even so was the same with his service, established on Christ
after the Spirit (the true light) Ps. 110. a, Acts 1. ^, Heb. 5. b, 6. c, 7. b,
which is an high Priest that bideth for ever, at the right hand of God in the
heavenly Being: whose service of the spiritual and heavenly ministration,
comes not to pass in the letter; nor in the figures: but in the very true
Being.

12. BEhold, even so was Christ after the spirit (in his Office or Service)
Heb. 8. a, 9. b, 10. b,
a minister of the very true and heavenly goods, among his Disciples and
Believers: and has ( Act. 1. b
when he had taken in the heaven) multiplied himself (through his seed of the
holy Ghost) out of the heavenly Being, to the increasing of his generation (the
upright seed of Abraham) according to the Promises. And even so became Christ
fruitful upon earth, Act. 2. e.
in many thousands of his saints, all which he (through his death) made free
Romans 8. a,
or justified from the sin, and made them alive through his holy Ghost, taking
them up from the earth, and assembling them unto him at the right hand of God
his Father, Act. 7. f. Ephesians 2. a, Phil. 3. c
in the heavenly being.

13. Lo, in such wise ceased the law of Moses, and the services of the
priesthood after Aaron, with the disciples of Christ: and have in such sort
changed them, and verily not otherwise.

14. BUt this grace which appeared through Christ, and this everlasting life
(to the joy and triumph of Christ) Act. 10. d. 13. e, f, 14. b, c, etc.
was spread abroad in all the lands and generations of the heathen. And all
those that believed on Jesu Christ, kept the pascha with him; ate his body, and
drank his blood; they 1 Cor. 10. c, 11. c,
became one body and blood with Christ; which were also all, Children of the
promises with Christ, Romans 8. b,
and coheirs in the secret treasures of the heavenly goods, and in the 1 Cor.
15. c, 2 Cor. 4. b, Phil* 3. b,
resurrection of the righteous: and were even so all, the right children of the
new testament.

The XXVII Chapter.
IN all this same (even as we have before with Christ the heaven, Mat, 25. d
Romans 2. a, 6. c, 8 a, b,
and the eternal life, and have a portion with Apo. 20. a,
him in the resurrection; namely, they, which belong unto him, or are Ioh. 15.
a, 17. c, Romans 8. a, b Ephesians. 3. b,
incorporated into him.

2. For the firstling which rises (of them that sleep) 1 Cor. 15. b,
is Christ, after that, they which belong unto Christ: which make them
manifest, in the time of the 1 Thessalonians. 4. b, Infra. 41. d
coming of Christ in his majesty. For otherwise it cannot come to pass.

3. But they which belong not unto Christ [namely, which are not incorporated
into him, nor Romans 6. a,
baptized in his death; neither yet buried with him, nor kept the Ioh. 6. c 1
Cor. 11. d
supper (in his pass over) with him] have no portion with Christ, in the
resurrection, nor in the eternal life, according to the Scripture. For they
which are in him, and in whom he is glorified, those are one Ioh. 14. c, 17. c,
body with him, and are like as he is: for that cause Romans 8. a,
they belong also unto him, and are always and for ever where Ioh. 12. c, 14.
a, 17. c,
he is, in the secretness of the Kingdom of the God of heavens.

4, For this is the will of Christ, that all his members should inherit Mat.
25. d. Apo. 21. a,
the kingdom of the God of heavens (the most pure beauty) with him; and so live
with him everlastingly, according to the scripture.

Christ with perfect hearts, and have ^ven so a part or portion with Christ, in
Apo. 20. a
the first resurrection, has the second death which is come* and bears
dominion over the world, and all unbelievers) no power; for they are entered
Ioh. 5. c Romans 6. a
through the death of Christ, into the everlasting life. And therefore they shall
both now and for evermore (as upright Christians and Priests of God) A^o. 5.20
b, 22. a,
reign with Christ according to the Scripture.

6. Consider, at the same time when Christ (the everlasting life) was Act. 2 c
10* c, 13. c,
fruitful upon the earth (to a Ioh. 1. a
light of men) through the belief, then was it known that the belief is the
free woman, and the true testament, whereout the free Children and heirs Romans
8. b,
of the riches, and of the secret heavenly wisdoms of God, are born.

7. FOr that cause, O ye dearly beloved (ye Psalm. 95. b, Heb. 3.4, b
hear this day my voice) let my sayings enter into the ears of your hearts; and
become understanding in the mystery of the heavenly and spiritual works of
God, according to the spirit: as also in his outward works, according to the
flesh.

8. For behold, In the time when the living souls of Christ (where through the
holy Ghost) brought forth Act. 2. b Romans 8. b
upon earth, so was then the belief with the service of the word of the holy
ones of Christ, the fruitful wife, of whom the living souls of Christ were
born: but Christ (the light of life) was the husband the Lord, or the head of
the same wif^; which out of the power of God, Act. 10.
poured his Act, 2. a
holy Spirit (which is the seed of the increase of Christ, to the procreating
of his spiritual children) into her. And even so were all those which were born
thereof, the upright children of God, according to the promises.

Jesus Christ, of the true resurrection, and of the second death, is declared
in the Glass of Righteousness.

The XXVIII Chapter.
WHilst now the children of men cleaved Abraham (which was of one Being with
the true light of life) or grounded themselves therein; and even so obediently
respected the service of the Belief (administered out of the true light, which
is Christ himself) in his requiring: exercised them therein, and only gave ear
and had regard unto the Mat. 13, f, 24. 1 Cor. 4. a 2 Cor. 5. c Heb. 13. b
ministers of the holy word, which had kept the Passover with Christ, out of
flesh, into spirit, and out of death into life: and Romans 8. b,
were even implanted into Christ; and Ioh. 17. c, 2 Pet. 1. a,
codeified with God: and also (being obedient unto the word in his requiring)
bid steadfast therein, until that they had also kept the pass over with Christ,
and obtained Romans 12 a, Ephesians. 4. c,
the renewing of their spirit and mind, in Jesus Christ (the which is the
upright supper or pascha, Ioh. 6. c 1 Cor. 11. c,
wherein men rightly eat the body of Christ, drink his blood; are partakers of
his sufferings, and Romans 6. a, Gal. 3. c,
baptized in his death, unto his burying: and even so remember the suffering of
Christ, and Luke 22. b,
witness or publish his death, till unto his coming; that is, until the true
light arise 2 Pet. 1. b,
in the heart) so were they made safe, Heb. 9. b
justified from their sins, renewed Ephesians. 4. c Col. 3. b,
in the spirit of their mind, and sanctified in Christ, Romans 12. a, 1 Cor. 12.
b Ephesians. 4. b, 5. c,
to fellow members of his body, and to Romans 8. b, Apo. 21. a
coheirs in the riches of God his father, in the everlasting life.

2. So long now as that all this did flourish or bear sway (in his upright
state) with the children of men, so was Christ (in his Belief, and through his
Belief) also daily fruitful Act. 2. c 3 c,
to many multitudes of his holy ones, which assembled them all (through the
service of the holy word) unto Christ, and became Romans 12. a, Ephesians. 4. b, 5. c,
one body with him, like as we have also before said.

3. Behold, with this same Christ, and all his holy ones (which are the true
members of his body) will God now in this day (which he himself has appointed
or ordained) Isa. 3. b, Sap 3. a, Act. 17. d Iud. 1. b,
judge the earth with righteousness, according to the Scripture.

Ioh. 6. h
fell away from the Belief of the true light and life, or turned them
therefrom, clave unto, or followed their Ier. 7. c, 9. b, Rom 1. c
good thinking (according to the imagination of their knowledge) and the
earthly ingenious wisdom of the flesh: and that they Mat. 24. a,
boasted them to be Christians, and many gave forth themselves Act. 20. c, 2 Timothy 3.4. a, 2 Pet 2. a
for preachers of Christ, ere ever they were baptized in the death of Christ
and anointed by Christ with his holy Spirit: and that likewise the
unilluminated inclined their hearts, with the ears of their hearing and
understanding, unto the testimonies of the unregenerated and unrenewed or
ungoded men, or unsent Preachers, which meaned not Christ, (or had him not in
consideration) aright, nor had kept (according to the truth) the Pascha with
Christ, and were not entered (through the death of Christ) into the everlasting
life; but out of their Deuteronomy. 12. a, 29. b. Ier. 7. c, 9. b,
own goodthinking, or out of their literal knowledge, came into the sheep or
communalty of the Believers, or besides the Church of Christ (which were also
called of Christ, thieves, Ioh. 10. a,
wolves and murderers; and of the true prophets, Ier. 23. c, 27.29. b, Eze. 34.
a b,
false pastors) so ceased then likewise with them, the true Dan. 9. c
daily offering or God-service in the holy; the incorporating into Christ with
his like death, and the renewing of the life and mind in Jesu Christ, or the
procreation of Christ through his light and Spirit: and it became over them and
over the whole face of the Earth, utterly night and dark; and through the same
darkness, the foregoing service which leads to the life of Jesus Christ,
became unknown, and there entered in much renting and division among the
children of men, 1 Timothy 4. a, 2 Pet* 2. a
to wit, that many of them became estranged from the truth, from the Church of
Christ, and from the right sense of her services; and even so got the
abomination of desolation, contrary to Christ* and the requiring of his
doctrine, his breaking in over such as were declined or estranged from the true
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which leads to the new birth of the upr^ght mind
and Being of Christ.

5. For with all them that turned off and Isa. 29. b Apo. 5, a,
closed book, or dark word that was without light. For that cause also the
service which was administered (out of the letter of the Scripture) of the
unilluminated, was as a dead body without soul* or as a dead wife which is
deceased from her husband, and can bring forth no children of life.

6. NOw when this true light (for the self wisdoms cause of the earthly man,
which is the darkness against the true light) gave no more cleerness upon
earth, with the off-fallers and estranged from the true belief; and that
likewise the night or darkness had Ioh. 9. a
captived the unbelievers, and the estranged from the Church of Christ; so
obtained then the nature of sin, or the child of the Devil and condemnation,
that contrary nature, or adversary of Christ (which is called 2 These. 2. a,
I^fra. 32. ^,
Antichrist) his shape, in the inward Temple of the unbelieving and
unregenerated men, and multiplied it self even so among many on the earth, in
the bringing forth of his wicked frui^s.

Antichrist signifies unto us, a contrary anointing: And is an anointing or a
Io^. 20. a,
freedom either an appeasing of the heart, which comes unto the man (when he
is separated or estranged from the true Belief of Jesu Christ, and from his
Church) in his inwardness (before the coming of the true Christ, or anointing
of the holy Ghost) from the seed of the old serpent, or of the Devil. Which
false anointing that the man takes on to himself out of the flesh, and out of
the fleshly wisdom of his goodthinking knowledge; as also cut of the seed of
the devil, and wisdom of the flesh, works in him a secret res^sting and
disobedience against the Lord Jesus Christ and his requiring. And the same
resisting and disobeence, is the 2 These. 2. a
secret iniquity of Antichrist, which the man (in his estranging from Christ,
and his Church) cannot well perceive, because that he, in the separation from
Jesu Christ, is well contented (in his heart) with the Job. 20. a,
wisdom of the flesh: and even so, contrary to the right doctrine of Jesus
Christ ( Ioh. 13. d, 14. b. 16. b,
which has her ministration to the holy Spirit of Christ and his love, and on
the good life of God) lives boldly (against all God's truth) in his self
wisdom, knowledge or scripture learnedness: the which is a false freedom, and
the Job. 20* a, Dan. 9. ^, 11. d. 12. a, Mat. 24. b 2 These. 2. a,
abomination of desolation, against all that which is God* God service, and
Christ, or the truth of God.

8. BEhold, this Antichrist has exalted himself, with his deadly service and
falls Dan. 12. a, 2 These. 2. a,
above God, and above the true God service; and set himself (as though he
himself were God) in the temple of the Lord (namely in the inward part of the
man, wherein the living God with his Christ, ought Lev. 26. b, Ioh. 14. c, 2
Cor. 6. b. Aqo 21. a
to dwell, to live, and to walk; and has ^ven so quite and clean abolished or
destroyed the Law of the Lord, and the true faith in Jesu Christ; also driven
out and taken away the same from the hearts, minds, and thoughts of men, and
darkened it in them: brought the Holy of the house of God Ps. 74. a, 79. a, Dan.
8, b, 9. c, 11. d,
into desolation: caused the daily offering in the Holy [which is the Romans 6.
a,
mortifying of the sin, through the death of Christ] to cease: and even so set
the abomination Dan. 9.11. d, Mat, 24. b Man. 13. b
of desolation in the holy place, where it ought not to stand.

9. Out of which abomination of Desolation (which in the secret of the man's
inwardness, has increased in all manner of iniquity and abominations, till
unto this day; and obtained the pre-eminence with many) there are risen up many
manner Matthew. 24. c, 1 Timothy 4. a, 2 Timothy 3. a, 2 Pet. 2. a,
spirits of Error, and sundry sorts of false hearts of the Scripture learned:
which have (out of the goodthinking of their own spirit* and out of their
Scripture learnedness, as also through their ingeniousness or imagination of
the knowledge) brought forth manifold false Doctrines, wherethrough they
seduced the people, and estranged them more and more from Christ and his
Church, and from the new Birth in Jesu Christ.

The XXIX. Chapter.
NOw when the Apostates or off-fallers Matthew. 11. c,
humility and meekness of heart; and to the upright Being of the love of
Christ: and gave them to the ingeniousness of their knowledges: and even so
with their knowledge, set up themselves to be Judges over the testimonies of
Christ and his Apostles; so clave they ^hen unto the 1 Timothy 4. a,
spirits of error* and brought in therethrough, absurd 2 Timothy 2. b.
arguments of Christ, and of all that the Scripture speaks of him, or of the
spiritual heavenly goods: stirred up the hearts of men unto many manner of
foolish desire^, 2 Timothy 3. a, 2 ^et. 2. a, b, Jude 1. b,
vain or fond knowledges, and to manifold false righteousness and chosen
holiness: and administered even so their own Matthew. 16. a,
leaven, for the bread of life*

2. Wherethrough likewise the daily Dan. 8. b, 9. c, 11, d,
offering in the holy of the true Tabernacle, was no more observed (according
to the true Being) with them and their adherents: and for that cause also there
chansed with them no purging of sins, nor pouring forth of the holy Ghost.

3. For the imagination of the knowledge wherethrough many of the children of
men, grounded their hearts thereupon, and not on Christ, nor on the obedience
of his requiring. By which occasion also, the true services of the holy spirit
of Christ, with the treasures of the spiritual and heavenly goods, ceased with
them, and the an. 9.11. d, Mat. 2^. b,
abominations of desolation became the more manifold in the holy place of the
Lord [namely, Luke 17.21. c
in the inwardness of men.]

4. For that cause the true Ier. 5. a,
Belief, and the upright service of the holy ones, is now also come into
reproach or contempt; the Sun (that heavenly day light of Christ) become
utterly covered with Isa. 13. b, Eze. 32. a. Joel. 2. b 3. b.
the darkness of the wisdom of men; and the Scripture (before the
understandings of men) as a dark word, Isa. 29. b Apo. 5. a,
or a closed book, and as a Lanthorn without light: whereout many singular
matters are presupposed, but not at all perceived or understood.

1 Timothy 4. a.
and from the true service of Christ in the holy: and that the darkness and
desolation, and the many manner divisions of Religion came fast upon the world;
so was the world covered with such abominations and darkness, and the hearts of
the people with such desolation of confusion.

6. In which time of this same night and error, many goodwilling hearts to the
Righteousness, have sighed with anguish of mind; also diligently sought the
light and truth; groped thereafter Isa. 59. b 2 pet. 1. a
as the blind (here and there) on the painted walls; and so (with great
diligence, zeal, and earnestness) inquired after the righteousness; also
searched for the same (with fervency) in the Scripture, and had a regard or
consideration on many, whether same were any where to be found, or to be
gotten, by any man, or might break forth by any one.

7. But whereto soever they turned them or went, without Christ and his Church,
and without his true belief, so was it everywhere, nothing else but knowledge,
wisdom of the flesh, good thinking of man Isa. 59. b
darkness, lies, and sin, or error, which met with and took hold of them.

8. And whilst that the Sap. 5. a
sun of righteousness shined not unto them* so have they not been able (how
much diligence soever they bestowed thereabout) to find the righteousness which
God esteemed.

9. Even thus have truly (in process of time) of Christ and his love, and even
so born rule upon the Earth; namely, from the ti^e forth of the defection or
estranging from Christ and his true belief, till unto this day of love, and of
the appearing of the coming of Christ.

10. In which day, God will now ( Isa. 11. a 2 these. 2. a
with the Spirit of his mouth) slay the Antichrist or mischievous Nature, and
make an end thereof; sanctify again the Forefront and the Holy of the true
Tabernacle (which are utterly fallen into desolation and ruin, through the
earthly wisdom of the slesh) according to the service of her true being; and
set up again, the daily Offering: and judge the People, with his light and
righteousness, Isa. 9. a. 11. a. 32. a. 42. a. Jer. 23. a 33. b.
according to the Scripture.

11. Yea, assuredly, the Lord will now accomplish this same; and (with his
light, truth, and righteousness) take the Isa. 9. a. 11. a.
pre-eminence, according to the Promises.

12. WHat we had here more to say, of the defection or estranging from the true
light; of the true faith; of the Child of the Devil, or Antichrist; of the
abomination of desolation; of the false pastors; and of the many manner
conceited opinions or good thinkings of me^, is declared in the glass of
righteousness.

The XXX Chapter.
BUt whenas now these foresaid many manner Joh. 15 17.
through the incorporating into Christ (which were the upright Ministers of the
holy Wrd of Christ) with all the holy ones of God and Christ, were fallen
asleep: that the light of life was become unknown, the Law of Lord forsaken;
Jer. 5. a. Hos. 4. a. Mica. 7. a
the true faith, taken away from the earth; as also the darkness, with much
falls doctrine (through the unregenerated or ungodded men) come in abundantly;
and great discord, Matthew. 24. a.
and division risen up (among the children of men) upon the earth: so were
there then many of the remnant of the Christianity, who (in the same time)
greatly bewailed the discord and erring blindness of men, and did mourn in
their hearts very sore: and have even so (out of a good intent, and goodwilling
heart to the righteousness) loved the peace and concord, among the children of
men; and also with diligence, sought after the same.

2 These have (in their good-willingness to the bestowed all their diligence
and care to understand the same; and even so thereout (according to the
utterest or best that they knew) figured out and set forth the services and
Ceremonies, and the ordinances of the Christianity (in most like manner or
conformabl^st unto the Scriptures, and requiring of the Apostolical doctrine of
Jesus Christ) in the distinctest manner that they were able, before the
Children of men, that they might live therethrough, in righteousness and
peace. They have likewise used the same Services and Ceremonies, to the
requiring of the righteousness, and to a good discipline and orderliness for
the people, which humbled them under thos^ same.

3. Howbeit, whilst that the light of the true being of Jesus Christ, Sap. 5. a
shined not (in his perfect clearness) with many of them, so could they not use
nor minister the right use of those Services or Ceremonies, which bring the
spiritual and heavenly goods with them; reveal or declare 1 Cor. 13. b. 2 cor.
3.4. a.
the face of Jesus Christ uncoveredly; and teach the believers, to the Kingdom
of Heaven: but they have, so far forth and so near as they (to the utterest of
their power) could by any means get or attain to the same (according to the
testimonies of the Scripture) with their understanding and knowledge,
administered unto the people (to a memorial of Christ and his Acts) the
signification and the image-like and figurative services, of that which is
required through Christ: and even so taught them (through the same Services and
Ceremonies) the civil or nurturable righteousness: but not the very true,
Spiritual, or heavenly: for they could not attain unto the same.

4. NOw when these Services and Ceremonies Mat. 26.27.
passion or suffering of Christ, the Heb. 9. b
Offering for the sin, the death of Christ, his Burial, the Pascha or his
Passe-over, and his Resurrection and Ascension.

5. They held also a remembrance of the Saints, which had faithfully followed
after Christ; likewise of the confessing of sins, and of the forgiveness of the
same, as also of the Cleansing (which is called, Purgatory;) Also they named
certain observations or usages of the same services, Sacraments, which they
held forth before the believers, to holy signs, and kept them therewith,

6. [The Cleansing, which is called Purgatory, signifies unto us, the making
pure of the believers of Christ, which they, in distress, affliction, Joel 2. b
2 cor. 7. b
sorrow, and anguish (for the sins cause) do pass through; wherein they (as in a
fire Isa. 48. b sap. 3. a.
of humiliation) are purged Act. 13.15. b.
or justified from all their sins, through the belief, for to enter even so (
Mat. 5. a.
with pure hearts) into the Kingdom of the God of heavens. In which fire of
Cleansing or Purgatory, the upright believers of Christ Eccl. 2. a. luke 21. b.
show forth patience, in Prayer unto God. And even so (in the Hab. 2. a heb.
10. d.
belief, and in the manner of suffering) they follow after Christ in his Mat.
16. c. romans 6. a. 1 pet. 2. c. 4. a
death of the cross, to the purging of their sins. Sacrament, signifies unto
us, an holy sign of a secret or hidden thing, to whom one gives the name of
some holy or godly thing, that the same Sacrament has hidden in it; or it
signifies the same holiness or godliness, that has been tofore or shall come
after-ward.]

7. In conclusion: they held of all the holy ^^^ngs (whereof the Scripture
makes mention) a memorial or remembrance. And all this same was daily set
forth, and preached or published (in figures) unto the People, to a good
memorial, or for to have the same continually in remembrance, that it was come
to pass, or had the foregoing (according to the truth) in the true being.

8 BUt verily, where now these figurative Phil. b.
the perfection in Jesus Christ: neither yet can the People likewise through
those same, obtain or inherit the purging from their sins, nor the putting
away of spottedness from their conscience, nor yet the true being of the
mystery of the Sacraments and figurative services, like as the same is now
(through the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ and his service of love) declared and
brought unto us.

9. Therefore have not these foresaid figurative services, been any more
furtherance unto them nor yet brought the People nearer unto the true being,
then unto nurturable sustentation, and to a figurative remembrance of Christ,
and of the things which the holy ones of Christ were passed through, and which
all believers of Jesus Christ ought to pass through.

Sacraments, were with diligence set forth; and earnestly observed* to an
humbling of the People) so have the People (which humbled them obediently
thereunder) been kept under those figurative services, so that the great and
horrible Is^. 4^. b 2 pet. 2.3. a. b.
destruction has not fallen upon them, which shall now (in this last time)
fall upon all ungodly and resisters of the truth; and upon all them
(obediently) under the service of the love of Jesus Christ.

11. For that cause, the said figurative services and ceremonies, shall not now
(in this day of the love of Jesus Christ) be imputed unto the People which have
intended and sought the righteousness therein, for sin; but much rather for
righteousness* because they have showed therein, their good will unto the
righteousness.

12. For now in this day of the love of Jesus Christ, must (no doubt) the
figurative services be all renewed unto their right use, through the true
light, and through his upright service of love, and declaring of the requiring
of his upright righteousness; also set or o^dained in their right ordinance;
and used (to the requiring of the upright righteousness) in their right
observation: and they shall even so in their right use (at the appointed time
of the Father) have the fulfilling of their requiring, with the obedient
believers in Jesus Christ.

13. And all good willing ones to the upright righteousness in Jesus Christ,
with all such as assemble them unto us and our communiality, and humble them to
our most holy services of the love and his requiring* shall then likewise (to
an entrance into the same upright righteousness) become renewed in their
understanding, to the en^ that they all might rightly (according to the truth,
and according to the r^quiring of our most holy service of love) pass forth,
from their beginning or entrance of the Heb. 6. a
Christian life, after the very true perfection. But whosoever refuse this same,
and they that turn them away therefrom, those shall not obtain the upright
righteousness of God, nether presently, nor for ever.

14. WHat shall we now say hereof? shall we then witness, that we unilluminated
and unregenerated (seeing that their Images, figures, and shadows, have
(through the 1 Cor. 13. b. heb. 7. b. 8. a.
perfect righteousness) the fulfilling of the requiring with the perfect ones)
and that also the unregenerated should forsake those same? No in no wise: but
we require (under the obedience of the love) with the right use of the
image-like and figurative services, the obedience unto the requiring of those
same, at their hands: and so daily instruct them with those same and through
those same, that they are debtours to accomplish and obediently to ^stablish
the requiring of th^se same, and even so obediently to observe them till unto
the appointed time of the fullfilling o^ their requiring.

15. For this we say out of the living trut^ of God, which is declared unto us
out (...) Gods grace, that he, which without the lo^^ and her service (or
without the very true bei^^ of the love of Jesus Christ and his service)
fo^^saketh the image-like or figurative servic^^ and the signs of the secret
godly things through his Deuteronomy. 12. a.
good thinking or knowledge and even so separateth him from the minist^^tion of
those same, and accomplisheth (...) their requiring, nor has been obedient
(...) the service of love, till unto the Is^. ^8. a 2 (...). 1. b.
rising up the true light in his heart; nor yet remain^ steadfast in the
doctrine of the same services, unto the upright being of the love; of Jesus
Christ, ^e forsakes verily (although he have never so much knowledge of
spiritual and heavenly things) the Images or figures, and the signs of the
secret godly things, unrightly and with ignorance, and takes unto him the
freedom for to be unbound from the services, not ^o the edifying of the
Congregation, but to ^nedifying and contention: and is seduced and deceived by
his own spirit or imagination of ^he knowledge, wherewith he also s^duceth and
deceives other more, which hear and fol^ow him therein: in such wise, that they
not ^^ely utterly forsake the services, and the ^mages figures* and signs; but
also the 1. Reg. 15. c.
obe^ience of the requiring of the gracious word ^er. 33. b
raised up presently with us, out of the grace ^f God, according to his
promises) and the te^^imonies of his holy Spirit and service of love, and make
up themselves there against: and ^ill needs even so (according to the
Imagina^^on of their knowledge) live free or in free^ome: and cause nothing
else but breach and ^ivision among the Congregations, and resist^^g against the
Priests or Elders.

16. Now when they have thus (in every as unneedful, so forsake and resisted
they then those same, contrary to Gods truth and his requiring, and contrary to
all godly and Christian ordinances: and understand nothing at all of the
mystery of those same, nor of the right Salvation of men in Jesu Christ: and
run even so forth with the far inspection of their knowledge, thinking all too
little on the obedience which they are debtours to show in the foregoing
services: And so they remain in the taking on of their own freedom, without
the right and true freedom of the children of God.

Let every one take it to heart.

17. BUt of these our forementioned Sayings of the figurative services and
Ceremonies, consider (ye dearly beloved) how that the Christians (for a certain
season) have had and ministered figurative services; and been sustained
therewithal, till unto the day of the love of Jesus Christ. Which figurative
services and Ceremonies, have been the Images, figures, and shadows, of the
true and spiritual things, which were tofore (through Jesus Christ) come to
pass, seen, heard, ali^^ spoken and published, in the true being, for that we
should therethrough remember the same true and spiritual things: and that
altogether in such wise, as the Jews also had and ministered their figurative
Services and Ceremonies, wherewithal they were sustained unto the day, wherein
Christ was borne unto them of the seed of David. Which figurative services and
Ceremonies, were the Images, figures, and shadows, to a memorial of the true
spiritual things, which should (in the time to come) come to pass, and be seen,
heard, also spoken and published in the true being of the 1 Cor. 13. b. 2 cor.
3. b
uncovered face of Christ.

The XXXI Chapter.
FUrthermore (ye dearly beloved) behold and consider, how that he Catholic
Church of Rome, has obediently grounded it self on the aforesaid Services and
Ceremonies, which are the figures or the prefiguration of the true Christianity
and her Services; and (with diligence and ferventy) observed those same, to a
good discipline or ordinance of the congregations; and even so (in figures)
borne the name of Christians.

2. Christians, signify unto us, those that are anointed. For the holy ones of
Christ were in times past so named, Act. 2. a
which were anointed with the holy Spirit of Christ, to Priests or Elders of
the holy understanding.

3. Through which anointing with the holy Spirit of Christ, they were the
upright Fathers of the household of Christ, and foregoers in the Christian
Congregation, which daily set forth Joh. 6. h. 1 John 1. a.
the word of life (which is Christ himself, and had his Gal. 4. b
shape in them) before the Disciples of the Word or Christ: wherewith the
Novices or Disciples of Christ, were nourished and brought up in all wisdom
and righteousness of God (with holy understanding) unto the Ephesians. 4. b
old age of the Man Christ, or anointing of the holy Ghost. The which shall now
also in this day (under the obedience of the love) ^lourish even so in the true
being, according to the promises.

Rome (till unto this day) ministered and observed in figures, as is abovesaid.
For, to a token of r^membrance of the holy anointing of Christ, with the holy
Spirit, they have used the anointing with Oil: And it is a Sacrament of the
holy Church of Christ, which signifies unto us, the anointing of the Priests
or Elders with the holy Ghost.

5. Of which anointed Elders, or foregoers of the Communality of the Catholic
Church of Rome, the chiefest anointed is named, Papa, and signifies unto us,
an old Father in the holy understanding; also the chief Bishop or High Priest,
which has his being or conversation, in the most holy of the true and perfect
Sanctuary, and ministereth his office of the holy word thereout: and for that
cause is also named, the most holy Father.

6. For in times past, the eldest in the holy understanding (among them which
were anointed with the holy Spirit) was so named, because that he (before all
other) was the eldest in the holy wisdom of God: also a Father of his spiritual
Children, and of all spiritual Persons.

7. For through his service of the holy word, the true clearness of Christ was
spread abroad in all Lands: and the living souls (through the seed of the holy
Spirit of Christ) were brought forth, Ephesians. 4, 5. c.
to a communality of Christ, and Tabernacle of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. b.
apoc. 21. a.
wherein God lived and dwelt. Which true being, is the upright service of
Christ, that flourished in force by the anointed with the holy Spirit of
Christ. And has (to a memorial of the same service) been figuratively observed
in the Catholic Church of Rome.

8. THose now that are next unto the Papa, are named, Cardinals; which signify
unto us, the Principallest, which are nearest (in the most holy understanding
of the godliness) unto the eldest or holiest father, and have their communion
with him, in the most holy of the true and perfect being.

9. For the Principallest (which were nearest to the Eldest or holiest Father,
in the Ephesians. 4. b
old age of the holy understanding, and in the righteousness and godliness)
were (in times past) so named, in the true being.

10. THe next unto the Cardinals, are named Bishops. Which signify unto us*
the pastors of the sheep and Lambs of Christ, and the chief Priests or Elders,
which in the service and testimony of the spiritual and heavenly truth
(administered by the chief Bishop or oldest Father) are understanding; and grown
up so old and manly, to the manly stock of the oldest Father, that they have
received the key of the spiritual and Heavenly understanding, for to unlock the
same holy intelligence, unto them that are a-growing up to Elders, and to
ordain them to Priests or Elders. Wherethrough they distinctly divide the
ordinance and laws of the spiritual and heavenly goods, and the understanding
of the same, from the earthly, natural, and wordly ordinances; namely, to a
good keeping and Pastouring of the Congregation or flock of Christ.

11. For that cause they are also fore-goers Romans 6. a. col. 2. b. 3. a.
in the mortifying and burying of the sin, and the ministers of the holy word,
in the holy of the true offering: that is, in the keeping of the Pascha or
Passover with Christ, in his Supper: wherein the death of the sin, and (at the
end of the same) the making alive of the man comes to pass.

12. With which service, they inform and are serviceable to the Priests or
Elders which are a-coming on (namely, unto the weaned Lambs, which are weaned
or withdrawn from the milk of their youngness; and Col. i. b. 2 pet. 3. b.
growing up to the old age of a sheep of Christ, or which increase them in the
godly, wisdom of Christ (till unto Ephesians. 4. b
the old age of the holy understanding of Christ, and of the godly wisdom of
the oldest Father, or chief Bishop.

13. For because of this same service in the holy, and because of their manly
old age of the holy understanding, such ministers of the holy Word were in time
past (in the true being) named Bishops or Superiors of the Elders, either 1 Timothy 3. a. Tit. 1. a.
Pastors of the sheep of Christ.

14. THe next unto the Bishops are named Parish Priests or Curates: which
signify unto us, Levitical priests, or adjoined Pastors, and Elders of the
holy understanding, as those that are joined and ordained to the ministration
of the holy Priests office, and to the service of the Communalty, for to
minister even so (in the service of the holy Word) the forefront of the holy
Tabernacle, or the Mat. 3 a luke 3* ^.
entrance of the Church of Christ, either Heb. 5. 6. a.
beginning of the Christian life, in his Service and Requiring. Which Elders
are chosen and joined to the Service of the holy Word, because they leave or
let pass the childhood or youngness of the holy understanding, and grow up
(according to the requiring of the service of Love) unto the manly agedness 1
Cor. 13. b. ephesians. 4. b.
of Christ [that is, unto the true being of the oldest and holiest Father] or
pass forth after the Perfection; and even so go before the Communalty of the
Believers (in the Deuteronomy. 10. b. je^. 4. a.
Circumcision of the heart, or in the Rom 6. a col. 3. a. 1 pet. 2. a. Heb. 12 a
laying away of the sin in the Flesh) in all fear of God.

15. For that cause* they have also their Service, in the Congregation or
Church of Christ; namely in the forefront; that is, where the Sanctification
or godliness, or the Joh. 3. a.
new birth in Christ, has his beginning, to a Romans 6. ^ 1 pet. 2. a.
laying away of the sin in the ^lesh.

Heb. 13. b.
a good care over them: and to witness and teach them daily, the holy
understanding of Christ (the oldest Father,) according to the ordinance of
their Bishop, to a leading of them into the holy of the true God-service in the
Spirit, where the Heb. 9 b
purging and forgiveness of sins comes to pass, to the end that the
communiality should even so (with the service of the holy word) be peaceably
sustained and nourished, and live godly Ephesians. 4. ^
in all love and concord.

17. THe next unto the Parish Priests, are named Deacons. Which signify unto
us, Ministers 1 Timothy 3* a. tit. 1. a.
or helpers of the Parish Priests, in the holy God-services, to the end that it
all (whatsoever concerns the service of the holy Word, and the godly
doctrine) might be orderly and godly ministered, among the Communialities.

18. THe next unto the Deacons, are named Sextons. Which signify unto us,
conservers or keepers of the holy things: or to whom the charge of holy things
(to be used in their Ordinance) is committed, that they might be occupied in
due or convenient time.

19. AMong all those, there are also risen Monks. Which signify unto us, such
as dwell alone, and are (through the love of the righteousness) sanctified; and
for that cause also, separated from the World, and from all what is worldly and
fleshly, for to live even so (as sanctified ones of God) in the solitariness of
their life, wholly in God, and in his holy being.

20. For such as were mortified touching the world and the flesh, Gal. 5. a.
with all self-lusts and desires, and busied them not with any thing, save only
with the things which concerned God and his righteousness, were in time past,
so named.

21. NExt unto all these forenamed anointed ones, are the common People, which
believe and cleave unto the Services, Religions, and Ceremonies of the anointed
and which also humble them to the requiring of those same. The which are named
Christians; and are yet unanointed: and signify unto us, the Christian Church
or the Congregation of Christians or anointed ones, which are assembled
(through the service of the holy Word) by the Elders Mat. 13. f. heb. 13. b
of the holy understanding, unto the sanctification in Jesu Christ, and before
whom the costly treasures of the holy things, or of the spiritual and heavenly
goods are set forth, unto Salvation in Christ; and which also submit them
obediently under the doctrine of the anointed ones or spiritual persons: which
daily hold forth the law or ordinance of the Lord before them, and teach them,
how they should live; also come to the spiritual understanding or new Ioh. 3.
a. romans b. a.
Birth in Christ; and what they ought to do, and leave undone.

22. And they that remain, live, and walk without the same Christianity, or
her Congregation, with all them that are not incorporated (as fellow members of
the Church of Christ) into the same, are named Heathen, which have their
forth-going (without Christ and his Church) in the Heathenship or
uncircumcision; also are captived or blinded with darkness; and cannot obtain
nor inherit any Salvation nor everlasting life, with Christ.

23. BEhold, All this has been even so in times past in his true being, whenas
the light of life had his clearness; and the belief of Jesus Christ, her
service, in the holy ones of God (the renewed or godded men) upon the Earth.
But all this same (as touching the knowledge thereof according to his upright
being) is become darkened or secret before many; and the truth and right
ordinance of the same, also utterly unknown. All which shall now (in this day
of love) be Act. 3. c.
restored or brought again (through the revealing of the coming of Christ and
of his holy Spirit) into his upright state and true being, or Christian
ordinance, and flourish or become forcible, according to the promises.

The XXXII Chapter.
Isa. 1. b. 43 c. 66. a jo^. 7. b. c. hos. 5.6. a mica. 6. a.
with the Jews, which stood in suchlike wise captived in their image-like and
figurative Services and Ceremonies.

2. For unto all them that walk without the true being of the Godliness and
heavenly Truth, or without the Family of the Love of Jesu Christ, and so
(according to their good thinking) set up, minister, teach forth, and observe
Services and Ceremonies, all things chance (or they have them) in Similitudes,
Isa. 6.29 b. mat. 13. b act. 28. d. apoc. 5. a.
Parables, or closed books; and in Images, Figures, and Shadows, because they
should not (without the Very true and his upright prefiguration) see, with the
eyes of their earthly minds; hear, with the ears of their fleshly thoughts;
nor comprehend in their dark hearts, the secret works of the holy Spirit of
Christ: which also the world nor her Wise, Sap. 1. a. mat. 11. c 1 cor. 2. b.
understand, know, nor receive.

3. BUt whenas now many manner abuses and ignorance of the right difference

4. Wherethrough many, unorderly rejected and blasphemed the Services and
Ceremonies of the Catholic Church of Rome; rented the concord and nurturable
sustentation of the same; and turned them away therefrom; and even so, out of
their knowledge (which they took out of the Scripture) brought in certain
Services and Ceremonies, in another wise or order; and set forth and taught
those same (for the upright Christian Ceremonies) unto the people. Howbeit,
they have procured or obtained little love and righteousness; but rather much
contention and controversy, therewithal. For many of them understood not, what
they taught, nor what the Services and Ceremonies (which they rejected and
blasphemed) signified in themselves.

5. They spoke likewise much of Gods Word, which yet they themselves (like as
it is a living and mighty Word Jer. 23. c. heb. 4. b.
that cutteth and pierces (as a sharp sword) into the inmost part of the soul)
had never heard; nor seen his clearness (like as it is shining and flowing
forth out of the living God.) much less understood the mind or will of the same.



7. BEhold, in this contention and controversy, which sprang up among the
unilluminated People (after that the defection or estranging from Christ and
from 1 Timothy 4. ^. 2. (...). 3. a. 2 pet. 2. a.
the holy belief, was once chanced with many (through the works of darkness) so
became then manifest and known (like as there is written thereof) the nature of
sin, or the Job. 18.20. ^. 2 these. 2. a
child of the devil, and of the Supra. 28. d.
condemnation, which in the Scripture, is named Antichrist: whose iniquity
(wherethrough the Law or Ordinance of the Lord was abolished; and the true holy
and the requiring of his services, Dan. 9.11. d. mat. 24. b. 2 these. 2. a.
laid wast in the hearts of the men) remained secret and unknown unto many,
till unto the same time.

8. In which time of the manifesting and knowledge of this same mischievous
one, one might certainly (if he had had a right regard unto the Scripture) have
easily perceived thereout, that the Joel. 2. b. d.
great day of the Lord and the Mat. 24. d. 24. d. tit. 2. b.
coming of Christ, was coming on or at hand, and h^rd by according to the
Scripture.

9. BUt seeing now that there was much contention, and many divided minds

10. But for the most part, they were all divided one against another. For
every one rested persuaded to have right in his cause; and like wise (in his
service) the upright Christian Ceremonies, or the name thereof.

11. Among all these there have also been certain, which were counted of many,
for Sectaries, Heretics, and Seducers of the people; and for that cause,
persecuted and banished; and many (for the conscience and faiths cause) were
slain and put to death,

12. OH! what a lamentable thing, is the slaying or Isa. 59. a jer. 22. b. eze.
22. a.
shedding of blood, for the consciences cause, to wit, of those that are
zealous toward the righteousness* and (according to the outward dealing) do no
man harm.

13. For this I say verily, that many single-minded hearts (for the consciences
cause) which they had to God and his righteousness) have been guiltlesly put to
death.

14. Oh, what is there more lamentable before God and his holy ones, Psalm.
56.58.59. a b isa. 59. a. jer. 22. b.
then the shedding of innocent blood!

The XXXIII Chapter.
Act. 20. c romans 16 b ph^l. 3. c. 2 timothy 3. a. 2 pet. 2. a.
ease in the flesh, and through manifold self-seeking, whereafter they sought,
as also through much more other falsehood, which they practiced and used.

2. Certain of those false hearts have turned them to slandering and traitory:
in such wise, that they have (with slander and wicked backbiting) Mat. 24. a.
betrayed the other, with whom they (in hypocrisy) had falsely their
conversation: yea, and also delivered over certain into the hands of the
Magistrates, for to be slain or rooted out.

3. Certain have killed, murdered, and (in many manner of wise) destroyed one
another of them. Certain Mat. 24. a.
have applied them (with subtilty) unto uproar and warlike dealings, and to
stealing or the every: and certain also to false Sap. 14 c romans 1. c. 2 pet. 2.
b
and inordinate liberties, and are even so fallen into manifold unjust dealings
and blaspheming of God.

4. For that cause* through these many manner of abuses and ignorances (taken
on and maintained out of the knowledge of the Scripture) and by reason of the
false hearts, which set forth and enforced Religions, Ceremonies, or
God-services (wherethrough they (with many manner of false testimonies) accused
each other for Sectaries and Seducers: and also brayed forth much wickedness
(to slander and cursing) one over another) the Magistrates of the world were
occasioned (against many) to persecution and putting to death.



6. But whilst that they knew not the truth the righteousness, nor the upright
services and C^remonies, nor loved the upright righteousness with all their
heart, so is also the love unto the righteousness, Mat. 24. b.
waxen cold with many: and they are therethrough become slothful toward the
same; but very diligent in their own in^orcements or enterprises.

7. In like manner, many (seeing that they loved not the righteousness with
whole heart) became altogether vainly minded; and like unto the world, in her
abominations; and have even so let pass all fruitful doctrine.

Pro. 1. a
and follow not the seducing of the destroyers nor the multitude of the
ignorant, in their error: nor enforce you not Romans 12. a.
to be of one mind with the contentious world, nor with the discordable or
divided wise and Scripture-learned: but apply you unto concord, Ephesians. 4.
in all love: and lock into it with undestandinging, what the Scripture says,
what it requires of us, and how it becomes fulfilled: as also how that we are
not called (through the Scripture) unto 1 Cor. 7. b. ephesians. 4. a.
strife, contention, nor to variance or discord; but unto peace, and to the
love.

9. For I say unto you verily, that there are before this day of love (which is
the true light of God, and the coming of his Christ it self) many
Scripture-learned (that were very richly learned with the Mat. 23. a. b. 24. a.
speeches of literal Scripture, in the subtilty and knowledge; but not in the
Romans 13. a. ephesians. 4. c.
renewing of the Spirit and mind, unto Mat. 15. f.
the kingdom of God) risen up, which have not inseen, understood, nor known the
truth of God, in the light of the heavenly and spiritual wisdom of Christ;
much less witnessed or taught the same; and yet much less brought in or
ministered the upright or true Christian Ceremonies, which lead unto the
Godliness in Jesus Christ; or to his love and Peace.

10. For they have not out of their literal 1 Timothy 1. a. 2 timothy 3. a.
secret mind of God, nor the clear ground of the services and Cer^monies of the
Christians; therefore also they have consulted or held Councels thereof: and
are even so become disputing and at variance betwixt themselves, about the
Scripture, and about each others opinion and institution of his Ceremonies and
Services, and have not inherited the true love and peace of Christ.

11. Whereout each one may by himself, well perceive and mark, Jer. 8.23 c. d.
that it is mere Lies or untrue, what such Scripture-learned (through the
knowledge which they get out of the Scripture) bring in, institute, preach, and
teach.

Romans 6.12. a.
in his death; become renewed with him, in a new life: and in whom the living
God with his Christ, has even so then obtained Joh. 14. c gal. 4. b.
his dwelling and shape. From whose bodies likewise, the words of God and
Christ, do then slow forth Joh. 7. d.
as living waters; which also concordably agree with the testimonies of the
holy Ghost; and with our Writings and their requiring; as also with the
requiring of the Law, of the Prophets, and of the Apostles of Christ.

13. Behold, out of the declaring of these upright followers of Jesu Christ in
the requiring of his doctrine, till unto his love, it shall now all (whatsoever
concerns God and his Services) be uprightly and according to the truth, used
and ministered in his right Ordinance, according to the Scripture. Let every one
now therefore have a good regard hereunto, and take it effectually to heart.

14. WHat we had here more to say, of the dissension, of the contending, about
the Ceremonies; and of the pernicious Sectaries and Heretics (and who they
are) is declared in The Glass of righteousness.

The XXXIIII Chapter.
BUt the whilst now that the figurative Services and Ceremonies of the
Christians, yet flourished in vigor; and that the discordable minds, out of
the knowledge of the Scripture, did daily increase (to a more intangling) with
much contending and disputation of Christ and of his Services and Ceremonies:
and that many good-willing hearts (which had great Mat. 5. a
hunger and thirst after the righteousness) searched the Scripture (for to
understand the truth and the will of God, and to live therein) with great
diligence and zeal, and sighed* and prayed unto God: so has God at the last,
remembered the desolate, Exo. 3. a psalm. 9. b.
heard the ^ighing and prayer of the poor, and for his chosens sake (to the end
that his Truth, and what his will is, might (before all lovers of the Truth)
be made manifest or declared, and the Scripture fulfilled) Mat. 24. c.
shortened the days, according to his promises, and (through the hearty
mercifulness of his love) wrought a great Hab. 1. a. act. 13. e.
and wonderful work upon earth, out of his holy heaven; and Joh. 6. e. act. 17.
d. Romans 8. b. 1 cor. 6. b. 2 cor. 4. b. ephesians. 2. a.
raised up me HN, the least among the holy ones of God (which lay altogether
dead, and (without breath and life) Ezekiel. 37. b.
among the dead) from the death, and made me alive, through Christ, as also
anointed me with his godly being; manned himself with me, and godded Joh. 17.
c. 2 pet. a
me with him, to a living tabernacle or Joh. 14 c 2 cor. 6. b. apo. 21. a.
house for his dwelling, and to a Psa. 45.89. c. ^sa. 16. b.
seat of his Christ, the seed of David, to the end that this wonderful works
might now Isa. 2. a. joel 2. c. acts 2. b.
in the last time, be known; the light of his glory (with full clearness and
instruction) reavealed; and the coming of his Kingdom (to an Evangely of the
same Kingdom, and to the Genesis 22. b.
blessing of all Generations of the earth) Mat. 24. b. apo. 14. a.
published in all the world, according to the Scripture.

2. Behold and consider (my beloved) how wonderfully Psalm. 4.68, d.
God works in his holy ones: and how that now in this Day or light of the
love, the Romans ^4. b. ^ Cor. 5.
Judgment Seat of Christ is revealed and declared unto us out of Heaven (to a
righteous Judgment upon Earth) from the right hand of God: and how that on the
same Judgment Seat of Christ (that the Scripture might be fulfilled) there
sits 2 Reg. 7. b. psalm. 98. c. d. isa. 16. b. 32. a. 42. a. jer. 23. a. 33.
b.
one now (in truth) in the habitation of David: which judges uprightly,
thinks upon equity, and requires righteousness.

3. Through him, God will now in this day (which he himself has appointed; or
ordained thereunto) judge the Act. 17 d
compass of the earth with righteousness.

4. In which this same day or last Time [namely, in the perfection of the works
of God, and in his righteous Judgement] the God of heaven has now declared
himself and his Christ, together with Isa. 3. b. mat. 24.25. d. jude 1. b.
all his Saints, unto us (his elect;) also made a dwelling with us; and brought
even so unto us (out of his holy being) the most holy of his true Tabernacle,
Psa. 66. a apo. 21. a. b.
with the fullness of his garnishing, and spiritual heavenly riches, to an
everlasting fast standing Jerusalem, Joel 3. c. apo. 21. a.
and house for Gods dwelling, according to the Scripture. The which is the very
true Dan. 2.
undisturbable kingdom (full of all godly Power, Joy, and of all heavenly
beautifulness) wherein Psa. 67.96. Joel. 2. c. apo. 15. a.
the laud of the Lord (with fullness of the eternal life and lovely sweetness)
is sung, from everlasting to everlasting: and wherein all minds man. 5. a.
of pure hearts, Lev. 26 b 2. cor. 6. b apo. 21. b.
do dwell, live, and walk (with freedom, and Christian triumph) in all love.

1 Timothy 1. b.
great grace and mercy is chanced unto us, for that we should Mat. 24. b. apo.
14. a.
publish the true Evangelie of the Kingdom of the same light, in all the world,
for a witness unto all people, and to peace and joy, as also to an eternal
Deuteronomy. 4.32.
mercifulness or pitying of the servants of the Lord, or of all them that seek
the Lord, that the Scriptures might become fulfilled; and all such as remember
the Lord, be Isa. 2. a. 13. c. 60. a. jer. 3. b. 50. a. eze. 13. c.
assembled (in the body of Christ) unto this his seat of the righteous
judgment, and to his Most holy of the true Tabernacle or house of his
dwelling; and not for our sake, nor for any man's righteousness cause.

6. For even so (in all such sort as God has now made manifest his wonderful
work, upon the earth) must the Scripture be fulfilled; his Most holy declared;
to an everlasting, true, and perfect light; and evangelized or published in all
the world to an everlasting Isa. 32. c. mica. 4. a.
rest and peace of his holy ones.

7. For I say unto you verily, that the Lord has wrought this wonderful work
of his love (extended on us out of his grace) for his own sake, for to make his
holy Name, now in the last time (according to his promises) Psalm. 113. a. isa.
59. c. mal. 1. b.
great and glorious in all Lands: and so to declare his truth and
righteousness, upon the earth: to show his true God-service: to consecrate or
hallow again the Holy of his true Tabernacle (which has a long time, utterly
lain waste with Dan. 8. b. 9. c. 11* d. 12. a. mat. 24. b
many abominations) through his gracious word and service of Love, out of the
light of the Most holy: and to set up again Dan. 8. b 9. c. 11. d.
the daily offering, which has also ceased a long time, for the abomination of
desolations cause, To the end that the same might be ministered in his upright
Service (like as in times past) to the purging and forgiveness of sins.

8. EVen thus would the Lord let his Word Isa. 2. a. mic. 4. a. acts 2. b.
in the last time) upon earth, that his promises might be ^stablished; the
hungry souls, satisfied Mat. 5. a.
with righteousness; the Scripture Luke 24. c.
fulfilled, in all what God has spoken through the Spirit of his Prophets and
of his Christ; and the man (which has utterly corrupted his understanding,
with the knowledge) Mat. 24. c.
made safe and blessed, out of his grace, according to the promises.

The XXXV Chapter.
BEhold (ye dearly beloved) how that now in this present day, the Scripture
becomes fulfilled, in all what it mentions of Christ, Genesis 21.22. isa. 2. a.
60. a. mal. 3. a. 4. a. mat. 24.25.
of his seed, and of the coming of his glory.

2. Which coming of Christ in his glory (like as the same was in times past
published Isa. 40.49. mal. 1. b. act. 13. ^. romans 9. b. 21. a. b. c.
unto the heathen, and also believed of them) God has now in the last time,
declared among the Heathen; and showed mercy on the Heathen, before all other,
that the whole earth might be Isa. 11. ^. hab. 3. b.
filled with his glory, like as there is written thereof: Number. 14. c.
As truly as I live (says the Lord) the whole world shall be filled with the
glory of God.

3. Further, says the Lord through Esdras, They 4 Esd. 1. ^.
that have not heard me shall notwithstanding believe me, or put their trust in
me: and they to whom I have showed no tokens, shall do the thing that I command
them. They have seen no Prophets: yet shall they call their unrighteousness to
remembrance. Therefore witness I mercy (says the Lord) unto the People which
are to come: whose babes or little children, rejoice them with gladness. And
although they see me not with bodily eyes, yet believe they in the Spirit, the
thing that I say. I will give unto them the Dukedom of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and of the Prophets.

Isaiah: Isa. 5. ^. 11. b.
The Lord will display or set up a Banner, far-abroad among the Heathen; and
allure them from the ends of the earth.

5. Again, through Ezekiel: Eze. 39. c.
I will bring my glory among the Heathen, that all Heathen may see my Judgment
that I have kept; and my hand which I have stretched out over them, to the end
that the house of Israel may thereby know that I (the Lord) am their God, even
from this day forth, for evermore.

6. Again, over Israel: Soph. 3. b. zec. 2. b.
O thou Daughter of Israel, I will build thee again, that thou shall be firm
and sure.

7. Again: Number. 24. a.
The habitations of Israel are very goodly: For they are like broad valleys, as
the well-watered Gardens, by the Rivers, and as the Tabernacles which the Lord
stablisheth, even like the Cedars planted by the water side. There shall water
flow forth out of his bucket: and his seed shall be a great water.

8. BEhold, In this present day, is this Isa. 26. b dan. 12. b 4 esd. 7. d John
5. c. 1 these. 4. b
resurrection of the Lords dead, comes also to pass presently in this same
day, through the apearing Mat. 24. d. 25. d. luke 17. c act. 1. b.
of the coming of Christ in his Majesty. Which resurrection of the dead (seeing
that the same is come unto us from Gods grace) we do likewise in this present
day) to an Evangely or joyful Message of the Kingdom of God and Christ) Mat.
24. b. ^po. 14. a.
publish in all the world, under the obedience of the love.

9. In which resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us, that the time is
now fulfilled, that his dead (or Isa. 26. d 1 Cor. 15. ^. 1 these. 4. b
the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord) rise up in this day of his
judgment, and appear unto us, in godly glory: which shall also (from
hencefo^th) live in us everlastingly, with Christ, and Apo. 5.22. a.
reign upon the earth: wherein the Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present
day, like as there stands written thereof:

10. The Deuteronomy. 32. d.
Lord shall judge his people: and he will have mercy on his servants or
ministers. For he shall behold that their power fails them.

11. Again: The Lord slays, Deuteronomy. 32. d. ^^b. 13. a. sap. 16. b.
and makes alive: he leads into hell, and brings thereout again.

12. The Lord makes poor and rich: 1 Reg. 2. a.
he humbles and exalts.

13. He lifts up 1 Reg. 1. a. Psalm. 113. a.
the needy out of the dust; and exalts the poor, out of the mire, that he
might set him among the Princes, and let him inherit the seat of honor.

Isa. 57. b
will not contend for ever, nor be always angry: but there shall a spirit or
wind blow from my face, Ezekiel. 37. b.
and I will make breath.

15. Again, Christ speaks touching him which believes in him: Joh. 6. ^
I will raise him again in the last day.

16. Again, Act. 17. ^.
The Lord has appointed a day, in which he will judge the compass or circuit
of the earth, with righteousness, through one man, in whom he has decreed it:
which holds forth the Belief before every one, inasmuch as God has raised
him from the death.

17. Again, Apo. 21. a.
There shall be no more death, sorrow, wailing, nor pain: for the first, is
passed by. And he which sat upon the seat, spoke, Behold, I make it altogether
new.

The XXXVI Chapter.
WIth this resurrection of the Lords dead, God the Father does now declare,
Joh. 14. c. apo. 21. a*
for his dwelling, and lives and walks in us with his holy ones; wherein the
Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present day [namely, in all] like as there
is witnessed and written, of the resurrection of the dead; and of the restoring
of his house or tabernacle. Wherewith God shows now unto us, that in this
present day, the time of the restoring of his house is fulfilled: whereout the
salvation of the people is evermore manifested; and Gods true light, Word,
Spirit, and life; Isa. 2. a. mica. 4. a.
published or preached, and whereout also the same shall always and for ever,
be published and declared, to the end that they all (which have a desire unto
the house of the Lord, and turn them thereunto) might now, according to the
word of the Lord, be assembled unto the Lords house; and Isa. 60. a
walk in his light: wherein the Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present
day, like as there stands written thereof:

2. It shall come to pass in the last time (says the Lord) that the Isa. 2. a.
mica. 4. a.
hill whereon the house of the Lord is* shall be erected; and exalted above all
hills: and all the Gentiles shall run thereunto; and much people shall go
thither, and say, Come, Isa. 13. c jer. 50. a. zec. 8. b.
let us go up to the hill of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: that
he may teach us his ways; and that we may walk in his paths.

Jerusalem, and the hill of Sion. Therefore shall now likewise [namely, where
the house or dwelling of the Lord is] the Isa. 2. a. mica. 4. a.
law of the Lord proceed out of Sion; and his Word, out of Jerusalem: like as
there is written thereof.

4. Further* Christ says also touching the house of the Lord: Joh. 14. c
Whosoever loves me, he will keep my word: and my Father will love him. We will
come unto him, and make a dwelling with him.

5. Again: Apo. 21. a.
Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men: And he will dwell with them: and
they shall be his People: and he (God himself with them) will be their God. And
God will wash away all tears from their eyes.

6. VE^ily, with all these, and in all these 2 Reg. 7. b. ^ isa. 9. a. 11.16.
jer. 23. a. 33. b. dan. 7. ^. 7. ^.
Kingdom of the seed of David, and the seat of the true majesty; and the same
is also established with us (for the righteousness cause) even for ever and
ever, To the end that the same Kingdom of the seed of David, and the seat of
his Majesty, might endure for ever and ever, like as the Scripture witnesses
thereof. Wherewith the Lord shows and makes known unto us, that the time is
now fulfilled, and the day come, wherein he establishes his promises, and
accomplisheth it all, which he has assured Psa. 89. c. d. 110. a a 132. b.
or promised (in times past) unto his servant David [that is, unto his beloved
service:] wherein the Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present day, like as
there stands written:

7. I will raise up thy seed (says the Lord to his servant David) 2 Reg. 7. b.
1 per. 18. b.
that shall proceed out of thy body after thee. I will make his kingdom to
prosper. He shall build an house for my Name: and I will make the seat of his
kingdom prosperous for ever. I will be his father, and he shall be my son,
says the Lord.

8. Again, 2 Reg. 7. b. 1 par. 18. b. psa. 89. d.
I will keep my goodness toward him for ever: and my Covenant shall stand firm
unto him; I will give him seed perpetually; and uphold his seat, so long as the
heaven endures.

9. Again, Isa. 16. b.
There shall be a seat prepared, through grace or benignity, that one may sit
thereon (in truth) in the habitation of David.

David) shall now in this day make manifest it self, and come forth in
righteousness: and shall likewise through us (out of this our true ministration
of the love) spread abroad and publish the Lords righteousness: wherein the
Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present day, like as there stands
written thereof:

11. A Psa. 22. d.
seed shall serve the Lord: The Lord shall be published or declared unto
childs child: that is, from generation to generation for evermore.

12. Again, Psa. 92. b.
Such as are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
our God: and when also they are old, yet shall they blossom; and be fresh or in
good liking, for to declare that the Lord is righteous.

13. BEhold (ye dearly beloved) how that Isa. 29. b. c. dan. 12. b. 4 esd. 6. c.
sealed-to prophecies opened; and al^o accomplished, in this present day. And
consider likewise, how that the God of heaven* has showed his great love,
grace, and m^rcy, on us little ones, Isa. 57.66. a. mat. 11. c.
and Gods elect; brought the Most holy of his true Tabernacle (in his perfect
building and gorgeous garnishing) to us or in us, out of his holy heaven; and
declared the same (to an everlasting manifestation of the perfection of all his
works) through us, upon the earth; To the end that his gracious Word (which he
has spoken in times past and Jer. 13. b
raised up with us, according to his promises) might rem^in and stand fast
with us from henceforth for evermore, and the Scripture and all what it
witnesse^h and requires, perfectly accomplished; and this day of love and of
salvation of the godly and heavenly clearness (which is revealed and come unto
us little ones, with whom the living God of heaven has begun his work, to
bring it to perfection) published in all the world: and that likewise (in the
passing through with his light) the true Psa. 96. b 4 esd. 7. d. isa. 16. b.
judgment seat of Christ (before the which every one is debtour to humble
himself, with naked heart) might (in the same day) be seen among the People;
and the true most holy of the true Tabernacle, ministered ^verlastingly (in his
true being) in the same day. And that even so the mercy-seat of the godly glory
(with his treasures of the spiritual and heavenly goods) may bide and reign (to
an eternal rest and peace of his holy ones) Isa. 9. a. 11. a. 32. a. 42. a.
jer. 23. a. 33. b. apo. 5. b. 21. a. 22. a.
everlastingly on earth, like as in heaven, according to the promises.

14. WHat we had here more to say, of the wonderful works of God; of his love
extended (out of grace) unto us; and of the fulfilling of the word of the Lord
and of the Scripture, is declared in The glass of righteousness, and in more
other testimonies of our writings.

The XXXVII Chapter.
perfection or consummation of all the works of ^od) under the obedience of the
love. For all foregoing services (which are proceeded from God; and
administered out of his light Mat. 24. d. mar. 12. c luke 10. c. 1 cor. 13. b.
direct and lead unto the most holy and his Service.

2. For that cause, they all cease, and are fulfilled (or have accomplished
their services) in the same perfect being; namely, after this manner: to wit,
to show faithful obedience, from the beginning of the Christian life, till
unto the perfect 1 Cor. 13. b. ephesians. 4. b.
old age of the most holy being of Christ; namely, from the 2 Co. 6. b. apo.
18. a.
departure out of the heathenship (through the 1 Pet. 1. b.
obedience of the Word) unto God his Covenant of the Genesis 17. b.
circumcision of the holy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: That is, unto the
fear of God (the forefront of Gods true Tabernacle) whereout the beginning of
the godly wisdom proceeds or springs.

3. For with the said holy Fathers, God Genesis 17 b. 26. a. 28. b.
in his Covenant of Circumcision: and even so (in the same service) builded or
set up the forefront of his true Tabernacle, with the Fathers of his Covenant.

4. From the service of the Fathers, ^n Gods Covenant of the Circumcision, and
of the accomplishings of the same service, in the fear of God (the true
Forefront) Exo. 2.3.
unto Moses, which has (in his service) figured forth the true being of the
true Sanctuary or Tabernacle of God in the Spirit; and the accomplishing of the
true God-service (as a to-coming righteousness and perfection of all the works
of God) Exo. 25.26. etc lev. 1.2. etc. number. 3. etc.
in images* figures, and shadows, according to the very like manner or
ordinance, as it was ministered by the Priesthood of Aaron* under the obedience
of the Law.

5. From the service of Moses, and his prefiguration of the upright
righteousness and holiness unto 2 Reg. 7. b. isa. 16. b. jer. 23. a. 33. b.
King David and the Prophets of God: to whom the true being was showed, in the
spirit of their sight: which likewise bear witness and proph^sie (in their
service) out of the light, and through the Word of the Lord, on the true being,
like as the same in this present day* is come unto us.

David and the Prophets, Mat. 11. b. luke 16. b.
till unto John the Baptizer with the water of repentance, the true mal. 3. a.
mat. 3. a.
foregoer or the foregoing light, that goes before Christ (the true true
being) for to prepare the mal. 4. a. luke 1. b.
hearts of men (in his service) to the true being, in the confessing of their
sins, and in Mat 3. a man. 1. a. luk 3. a.
repentance for those same* for to make them even so meet, to enter into the
holy of the true Tabernacle of God, to the knowledge of the true salvation in
the forgiveness of their sins.

7. From the service of John the Baptizer with the water of repentance, and the
accomplishing of the same service, Mat. 3. b mar. 1. a. luke 3. b. joh. 1. c.
unto Christ and his service in the belief, to justification in the Spirit; And
this is the true service and Heb. 9. b
offering of Christ, in the Holy of the true Tabernacle of God. In whose
accomplishing, the images, figures, and shadows do cease, for that with the
man, in the accomplishment of the requiring of the Word of Christ (through
Christ, and through his service in the belief) the true being and the perfect
rig^teousness, with the ministration of the heavenly goods, becomes made known
in the Act. 1. b 2. a.
spirit of the inward man; and all what God requires of the man, fulfilled or
accomplished.

8. For through Christ, and through his service in the belief, God has builded
his Holy of the true Tabernacle, according to the true being (whereof the
figurative services gave their shadows, and whereon all the Prophets of God
have prophesied) with the disciples of Christ; as also manifested and
accomplished the true Isa. 53. b mat. 26.27. mar. 14.15. heb. 9.10. b.
offering (to the forgiveness of sins, and to an everlasting atonement of the
generation of mankind) in the Holy.

Mat. 28. b. mar. 16. b luke 24. ^. f.
ordained them to Elders of the holy understanding, and to Ministers of the
same service in the belief or faith: and is even so ascended Mar. 16. b. act.
1. b
into heaven to the right hand of God his Father, and entered into the most holy.

10. And from thence he has, out of the same most holy, Act. 2. a.
poured forth his holy Ghost, upon his Disciples: sanctified his holy, and
ministered the same (in his full service) according to the true being; as also
established the true Testament with them, to the Jer. 31. d luke 22. b. heb.
8.10. b.
forgiveness and purginig of sins: and has even so declared (in the heaven)
the most holy unto them, and given them to understand, how that he would bring
the same again (in his coming) upon the earth (with power and glory) in the
last time; and set up again his true forefront and holy, each one in his
ministration; together with the daily offering, Number. 14. c. isa. 11.59 c. hab.
3. b. mic. 4. a. mal. 1. b
to an everlasting glory and majesty of God upon the earth, like as there is
written and witnessed thereof.

11. BEhold, in such wise (as is said) have the foregoing services (which the
God of heaven has brought again, and erected with us, through his Christ)
their ministration, to the most holy Mat. 22. d. mar. 12. e 1 cor. 13. b.
being of Jesu Christ, which is the true light of life; and the most holy of
the true Tabernacle it self. Wherein it becomes all fulfilled, that is
promised by the God of light: and written of Christ.

12. And this most holy whereon we witness,

13. Therefore also is this day or light of the love, with his service in the
most holy, the last day, and the perfection or conclusion of all the works of
God. In the which God himself, with his Christ, Mat. 24. d. 25. d. jude 1. b.
and with all the thousands of his Saints (as in the most holy of his true
Tabernacle) appears and comes unto the believers and obedient ones to the
requiring of his word, to an eternal Heb. 3.4. a.
rest of his holy ones and to a Godly consolation for all afflicted hearts,
which hope on God and on his righteousness, and bear the love of God and
Christ, in their hearts, To the end that they all which love God and his
Christ, might now live Zech. 8. a. ephesians. 4. a.
lovely and peaceably in the same rest (with all the holy ones of God and
Christ) in all love.

14. Which most holy (the most pure perfect beauty) and his upright and
gracious service of love, we have received or attained unto, now in this last
time: wherein we inherit the John 10. b.
fullness of the life (to an everlasting joy) with God and his Christ. And that
same most holy and his service of love, reaches also no further: but it is the
perfection it self. 1 Cor. 13. b.
For that cause, the services of love (which the Lord has erected with us
little ones and elect ones) shall stand fast everlastingly in his ministration,
and remain for ever, according to the Scripture.

Psa. 95. b. heb. 3. b.
bitter-hearted, either offended thereat, neither hardens his heart
thereagainst: but 2 Co. 6. a. gal. 6. b. h^b. ^ ^. ^.
respects the same gracious time, to the end that he may enter into the rest
of the Lord, and that the severe Judgment (which comes (in this last day)
upon all ungodly and resisters of the service of love, and upon all rich
knowledge full wise, which have corrupted the Genesis 6 b.
way of their understanding, in the knowledge) fall not upon him, to his
condemnation.

16. Yea happy is he, which now respects well the true light: and assembleth
him in this day, unto the Heb. 5. a
mercy-seat of the Majesty of God and Christ, to his salvation.

17. For after this day, there shall no day of grace more, Apo. 10. a.
come upon the earth, because all the works of God, and his prophecies, become
fulfilled (according to the Scripture) in the same: and for that the Mat. 13.
c. 25. d romans 2. a. 2 these. 1. a
righteous Judgment of God (to an everlasting death and damnation of all
ungodly, and to an eternal life and salvation of all the holy ones and elect of
God) becomes also executed therein.

The XXXVIII Chapter.
COnsider and mark (ye dearly beloved) in generation of mankind (that the same
might be set up again in the godly nature and form (wherefrom it is Genesis 3.
a. s^p. 1. b. 2. ^. romans 6. b.
fallen away or estranged) and so become saved) with the foregoing services,
till unto this service and day of love of the perfection. In which day, the God
of heaven has also brought again and erected with us, the right ministration
of his foregoing services: and will likewise (in this day) with all that same
which he has spoken and w^ought from the beginning of the world; and restored
again with us, execute his righteous ^sa. 96. (...). d. (...).
judgment, to death and to life, like as there is written thereof.

2. Wherefore awake Man. ^4. ^. lu^^ ^^ ^. d.
now all: lift up your heads: hear and see the wonderful acts of God: and have
regard unto the 1 Cor. 15. ^. 1 t^es. 4. b
sound of the last

3. The forefront of the true tabernacle of God, wherein the beginning of the
true god service and of the upright Christian life becomes erected; The holy
of the true tabernacle of God, wherein the true god-service and his requiring,
and the obedience of the belief even unto the upright Christian life, is
accomplished, and the veil removed from the most holy; The most holy of the
true tabernacle of God, wherein the perfection of the true Christian life, and
all that which God has spoken from the beginning, and promised through his
prophets, is set up; The kingdom of the God of heavens, Romans 14. b. apo. 21.21.
a.
full of all pure beauty and heavenly powers, wherein all minds of pure hearts
do live (with Christian triumph) Jer. 23.33. b.
free without fear; The day of the Mat. 25. d. act. 17. d.
righteous judgment of God, in which the compass of the earth becomes judged
with righteousness; The Romans 14. b. 2 cor. 5. b
judgment seat of Christ, before which all things must needs be manifest; The
perfect being of God and Christ, in his abundant clearness of the godly light;
The true Heb. 3. b 4. a.
rest of all the children of God, in their perfect loveliness and upright
being; The Mat. 13. b.
mystery of the heavenly truth, wherein the right service of love has his
ministration. And the declaring of the spiritual Treasures, or riches of the
heavenly goods, which are administered and brought through the service of love
(to an everlasting perfection) unto the upright of heart, and wherein al
unperfect or childish things, images, figures, and shadows do cease, becomes
now in this present day (O ye lovers of the truth) Apo. 14. a.
evangelized and declared unto you all: and thereto also ye all (so well as we)
were Genesis 1. c. sap. 1. b.
created, for to live therein: and are called and bidden unto the same (out of
the grace and mercy of God) by me HN, in whom God has sealed the dwelling of
his glory, and his holy name.

4 Esd. 8. f isa. 60. b. apo. 21.22. a.
gate of the kingdom of the God of heavens, the entrance into the Paradise of
God or pleasant garden of the Lord, and the way to the Tree of Life, opened;
and great joy published, unto you all: and that the God of heaven Act. 3.
restores again with us (in this day of his love) all what he has spoken
from the beginning of the world, through the mouth of his holy Prophets.

5. Whosoever now therefore, are the People of the Lord, and all such as have a
desire to do his will, They shall now be well able to understand, that this our
testimony and doctrine, is of God, and come (with Psa. 59. a. isa. 2. a. 13. c.
jer. 3. b. 50. a. eza. 37. ^. zac. 8. b.
humbled hearts) unto the house and work of the Lord; submit them before the
Lords feet; and be assembled with us (under the obedience of the love (unto the
communiality of the holy ones of God; and Joh. 17. c.
incorporated (to all unity of heart, of the one man of God) into the true body
of Jesu Christ.

6. But whosoever appertains not to the Lord; has not minded the love,
truth, nor unity of heart; nor believed me HN, in the service of love: but
supposes to be wise, out of his own spirit and understanding; excuses or
justifies himself; and so has no desire unto the will of God my Father, He
shall not desire to come unto us, nor to make manifest himself, in this day:
before the Romans 14. b.
judgment seat of Christ.

7. BUt I say unto you verily, Whosoever assembleth Isa. 16. b romans 14. b
this seat which God has prepared to Judgment (let him then cover himself, so
subtly as he will) in his sins, and in his perverse and corrupt nature, 1
Cor. 4. a.
as also in his averted or off-turned meanings from us and from the requiring
of the service of the love of Jesu Christ; hear the judgment or sentence of
his condemnation, Matthew* 25. d.
out of the righteous judgment of God; and bear the burden of his damnation.

The XXXIX Chapter.
Apo. 19. a.
supper of the lamb) look now diligently unto it, that he make not his excuse
nor seek to clear himself, either with this or that: and so disdain this voice
or cal^ing. Like as (in times past) They that were bidden to the supper of the
Lord, Mat. 22. a. luke 14. b.
sought delays, and excused themselves: and for that cause, tasted not the
Supper of the Lord for evermore.

2. Therefore let no man bind his heart now, on Wife, Child, Oxen, Lands, nor
on any manner riches of this world. But let him turn his heart unto these
infinite riches of the heavenly goods.

3. And if any man now be (without the house of the Lord) Mat. 24. luke 21. b
in the field, or on the top of his own house, let him not go in again (to his
house) for to fetch any thing thereout: but let Mat. 16. c. luke 9.14. c.
him leave and forsake all that, and turn him hither-ward, and Isa. 2. a. mat.
24. b luke 21. b.
come to this holy mountain, whereon the house of the Lord stands, and his
daylight shines and let him Isa. 60. a
walk in the same light, That the abominations of the wicked world, and her
condemnation* Luke 21. d.
catch or take not hold of him as a snare.

4. For this is the condemnation, which goes (now in the last time) over the
man; namely, that Joh. 1.3. b.
the light is come into the world, and that the man loves the darkness, more
then the light: despises Pro. 1. c.
the proffered grace: and takes not heed unto this gracious time, to his
renewing and Salvation in the Spirit.

5. In which time (the whilst that the grace of the Lord stands open, and
that there is Isa. 55. 3
yet space, to obtain grace with the Lord) the hearts of the believing men are
changed or renewed; 4 Esd. 2. c. d. 6. c.
as also grounded (with minds of pure hearts) in the living God; and assembled
to one heart, and to one man in Jesu Christ.

6. For the Lord has now set his help, Psa. 89. c.
on one that is mighty; and exalted him, whom he has chosen out of the People.
The Lords hand shall advance him; and his arm shall strengthen him.

7. For that cause, Psalm. 107. c.
the righteous shall now see their desire, and rejoice them. For all Iniquity
shall be compelled to stop his mouth, because the Lord with his Saints, is now
Psa. 7. b. 9. a.
become judge himself, and this his day of love (which the Psalm. 118. c.
Lord has made for us (which walk in his light) to mirth and joy) shines so
clear and bright.

8. Therefore shall now also the eyes of all men be Isa. 2. b. 5. b.
humbled; and the People which have exalted themselves, shall be fain to bow
them: and Mic. 4. a. soph. 3. b. hag. 2. b.
there shall be peace upon earth.

9. FOr behold, The Lord makes now Isa. 57.60. b. zech. 9. b.
of peace, which publish peace abundantly: wherein the Scripture (like as the
Lord has spoken thereof in times past) becomes fulfilled in this present day;
like as there stands written thereof:

10. I (says the Lord) Isa. 66. b.
enlarge the peace among you like a water-stream; and the might or dominion of
the Heathen, like a river which flows over with water. At that time (says
the Lord) ye Isa. 66. b
shall suck; and be born upon the sides or in the arms. They shall dandle you
on their knees. And I (says the Lord) will comfort you like as a Mother
comfort her Children, when any evil happens unto them.

11. Again: Eze. i1. d. 18. d. 36. c.
I (says the Lord) will give you a concordable heart, and plant a new spirit
within you.

12. BEhold (ye dearly beloved) all this same does the Lord now accomplish in
this his holy day, with us little ones, humble hearts, and elected ones of God.

13. Therefore our Psa. 71. c
mouth shall now in this day, be full of laughter; and our tongue, full of
boasting. For great and mighty is the glory of the Lord, here among us, in this
house or temple of his dwelling. For that cause let every one come hither now,
unto this house of the Lord, whereout Isa. 2. a. mica. 4. a.
the glory of Lord is declared, and his righteousness taught.

14. COme now all, ye thirsty souls after Isa. 55. a eccl. 51. d.
and assemble you into the house of instruction. Wherefore should ye now tarry
any longer, or defer the time, seeing that your souls are exceeding thirsty?

15. For even for your sakes, I open my mouth, and cry, Isa. 55. a
Come, I pray you, and buy you wisdom without silver or money: and Eccle.
6.51. d.
bow down your necks under the yoke or ordinance, so shall your soul receive
wisdom. For even thereto have Eccl. 24. d.
I (wisdom) poured out the streams. I am as a course or chanel of the
unmeasurable waters, out of the rivers. I am as the river Dorix [that is, which
is swift] and like a water-conduit, am I gone into the garden of pleasure. I
said, I will water my garden of plants; and fill or make drunken the fruits of
my birth. For an overflowing passage is made for me: and my river reaches even
to the Sea. For my doctrine gives light like the fair morning: and I will
declare forth the same, wide and far abroad. I will pierce through all the
lowest parts of the earth: and I will look upon all such as be asleep: and will
also lighten all them, that hope in the Lord. I will pour out doctrine, like a
prophecy; and leave it unto such as seek for wisdom. I will not make an end
in their generation, till unto the holy eternity.

Eccle. 24. d. 33. c.
how that I have not labored for my self only; but also for all them that
desire the truth and instruction. Therefore apply you now all thereunto, for to
obtain wisdom. Eccle. 51. d.
For she is now near by, and lets her self be found: and brings much rest
unto them that labor in her. Eccle. 3. a.
Her children are a congregation of righteous ones: whose exercise is obedience
and love: and they bring forth that which is the wisdom it self. Which
wisdom, Sap. 7. c*
is the brightness of the everlasting and true light, and undefiled mirror of
the godly powers, the majesty of God, and the Image of his goodness.

17. WHat we had here more to say and to evangelize, of the perfection; of the
rest of the children of God; or the kingdom of heaven; of the most holy of the
true tabernacle of God, and of his service of love; of the true high priest,
and of his office; of the ceasing of the foregoing services; of the publishing
of the Evangely in the last time; of the wisdom; of the truth; of God; of
Christ; of the holy Ghost; of the upright Christian communiality, and of what
being or nature each one is in it self; and of all what is spoken of in this
Evangely of the kingdom, is declared in The glass of righteousness. If ye
therefore (O ye lovers of the truth) have a regard unto the sayings of the
same, ye shall then find the full instruction, of all what is needful for the
man to know (to his salvation) witnessed and declared therein.

The XL Chapter.
O All ye lovers of the truth (to whom I Act. 20. c.
counsel mind and will of God (whereunto every one is debtour to humble and to
Deuteronomy. 4. a. 30. a. 1 reg. 15. c
submit himself obediently:) also Gods wonderful work with his holy ones
(which the wicked world has never known nor understood, and which also Mat.
11. c. 13. b. 1 cor. 2. b.
bideth always and for ever hidden or secret before the same.) and the
declaration of the foregoing services of God; and how that they all lead and
have their ministration, unto the service of love, which is ministered out of
the most holy of the true Tabernacle of God thus largely and in the most simple
manner; and each ones service, briefly and with few words, to an assistance and
introduction unto those heavenly things, which shall yet (in their
manifestation of clearness in the Spirit) be seen and spoken of, in the most
perfect manner.

knowledge which arises in their hearts) to set forth, to preach, nor to teach
any services nor Ceremonies, wherewith (doubtless) they seduce themselves and
other more: but that they ought first humbly Jer. 33. b psa. 59. a. heb. 3. b.
to turn them unto the Word of grace, to submit them obediently under the
service of love (wherein the true light comes with full clearness,) to give
ear and credit to the same, and to accomplish his requiring. For in the same
service, every one shall receive good resolution and instruction, how for to
come to Joh. 3. a. romans 6. a.
the new birth in Jesus Christ, and to what manner of accomplishment, the
services and Ceremonies ought to be used and obeyed, in their right use.

3. And thereto, and to the unity of heart Ephesians. 4. a
in the love, is likewise all my service (chieffest) unto all lovers of the
truth. That they all which love the truth, might now come-somewhat nearer unto
us, in the holy understading; and be 1 Cor. 1. a.
concordably minded with us (under the obedience of the love) to the unity of
the heart in Jesu Christ, and become assembled unto us: and that they should
then even so, so much the better understand, the holy mind of our God, the true
service of love (wherein God (the most highest) has comprehended us.) and the
heavenly truth, witnessed in The glass of righteousness, and administered (out
of love) in this declaration.

4. FOr that cause my desire is unto you all (which read and hear these our
writings) that ye will diligently revolve in mind and thoroughly measure, our
upright and undeceiveable service, showed on you, and the ground of this same;
and have an inspection and consideration (with pure devotion unto God, upon the
understanding of every particular sentence, and whereunto the same serves, to
the Ephesians. 1. b
lightning of our understanding: And take even so good heed, unto the hearty
mercifulness of God showed on you, through the service of love.

1 Timothy b.
undeserved) is this mystery of the works of God, Ephesians. 3. a
uncovered unto you all, which love the truth, and presently in this day of
love, is the Mat. 24. b. apo. 14. a.
Evangely of the Kingdom (which is breathed on and brought unto us now in the
last time (out of of the word of grace, and out of the Spirit of the living God
(to the Isa. 59. c. 54. a. 66. b.
procreating of the living souls of Sion) published or evangelized (in these
Amos 5. b. mic. 2. a. mat. 24. c
perilous times) to the Salvation and Preservation of you all, To the end that
you might now in the last time, be Mat. 16. c. act. 2. c.
led out from the wicked world* and from her perverse generations; be released
from all conceited opinions, which the man takes to him out of the knowledge
of the Scripture; and have your communion or society with us.

6. For our communion in this true light of the love, is the uniformity with
God (the Father,) with Joh. 17. c 1 john 1. a.
his son (our Lord Jesus Christ,) with the holy Ghost ( Ephesians. 1.4. d.
the pledge of the promises of our Inheritance,) and with all the holy ones of
God, in the heavenly being. It is very true.

The XLI Chapter.
UNto this same grace, which is this day (O Ephesians. 4. ^ 1 these. 2. b 2 pet. 1. a.
called and invited.

2. For seeing that this great grace and hearty love, is chanced unto us
(through the appearing Mat. 24. d. luke 17. c. 2 timothy 1. b. tit. 2. b.
of the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ) from God the Father: and that
the Lord has stirred us up, in the end of the world; and sent us in the right
time, for to gather together his chosen holy ones, unto the mercy-seat of the
of the Majesty of God, to unity of heart Ephesians 4.
in the love of Jesu Christ, So pass we with the presenting of the same grace
and entire love of God) through the Nations of People: from the chiefest in the
understanding and knowledge of the Scripture, even unto the smallest and
simplest. For the sound of the last trumpet [namely, the voice or testimony of
the grace of the holy Spirit of love] Psa. 19. a. jer. 25. d. mat. 24. b romans
10. b
shall be heard in all the world.

3. Happy is he which to day hears this voice, and Psa. 95. b heb. 3. b. 4. a.
hardens not his heart: but believing the Word, becomes assembled unto the
body of Jesu Christ (the mercy-seat of the majesty of God) and enters into the
rest of the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 4. d. jer. 29. b.
God and his righteousness, with all their heart) and assemble them with us, to
our communiality of love ( Romans 12. 1 cor. 12. b Ephesians. 4. b.
the only Body of Christ:) and that they might even so enter, with us and all
the children of God, into the rest of the Lord, to their preservation, in this
day of the righteous judgment of God.

5. For that cause, let every one take now good heed unto this Day, and have
regard what the holy Spirit of love requires.

6. For whosoever assembleth not himself (in this day) unto the body of Jesu
Christ, under the obedience of his love: but turns his heart therefrom, he
shall become utterly confused in his heart, and wax (more and more) estranged
from Christ: and have no part with him in this holy day of his coming, nor
enter into his rest, for evermore; but obtain the Mat. 25. d.
condemnation (which also belongs rightly unto him) with all ungodly: whose
part shall be with the devil and all wicked spirits (with the chains 2 Pet. 2.
a.
or bands of darkness) in the fire of hell.

7. They now shall likewise all perish, which remain without Jesus Christ, or
without the communiality of his love; as also such as turn them therefrom.

8. For it shall now (this say I unto you verily) Mat. ^. ^ ephesians. 5. c.
of his Body; and not of them that remain without him, nor which turn them
away from him: much less to them which despise him, and do all their diligence,
Heb. 10. c.
to tread his word of grace (which is proffered unto us all (out of the service
of love) to righteousness, for to be made living in him) under foot, deriding
the same, and blaspheamor dishonouring the spirit of grace.

9. COnsider on the testimonies of the Scripture (ye dearly beloved,) how that
Jesus Christ, is (in this day) only the Savior of his Body. For thus there
stands written of him: Mat. ^. c
He shall save his People from their sins. But not the strangers which remain
without him.

10. Again: Mat. 3. b 13. d. Luke 3. b.
He shall gather the wheat into his barn, and burn the chafe, with everlasting
fre.

11. Again, the Lord Jesus Christ himself says: Joh. 15. a.
Every vine-branch an My.
of mine, which brings forth no fruit, shall be cut off.

12. Again: Joh. 14. b.
The world shall see me no more: but ye (says the Lord Jesus Christ to his
members) shall see me. For I live, and ye shall live.

13. Again: 1 Cor. 15. c.
The firstling which is risen from the death, is Christ: after that, They that
belong unto Christ; or that are of his members [namely, of his Flesh and
Spirit:] which make manifest Supr. 27 a.
themselves, in the time of the coming of Christ, in his majesty; 1 Cor. 15. c.
1 pet. 4. b.
and after that comes the end.

14. Thereof speaks Isaiah also, saying to the Lord (whenas he saw into the
hardness or obstinancy of the People, which should be upon earth, in the last
time:) 1 Isa. 26. c
Thy dead [that is, those which are deceased in the Lord] shall live, and arise
with the Body.

Take it to heart.

The XLII Chapter.
HErewith (ye dearly beloved) will we conclude Luke 21.24.
Scripture must even so become fulfilled, in all what is written of Christ.

2. Whosoever now therefore, has any good willingness toward God, Psa. 34. b.
1 pet. 3. b.
for to do his will, he shall well consider and understand, that these
testimonies, are no Joh. 7. b
manly knowledges, but are proceeded from God; and that they have their service
hereunto, for to pluck all good-willing hearts (in Joh. 17. c ephesians. 4. a.
the unity of the love of Christ) with us little ones and God his elect, under
the grace of life and hand of God, which is appeared unto us now in the last
time, to an everlasting and steadfast Hag. 2. b
peace upon the earth, according to the promises.

3. For that cause (to the end that it may now all be fulfilled in Christ, what
is written; and evangelized in times past of him) all hearts which love the
truth, and also all men, are now called (on the 2 Cor. 5. c.
behalf of the Lord our God) with this or through the service of love, unto the
love (the most sovereign majesty of God our Father,) To the end that they all
might now assemble them (to their preservation in this Mat. 24. a. 1 timothy 4.
a. 2 timothy 3. a 2 pet. ^. a.
perilous time) with us (under the obedience of the Love) unto the true Body of
Jesu Christ; and so we to become incorporated with each other (in all love)
Joh. 15.17. 1 cor. 12. b. ephesians. 4. b. c
into Christ, to one man of God.

4. COnsider now rightly (ye dearly beloved) whereto and wherefore the man is
summoned or required to come unto the majesty of God; and obediently admitted
into the service of love; and wherefore the man is also debtour, wholly to give
over himself unto the Lord, in the service of his love; namely, even herefore,
that the Lord might have his Lev. 26. b. joh. 14. c. 2 cor. 6. b. apo. 21. a.
dwelling and work in the man; and the man to live Zech. 8. d. mat. 22. d
upright and peaceably (in all Love) with God and his neighbor: and so inherit
(under the obedience of the love) the spiritual and heavenly Goods, and the
everlasting life.

5. But if now the man will not do so: and Esa. 42. a. ^8. b. 66. a. ^
robs he God of his, and keeps back from him, that which belongs unto
him: and cannot therefore 1 these. 1. b.
behold the lovely countenance of the Lord in his naked clearness, for evermore.

6. But happy is he, which is Mat. 11. c.
humble of heart, and has bent Psa. 40. a
his desire, to the Lord, and to the holy word of the heavenly truth: and
stands even so 1 Reg. 15. c. eccle. 6.7. b. 1 pet. 1.5. a.
obediently submitted, to the holy and gracious word of the heavenly truth, and
to the requiring of his service of love, and assembleth him to the people of
the Lord. For he shall behold with a pure heart, the gloof God, and live
everlastinlgy.

7. BEhold, hereto (whereunto also all people are now (in repentance for their
sins) called and bidden) was the man Genesis ^. ^ sap. 1. b.
created, the Genesis 22. b.
blessing of all generations of the earth promised, the Law given through
Moses, the Evangely preached (in times past) through Christ, and is now also in
Jer. 33 b joel 2. c. act. 2. b.
the last time (in the glorious power of God) to an introduction into the same,
published Mat. 24. b. apo. 14. a.
and spread abroad (through the holy Spirit of the love of Christ) in all the
world.

8. Whosoever now then Mat. 16. c.
forsakes himself, and gives over himself obediently in Jesu Christ (the
gracious word of the Lord) he becomes now admitted or received in Jesu Christ,
and in the obedience of his requiring.

9. The Lord grant us all, mercy, Baruc. 2. d.
and hearts of understanding, for to understand the clearness of this holy
Evangelie; and a Psalm. 51. b.
willing Spirit, for to give over our selves humbly and obediently, unto the
gracious Word of the Lord, and unto the service of his holy Spirit of love, to
all unity of heart, Ephesians. 4. a.
in the Love.

Amen. So be it.

and elected holy ones of God, which stand submitted under the obedience of the
love, and is willing to give over himself, and his whole heart and mind, to
the unity of heart with us, in the love of Jesu Christ, whereunto he is
summoned and required to come, on the behalf of the Lord, the supreme God: and
whether that he also desires to be partaker of the out-flown grace; and of the
godly Doctrine of the service of the love of Jesu Christ, which we have
received from the uncovered face of God and Christ, and to maintain or further
the same service: like as there is also required or desired, in the distinct
declaration of the requiring of the Lord, set forth Fide. 5. d. ^. f. Rev. 29.
d. ^.
by Fidelitas, our beloved Co-elder in the family of love.

11. Whosoever now wholly agrees herein with us: and stands minded with us,
to the unity of heart in the love of Jesu Christ; and to the godly Doctrine of
the service of the same love, let him then make the same apparent unto us: and
apply himself to be united (to one concordable Communiality of the love of Jesu
Christ) with us, like as we endeavor us toward him: and let us even so (to
all concord, under the obedience of the love of Jesu Christ, and to his true
Peace and upright godliness) be gathered together, So shall then the true love
and peace of Jesu Christ, well obtain the victory in us.



13. FUrther, so is also our desire and Exhortation (out of the submission in
the love of our Lord Jesu Christ) unto you all, that every one (to whom this
groundly instruction (setting forth by the holy Spirit of love) is administered
out of love, and which has assembled him to our Communiality of love, and to
the service of the same) remember this Supra. 1. b.
superscription [namely, Unto the Lovers of the truth etc. To whom (in the
beginning of these Writings) we do write] and make another (which he knows to
love the truth with whole heart, and to stand submitted unpa^^ially to the
love) partake with him of the same grace and love, whereunto he is loved and
assisted, and (out of love) to reach forth the hand or stand helpful, unto such
a one: and that he then likewise, write over his mind, will, or meaning, or
else present himself persoally, as is abovesaid: and so assemble him to the
service of love and to our Communiality, That the love in her service, may be
fruitful with many unto righteousness, and bring forth such* abundantly, to the
laud and praise of the supreme God, and to the peace and joy of all generations
of the earth, according to the promises. The grace of Lord Jesu Christ, be with
you all, Amen.

14. HErewith ye are all (O ye lovers

15. We all hope (in our prayer unto God) of all your goodwillingness, to the
concordableness with us, in the obedience of the requiring of the love.

15. The grace of the supreme God, and the upright righteousness and godly
being of the Communiality of the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ
(whereunto ye are now out of Grace, undeserved; called, and lovingly bidden)
obtain the victory in all your Hearts. Amen.

Sent from the Spirit of love (through love to concord, and through love to
life) into all lands, over the universal world. Charitas Extorsit per H. N.

FINIS.

