THE Pernicious Consequences OF THE New Heresy of the Jesuits AGAINST The
KING and the STATE.

By an Advocate of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most
Sacred MAJESTY. 1666.


THE Dedicatory Preface.
My LORD,
THE title your Honor has (...) these ensuing Papers, and to the Person who
makes them English, defends him from being thought presumptuous, that now they
are published and come abroad in the World: They wear this Cipher in front, as
a Periapta or Amulet to protect him from all malevolent Influenences. And he
had need have a sevenfold Buckler, that has to do with an Host against whose
assaults and stratagems even Kings themselves are not safe from danger. The
Pens and Tongues of their sworn Adversaries have sharpened the Swords and
Poniards, Ovid interest an Ferro, an Veneno perimas? Mariana l. 1. c. 7.
to say nothing of the Knives, the Poison, and the Gunpowder, which have so
often been prepared for their destruction. Much of this is indeed stiffly
denied: but is it not then a wonder, if the Villainies are so detested, there
should be found so few of the Party who renounce it in their Writings? I speak
not here of the Jesuits alone, but (as our Author has well observed) of their
other Churchmen too, who would certainly more decry it, were there not some
other Mystery in it, which we understand not, and they artificially conceal;
when one poor Widdrington and some few others ('till of late the Jansenists)
have been charged with no less Crime then Heresy, for disowning their
pernicious Doctrines: Nay, it has gained that Ascendent in France, (a Country
where these Holy Fathers have stood so long on their good behavior) that they
have even dared to justify the Excommunication of one of their Kings in the
King's own Printing House, at his own Palace, proper cost and charges, and
under his very nose; prevailing with his facility by an unbeard-of and
unparalled insolence: not to mention here Coriolanus's Abridgment, See the
Life of P. Boniface in Binnius's Collect. of Councils.
so destructive to the Gallican Liberty, and other their late practices,
sufficiently detected and perstringed by the Author of this ingenuous Piece.
Methinks it were impossible that Princes, who either loved their People or the
glory of the Crown, should truckle under such Impostors, to gratify a sort of
Phanaticks thirsting after their blood and ruin, to subject it to a foreign and
unreasonable pretense, by the wild and novel interpretation of I know not what
Infallibility, which even those of their own Party deride them for, who have
but a grain of Sobriety.

But what may not they pretend to who can create new Symbols and Articles of
Faith with an unerring Faculty, as well as Confidence? which can make men
believe it is for the Interest of Religion, how flagitious soever their designs
and practices are? It Is but calling for the Chair, and his Holiness dubbs
himself Infallible, and that sufficiently to consecrate the most nefarious and
prodigious of Doctrines: and I doubt not but when the Devil himself tempts men
to the most detestable Treasons, he gilds it also with this Religious Bait.

We have had ample testimony of this, even in Those who amongst our selves had
sucked in the Principles of that Roman Wolf; and which puts me in mind of what
that Hypocrite Rouse (a Partizan of the late Rebellion and long Parliament)
replied to a seduced, but worthy, Person, when near the Catastrophe of our
Liberties he was one day pressed with an evident conviction by what unjust
ways they had pursued the Destruction of that Glorious and Excellent PRINCE
who fell into their Snares, That indeed he could not altogether excuse the
procedure; but this he knew, there lay Honesty in the bottom of it.

Papa post mutare Regna, Bellarm. de Pontif. To. l. 5. c. 6.
and uni auferre, atque alteri confer, tanquam summus Princeps Spiritualis,
si id sit necessarium ad animarum salutem, say the Roman Champions: And would
not one swear the men were Confederates, and understood one another, whose
actions and replies are so near of kindred? Santarel the Jesuit gives for one
of the Reasons why the Pope might depose Kings; Because their Persons were
burdensome to the State: Compare this with the very expression and words of
our late Republicarians. And again, That they have their Authority not from
God, but the Civil Law only, and ex arbitrio Populi, Adversus Edicta Reg. p.
145.
as Creswell words it: Nay, that Kings may be deposed by their Subjects for
sundry Causes, a Nolumus hunc regnare is sufficient. The whole Council of Trent
freed Subjects from their Obedience: Cap. 7. sect. 14.
So did the Rump-Parliament. What an harmony of Confessions is bear! I Will be
bold to affirm, there were never any two Doctrines more conformable, then that
of the Fathers (as they will be called, forsooth) and that of these Novellists,
who have so improved the Zeal of their Predecessors, as if the Aphorisms of
Emanuel Sa, Bellarmine and Mariana, were not the suggestion of a Diabolical,
but the Dictates of the sacred Spirit. And who of either Sect can have the
forehead to deny this, that shall but look into their Writings or Practices,
and the solemnity of their several Approbators and Apologists?

A man needs but to turn over the Persecution of Monsieur Arnald, to find how
these poor men are treated that but offer at the vindication of the Sovereignty
of Kings. I appeal to the horrid Murder committed on those Sacred Heads by
Clement, Chastel, Ravillac, etc. if after those crimson Tragedies they had not
each of them more then one Compurgator; The Mariana's, Veruna's, Guignard's, in
our Milton's, our Goodwin's and our Ascham's, another spawn of these holy
Cleremontanians. The thunder of Paul the IIId against Henry the VIIIth, even
before his more signal Defection, and that he but at first scrupled the
Supremacy, may be paralleled with their branding our most Religious of Kings as
inclining to Popery, who died to defend the most Orthodox Faith in the World.
The Bull of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth is notorious, as well as the
Catastrophe of those who plotted against her Royal Successor by the instigation
of Clement the VIIIth: and what hand they may have had in fomenting our late
Disorders both in Church and State from 37 to 60, let the World judge, when
they seriously reflect upon what Principles the Brethren proceeded, and what
were the Consequences; since nothing save Hell and Rome, could have inspired so
horrid a Rebellion.

But to number the Heads and Authors of this holy Fraud, begun by Mahomet,
Phocas, and Boniface the IIId, almost Contemporaries; to show that Turcism,
Universality and King-killing are of an Age, we may hear it justified, as well
as practiced, out of their own Mouths and Writings, (after a Thousand years
that all the World had condemned it) not as a Probable, but Infallible
Doctrine, if but the Catalogue of their Citations would consist with the limits
of a Preface; since our Author might have filled another Volume with their
Names and Numbers only: Alvarez, Ariana, Augustine Triumphus, Azoride,
Baronius, Becanus, Bellarmine, Bonarsius, Bozius, Campianus, Capistranus,
Carrerius, Catena, Chirlandus, Creswell, Doleman, Duval, Eudaemon,
Fevardentius, Gabulius, Garnet, Greg. of Valentia, Gretser, Guignard, Kellerus,
Lessius, Molina, Pacensis, Parsons, Pelagius, Richeome, Ribadeneira, Rosseus,
Sa, Sadlerus, Santarel, Scribanius, Stapleton, Symancha, Tesmond, Veruna,
Wendeckius, Zodoricus, and thousands more, who have dipped their Pens in the
blood of Kings, with a Praeclare cum rebus humanis ageretur, Mariana de Rege,
l. 1. c. 6.
si multi, etc. as one of these Gallants does not blush to say publicly and in
print. In Concert. Eccles. Catholic. Anno 1583. Treveris excusa, p. 22.
Velim sciatis (says Campian) quod ad Societate^ nostra^ attinet, omnes nos,
qui per totum orbem long lateque diffusi sumus, quorum est continua successio
and magnus numerus, sanctum foedus iniisse, neque quamdiu vel unus nostrum
supererit, studiu^ and consilia nostra de salute vestra (meaning the Subversion
of the Government, and the Religion professed in it) intermissuros: Jampridem
inita ratio est, and inchoatum certamen; nulla vis, nullus Anglorum impetus
superabit: and it is bravely resolved. Nor are these all of one, but of several
Nations also; to show that it is not the Vote of private Doctors only, In
Philopat. 106. See also Bellarm. cont. Barcl. to prove the Doctrine Catholic.
(as Creswell would bear us down) but of their whole College, Divines and
Lawyers too. Et certum est, and de Fide, That if any Christian Prince
deflexerit, shall but warp a little, he is immediately deposeable; and possunt
and debent eum arcere (like another Nebuchadnezzar) ex hominum Christianorum
dominatu: Platina in vita Greg. 7. p. 67.
and who shall say nay? Nos, nos Imperia, Regna, Principatus, and quicquid
habere Mortales possunt, auferre and dare posse. I could not forbear a smile at
the pretty Interpretation which Father Creswel gives to a place of Scripture
upon this Deflexerit which we mentioned: Such a Prince (says he) does ipso
facto forfeit his right of Government, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
7.15.
Si Infidelis discedit, etc. If the Unbelieving depart, let him depart. A
Brother or a Sister (suppose a Subject, He or She) is not under bondage in such
cases.

But all this is no news, My Lord, to those who shall observe how happily they
apply that Concession to S. Peter to invade the unclean Beasts, Act. 10.13
whenever his Holinesse's stomach serves him; Occide and manduca. 1 Cor. 15.25
Christ must reign 'till he have put all his Enemies under his feet: That is,
as one inferrs, 'till the Pope have served all Heretical Kings as Barbarossa
was. To which we add that of Jer. 1.10. See, I have constituted thee over the
Nations and over Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, to destroy, and to
throw down, to build, and to plant; for so they interpret that passage of the
Prophet, as our Author observes. And what of all this? We must know that the
Pope has a faculty beyond any Prophet or Apostle of them all, Carolus Rufinus,
Consil. 109. ^. 1.
as Antonius Maria blushes not to affirm: and Hosius once for all; Unless the
sense of Scripture (says he) be expounded juxta sensum Ecclesiae Romanae,
according to the sense of the Roman Church, it is not the express word of God,
but the express word of the Devil.

My hand trembles to proceed to the rest: and it was high time, My Lord, for
the Gallican Church, as it is for us, to lay their hand to the Buckler, and to
look after these Monsters, who have felt the effects of these bold and perverse
spirits, from their Childeric to their darling Henry his Majesty's renowned
Grandfather; Henry II.
not to mention that Henry of our own. It would fill an Iliad but to repeat the
sad consequences of this exauctorating Doctrine since Gregory the VIIth
degraded that Proto-Martyr-Emperor (as we may style him) to this Idol the Pope.
Henry IV.
And what befell our John of England, whose Crown was given away to Philip
Augustus K. of France, and received again on condition of a sordid Vassalage?
Nor did Innocentius the IVth pretend less to the Emp. Frederic the IId;
Bonifacius the VIIIth on King Philip the Fair; Julius the IId, who deposed John
of Navarr; Sixtus Vtus Henry the IIId, as a forerunner of the Knife.

Who can with patience read the insolent treatment of Celestine the III^
crowning an Emperor with one foot and spurning it off with the other? And where
the neck of a Frederic was proudly trod on, we have beheld the very Marble and
Inscription justified by that perverted Scripture, In S. Mark's Church at
Venice.
Psalm. 91.13.
Super Leonem and Aspidem -- to show their contempt of Kings.

Dr. Parry was encouraged to murder Q. Elizabeth from his Holiness, by an
express Letter of the Cardinal of Como's extolling the design: and Perron has
celebrated the like pretenses, to palliate the Odium, or, at best, leaves it
problematical; when after all that the Third Estate had declared in abhorrence
of it, and the Parricide committed on the person of the French Henry, he tells
us, the Doctrine which renders Kings indeposable is a Doctrine which opens a
gap to no less then Schism and Heresy, and is wholly unnecessary, advising his
Auditors to submit to the Judgment of the Pope, as the only Moderator in the
Case; and what that is, we have in part declared. Woe be to that Prince whom
our Holy Father resigns to Chastisement propter Haeresin; or that the Eruditi
and Graves pronounce for a Tyrant and burdensome to the State; as Pope
Bradshaw and his Assessors not long since with us.

Would one think the action of Jehoiada upon Athaliah should be suborned to
justify a Popish Regicide? But 'twas done zelo matris Ecclesiae, De Inst.
Sacerd. c. 13.
says Tolet. I omit to speak of the Decrees of the Council of Constance against
this accursed Doctrine, so worthily vindicated by our illustrious Author, and
of the Practice as well as Precept of our Blessed Lord himself, the Apostles,
Primitive Fathers, and the Ages they lived in; because they are written with
the beams of the Sun. In Apol. c. 37 Vestra omnia implevimus, etc.
And if Tertullian had not long since assured us they wanted neither Strength
nor Numbers, the duty of our Obedience had been sufficiently described to teach
us subjection to our Princes, good or bad, 'till our modern Cunradus Brunus, de
Haeret. l. 3. c. ult. n. 13.
Fathers did open the eyes of the superstitious World, forsooth, and obtained a
Brief of his Holiness, by which subjects were dispensed withal, ut servirent
tempori -- or until (as our Countryman explains it, Creswel ad Edict. Regi.
Ang. p. 151. and sect. 2. n. 160, etc.
) they should have vires idoneas, sufficient force, which De Princip. l 1. c.
26. p. 178.
Ribadeneira styles Christian Prudence: For then, Omnium Catholicorum
sententia, It Is universally agreed upon, that Subjects are not only to rebel
against Heretical Princes, but are by divine precept, and conscientiae vinculo
arctissimo, and under pain of damnation, obliged to it.

That which I would evince is, the peril Kings are in, who stop their ears to
the Trumpets which are daily sounded to alarm them against a sort of Sycophants
and Roman Pensionaries, who swarm in their Courts and Kingdoms, watching only
for this bloody signal. Let our own incomparable PRINCE but consider, how often
his Dominions have been claimed as Feudataries to the holy See, and how
difficult it would be to wrest it out of these Harpyes talons, had they power
equal to their will, or to the Right they have so insolently forged. Vide Fr.
Bozium Eugub. de Temp. Eccles. Monar. l. 2. c. 1. p. 264, 265, etc. Bell. Apol.
advers Reg. Ang. cap. 3.
The King of England (says Bellarmine) is a Vassal to the Bishop of Rome
ratione directi dominii. What can be more directly said to prove what I assert?
Nay, and, as a learned Prelate of ours well observes, Masconius transferrs the
Title of Fidei Defensor to the Pope also: though it is well known, our Princes
have a right of more antiquity to it then any Pope's donation, Vide English
statutes, 24 H. 8. c. 12. and the very first words of Magna Charta.
and that jure Coronae; as were easy to evince, though we admitted Leo the Xth
to have prophesied that year, John 11.52.
as his brother Caiaphas had done before him.

But this is fortified, say they, by the authority of the Canonists, Decretals,
and, what is yet more formidable then all this, by the subjects and properties
of a new Obediential Vow of an whole Order of King-killers. Let us produce a
specimen or two, to show with what Secrecy and Religion they proceed.

The Jesuit Binet told Casaubon at Paris, that 'twere better all the Kings in
Christendom were killed, then that a Confession should be revealed in which the
life of a Prince might be concerned: and Emanuel Sa, that the Confessor potest
jurare se nihil scire, may swear and lie too, whatever he heard, rather then
detect the Villainy of such a Traitor: Eodemque modo potest penitus jurare se
nihil tale dixisse, etc. And upon this it is that Bellarmine celebrates our
Garnet for his laudable Obstinacy; though the less-perverted Monks of the other
Orders have made no scruple to reveal the Treason, and prosecute the Traitors
to the Gallows.

I tremble almost to repeat the Instance, but it is his Majesty's Grandfather
of Glorious Memory who affirms it of them, That there was not long since a
French Jesuit so impudent as to assert, That if our Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ himself were now conversant on Earth, passible and obnoxious to death,
should any man confess to him that he designed to murder him, he would suffer
Jesus Christ to be killed, rather then reveal the Confession. To this Perron's
Reply is so impertinent and superficial, as one would even blush to see how he
shuffles it over. The Confessor (says he) needs not reveal the manner of his
Treason, it is enough he give the King warning to take heed of himself. So, it is
reported, did the Augurs to the great Caesar; but it prevented not one Stab of
the two and thirty: nor did their Garnet so much as this, nor any one of those
reverend Fathers, that ever I could learn.

But let us have a taste of their Politics. -- Caeso Rege ingens sibi nomen
fecit, says one of Henry the Third's Murderer; and Emanuel Sa, In Verbo
Clericus.
Clerici Rebellio in Regem non est crimen laesae majestatis, quia non est
Subditus regi, The Rebellion of a Churchman against his Prince is no such
thing as Treason, for he is none of his Subjects. An excellent argument to make
Kings in love with Jesuits. But this is not all: Summus Pontifex (says
Bellarmine) Clericos exemit a subjectione Principum: plainly, Non sunt amplius
Reges Clericorum superiores, Kings are no more their superiors; so that upon
the matter, how many Priests and Jesuits in a State, so many Kings and
Emperors. Who art thou (speaking to Princes) that judge another man's
servant? Baronius in Paraenesi ad Venetos, page 47.
Domino suo stat aut cadit, says the Cardinal. And Santarel goes farther yet;
Tractat. de haeres.
Papa sine Concilio -- the Pope does in spite of a Council depose an Emperor;
quia Papa and Christi unum est tribunal, they are Colleagues in Office: but
which is more then Bozius it seems allows, who speaking in the person of Popes
alone, de Temp. Eccles. Monarch. l. 1. c. 3.11.
says, Per me Reges -- By me Kings reing; he may remove them, yea and mulct
them too with death, not for Heresy only, but if they so much as favor it.

I cannot affirm that all our Roman Catholics are of this Belief; but then I
can hardly call them Roman Catholics; indeed, (my Lord) they are not
through-pac'd. We see how Barclay, Watson, Widdrington, Sheldon, Bekinsaw and
others have been censured, hated and reproch'd for maintaining the contrary; as
of old the more loyal Sorbonists, now sinking under this prodigious Tyranny, to
their everlasting reproach, as well as prejudice of the poor Jansenists, who
with the Church of England are the only Confessors amongst all the Christian
Professors now extant, that I could ever read of or discover. And though one
might instance in some few honest Papists who were in times past of this
Opinion too; yet when I seriously reflect how many are now-a-daies devoted to
the Jesuit, I am amazed to consider to what disloyal temptations they are
exposed, even by their very Institution.

Indeed Cardinal Perron denounces severely against any who shall dare to
perpetrate the Crimes; but in the same breath he ingenuously tells us, that he
means it whilst they are Kings, since being once Excommunicated they are no
more so, but become Plebeians, or but Wild beasts rather, made to be taken and
destroyed: and therefore that their new Saint Clement, who murdered Henry the
Third, did not kill the King, because he was deposed. Which Lesson was well
took forth in our late Holy War at home, when they were by no means to kill
the KING, forsooth, but to shoot at CHARLES STUART: For thus have all the
malicious Topics and devilish Arguments been made use of by our late Fanatics,
as if this Cardinal had inspired them: witness what they borrow of him from the
Prophet Abias's deposing Roboam (as they call it, De Laicis, c. 7.
) Azarias's outing Ozias, etc. Bellarmin affirms that Kings are not only
subject to Popes, but even to the most inferior Deacons. We have a Pack, My
Lord, amongst us, that would think themselves much injured to be called
Jesuits; yet speaking of the Consistorian Discipline and power of Eldership,
are bold to say, -- Non hic excipitur Episcopus, aut Imperator: to omit the
famous T. C. and the many others I could bring on the Stage, suffragans of this
Doctrine, had we no worse experience of it. But it is not their Passion for
God, but for the World, which makes these men defend their Interest by such
pernicious Consequences. Add to these the Crew of Anabaptists, and those other
truculent Champions of the Fifth Monarchy, who have improved their Principles
to that notorious height and danger, that God forbid their Dominion should ever
be founded in his Majesty's Grace: For let us but examine what they Teach, and
what they have practiced, from that infallible Dictator in S. Peter's Chair, to
the meanest Sectarian; their Writings and their Actions, from Knipperdolling to
Venner, from Pope Hildebrand to Pope Henderson, are sufficiently instructive
what Princes are to expect.

One would think the divine right of Kings as Superiors, Obedience to
Governors, Relative duty of Subjects, and Primitive Example, had been so
positively described and secured by that admirable Institution of Christianity,
that all who profess themselves of that Belief, Disciples of that Religion, and
who pretend so much to extraordinary Illumination, (from the fatal examples of
the Event of all Rebellions since the very first defection of Lucifer to this
period of ours) should be sufficiently convinced of their duty to Kings as
God's Vicegerents on Earth, and of that irrefragable Truth, That those who
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.

But since a sort of Monsters there are, who neither believe Moses nor the
Prophets, no nor God himself, who rose from the dead to assert and plant the
Doctrine of Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, by the Preaching of his holy
Apostles and their Successors, till of late; what moral Confidence can a Prince
repose in the Pretenses of any who are thus sworn and addicted to their
Tenants? I speak here as to the Jesuits in particular, and to those who of
late lay at his Majesty's feet, out of that Religiou^ pretense, the Tenderness
of Conscience, without ever showing either Religion or Conscience in any their
Actions or Writings hitherto relating purely to his Majesty's Interest, the
Church of England, or her Friends, whiles the years of her most barbarous
Persecution continued; but which if they had done, I would here turn Apologist
in their Cause, and plead it with affection.

But, say those of the Church of Rome, what is the Disloyalty you lay to our
charge? Name us the Persons, and produce the Instances. The Answer is short:
That whiles the Doctrine of Deposing Kings, (whatever is pretended, remembering
that of Charles the Vth, In Pact. Car. V. cum Clem. VII.
Vocem esse Jacobi, manus autem Esau) abetted by so many late Decrees of Popes,
remains uncondemn'd, there is reason sufficient for Princes to be jealous of
favoring a Party who suck in those Principles with their Milk, as many of them
at least as are Alumni of the Jesuits, See the Book entitled, The Jesuits
reasons unreasonable, p. 2. published by a Roman Cath.
and who by the Papists own acknowledgment are not worthy to be considered, no,
not as to Exemption from the most rigorous of our Laws against them. It Is the
same Author who frankly confesses that F. Parsons did most deservedly draw it
upon that whole Order, p. 9, 10, etc.
by his continual and intolerable Practices against the Crowned heads of this
Nation; from whence he inferrs, that neither can his Majesty be safe, for
reasons unanswerable to any that shall take the pains but to survey their
Tenants, and the voluntary Obligation into which they have precipitated
themselves, Slaves to the Pope as they are, and to that Theological Bawd, the
Doctrine of Probability.

But would they now cut off this Objection at once, and give just satisfaction
to the Charge, (as, most assured I am, diverse of his Majesty's loyal Subjects,
of their persuasion in many other things, earnestly contend for, though with
the sacrifice of that whole pragmatical Order, which thus has set the World in
Combustion) let them, and the entire Party, subscribe to all Doctrines which
deny the Pope's authority of Deposing Kings, and releasing Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance; and let the Pope himself approve it, and cause an Index
expurgatorius to be made of all those Authors we have enumerated, and the Books
that more lately maintain and favor it: since even all this were little enough
to secure his Majesty from too just apprehension, whiles that sacrilegious
Thesis, asserting the Pope's Dominion over Temporals, and Infallibility, (even
extra Generale Concilium) is yet publicly cherished, which enables him to
rescind all this in a moment, and Absolve to morrow what he Obliges to day,
Brunus de Haeret. l. 3. cap. 15.
and make that to pass for the undoubted Word of God, which is in truth the
very Doctrine of Devils. For if (as a most pious and learned Prelate of our
Church has explained it) truly and ex animo they are otherwise affected, Bishop
of Down and Conner Ser. on 5. Nov.
they should do well to unsay what has been said, and declare themselves by
public Authority against such Doctrines, and say whether or no their
Determinations shall be de Fide. If they be, then all those famous Catholic
Doctors, Tho. Aquinas, Bellarmine, Creswel, Mariana, Emanuel Sa, etc. are
Heretics, and their Canons teach Heresy, and many of their Popes to be
condemned as Heretical, for practicing and teaching Deposition of Princes by an
Authority usurped against, and in prejudice of, the Christian Faith. But if
their Answers be not de Fide, then they had as good say nothing; for the danger
is not at all decreased: because if there be Doctors on both sides, by their
own Charity maintained by Cath. c. 7.
assertion they may without sin follow either; but yet more safely, if they
follow the most received and the most authorized: And whither this Rule will
lead them, I will be judged by any man that has considered the Premises:
Briefly, either this thing must remain in the same state it is, and our Princes
be still exposed to so extreme hazards: or else let his Holiness seat himself
in his Chair, condemn these Doctrines, vow against their future Practice, limit
his Ordo ad spiritualia, contain himself within the limits of Causes directly
and merely Ecclesiastical, disclaim all power so much as indirect over Princes
Temporals; and all this with an intent to oblige all Christendom. Which when I
see done, I shall be most ready to believe, that nothing in Popery does either
directly, or by necessary consequence, destroy Loyalty to our lawful Prince;
but not till then, having so much evidence to the contrary. Thus far this
reverend Prelate.

And that this is likewise the sense and (as I affirmed) earnest desire of all
the honest men of the Romish Church, is most convincingly, as well as boldly
and loyally, asserted by that learned Remonstrant Remonstrantia Hibernorum
contra Lovanienses, Ultramontanasque censuras, de incomparabili Regum Imperio,
subditorum que Fidelitate and Obedie^tia indispensabili, ex SS. Scripturis,
Patribus. Theologis vindicata, 1665.
R. Carron; whose Vindication of what I here produce against the Jesuits and
other Popish Errors (that Querimonia ad Alex. vij. ibid.
zizania (as he truly styles it) of Infallibility, etc. the subject of the
ensuing Treatise) I find published since this Preface was finished: and I
heartily wish it may produce an Effect suitable to the attempt of that candid
and ingenuous Person; that so, though we have many other failings to charge
them withal, they may yet lessen by degrees, and as God shall please to
enlighten them, till we come to a perfect and consummate Reconciliation.

In the mean time, with what forehead, my Lord, can this Faction cry out
against us as cruel, or at our Sanctions as unjust, whilst his Sacred Majesty
has a faculty commensurate to his Piety, and a Prerogative which can gratify
his merciful nature, without reversing what his Predecessors have enacted, who
reigned in such prosperity, not so much because they executed the Penalties, as
for that they had the power to do it, and did use it prudently: and I confess
I was infinitely pleased to find it avowed by a Romanist, that they were
themselves the occasion of those Sanguinary laws, (as they would brand them)
and to justify them too, as the forecited Author has most ingenuously
acknowledged. And how indeed can that Party exclaim against his Majesty or his
Laws, accusing the Regulars as the persons culpable, and the Seculars as the
persons accidentally and for their sakes only obnoxious and punished, whose
demerits were the cause? It is for these therefore, my Lord, I would sooner
plead for mercy, and in earnest I wish it might consist with the Wisdom of the
Legislative power to state a difference between them. But we have already
described the Expedient: Let them first renounce their dangerous Opinions, by
some such public, irreversible and authentic Act, as may totally cancel the
just presumption which lies at their doors, and at once remove that intolerable
scandal which the World does universally charge them withal, and which even
one of their own acknowledges to be their due, after a thousand notorious
Examples, Proprium esse Ecclesiae, odisse Caesares, Guicciard. Hist. l. 2.
That Popes have even a natural Antipathy to Kings.

It is the Reverse (my Lord) of these Doctrines, and of all those fatal Images
of Jesuitical Disloyalty, for which the Church of England alone will have the
honor to be deservedly celebrated to Posterity. And if his Majesty do not
love and cherish her above all the Churches and Professions under Heaven, a
Church which has so constantly maintained a Truth so ancient, so pure, and so
obliging to Kings, even in the sense and interpretation of her very
Adversaries, who have the least grain of true Illumination and ingenuity; the
Miracle of His and Her stupendous Restoration will rise up in Judgment
against us. But He has already done it to his eternal renown; and I have no
more to add, but that God Almighty would still maintain what he has so
signally wrought amongst us. And for those heroic Assertors of what not only
concerns the French Kings, but indeed all the Crowned Heads of Christendom
besides; mine Option and Augure is, That, as God gave Egypt to the King of
Babylon for his hire and reward in having chastised those wicked Nations he was
angry with; so it may please him to give these sincere Defenders of Jansenius,
and other Truths, in opposition to the Errors of the Roman Court, the Light (in
fine) of his divine Truth, and to emerge out of that Egyptian Darkness in
which the rest are so miserably involved.

These, with my Prayers for your Lordship's consummate Felicity are the Votes
of,

My Lord, "Your Honor's most obedient and most obliged servant.

THE PERNICIOUS CONSEQUENCES OF THE New HERESY of the JESUITS AGAINST The
KING and the STATE.
Advice to the Reader.
THis Treatise being written two years since, and several Copies thereof
dispersed among diverse persons of Condition; it was deemed the conjuncture of
the present Affairs might render the Publication of it necessary for the
benefit both of the Church and the State: But it is thought fit to advertise,
that the Author of this Piece having made use in it of some Memoires concerning
Infallibility, which he had before prepared; these Notes happening to fall into
the hands of a person of small Judgment, he caused them to be printed under the
Title of A Defense of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, etc. adding of
himself a great many impertinent and indiscreet particulars, which have
exceedingly disfigured these Memoires.

IT does not suffice that our Divines have represented to the Church the
Exorbitances of the New Heresy of the Jesuits in what concerns Religion and
the honor of God, to whom they would equal a mortal man by a most sacrilegious
impiety; the faithful servants of the King find themselves obliged likewise to
elevate their voices, and to represent those pernicious Consequences as to what
regards the safety of his Sacred Person, and the good of his Estate.

The Apostle S. Peter establishes for the two principal parts of Piety, the
Fear of God, and the Honor which is due to Kings: Deum timete, Regem
honorificate. If these Divines have satisfied the first of these obligations,
by the just aversion they have stirred up in all pious persons to the
pernicious adulation of the Jesuits, which they have discovered to be no less
then a kind of Idolatry: it were but reasonable that others should satisfy the
second, by inspiring all those who bear any love or affection to their King,
with the horror which they ought to have of a Doctrine which may prove to
funest to his Person, and is in danger of ravishing from him the most august
and supreme Quality that he has received from God, which is to depend on him
alone in Temporals, and to be independent of all other Powers upon the face of
the Earth.

True it is, that his Majesty has already been advertised of it, and has
clearly perceived by that light and vivacity of spirit which all Europe admires
in a Prince so young, of what pernicious Consequence this novel Doctrine was
which they would introduce into his State, and the advantage which they might
take to establish their pretensions, who design nothing more then to reach the
Heads of Kings, and even subject them in Temporals.

It were fit therefore that all the world knew as much, that those who are not
sensibly touched with the prospect of an Error so prejudicial to Religion, (as
falsely imagining it to concern the Divines only) may at least be affected with
the consideration of the prejudice which it may bring to the State, and to the
sacred and inviolable rights of the Crowns of our Kings.

But since the address which has been made use of by the Partisans of those
corrupt Opinions has been to infuse it into the minds of the people masked
under the vizor of Religion and respect to the Pope, and to decry the opposers
of it as enemies to the holy See; it is necessary we should defeat their
artifice by discovering it to the world, and by teaching them to distinguish
(as our fathers have done before us) the Apostolical See from the Court
Politic of Rome, which are things totally different: For that which we are to
understand by the Apostolical Seat is, that Spiritual Authority of the Head of
the Church which Jesus Christ gave to S. Peter, residing in the Pope, and which
all Christians are obliged to acknowledge and reverence, by an inseparable
union with it, as the very center of the Communion of the Church. But the Court
Politic of Rome is nothing else but that Swarm of Courtiers who are about the
Pope's person to advance their fortunes, and thrust themselves into
Church-Dignities; and the person of Popes considered not as Popes, but as Men,
who being as obnoxious as others to their Ambition and other humane passions,
suffer themselves to be often transported by the adulation of their Courtiers,
to attribute to themselves, without reason, Rights and Prerogatives which God
never gave them, and that are equally prejudicial to the Sovereignty of Kings,
the repose of the People, the tranquillity of the Church, the good of the
Catholic Religion, and, in fine, to the true and solid grandeur of the holy
See it self.

In this sense it is we shall speak of the Court of Rome in the present
Treatise, as so many great persons and Saints have already done, by opposing
themselves to their unjust pretensions, without at all thinking they did
thereby in the least violate the respect which they owed the Pope as Head of
the Church; to which they, on the contrary, believed these Opinions must needs
be most disadvantageous. And we have so much the more liberty to do it now,
since the moderation of the present Incumbent speaks him very far from these
ambitious thoughts.

Now amongst all these illegitimate Usurpations of the Court of Rome thus
considered, there has none of them proved more funest to Christian Princes, the
Church, and even to Popes themselves, then that by which some of them have been
transported to domineer over Kings, to make themselves their Superiors and
Judges in the administration of their Kingdoms, and by pretending of a right,
when they fansied it for the cause of Religion, to depose them of their
Empires, and give their Estates to others, or to abandon them to the first
Usurper who had power to make himself Master.

It Is impossible to describe those horrid Confusions which this pretense of
theirs has brought forth in Italy and in Germany for so many Ages together,
the Wars it has kindled, the Blood it has made to be spilt, the Provinces it
has rendered desolate, the Cities it has ruined, the Scandals and Disorders
which it has filled the Church with: But one of its worst effects is, that it
has rendered the holy See (which should as well be the center of the love of
Catholics, as of the Unity of the Church) odious both to Kings and People, by
making them to look upon the Vicar of Jesus Christ not as a common Father, full
of tenderness for all his Children; but as a Temporal Prince, that would
trample all other Princes under his feet, and render himself absolute Master of
all the Kingdoms of the Earth. This is one of the main causes which has made
so many people revolt against the Church of Rome, and the most usual pretense
which they have taken to hinder many Christians from paying that observance to
Popes which they are obliged to render them, by confounding it with these
odious excuses. For having once anticipated the People with this erroneous
opinion, That one could not acknowledge in the Pope that real Authority which
Jesus Christ has given him, without owning that also which these Sycophants
attribute to him over Temporals and States; they have by an hateful Schism kept
them from acknowledging the Pope as Head of the Church, for fear lest they
should be bound likewise to own him for their King and Master.

It concerns the Church therefore to take away this color from Schism, which is
the greatest of all mischiefs, by separating the Spiritual power of the
Sovereign Bishop, as it has been instituted by Jesus Christ, and acknowledged
by all Catholics, from this false and exorbitant power, which Ambition and
Flattery would add to it, repugnant to the spirit of Jesus Christ and the
Doctrine of the Apostles.

And therefore we must needs confess, that the Zeal of the Parliaments of
France for the maintenance of the Sovereignty of Kings against the enterprises
of those who, subverting the Order of God, would have it to depend upon this
Spiritual Jurisdiction, is no less advantageous to the Church then to the
State; and that, on the other part, there is nothing more prejudicial to them
both, then that low and fleshly prudence of these Theologues, who think to
exalt the divine Grandeur of the prime Minister of the new Law, which wholly
consists in the love to eternal good things, and in the despising of the things
of this World, by secular and temporal advantages which God did never annex to
him; or that seek to enlarge their fortunes by this pretended Zeal for the
enlargement of the Authority of the Pope.

It Is known to the whole World, that the Jesuits have within these hundred
years been the chief defenders of these ambitious pretenses, and that their
Society has employed the most renowned of its Writers to disseminate this
Doctrine everywhere: It is this which has been taught by In his Book of the
King, and his Institut.
John Mariana, Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 12. puncto 2.
Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 4. par. 3. tr. 4 par. 411.
Alphonsus Salmeron, In his Truth defended under the name of Francis des
Montaignes, p. 70.
Ludovicus Richome, Of Justice and Right, tom. 1. tr. 2. disp. 19.
Louys Molina, In his Controversies, tom. 1. of the Pope, l. 5. c. 6. and in
his Book against Barclay.
Robert Bellarmine, In his Sermons of Saints, Sermon of the Charity of S.
Peter, page 70.
Johannes Osorius, In his Amphitheatre of honor, lib. 1. ca. 12.
Carolus Scribanius, In his Letter to a French Friend, approved by the general
Aquaviva, page 11.
Andrew Eudemon, Moral Instructions, tom. 2. l. 4. c. 19.
Johannes Azor, In his Treatise of mitigation toward the Catholics of England.
Robert Parsons, Tom. 5. of Censures, disp. 15. sect. 6. number. 7. p. 270. and
in-his Book entitled, The Defense of the Catholic Faith, etc. l. 3. c. 22.
and 23. and l. 6. c. 4. and 8. where he teaches prodigicus things against the
life of Kings, as this detestable Position, Rex talis post depositionem incipit
esse tyrannus titulo, quia non est legitimus Rex; nec justo titulo regnum
possidet: Ergo extunc poterit tanquam omnino tyrannus tractari, and
consequenter a quocunque privato poterit interfici.
Francis Suarez, In par. disp. 87. resp. ad 3. rat. and tom. 2. in c. 2. disp.
169. c. 4. n. 43. Edit. Antuerp. an. 1621.
Gabriel Vasquez, Of Justice and Right, l. 2. c. 1.33. dub. 2. and in other
Books, one of which is entitled An Apologetical Dispute for the Power of the
high Priest.
Leonardus Lessius, In his Book Heretic Chauvesouris, or Vespertilio,
concerning the excellency of the Jesuits Order, page 158, and 159.
Iacobus Gretserus, In his Controversy of England 1. edit. p. 108, 125, 127,
136. and 2. edit. p. 122, 140, 142, 152.
Martinus Becanus, Of Apostasy and Schism, c. 30, and 31.
Antonius Santarellus, In his Treatise of Controversies in particular, c. 6. q.
10.
Vincentius Filiutius, Tractat. 2. disput. 2. q. 5. art. 102.
Stephen Bauny, etc.

On the contrary, it is well known what extraordinary care the Parliaments of
Paris and the Universities of France have taken to repress the Authors of these
pernicious Opinions; the one by their Arrests, and the other by their Censures.

It Is above an hundred years since, that the Parliament of Paris gave a famous
Arrest upon this Subject, the 4 of December, 1561. against a certain Bachelour
in Divinity, who had put it into his Thesis, That it was in the Power of the
Pope to excommunicate Kings, to give away their Kingdoms, and to absolve their
Subjects of their Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity. This Proposition was
declared seditious; the Bachelour being not to be found, it was ordered that
the Bedel of the Sorbon vested in a red Hood should disavow it before a
President of the Court, and the chief of the Faculty of Divinity; and that
during four years space there should no public Disputation be permitted in the
College where it was defended. This whole affair is twice told us in the
Bibliothec du Droit, under the words Interdictions, p. 4478. and Effigies, p.
1110. And Bouchel, who is the Author of this Bibliotheca, in reciting of this
History adds this Remark; The plain truth is, that within these fifty years
past there is come a certain new Sect to be planted amongst us, called by the
name of Jesuits, who maintain Propositions quite contrary to ours, to the very
ruin of the State.

The same Parliament testifies its zeal for the Interests of the King and Crown
upon several other occasions; as when it condemned to the fire the 8 of June
1610. the Book of the Jesuit Mariana, entitled, De Rege and Regis
institutione; and that after the same manner Iu^. 26. 1614. it treated that of
Suarez, intitul'd, Defensio Fidei Catholicae.

But there was never any thing more celebrious upon this subject then that
which passed 1626. in the censure of Santarel. This Jesuit had written a Book
of Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, etc. printed at Rome 1625. permissu superiorum,
in which (following the common sentiments of his Society) he taught, That the
Pope might punish Kings and Princes with temporal pains, depose and deprive
them of their Kingdoms and States for the crime of Heresy, and for other
causes; as when they were culpable of any fault, if he find it expedient; when
they become negligent of their duties; when they are incapable to govern, and
their persons burdensome to their Kingdoms: He adds, That the Apostles were
not subject to the secular Princes but de facto only, not de jure; and in
sum, that since the Pontifical Majesty had been established, all other
Potentates were become but his Vassals.

So soon as ever this Book appeared in France, the Sorbon, knowing that the
Doctrine was invented and published for the universal destruction of Civil
Polity, and particularly the Monarchy of France, which was at that time
governed by the most Christian, most clement and just King Lewis the XIIIth,
that in treading the steps of their Ancestors, she might testify her zeal and
affection as well toward this Religious Prince, as toward the whole most
Christian Kingdom, and at the same time satisfy that which all honest men
required of her; resolved to examine the two Chapters of this Book of Santarel,
30, and 31, where this matter was treated of: And on the 1 of April 1626.
having first heard the Deputies report, and considered the several Opinions of
all the Doctors, she condemned the Positions (being the common Opinion of the
Jesuits) for a novel, false and erroneous Doctrine, repugnant to the Word of
God, and that renders odious the dignity of the Pope, opens a gap to all
Schism, derogates from the Supreme Authority of Kings, (which depends on God
alone) disturbs the public tranquillity, tends to the ruin of Kingdoms,
States and Republics, debauches Subjects from that Obedience and Submission
due to their Sovereigns, inciting them to Factions, Rebellions, Seditions, in
sum, to commit Parricides against the persons of their natural Princes.

This Censure approved by the whole Body of the University of Paris, and the
rest of the Universitics of France, was authorized also by a famous Decree of
Parliament of the 13. March 1626. which declared the Propositions contained in
this Book of Santarel false, scandalous and seditious, as tending to the
subversion of Sovereign Powers, ordained and established by God, and to the
stirring up of Subjects against their Princes, withdrawing their Obedience,
inducing them to attempt against their Persons and States, disturbing of the
public peace; and ordered that the Book should be torn and burnt, and that the
Jesuits should be obliged to disavow and detest it, and to approve the Censure
of the Sorbon.

This vigorous resistance of the Parliament and Sorbon has of late rendered the
Jesuits a little more reserved in producing to the world this pernicious
Doctrine. But as they never abandon what they have once undertaken, they have
invented a way of establishing it after a more dextrous, but more dangerous,
manner: for daring no more to propose it grossly and in terminis, they work
more subtily to introduce the Principles on which it depends by necessary
consequence; wisely judging, that if once by their artifice they can but
deceive the vigilance of our Magistrates and the Sorbon, they shall easily make
the People swallow it whenever they please, and that as a Truth indubitable,
which they will show by a necessary consequence from what they have already
made pass for a most Catholic Verity.

This is that which the Jesuits have done in maintaining that famous Thesis of
the 12 December 1661* as a Catholic Truth repugnant to the Greek Heresy
concerning the Primacy of the Pope, namely, That Jesus Christ has given to all
Popes ( whenever they shall speak e Cathedra) the same Infallibility himself
had, as well in matters of Right, as in those of Fact.

And that we might not imagine there were any great mystery in this condition,
When they should speak out of their Chair, Cum loquerentur ex Cathedra, they
expressly declare, that this Condition does not concern the Pope's speaking in
the head of a General Council: And in proposing for example, for one
Constitution made ex Cathedra, the two Constitutions on the Five Propositions,
they give us clearly to understand, that they do not pretend, that to the end
the Pope should speak from his Chair, it were necessary for him to assemble so
much as a Council of the Bishops of his Province, as the other Popes did; or
that he should consult the College of Cardinals, as they have since done,
(enterprising nothing (how inconsiderable soever) but by the advice of their
Brethren, De consilio Fratrum;) but that it is sufficient for him to speak in
his Bulls, or from the Constitutions and Decrees which use to be pasted up on
the Gates of S. Peter and in Campo de Fiori; this being the only solemnity
which at Rome they pretend does render them sufficiently authentic, and that
without so much as thinking it necessary they should be received and published
in the Provinces.

See now to what a height the Jesuits pretensions are come. All that the Popes
say in their Bulls and Constitutions, as well on matters and questions of Fact
as those of Right, is to be looked on as indubitably true as if Jesus Christ
had himself avowed it; the Pope's Infallibility being still the same,
(according to their reckoning) on these occasions and incounters, as that of
the Son of God himself.

Now how little so ever one knows of the Fundamentals of Santarellism, that is
to say, of the Doctrine which affirms the Pope has power to depose Kings, it
must needs be acknowledged that it is established by this Thesis of the
Jesuits, and that it is after a sort made more pernicious and criminal then
ever it has hitherto been. For the defenders of this Doctrine, so prejudicial
to Kings, were contented to establish this temporal power in Popes, by showing
that they themselves did attribute it to themselves by several Bulls and
Decrees; and that so we were bound to believe them, as being infallible in
matters concerning Faith. But there was none of them that yet durst deny but
that Popes might fail and be mistaken in the exercise of this power, because
none of them did ever think them infallible in Questions which concerned the
Fact; whereas the Jesuits now presume on both: They render Popes absolutely
Masters of Kings, in attributing to them (who by so many Bulls have defined
their Superiority over the Temporalty of Kings) the very same Infallibility
with Jesus Christ, even in matters of Right; so as they leave a King whom a
Pope had deposed no place of appeal, or so much as to complain that the Pope
might be mistaken in the matter of Fact, upon which they had judged him worthy
of so severe a punishment: since by this new Doctrine of the College of
Clermont he is equally infallible, whether he judge in general, that he has
this power to depose Kings, which is the Question de jure; or in particular,
that such a King merits to be so used, which is the Question de facto. We must
therefore clear these two points; One, that the Infallibility of the Pope in
matters of Right is, according to the Jesuits, the establishment of his Power
over Kings; the other, that his Infallibility in matters of Fact takes away all
means from the Kings they please to depose, to complain of so rigorous a
Sentence.

For the first, it is an easy matter to convince all the world of it: nor ought
we to imagine it a Consequence held only by those who profess themselves
enemies to the Jesuits Doctrine, and which the Jesuits disavow; it is a
Consequence which they themselves derive from it, which they everywhere
acknowledge must needs follow, and which does so indeed naturally and of
necessity. For Popes (as Jesuits themselves have learned us,) have so many
ways decided that they have power to degrade Kings, and dispose of their
Kingdoms whenever they judge it for the interest of Religion; that if to be
Catholic one is obliged to consider all that Popes say in their Chair, that
is, by their Bulls, as Decisions of infallible authority, and Oracles
pronounced even by Christ himself, Kings, their Ministers and Parliaments, must
either renounce the quality of Catholic, or else tamely acknowledge that Kings
are Sovereigns independent in respect of their own Subjects and other Princes,
but nothing so in regard of the Pope, but that he has power to make them
descend from their Throne, and to resolve them into their simple Originals; so
as exercising a Royalty superior to theirs, it may be said of his Empire as an
heathen Poet said of that of God, Omne sub regno graviore regnum est.


All this is an infallible consequent of Infallibility, as the Jesuits well
prove. For who can choose but believe that Popes have the power to depose Kings,
if once he be persuaded that their Decisions are so many Articles of Faith;
when it shall be showed him that Gregory the VIIth has decided it in express
terms in a Council held at Rome, Anno 1067, according to Onuphrius, Baronius,
and all the Jesuits, Quod Papae liceat Imperatores deponere; quod a Fidelitate
iniquorum subditos potest absolvere? Whence In Apol. pro potest. sum. Pontif.
part. 2. sect. 3. fol. 396. Plane tenendum est hanc doctrinam non esse
ambiguam, ita ut utrumque opinari liceat; sed omnino certum, ita ut absque
injuria fidei negari non possit. Primo igitur id probo, Quia hae Propositiones
in terminis definitae sunt in Concilio Romano, Quod Papae liceat Imperatores
deponere, quod a Fidelitate iniquorum subditos potest absolvere. Atqui
definitio facta a summo Pontifice cum Synodo ad Fidem pertiner.
Lessius the Jesuit concludes (supposing the Principle of Infallibility) That
this Doctrine is no problematick Doctrine, but a constant Truth, not to be
denied without violation of our very Faith. We must absolutely believe (says
he) that this Doctrine (viz. that the Pope may depose Kings,) is an undoubted
truth, and not such as we may believe what we please of; but such an one as is
entirely certain, not to be contradicted without wounding our Faith. And this I
prove, first, Because these Propositions are defined in proper terms in the
Roman Synod under Gregory the VIIth, where it is affirmed, that the Pope may
depose Emperors, and absolve the Subjects of wicked Princes from their Oath of
Allegiance and Fidelity. Now a Definition made by a Pope in Council is matter
of Faith.

This is clear now without mincing, nor can it be more expressly declared that
the power to depose Kings is a necessary consequent of Infallibility; so as
those Jesuits must needs be very impudent who shall after this dare to affirm,
that they are their Enemies who derive this sequel from their Doctrine.

The Jesuit Cardinal Bellarminus sub nomine Sculkenii adversus Widringtonum.
Haereticum est dicere Pontificem, ut Pontificem, and ex jure divino, non habere
potestatem Principes seculares suo Principatu exuendi, cum id bonum spirituale
sive ingens Ecclesiae necessitas requirit. Probatur Conclusio. Ista sententia
est haeretica cujus contradictoria est de Fide: Sed Pontificem habere
potestatem deponendi Principes est de Fide: est enim definitum and conclusum a
Gregorio VII. in Council. Romans Quod Papae liceat, etc.
Bellarmine, under the feigned name of Sculkenius, writing against Widrington,
proves in the same manner by this Gregorian Decree, that the Pope's Superiority
over Kings is an Article of Faith, It Is an Heresy (says he) to affirm that
the Pope, as Pope, and ex jure divino, has not the power to depose Secular
Princes of their States, as often as the public good or some urgent necessity of
the Church does require it. I prove this Conclusion. An Opinion becomes
heretical when its contradictory is de Fide: But it is de Fide that the Pope
has power to depose Princes; since it has been defined and concluded by Gregory
the VIIth in a Roman Council, where it says expressly, That the Pope may depose
an Emperor.

Now who can deny this Conclusion that holds but the Principle, which is, That
what has been defined and concluded by a Pope is de Fide? Is not this Argument
of the Cardinal invincible, supposing the Maxim to be true? By consequent
then, who can doubt but that, according to the Jesuits opinion and the truth
it self, the power of deposing Kings is in the Pope a certain Consequence of
his Infallibility?

The same Gregory the VIIth has so often decided the same Point, that no man
questions his pretense of making it an Article of Faith; as may yet be seen in
the Bull of the Deposition of the Emperor Henry the IVth, made likewise in
Council, where, addressing his speech to S. Peter and S. Paul, he thus
expostulates.

Now therefore exert and vindicate your power, O great and most holy Princes of
the Apostles, that all the world may take notice and acknowledge, that if you
can bind and loose in Heaven, you can also on Earth dispose of Empires, of
Kingdoms, Principalities and Marquisates, in sum, of all men's goods and
fortunes whatsoever, by taking them away from those who deserve them not, and
by bestowing them on others. -- For if you judge things Spiritual, shall we
believe you have not the power to judge of Temporal and Secular? Let all the
Kings and Princes of the Age learn what your grandeur is and your power, and
not dare to despise the Commandments of your Church: and be sure to leave such
prompt and lasting marks in the judgment which you exercise against Henry, that
his ruin be not attributed to the fate of arms or fortuitous accidents of War,
but to your sole and almighty power.

In consequence of this he denounced to the Emperor, as from God, that he
should never win battle. But if Popes are infallible according to the Jesuits
in actions past, it is certain, at least, that they are not in those which are
to come. For never did Prince gain so many, remaining Victor in more then 50
pitched Battles, and having at the very first slain the person whom his
Holiness had designed to make Emperor in his place.

I could recount a number more of Passages relating to the same Pope, where he
argues for the same Doctrine, as visibly founded in the Scripture, and annexed
to the Papal dignity. For it is not imaginable that he should pretend only this
right over Emperors, because the Popes had so much contributed to the
re-establishment of the Western Empire. On the contrary, it is perspicuous that
his pretense was over all Kings, and that it was built on that Supposition of
his, viz. that the power of the Keys contained in it the Temporal Superiority,
which made him set upon the Crown he sent to Rodulphus, Usurper of the Empire,
this Latin Verse, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho. To show that he
believed he had power to dispose of Kingdoms by a right pretended to be given
S. Peter by Jesus Christ himself. It Is likewise on the same basis he threatened
Alphonsus King of Arragon, to stir up his Subjects against him, if he gave him
not speedy satisfaction concerning a certain affair: As, according to Cardinal
Bellarmine, he braved Philip the Is It King of France, to show that he exempted
none.

But nothing does so evidently discover that one cannot acknowledge the Pope to
be infallible, but that at the same moment we must acknowledge him likewise
above Kings in Temporals, as that famous Decision of Pope Boniface the VIIIth
has done in the Bull Unam Sanctam, approved by Leo the Xth in the Council of
Lateran; and the use which the favorers of the Roman Court make of this Bull
to establish its pretensions.

There this Pope defines, That both the one and the other Sword appertains to
the Church, and to the Pope: That the Temporal Sword is subordinate to the
Spiritual, and the Temporal Authority to the Authority Spiritual: That if this
Spiritual power deviate from the right, it must be judged by the Spiritual
authority: That this power was bestowed on S. Peter and his Successors: and
That whoever resists this Subordination of Power, resists Order, in
establishing two Principles like the Manichees. Whence he concludes, that it is
necessary to Salvation, that every humane power should submit it self to the
Bishop of Rome.

Cardinal Bellarmine, a Jesuit, in his Book against Barclay concerning the
Power of the Pope, proves by this Bull, that Kings are subject to the Pope in
Temporals; and this Doctrine is certain and most indubitable. Now that it is
(says he) a thing constant and evident, that the Sovereign Bishop may for just
causes be Judge of Temporals, and sometimes depose Temporal Princes, we prove
by the Extravagant Unam Sanctam de majoritate and obedientia, which shows us
that Sword is subordinate to Sword; that is, that the Temporal Authority is
below the Spiritual: and that if the Temporal neglect his duty, it shall be
judged by the Spiritual. And for fear it should be objected, that Clement the
Vth seems to have revoked this Bull by the Extravagant Meruit de privilegiis;
he prevents the Objection by saying, that Clement the V^h did not revoke the
Bull of Pope Boniface, but advertised only that this Bull of Boniface had
defined nothing new, and had only revived the ancient obligation which men
have to obey and submit themselves to the Apostolical See, in the manner he
had before declared, and which this Bull does observe; that is to say, as well
in Temporal things as Spiritual.

Alexander Carrerius of Pavia, in a Book entitled De potestate Primi
Pontificis adversus impios Politicos, Of the power of the Sovereign Bishop
against the impious Politicians, (which is the name he gives to the French, and
particularly the Parliament,) proves by the same Bull, that the Superiority
over Kings in Temporals is an Article of Faith. This Power of the Pope (says
he) over the Temporals of Kings is confirmed by the testimony of Jeremiah; Jer.
1.10.
See I have this day set thee over the Nations and Kingdoms to pull down and to
destroy, etc. as it is also decided by the Extravagant Unam Sanctam; where it is
said, that if the Temporal power deviate from the right, it shall be judged by
the Spiritual, declaring that every humane creature is subject to the Bishop of
Rome, and that this is necessary to Salvation. Therefore Boniface writ to
Philip King of France in these terms: Know that you are subordinate to us both
in the Temporal and Spiritual; and we do hold and declare them Heretics who
maintain the contrary. For there are three marks whereby to distinguish matters
of Faith. The first is, When the Decrees of a Synod are couched in these terms,
If any one affirm such or such a thing, let him be accursed. The second, when
it says that those who maintain the contrary shall be Excommunicate ipso
facto. And the third, when those of the contrary opinion are reputed and held
for Heretics.

In fine, Cardinal Baronius having in a certain place mentioned the very Bull,
concludes, that none do deny this Determination of Boniface, unless such as are
excluded from the Church: Haec Bonifacius, says he, cui assentiuntur omnes
nisi qui ab Ecclesia excidit. And very well argued it were, if to be a member
of the Catholic Church it were necessary to believe the Pope infallible; since
there is nothing more trifling and absurd then those Subterfuges which some
Authors retire to, to put themselves under covert from this Bull, because they
would fain support the Pope's Infallibility, but dare not maintain his Temporal
Sovereignty in France.

The chief of these is Doctor Duval, who, in his Treatise of the Power of the
Pope, avows that Boniface the Eighth did establish his Superiority over the
Temporalty of Kings through the whole body of his Bull; but says, that in all
the Bulls there is nothing save the Conclusion which is of Faith, and that the
Conclusion of this in particular imports only, that every creature is subject
to the Pope: which is true (says he) as it relates to Spirituals.

Certainly, if the Authority of Kings had need of so pitiful a Reply, one would
conclude it built on a very weak foundation, Nullas habet spes Troja, si tales
habet.


For what appearance of Reason is there in this learned Doctor's Solution?

1. How does he pretend we should believe that a Pope, who makes a Bull only
to establish his Superiority over Temporals, (which is the thing contested, and
not over the Spirituals, which no body does dispute) and that he who speaks
throughout his whole Bull of this Superiority in Temporals, should in the last
line form a Conclusion different from the Principles which he has established,
and that we are only to regard this last line?

2. The word subesse indifferently signifying a subjection in Temporals as well
as in Spirituals, is it not clearly expressed and determined to Temporals by
all that precedes it?

3. How shall we ever comprehend what a Bull means but by the way it was then
understood when it was made, as well by those who opposed it, as those who
defended it? and do not we know the troubles which then disturbed all France
and the Church caused by this pretense of the Pope, maintained by his
Partisans, and contested by all the French?

4. In fine, has not Boniface himself explained his own words by another Bull
shorter then this, which he sent to King Philip in these terms, Scire te
volumus, quod in Spiritualibus and in Temporalibus nobis subes; aliud
credentes, Haereticos deputamus? Whence Carrerius, as we have already seen,
concludes well, (supposing the Pope infallible) that those who disagree
concerning the Pope's Superiority over the Temporals of Kings are Heretics.

And the French of those times, without amusing themselves with Monsieur
Duval's Sophistry, answered after another manner, and sufficiently testified,
that the opinion of Infallibility was not so much as known in France. See an
Act of the whole Kingdom against these Bulls of Boniface VIIIth, as it is
inserted in the first Tome of the Liberties of the Gallican Church.

Of You, Sir, our most Noble Lord, by the Grace of God King of France, the
people of Your Kingdom supplicate and desire, (because it behooves them so to
do) that You preserve the Sovereign Freedom of your Kingdom, which is, that
You own and acknowledge no Sovereign on the Earth over Your Temporals, but God
alone; and that You give all the World to understand, that Pope Boniface does
manifestly err, and commit a most notorious mortal sin, in sending You word by
his Letters and Bulls, that himself was Sovereign of Your Temporals, etc. and
those who should believe the contrary, he esteemed as Heretics. Also that You
cause to be declared, that we are bound to hold the Pope himself an Heretic,
and not You, good King, and all the liege people of Your Kingdom, who have ever
believed and do believe the contrary.

The same Protestation is to be seen in several Acts inserted in that
Collection which Mons. du Puy has made of the difference between King Philip
the Fair and Pope Boniface; where you will see how Pope Boniface's Bulls were then
explained, and what was the opinion of France touching Infallibility.

It Is in vain to strive to make any other replies to these kind of Popes
Decrees, then such as the French of that Age did before us. For as there is
nothing to which the Court of Rome aspires with greater passion then to this
Temporal Empire; so neither is there any thing which the Popes have established
with so much industry.

Cardinal Bellarmine sums up no less then 18 since Gregory the VIIth to our
times, who manifestly attributed to themselves this right (as they called it)
of deposing Kings, and chastising them temporally, even to the privation of
their States; viz. Victor the IIId, Urban the IId, Paschal the IId, Gelasius
the IId, Calixtus the IId, Alexander the IIId, Innocentius the IIId, Honorius
the IIId, Gregory the IXth, Innocent the IVth, Boniface the VIIIth, Clement the
VIth, Paul the IId, Julius the IId, Paeul the IIId, Pius the Vth, Gregory the
XIIIth, and Sixtus the Vth.

He counts to 16 or 17 Kings and Emperors against whom Popes have pretended
this right of Sovereignty as a debt due to them; amongst which there are 5
French Kings, Philip the Is It, Philip the Fair, Lewis the XIIth, Henry the IIId,
and Henry the IVth.

Baronius mentions also the Excommunication of a world of Germans, who are not
yet well agreed concerning the Pope's Power: by which it appears that they
always pretended to make it an Heresy when at any time they were the
strongest party.

Nor is there any thing more frequent in these Bulls then their menacing Kings
and Princes to deprive them of their States, in case of Disobedience. Which
universally betraies that Passion which the Court of Rome has to infuse this
belief into the minds of the People.

But if one could forget those other enterprises of Rome against our Kings,
which are founded upon this pretented Superiority, as this Superiority is upon
Infallibility, since France has so universally hindered their effects; yet we
cannot but remember that which made us lose Navarre, because the wound is yet
bleeding. Ferdinand had no other pretext to swallow it up from John d' Albret,
Great-Grandfather to Henry the Great, besides a Bull which he obtained of
Julius the IId against the King and Queen of Navarre, importing Privation of
their Kingdom for having assisted Lewis the XIIth, whom it called Schismatic,
and as having denied passage to the Army which Ferdinand King of Arragon would
have sent into France to assist the King of England in the conquest of Guienne.

I know very well that Cardinal du Perron, to render this Doctrine of the Power
of Popes over the Temporals of Kings less odious to the French, tells us, that
the real cause of the loss of the Kingdom of Navarre was the breach of the
Alliance which the King of Navarre had with Ferdinand King of Arragon, which
Ferdinand pretended to have been established on condition, that if the Kings of
Navarre should violate it, the Kingdom of Navarre should again revert to the
Spaniards, who had rendered it by deed in Writing to the race of Albret; and
that Pope Iulius's Excommunication was neither the true Cause, nor real
Pretense, but a certain tail of a Pretense, which though Ferdinand had made no
use of, he had notwithstanding pretended that the Kingdom of Navarre
appertained to him, and consequently possessed it.

But I know as well too, that there is nothing worse founded then this answer,
as Mons. du Puy has made appear by most invincible proofs in his Treatise of
the Right of the King to the Kingdom of Navarre.

For he does there prove by the Spanish Historians themselves, that Ferdinand
during the Usurpation, and whiles he lived, had only the Title by the Pope's
Excommunication to justify his Arms. He shows how Ferdinand having swallowed
up this Kingdom 1512, and being pressed by the King of Navarre 1513 to do him
reason, defended his possession by no other right but by that of the
Excommunication; and that in the two most authentic Acts on this subject, one
whereof is the Will and Testament of Ferdinand, by which he bequeaths the
Kingdom of Navarre to his Daughter Jane Queen of Castile, and the other of the
Union of that Kingdom to that of Castile, it is expressly signified, that John
d' Albret and Catharine his Wife had been deprived of it by the Pope, for
having adhered to the Schism of the French Kings against Pope Julius the IId;
and that the Pope had given him this Kingdom to dispose of as he pleased. I
omit the other proofs. Which sufficiently shows that the Pope's Bull was no
tail of Pretext, but indeed the only and sole Pretense of that unjust
Usurpation which continues to this very day.

In the second place, there is nothing more absurd then to say that the
Spaniards had never rendered the Kingdom of Navarre to the race of Albret, but
with this written Caution, That if their Successors should violate the
Alliance, the Kingdom should revert to the Spaniards. For Iean d' Albret (on
whom was the Usurpation) was the first of Albret's race who possessed the
Kingdom. How then could it be said that the Spaniards had rendered it to
Albret's race, who before never enjoyed it? And supposing we did take the word
rendered for given; it is no less false that the Spaniards (were they of
Arragon, or Castile) gave this Kingdom to the race of Albret, who in no sort
held it of the Spaniards but by the Marriage of Catharine, who succeeded King
Francis Phoebus his Brother, and Francis Phoebus to Elianor his Grandmother,
wife of Gastion de Foix, and sole superviving Daughter of Blanch Queen of
Navarre, which Lady had espoused John King of Arragon the Father of Ferdinand,
who being born of another Venture had nothing to do with Navarre: So as this
pretended Caution can be no other then a mere impertinent Fable without any
foundation, since the Spaniards having neither rendered nor given the Kingdom
of Navarre to the race of Albret, they could never appose any caution or
condition either in rendering or bestowing it.

Thirdly, The Spaniards themselves could never yet produce any Treaty of
Alliance between the Kings of Arragon and those of Navarre where this Condition
was appos'd: though, besides all this, it be beyond the power of Kings to annex
any such Condition, since they are not so Masters of their Kingdoms, as to
transfer them to any others then those who are their legitimate Successors.

Fourthly, In fine, it is plainly false that ever John d' Albret broke any
Alliance with Ferdinand; but, on the contrary, Ferdinand it was who invaded
Navarre in the month of July Anno 1512, and who made himself master of
Pampelona, the capital City of that State, before there were any French in
Navarre; which compelled John d' Albret to throw himself into the arms of Lewis
the XIIth, with whom he was before but in ill intelligence, to endeavor to
maintain himself against this unjust Usurper, who four months before this
Treaty of John d' Albret with Lewis had obtained a Bull of Excommunication of
the Pope against the King of Navarre, as falsely representing, that being joined
with the King of France excommunicated by the holy See, he denied the English
free passage to enter into Guienne.

It is therefore evident that it is only this pretended Power which the
Flatterers of the Pope have of late Ages attributed to him, to dispossess
Kings, and make Donations of their Kingdoms to him that can obtain them, which
has cost our Kings the Kingdom of Navarre; since Ferdinand had but this
pretense only to invade it; and all that the Spaniards would add to it since,
was never so much as in their heads, because it was out of all probability. And
it is still true, that this right is annexed (by all those who defend it) to
this Infallibility.

We see likewise that ever since this, Popes have always favored the
Usurpation of Navarre, as a mark of the Power which they pretend to have for
the deposing of Kings. This is evident by their shunning as much as possible
the qualifying our King with the Title of the King of Navarre; as in the Bulls
of Cardinal Barberin's Legation 1625, wherein the King being but simply styled
King of France, it was ordained by Parliament, that it should be declared by
the Pope, that the quality of the King of Navarre had been omitted by
inadvertency in the said Bulls, and that till that were rectified the Arrest of
Verification should not be delivered, and the Bulls continue without execution
in France.

But what they could not then obtain by the wise resistance of the Parliament,
they have now found an Expedient to obtain by the credit which the Jesuits
have at Court: for finding they had there wrought so great an aversion against
the Iansenists, that there was nothing more desired then their condemnation;
they believed they could make it be purchased with the loss of the Quality of
King of Navarre: nor were they at all mistaken in their expectation. For Pope
Innocent the Xth addressed his Bull to the King by a Breve, wherein he only
styles him King of France; and all who loved the State saw with grief that they
received this Breve so injurious to the King with open arms. You see how well
the Roman Court knows how to profit on occasions and take her advantage, she
never lets any escape which she does not manage with a singular address. But
this Breve will one day prove one of its most memorable examples: since under
color of ruining the poor Iansenists, she has opened a gap to establish two of
the most considerable points of her Grandeur, and which have indeed been the
most contested in France: The one is, That the Pope alone may decide Poins of
Faith with an infallible Authority; the other, That he may give Kingdoms away
at pleasure, as Julius the IId gave that of Navarre to the Spaniards.

By all these proofs it is evident that the Superiority of Popes above Kings in
Temporals is an inseparable Position of Infallibility, as to the pretense of
all those Theologues who are married to the Interest of the Court of Rome,
especially the Jesuits: It Is also clear that the subtilty of those who have
made as if they would separate them has so little basis, that it were an
unworthy and dangerous prevarication in those who are obliged to maintain the
Supreme Authority of their Prince, but to reduce the Right of Kings, which is
certain and indubitable, to so shallow and trifling a defense.

So as the only means of hindering the establishment of this pernicious
Consequence is, to stop that so dangerous a Principle; and above all, not to
permit the Jesuits the impudence of making it an Article of Faith, and the
carrying it even beyond all sorts of bounds, and to an Infallibility in
Questions de facto; which is, in sum, to have given the fatal blow to the
ruin of the Royal Throne.

This is easy to prove. For Popes being once established superior to Temporal
Princes in Temporals, as we have showed they cannot fail of obtaining, if once
we allow them infallible in Questions de jure; what defense remains there to a
Prince against the stratagems of this Power, but the pretense of its being
possibly miss-inform'd, and that it was mistaken in the grounds on which it
proceeded to despoil him of his State?

But what means is there of opposing that pretense against a person who shall
be in possession of the same Infallibility with Jesus Christ in matter of Fact?
What Christian is there who should dare oppose to Jesus Christ that he is
mistaken? and what were there more easy for a Pope then to ruin this defense;
since for that he had only to declare by a Bull that he has well examined the
Prince's Cause, and that he deserves to be Excommunicated and Deposed, to
oblige all the World to believe that he did merit it indeed?

Nor let any pretend that it is not in these kinds of Facts that Popes are
infallible: For both the Principles and Reasons of the Jesuits tend to it: And
the benefit of the Church (which is the sole foundation of this Imagination)
will rather incline to believe, that God is bound to make the Popes as
infallible in affairs so important as the subversion of Kingdoms, the
consequences whereof are so terrible to Religion it self; as in the judgments
which they make, whether there are or are not Errors in a particular Book,
which is of it self but of very little consequence.

Now if the Jesuits, without any reason, and from an humane apprehension and
fear, should except these Facts, they would not in the least diminish of the
pernicious subjects of their Doctrine; because the spirits of those who are
once imbued with their Opinions would easily break through these weak
restraints, in which they made believe they would keep them, and maugre these
groundless exceptions carry their corrupt principles to all their natural
consequences. So as there is nothing able to oppose the funest effects of this
Doctrine, which subjects Kings to a foreign Power, whiles they permit this
double Infallibility of Fact and Right to subsist, from which it is impossible
to divorce it.

I very well know that there are some who seek several pretexts to charm the
vigilance of Kings and their Ministers, that so they may not perceive how this
Doctrine of Infallibility is prejudicial to States.

One of these Pretenses is, the affirming that this Infallibility relates to
Faith and Doctrine only, which are things Spiritual, and that have nothing of
common with the Temporals of Kings, and the rights of their Crowns.

But there is nothing more unreasonable then this adulterate Color. For it is
true, that indeed this temporal is not of Faith it self, nor is the Doctrine
the immediate Object of Infallibility: But one cannot without Heresy deny that
it may not be the subject and matter of Faith; since it is an Article of Faith
established both by Gospel and the Apostles, that we ought to pay Tribute to
Caesar, which is a temporal thing; and that we owe Obedience to Temporal
Princes, not only to escape the punishment which they may inflict on us if we
transgress, but because we are in Conscience also obliged to it. Non solum
propter iram, sed etiam propter Conscientiam. So as to persuade Kings that
their Temporal is so far remote from Faith, that it can be no matter of Faith,
is to dissolve and break the most sacred bond which unites their Subjects to
their Empire, to wit, that of Conscience and Religion. Faith is in it self a
thing entirely spiritual and divine; but that does no way hinder things humane
and temporal from being very often both the subject and matter of it. War is
a secular thing; yet it is matter of Faith to know whether a Christian Prince
may make war: And the Anabaptists err in matter of Faith, when they maintain
that it is unlawful. The power which Magistrates have to put Malefactors to
death is a temporal thing; and yet it belongs to Faith to decide whether Jesus
Chirst has left this power to Christians or no: and the same Anabaptists, who
deny it, are esteemed Heretics by the Church. Usury is a temporal thing; yet
is it matter of Faith to resolve whether or no it be a sin. In like manner the
Power of Kings is temporal; but it concerns Faith to determine whether the
power of the Keys, which Jesus Christ has given to S. Peter, does extend to
the breaking of that Obligation and Tie which Subjects have to their Sovereign,
by absolving them from their Oaths of Allegiance. It concerns the
interpretation of the words of I. Christ, and by consequent has relation to
Faith: It imports the extent of the power that Jesus Christ has given the Pope,
as his Vicar; which we can know nothing of, but by divine revelation preserved
in the Scriptures, and by Tradition; and by consequence it is matter of Faith.

It is no way then to be doubted, but the Question whether the Pope have any
right to punish Princes with temporal pains, and to divest them of their
States, by virtue of that Authority pretended to be given to S. Peter, is no
concernment of Faith; and therefore it is in earnest a mere mockery, to persuade
Kings, that the Pope's Infallibility does not extend to them, whenas in truth
there are none whom it so nearly concerns as they; since Popes having so often
decided this Right to be theirs, if once the people be suffered to hold them
infallible as to what they determine touching Faith, none can hinder them from
acknowledging also that they do not err in their explication of the words of
the Gospel touching the Primacy of S. Peter, as of an Empire and Monarchy which
extends it self even over the Temporals of Kings.

But, besides this, the question is not of what the thing is in truth, but what
it is in the opinion of the Jesuits, and that the strive to infuse into the
World; seeing from thence it is the ill effects proceed which this unlucky
Doctrine may produce: Error and Superstition being infinitely more capable
then either Truth or Religion to engage an abused people to Insurrections and
disorders more nefarious. Now the Jesuits, as we have already seen, maintain
that this Infallibility of the Pope reaches even to the making their
Sovereignty over Princes an Article of Faith. It is of Faith (say Bellarmine
and Lessius) that the Pope may depose Kings, because Pope Gregory the VIIth has
decided it, and that the Decision of a Pope is a point of Faith.

It were to take away all humane Reason, to hinder men from thus arguing; and
by consequent to sleep on the point of a Precipice, to suffer the Doctrine of
Infallibility to creep into a State, from whence it is impossible but the other
must needs spring.

For having once permitted the people to be seasoned with this Opinion, and
that they are but accustomed to receive all that Popes pretend in their Bulls,
as well concerning matters of Right as of Fact, as if Jesus Christ himself had
pronounced it; if a Pope please to apply the Infallibility acknowledged to be
in him, for the determining (as they have frequently done) that by virtue of
the power which Jesus Christ has given him to bind and loose whatsoever is on
Earth, he has power to depose Kings and absolve their Subjects from their
Fidelity, and that such a King merits to be deposed; it is not to be thought
'twill prove so easy a matter to defend ones self from these Fulminations, by
altering the minds of the people in a moment, and persuading them that he whom
they took to be then so infallible, is now no such thing, or is not at least in
that matter; that is to say, that he is infallible when what he affirms does
not concern us, but ceases to be so when it imports us he should not be so.
This were to make an ill estimate of the minds of men, and of the force which
custom has over them, to suffer one's self to be dazzled with these vain
confidences.

Those Opinions which do by little and little establish their authority in the
minds of men, are weak and tender in their infancy and beginning; nor is it
then so difficult a matter to extirpate them: but when once time has rooted and
confirmed them, they get dominion of Reason, and discover a tyrannous look
against which it dares not so much as lift up its eyes. Capable they are to
precipitate it into all manner of excess, and make men violate the rules of
very Nature, and the most sacred obligations of civil Society; especially when
they happen to be Opinions which possess the spirit by the way of Religion. For
men being once persuaded, (and with reason) that they ought to prefer Religion
before their lives, their goods, and whatever else they enjoy, if in that they
chance to be prepossessed by an error of dangerous consequence to the Civil
state, they maintain and defend it to the utmost. Nulla res multitudinem
efficacius regit quam Superstitio. The League, the Guelphs and Gibelines are
sanguinary examples of it: so as there is not a more mistaken and wicked
policy, then that of those who, minding only the present Age and their own
interest, suffer these Opinions to root themselves; without considering that it
is infinitely more easy to hinder their establishment, then to stop their
accursed effects when once they are confirmed.

The next Pretense is, to make the world believe that there is no such great
reason to apprehend even the Opinion it self of the Pope's Sovereignty over the
Temporals of Kings; because, say they, Popes can exercise in so few Instances,
that they seldom happen; as in case a Prince fall into a formal Apostasy from
the Faith and the Church, to embrace a false Religion. But it is in vain these
Authors endeavor to excuse this pernicious Doctrine by this false Color;
since those whom they would defend loudly disavow them, as not enduring that
any should prescribe such narrow bounds to this Temporal Monarchy.

On the contrary, there is nothing (with these Divines) so ordinary, as the
Occasions for which they give the Pope this right to depose Kings; so as there
is not one in Europe whom they may not justly depose, according to their
Maxims, had they but as much power in effect as they conceive themselves to
have in right.

Is there any thing more frequent then not to pursue the Pope's intentions in
making War or Peace? It suffices the Pope (according to the Jesuits) to
dispossess a King, whenever he shall conceive Peace or War necessary for
Religion. This is what Bellarmine teaches in express terms, in his Book against
Barclay, cap. 19. And what (says Barclay) if the Emperor refuse to draw his
sword at the command of the Pope, or draw it against his will? I answer, (says
Bellarmine) that if the Emperor will not draw his sword at the command of the
Pope, or draw it against his will, and it shall be requisite for the Spiritual
weal, he shall force him to do it by the spiritual Sword; that is, by his
Censures, to draw the material Sword, or to sheath it again: and if the
Emperor be not concerned with these Censures, he shall absolve his Subjects
from their obedience, the necessity of the Church so requiring, and even take
away his Empire from him. It Is thus he shall make him know that the Sword is
subordinate to the Sword, according to the Bull Unam sanctam; and that they
both belong to the Church, though not after the same manner.

We see likewise in Odorious Raynaldus, tom. 18 ad an. 1458. number. 36. Novum
Legarum mittit, ut si ad Pacem redintegrandam dissentientes inducere non
posset, proposita anathematis poena, illos ab armis juberet Pontificis nomine
absistere, ac finitimorum Regum arma conjungeret in eum qui jussis non pareret.
Raynaldus, Continuator of Baronius, a famous example of this manner of
proceeding in Popes. For he reports, Anno 1458. n. 36. That Calixtus the IIId,
desiring to hinder the War 'twixt the King of Navarre and the Prince de Viana
Heir of that Kingdom, sent them a Legate with order, if he could not reconcile
them to Peace, to dispose them as from the Pope to lay down their arms, by
menacing them with an Anathema, and arming their neighbor- Kings against him
that should disobey. Is not this to subject Kings in the noblest right of their
Crowns, which is to conclude Peace or War as themselves think fit?

Nor is there any thing more ordinary with the most Catholic Princes, then to
have Alliances with Princes either Heretics or Infidels. The example of John
d' Albret, deposed from the Kingdom of Navarre by Julius the IId, declares
again that this pretense is sufficient for a Pope to depose Kings; since this
King had not been sold, but on pretense of an Alliance which he was accused to
have contracted with Lewis the XIIth, whom this Pope pretended to be a
Schismatic, because he was in war with him for Temporal interests.

It Is a thing of no great consequence to molest a few Monks in the possession
of their Privileges; yet was that enough to depose a King, and deprive him of
his State. For so it is that Bellarmine explicates the Privilege of S. Medard
of Soissons, falsly-attributed to S. Gregory, and conceived in these terms. If
either King, Prelate, Judge, or other Person whatsoever, shall violate these
Decrees of our Authority Apostolical, or but contradict, disquiet or trouble
the Friars, or shall ordain any thing contrary hereunto; let him be deprived of
his Dignity, of whatsoever quality he be, separated from the Communion of the
Faithful, and condemned to eternal pains in the judgment of God.

Though there was never any thing more false then this Privilege, as all
knowing persons understood; and albeit it had been true, one might say that it
only contained a menate of God's displeasure, very frequent in those Ages, and
not a severe sentence of downright Deposition: yet did this serve the Jesuits
turn in favor of Popes, to establish them a right of dispossessing Princes and
Judges upon like occasions; and they extort this very interpretation from
Gregory the VIIth, who takes in the same sense certain expressions somewhat
resembling them, of this Saint, concerning the Hospital of Autun.

The interpretation of the words of S. Gregory (says Bellarmine de Potest.
Roman. Pontif. in Temp. c. 40.) is not mine, but of another Gregory, equal in
Dignity, and not much inferior for Sanctity. For S. Gregory VIIth, in his
Epistle to the Bishop of Mets, which is the 21 of the 8 Book, cites this place
of S. Gregory, to show that the Emperor Henry was justly deposed. S. Gregory
(says he) declares that Kings are fallen from their dignity, when they have
the boldness to violate the Decrees of the Apostolical See, writing in these
terms to an Abbot named Senator; Si quis vero Regum, etc.

So although one may, and with great reason, destroy that foundation which is
alleged from S. Gregory; yet one cannot do it against the testimony of
Gregory the VIIth, who was no whitless infallible then he, if all Popes be
infallible; and, by consequent, it must be acknowledged, that by the Doctrine
of Infallibility Popes have right to pronounce Kings to be fallen from their
Dignity, as often as they molest Monks and Religious men in the enjoyment of
the Privileges that have been given them by the holy See: a fortiori therefore
may it suffice to dispossess Chancellors, Presidents, Counselors and other
Magistrates, when they have given any judgment or sentence prejudicial to their
Privileges.

But Innocent the IIId, in the chapter Novit. de judiciis, has opened a door
that leaves no considerable error of Princes, for which the Pope may not
depose them, at least if they persist in them. For he pretends, that granting
he had no right to meddle in Secular affairs, yet he was to judge of all such
wherein there might be any mixture of sin; Ratione peccati, cujus ad nos
pertinet (says this Pope) sine dubitatione censura, quam in quemlibet exercere
possumus and debemus. And as in all contests there is commonly some sin on the
one side or the other, especially when there is War, there being none of
either part just, according to the Divines; so by this means the Pope becomes
sovereign Arbiter of all the Secular differences of Christian Princes. Now
menaces of Deposition and Privation of all Dignity always march with the
judiciary Sentences of Popes against those who do not obey them; and so, unless
Kings were impeccable, or blindly resolved to obey whatever the Roman Court
shall ordain them, it is hard if they ever want a pretext to depose a King when
they have a mind to undertake, and have strength enough to execute it.

It must then be acknowledged, that if once Infallibility be established, the
Pope will always find reasons enough to dispossess a Prince, which if he do
not put in practice, it must be when he wants either will or power. But were it
reasonable that Kings, who are established by God, should suffer Maxims to be
introduced, according to which the acknowledgment of them for Kings by their
subjects should depend upon the will of another? Does not Christian Prudence
and Policy oblige them to banish from their States all the seeds of Division
and trouble, and not only to consider the present, but enlarge their vigilance
for the time to come? It is true, that by the Grace of God, he who now sits on
S. Peter's Chair is so wise and moderate, that we can expect from him nothing
save actions of goodness and sweetness toward all Christian Princes; but we
have no assurance that it will always be so; and the past examples show us
sufficiently how easily things change at the Courts of Princes in a little
time, which changeing so often their Princes, change also their Interests with
them. I will only recite what I find recorded in the History of King Henry the
Great, so judiciously written by my Lord Bishop of Rhodes.

This Prelate remarks, that the League (which took birth from the time of Henry
the IIId, and which, with reason, he styles A powerful Faction which thought to
introduce the Spanish dominion in France, and which strove to subvert the order
of the Succession of the Royal Family under the most specious pretense in the
world, viz. the maintenance of Religion) would needs at first sustain it self
by the authority of the holy See, which they carried to Rome, and presented to
Pope Gregory the XIIIth, to obtain his approbation; but he never would consent
to it, but as long as he lived did altogether disavow it. Had Henry the IIId
any reason for all this to be confident that Rome would never join with these
Factious persons, who desired nothing more then to dethrone him themselves? If
he did believe it, he was strangely abused. For the same Bishop acknowledges,
that Gregory the XIIIth was no sooner dead, but Sixtus Quintus, who succeeded
him, approved of the League, and fulminated terrible Bulls against the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde, declaring them Heretics and Apostates, etc.
and, as such, obnoxious to the Censures of the Church, and the pains denounced
in the Canons; deprived both them and their Descendents of all lands and
dignities, rendered them incapable to succeed in any Principality whatsoever,
especially that of the Kingdom of France, absolving their Subjects from their
Oath of Allegiance, and forbidding them to obey them.

Notwithstanding this Prelate notes, that Sixtus the Vth was shortly after
displeased with the League, and could never be brought to furnish any thing
toward the expense of the War, which plainly abortiv'd the greatest part of
their enterprises. But Urban the VIIth, holding the Seat but 13 days after
Sixtus, Gregory the XIVth succeeded him, who being of a vehement spirit, and by
inclination a Spaniard, ardently embraced the party of the League, prodigiously
lavishing the Treasures which Sixtus Quintus had amassed, to levy an army of
twelve thousand men, which he put under command of Count Hercules Sfondrati his
Nephew, and accompanied it with a Monitory or Bull of Excommunication against
the Prelates who followed Henry the Great, which he sent by Marcellino
Landriano his Nuntio, with a world of money to be distributed to the Sixteen of
Paris, and amongst the Heads of the Caballs in every great City. To which this
Bishop adds, That the Parliament of Tours, ( that is to say, that party of the
Parliament of Paris which was at Tours) having received intelligence of the
Monitory, caused it to be torn in pieces by the hand of the common Hangman,
and decreed seizure of body against the Nuntio; and that on the contrary those
of Paris annulled this Arrest, as being given (says he) by people without
authority, ordaining, that they should obey his Holiness and his Nuntio.

These Examples produced by a famous Bishop, and one whom we cannot doubt to
have been most affectionate to the holy See, makes us judge, that a Wise
Politician will never neglect betimes to suppress these strange Opinions, which
both the Parliament and Sorbon have so often pronounced so pernicious to
States, as tending to the subversion of Sovereign Powers ordained and
established by God, and to the stirring up of Subjects against their Princes,
under pretext that the present state of the Court of Rome would appear very far
from such like enterprises. It belongs also to the wisdom of a King so
illuminated as ours is, and affection'd to the prosperity of this Kingdom, not
to confine his cares within such narrow limits as the present Age. His own so
wonderful Birth, and that of a Dauphin which God has so early blessed his
Marriage with, should make him hope that his Race (which is that of S. Lewis)
shall reign to the end of the World over this great Monarchy: it is this which
yet obliges him farther to extend the thoughts of his Royal providence beyond
the bounds of common prudence, to prevent the source of those evils which may
possibly happen in the Ages long to come, and to permit nothing which may one
day shake a Throne upon which all his Descendents ought to sit hereafter.

And truly it were highly necessary that great Kings should labor for
themselves and their Successors to establish their Authority, since they have
to do with the most crafty and able Politicians in the world, who perpetually
watch all occasions of more and more amplifying that of their Master; who with
infinite diligence manage the least occasions of advancing them; who take for
well-grounded all that escapes and is let pass, changing as soon Favors into
Right; who are not repulsed at every resistance which sometimes opposes their
undertakings, but, giving place for a while, are by the next opportunity ready
to make fresh assaults; which often succeeds, either by change of some Minister
of State, or the humor of our Nation, whose vigor being but of a short
continuance, yields that with the greatest facility to day, which she never
resolved to agree to yesterday.

We have an Example of this in that possession which the Pope's Nuntio's have
gotten, of receiving the Attestations of the Life and manners of those persons
who are nominated by the King to Bishoprics and Abbeys. The late Mons. du Puy
has compiled a Treatise concerning this subject, where he shows, That by the
Ordinance of Blois, Anno 1576, by advice of the States General convened at
Paris 1615, and by the Assembly of the Notables Anno 1627, this information
ought to be made by the Ordinaries, as conformable to the Council of Trent,
Sess. 22. chapter 2. and Sess. 24. chapter 1. That notwithstanding those of Rome had
always striven to put the Nuntio's in possession of this Right; That they had
vainly attempted it when Henry the Great prosecuted his Absolution there; That
they had begun to usurp this possession during the late King's Minority; and
that by little and little they had reduced things to such a point, as to oblige
all those who were nominated to have recourse to them, till in the year 1639.
it happened that the Sieur Hugues de l' Aratut, nominated to the Bishopric of
Cominges, making his Information before the Ordinary, and the Pope refusing to
admit him, the late King of glorious memory resolved to oppose this violence
and stop its course; so as the affair having been sent to the Parliament, there
was an Arrest given the 12 of December 1639, by which 'twas ordained That these
informations concerning Life and manners should for the future be made by the
Diocesan Bishops of the places, and not by the Nuntio's. Notwithstanding the
Nuntio's have still continued to maintain their pretensions in despite of this
Arrest, nor is there a person of them that does yield obedience by his
addressing to the Ordinary; because those who are disposed to do it apprehend
(and not without reason) lest their Bulls should be denied them.

Well known is that famous Arrest given Anno 1648. upon the Remonstrances of
the late Advocate-general Mons. Talon against those who would have valid in
France the Censures of the Inquisition and Index; in the interim they were
never more in reputation then since that time: and it is hard to comprehend how
the Clergy of France (which has ever been so generous) could endure it, without
once complaining, that the Episcopal Decrees of the Prelates of France have
been treated by the Inquisitors of Rome with so much indignity; that they have
ranged them amongst the damned Books which they esteem so disgraceful, without
vouchsafing either to clear it with the Bishops before Censure, or to render
them any account of what they found amiss therein afterward.

See but how they bear all things before them with a perseverance
indefatigable; and by degrees how the pretenses of the Roman Court (which have
formerly been so odious among us) establish themselves in the Kingdom, and the
ancient Maxims that our Fathers have conserved with so much zeal and jealousy
are changed and come to nothing. It Is not always done at once, but sometimes
by degrees and insensibly; and to give an Instance of it, we need go no
farther then to that of the Infallibility of the Pope only.

It Is certain that in the time of the Councils of Constance and of Basil they
acknowledged no other Infallibility in the Church then that of the Church
Universal, and the General Council which represented it, and that it went for
current among all learned men, that the Pope might err in point of Faith. It
is what may be seen not only in the Works of the greatest persons of those
times, as of Gerson, Peter d' Ailly Cardinal of Cambray, the holy and knowing
Carthusian Dionysius Rikel, Cardinal Cusa, the Abbot of Palermo, the Cardinal
of Florence, John Patriarch of Antioch, Alphonsus Tostatus surnamed the Prodigy
of the world, Johannes de Parifiis, and of many more; but likewise by the
contest which sprung up in those times, Whither a Council were above a Pope, or
the Pope above the Council; which was decided in favor of the Council by the
Fathers of the Council of Constance and Basil, who maintaining the Preeminence
of the Council, made use of this Principle as certain and indisputable, That a
General Council could not err in Determinations which regard Faith and good
Manners, and that the Pope therein might err.

So the Council of Basil, minding to establish this Preeminence of Ecumenical
Councils in its Synodal Letter published after the third Session, speaks in
this manner. This holy Church has received so great a Privilege of Jesus Christ
our Savior, which he has founded by his Blood, that we most firmly believe she
cannot err. This is what is agreeable to God alone by nature, and to the
Church by privilege. Nor was this gift imparted to the Sovereign Bishop, of
some of whom we read that they fell into Heresy. It Is the Church alone which
is without spot or wrinkle, which cannot err in things necessary to Salvation.
And afterward, If the Council might err (it being certain that Popes may
err) all the whole Church would be in an Error: Si errare posset Concilium,
cum certum sit Papam errare posse, tota erraret Ecclesia. See the Voice of the
whole Church legitimately assembled by the H. Spirit in General Council: For
it is not to be doubted but that then the Council of Basil was Ecumenical,
since Pope Eugenius the IVth acknowledged by an Authentic Bull (recited in the
16 Session,) that the Council was legitimate and General from the beginning of
it to that very moment.

But what clearly testifies that no body in those times doubted of the
preeminence of a Council above a Pope in things concerning Faith, which cannot
be established but on this of the Council's not erring and that the Pope may,
is what Pope Eugenius (what time he chiefly strove to set himself above a
Council) was notwithstanding obliged to acknowledge, That in matters of Faith
the opinion of the Council ought to be preferred before that of a Pope. This we
see in the last of the 3 Bulls, which he revoked when he rejoined himself to
the Council, 1434. in these terms.

Suppose a Pope or his Legate would do one thing, and that a Council would do
the contrary; we ought to follow not the Sentence of the Council, but the
opinion of the Pope, or his Legate who represents him, because the Pope 's
Jurisdiction is above that of all Councils; unless it happen that the things in
controversy concerned the Catholic Faith, or that they were such as without
the determination thereof the whole State of the Universal Church would be in
disorder. In such a case there must be had more regard to the opinion of a
Council then to that of Popes. Nisi forte quae statuenda forent Catholicam
Fidem respicerent, vel si non fierent, statum universalis Ecclesiae
principaliter perturbarent; quia tunc Concilii Sententia esset potius
attendenda.

This Pope you see acknowledged that in things concerning the Catholic Faith,
the Pope being of one opinion, and the Council of another, that of the Council
was to be chosen. Now this were ridiculous if the Pope were Infallible in
Decisions touching Faith; since there is no opinion which we ought to prefer
before a man that is Infallible. And therefore Pope Eugenius, whatever he
pretended to place himself above all Councils, durst never arrogate that of
Infallibility.

Dionysius Rikel Carthusian, (termed the Extatick or Illuminated Doctor, as
having through all his Works joined an illuminated and inflamed Piety with his
profound skill in Divinity) in his Treatise of the Authority of the Pope and
Councils, having in several passages spoken highly of that of the Pope, does
notwithstanding acknowledge that in Council one cannot dispute the having this
advantage above the Pope, That a Council cannot err in matters which pertain
to Faith and good manners, and that the Pope may err there. The power of a
Council (says he) is in this greater then the Pope's, that Jesus Christ has
promised to his Church, or the Council (which is her Representative,) an
infallible direction and divine assistance which shall never fail. So as a
Council can neither err in matters of Faith, nor in what regards good manners;
forasmuch as it is immediately led by the Holy Spirit in the Determination of
these things. And therefore the Pope himself is in these things to adhere to
the Church's Determination, that is, to the Decrees of the Council, as to an
Oracle, and regulation of the Holy Ghost; whereas the Pope being obnoxious to
err in points of Faith, good manners, and other matters necessary to
Salvation, methinks men should not acquiesce in his judgment as the only
certain opinion, because he is not an infallible rule, nor yet a foundation so
established, but that it may deviate from the Truth.

This holy Monk says the same thing in a Sermon upon S. Hilarie; and excepting
only those Authors who are notoriously engaged in the Interests of the Roman
Court, all the knowing Divines of that Age spoke the same Language. I observe
only Pope Adrian the VIth, who having taught the same Doctrine before he was
exalted to the Pontificate, did not only not retract it afterward, but caused
his Works to be printed at Rome, in which we may yet read these words, namely
in his fourth Book of Sentences: If by the Roman Church (says he) you
understand him who is the Head of it, it is certain (pray mark the term) that
this Head of the Roman Church, viz. the Pope, may err even in things
appertaining to Faith, by defending an Heresy by his Determination or
Decretal. Si per Ecclesiam Romanam intelligatur Caput ejus, certum est quod
possit errare, etiam in iis quae tangunt Fidem, Haeresin per suam
Determinationem aut Decretalem asserendo.

See what this holy and knowing man has written, being then a private person;
and what it was he so approved when he was Pope: so little did his Advancement
blind him, as it has done many others, or make him forget what he owed to
Truth, to gratify his new Dignity with advantages which he believed Jesus
Christ never imparted to him.

It is not here necessary to allege the Parisian Doctors opinions, so well
known to the World, and to the Jesuits themselves, who term the opinion
against Infallibility Sententia Parisiensium: but we must not omit the sense of
the whole Faculty in a Body, in this celebrious Declaration of the Faith which
she made by order of Francis the Is It, and which was afterward verified in
Parliament; so as in France it held a particular force of a Law and a public
Ordinance: Having therefore received a command of the King to reduce into
Articles the principal Points of Faith attacqu'd by Heretics, she declares,
That General Councils cannot err in Points of Faith and regulation of good
manners. Certum est Concilium Generale legitime congregatum, universalem
Ecclesiam repraesentans, in Fide and morum determinationibus errare non posse.
But for the Pope, see what she says of it all; It is no less certain, that
there is one Sovereign Bishop by divine right in the Militant Church, to which
all Christians ought to submit, and who has likewise power to confer
Indulgences: Nec minus certum est, unum esse jure Divino Pontificem in Ecclesia
Militante, cui omnes Christiani parere tenentur, qui quidem potestatem habet
Indulgentias conferendi.

This different manner of speaking of Councils and the Pope in two Articles
which immediately follow, attributing Infallibility to the Council, and none to
the Pope, sufficiently states the different sentiments which these Doctors had
both of Councils and Popes upon this subject. For I think not my self obliged
to refute the extravagancies of a certain Writer of these times, who pretends
to prove by the Obedience which these Doctors teach is due to the Pope, as if
by that we acknowledged his Infallibility. By the same argument he may prove,
that not only all Bishops in particular, but that all Abbots, and Abbesses,
Priors and Prioresses are infallible, because they are promised obedience. But
he should have learned that in promising obedience to the Pope, men are so far
from acknowledging an entire submission of belief to his Decisions, that the
Divines say expressly, and amongst others Mons. Duval, Summo Pontifici parendum
esse, sive errare possit, sive non: Which signifies but this, That men should
not Dogmatize the contrary to what he has decided, and with this caution yet,
nisi Error sit intolerabilis, as Gerson affirms.

Such as has been the common sentiment of our Parisian Divines, till Mons.
Duval, who would have introduced Opinions into the Sorbon totally repugnant to
these ancient Maxims: But, as it is customary with those who engage in quarrels
against what is universally received, it has hitherto been with much wariness;
Duvallius de supr. aut. Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 1.
For he did in that manner assert the Pope to be infallible in matter of Faith,
that in the same breath he likewise taught, 'twas no matter of Faith to believe
it: Non est de fide Summum Pontificem esse infallibilem.

He holds moreover, that the Opinion of his not being infallible is neither
rash nor erroneous. Non est erroneum, neque temerarium temeritate opinionis,
dicere, Summum Pontificem in decernendo errare posse. And speaking concerning
the Decision of a Pope against a Doctor of Paris, he says, That this
Definition of Sixtus the IVth is not of Faith, but only very certain; because,
says he, the Definitions of the Sovereign Bishops have not the certitude of
the Catholic Faith, till they be first received by the Universal Church, or a
General Council.

And thus, whatever the Doctor's design be and those of his gang to advance the
Authority of the Pope, they have been yet obliged to acknowledge, that a Divine
who should doubt, or not believe what has not been decided but by a Pope,
should neither be accused of Error or Temerity, provided he did not contradict
the Pope publicly and with Scandal.

Behold here the very first breach which has been made, at least in the Sorbon,
against its ancient Doctrine. But in the mean time this has not hindered those
very Persons who encouraged this Doctor, and that were engaged by Interest with
the Court of Rome, to reject this personal Infallibility of the Pope, whenever
they had any regard of their reputation amongst learned men. This is evident by
Cardinal Perron, who in his Reply to the King of Great Britain, l. 6. p. 1083.
expressly acknowledges, that the only expedient to determine Disputes of
Religion with a certainty of Faith is by a General Council.

Were the Service (says he) taken away from the Original Tongue, and
transferred into another, all means of celebrating universal Councils, and
having any certitude or assurance of matters of Faith, would cease. For there
being no certitude of the genuine sense of Scripture by our particular
Interpretation, since no Interpretation of Scripture is of private inspiration,
and we having no way left us of resolution with certitude of Faith in debates
which rise about Religion upon the meaning of Scripture, besides the voice of
the Church speaking in General Councils; evident it is that whatever it be
which takes away from the Church the means of holding General Councils, takes
away from it all means of deciding the Disputes of Christian Religion with
certitude of Faith.

Cardinal de Richelieu, in his Book of Controversies, which has been approved
by the late Mons. Lescot Bishop of Chartres, and diverse other Divines
exceedingly devoted to the Court of Rome, acknowledges the same thing, Lib. 3.
c. 5. p. 424. Since there is (says he) no Ecumenical Council which injoyns
the use of the Images of the Divine Persons; it is evident that it is no Article
of Faith: supposing that for the Principle, That only General Councils can
frame Articles of Faith.

Thus we see that the Doctrine of Infallibility, which had been promoted by
Mons. Duval with some kind of fear and reserve, was abandoned by the most
knowing persons of the Church, and chiefly by those who defended it against the
Heretics; because they would not engage the cause of the Catholic Religion in
defense of an Opinion so insupportable: and therefore the Favorites of the
Roman Court were then contented that this Opinion should pass for problematick
only. Whence it came to pass that Mons. Duval (who had but just proposed it in
this manner) was all his life in so great esteem at Rome, that he was looked
upon there as the person in the world who had rendered the greatest services to
the holy See; and that all the Nuns had order not to do any thing here without
his advice. But finding this tentative succeed so happily, and that the
Jesuits (having gained the Catholic Universities) had filled all men's
thoughts with this infinite power of the Pope, which was highly advantageous to
them for the withdrawing of them from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, they no
longer remained in this moderation. They pretended that it was not enough for
the French to permit them to say the Pope was infallible; but so ordered the
matter, that no man was suffered to acknowledge him for less. They were
contented that Mons. Duval should say that it was no matter of Faith to believe
the Pope infallible, because this reserve was necessary at that point of time,
for the currenter passage of the Doctrine; but having first begun to distribute
it in this manner, they did not long rest there; the design is to make men
believe that the Doctrine of the Faculty of Paris (opposite to this
Infallibility, which in Mons. Duval's days was neither an Error, nor any rash
Opinion) is since that time (though the Church never thought of any change)
become a manifest Heresy.

This is what the Jesuits have exceedingly farther'd: For it is about 5 or 6
years past that Father Theophile Raynaud, a Jesuit of Lions, published a Book
with this Title, (...), Ipse dixit, to show not only that the Pope is
infallible, but that it is matter of Faith that he is so, and, by consequent,
those that doubt of it Heretics; and he treats Mons. Duval very ill in his
Book, whom in contempt he calls a certain Doctor, for his caution in not so
openly venting this false Doctrine as a new Article of Faith. And because they
saw this enterprise of theirs was not punished as it deserved, growing daily
more insolent, they proceeded to that extravagant impiety of their Theses of
the College de Clermont, which is now the object of the indignation of all
France, daring publicly to maintain, (even in the midst of Paris it self, and
in face of the Parliament) That the Catholic Truth which opposes the Heresy
of the Greeks concerning the Pope's Primacy is, That Jesus Christ has given to
all Popes the very same Infallibility which himself had, not only in Questions
de Jure, but in those also de Facto.

By this it is visible to what their boldness may aspire, if not timely
prevented and repressed, and what progress these monstrous Opinions are like to
make, to the total destruction of the Liberties of the Gallican Church so
precious to our Ancestors, unless we be more vigilant in stopping its carreer.

And in earnest it is very hard it should not be so, if we but consider a
little those three Expedients which the abettors of the Court of Rome make use
of to establish their Maxims.

The First is, the Company of Jesuits spread over the face of the Universe,
and got to be Masters of the greatest part of the Colleges; so as all the World
being imbued with these Principles from their infancy, as 'twere, Opinions not
advantageous to the Church, but the Court Politic of Rome, they are received
with respect, as if they constituted a part of our Religion; so as it is quite
against the hair of any other, because the Jesuits accustom those who have
once placed their belief in them, to look upon men as persons suspected of
their Faith, who in this are not of their opinion.

There is the hands of many persons a Treatise of the late Father Eustachius
Gault, a very knowing and pious Father de l' Oratoire, nominated by the late
King for Bishop of Marseilles, wherein he mentions how dangerous it is for this
very reason, lest all the Colleges should in time, and by degrees, fall into
the hands of the Jesuits.

The Second means is, the care they take concerning Books; blasting all that
they find containing any thing of the ancient Maxims of the School of Paris,
suppressing them all that they can; or at least so ordering the matter, as to
retrench whatever is not in their favor: as they have done by a large
Discourse of Guicciardin, treating of the politic Incroachment of the Court of
Rome, which is no more to be found in the late Italian Editions, but conserved
in the old ones, as may yet be seen in an ancient French Translation of that
famous Historian.

In the mean while they give all manner of liberty to such Books as maintain
their own pretensions, and that establish the Opinions on which they are
supported. It must be acknowledged that there is nothing has more advanced their
Interest: for it is almost impossible but the minds and spirits of Students
should be filled with the sentiments of those Authors which they read most.
Now without speaking of the less considerable Authors, who are infinite, those
who would more deeply apply themselves to the Ecclesiastical Science do
commonly addict themselves to Church History and the Councils; and for the
first, they go to seek it in Baronius and his Continuators. This person had
doubtless very many excellent qualities, and deserves great commendations for
having by his indefatigable labor disintangled an infinite many of things
which before lay in a strange confusion: But withal it must not be denied that
the Zeal which transported him for the Grandeur of the H. See made him commit
very many excesses, which might be pardoned in a person so commendable on some
other occasions, but by no means be defended: For how can we possibly excuse
him all those fabulous imaginations of his, where he engages himself to make
the world believe that Pope Honorius was never condemned by the 6th Council;
but that what we see of his Condemnation in the Acts of that Council has been
maliciously inserted by the order of a most pious Emperor, whom he affirms to
have consented to the Falsification of the Originals which he had in his hands?

And yet for all this, because F. Cambefis (a very learned Dominican) thought
himself obliged, for the honor of Truth and of the Church, to refute this
Fiction, which is of most pernicious consequence, (since there is not an Act of
General Council which one may not with as much likelihood say to be forged) it
has pleased F. Theophile Raynaud, a Jesuit forsooth, in a Book entitled An
Cyriaci immunes a Censura? a most bloody Satyr against the whole Dominican
Order, most outrageously to rend and tear this learned Friar, as if he had
perpetrated the hainousest sin in the world, for having shown that Baronius
engaged himself into very great Absurdities, in not acknowledging that a Pope
had been condemned as an Heretic in a General Council.

A strange piece of tyranny it would be, to take away all liberty from Divines
that love the Truth, to defend it against whomsoever when it is thus wronged,
and to interpret it a Crime to take notice of the excesses of Baronius, when he
endeavors to advance the Authority of the Holy See. He is not then himself, and
he sometimes says such things seriously on this subject, that it is hard to
reconcile them to sense; as when he attributes a kind of Infallibility to the
Pope, which is not well applicable to God himself, viz. that the Pope can make
new Articles of Faith, and change them again when they are made. Ut plane
appareat, says he on the business of the Apollinarists, An. 373. n. 22. ex
arbitrio pependisse Romani Pontificis Decreta sancire, and sancita mutare. This
is prodigiously strange; and yet we find something like this of Baronius in the
Preface of F. Sirmondus upon Facundus: For (says he) this Bishop is not to be
blamed for having maintained the three Chapters, since Pope Vigilius was ever
more disposed to defend them, as it was in truth reasonable, says the Jesuit:
Sirmondus Lectori.

Nec vero fraudi esse posse (Facundo) trium Capitulorum causam quam defendit:
in qua si verum loqui placet, honestius fuerat cum Vigilio cadere, quam vincere
cum Iusiiniano. Quod si Vigilium perpetuo ducem sequi maluisset, quam Vigilium
postquam Iustiniano cedendum fuit cum Afris suis reprehendere, nemo illum de
suscepta Capitulorum defenfione, ad quam Vigilius ipse ultro postea rediit,
jure accusandum judicaret. And afterward, Usus est (Vigilius) liberate quam
causa concedebat, semper alioquin ad defendenda, ut par erat, and probanda
Capitula propensior.


Vigilius ad defendenda, ut par erat, and probanda Capitula propensior. Save
only that he was not blamable but for blindly adhering to Pope Vigilius, in
changing his opinion as often as it pleased the Pope to change; defending the
three Chapters when this Pope defended them, and condemning them when the Pope
condemned them, undertaking to maintain when the Pope undertook it. After this
guise it is F. Sirmond (quatenus Jesuit) would have us conform our Conscience
to the Will of the Pope, without troubling our selves with the truth of the
thing. But I say, quatenus Jesuit; for as F. Sirmond, it is well known to all
his Friends, that there are few Divines who have less believed this blind
Obedience then himself.

But to return to Baronius: It must be acknowledged that his Annals being in
other places filled with many very good things for the confirmation of
Catholic Verities, and the purity of Discipline, contain also very many
pernicious Maxims, and false Reflections as to what concerns the pretenses of
the Court of Rome: and it is that which makes these last to be received and
swallowed, because they are mingled with the first.

The Continuators follow all of them the same spirit, and do but tread in his
steps; but without coming near him in that which he did well, they infinitely
surpass him in what he did ill. This is truth, especially of the last and most
ample, which is Raynaldus. There can be nothing more weak of one part, or more
insolent on the other; and it is a shame to the Church, that a Writer so little
able should presume to compile its History. He is a man without discernment,
without the spirit of an Ecclesiastic, without style, without judgment,
without sincerity, without credit, and who delivers with an insupportable
boldness, and as if they were forsooth so many Articles of Faith, the most
indefensible pretensions of the Court of Rome; who alleges Authors the most
partial and least worthy of credit, such as Poggius, Blondus, Turrecremata, and
the like, as the most authentic Testimonies, and after whom one were obliged
to condemn the honestest men, and those whose sanctity it has pleased God to
make known even by their Miracles, as the Cardinal d' Arles; in fine, who upon
all occasions, where he wants proofs, overflows with injuries and outrageous
declamations, unworthy an Historian, who should never be transported with
passion. For all this, he has had the boldness to dedicate his eighteenth Tome,
containing the History of Five Popes, and two Councils, viz. that of Basil and
Florence, to the French Clergy; and it is easily seen by his Epistle, that his
design was only to engage the Church of France, by the glozing Elogies he
gives it for its steady obedience to the Holy See, to approve, or, at least,
dissemble, all that his Tome contains advantages for the interests of the Roman
Court, and prejudicial to the Liberties of the Gallican Church. But the design
did not altogether succeed; for having made an offer of his Book to the
Assembly of the Clergy 1660, thereby to obtain some Letter of Thanks, and so in
time to make it pass for an Approbation of his Book through all the French
Churches; the Bishop to whom 'twas referred found the Book so repugnant to our
Liberties, that he would do nothing in it: and with this repulse was his
unworthy Present repaid. But the Abettors of the Court of Rome believe with
great reason that they have however gained a main Point, that there has been
nothing positively done against a Work presented to the whole Clergy, Where the
Ad an. 1423. n. 8. and in the Table, Verbo Constantiense Concilium.
Doctrine of the authority of a Council above a Pope, which is the prime
foundation of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the first Article of
the Pragmatick Sanction, is everywhere styled Heretical and Schismatical,
though it has been decided for a Catholic Truth by no less then two General
Councils: Where the Ad an. 1432. n. 9.12. and ad an. 1433. n. 9, etc.
Council of Basil, (so revered of all France) is rent and torn the most
outragiously in the world, and that in a time when Popes have declared it for
Ecumenical: Where a In his Letter to the Clergy.
trifling Scribbler imperiously presumes to decide a difference upon which the
Church would never yet pronounce, making those to pass for Anti-popes who
possessed the Seat in Avignon during the Schism, who are yet the only ones
which France has acknowledged; though God himself seems to have been willing
that this Question should have remained undecided, since he has permitted very
holy Persons to maintain the parties of both these Popes; Saint Catharine that
of Urban, and S. Peter of Luxemburg that of Clement, from whom he received even
his Cardinal's Hat, as S. Vincent Ferrier, who also adhered to the Avignon
Popes: Ad an. 1440. n. 4.
Where, by an abominable Lie, they impute to Charles the Seventh, that he knew
the Gallican Church had made a detestable Schism by pronouncing an impious
Sentence in behalf of Clement the VIIth against Urban the VIth: Ad an. 1438. n.
14
Where the Pragmatical Sanction, which was contrived at Bourges, following the
Decrees of the Council of Basil, by the French Bishops, which King Charles the
VIIth had assembled there, with the Princes, Lords and great Persons of the
Kingdom of all degrees and qualities is unworthily styled the Opprobrium of the
King, because it declares the Pope inferior to a Council, many ways limits
his power, and re-establisheth Canonical Elections.

Ad an. 1436. n. 4. and ad an. 1439. n. 40 and ad an. 1440. n. 2.
Where the Mandate de Providendo, Expectative graces, Reservations, Regresses,
and other like Abuses, so justly condemned by the Council of Basil, and by the
whole French Church, are maintained as legitimate Rights from this strange
pretense of a Bull of Eugenius the IVth, That the Church of Rome does what she
pleases with all Church-Dignities, without wrong to any man; because she may
allege this word of the Holy Gospel, Friend, I do thee no wrong, is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? and that the same Pope writing
to Alphonsus King of Portugal says, That the free disposition of all Churches
appertains to the Apostolical See, and that the Popes dispose of them as best
they like, to which even Kings and Princes submit themselves.

Ad an. 1436. n. 10 and ad an. 1439. n. 37
Where the most Sacred Canons of the Church are so subdued to the Pope's will,
that he makes a Pope writing to a King of France, to say, That it is a
ridiculous thing to allege them to him, or demand of him their observation, as
if he knew nothing of them; whereas if he acted aganst the Canons, we are not
to believe that 'twas done out of ignorance, but because it pleases him to have
it so: That he is so far Master, that according to his pleasure he might not
only interpret, suspend, and mitigate them, but alter and abolish them
likewise as pleased his fansy.

The whole Book is stuffed with like excesses, and greater then these too:
notwithstanding the fautors of these pernieious Opinions have this advantage,
that no body having complained of them, they will one day take this silence for
a tacit Approbation; beside the gain which they receive, when they who would be
learned in the Church History, studying it in these Books, shall at the same
time suck in all these dangerous Maxims.

Nor have they less perverted the other source of Ecclesiastical Science, to
wit, the study of the Councils. The last Collector of them, Binnius, being but
a small Copier of Baronius, Bellarmine and Suarez, who has stuffed his Notes
with all that he thought proper to inspire these new Opinions. And what is
altogether prodigious, is, that whereas the King of Spain has never permitted
that any man should print in his Dominions any passage of Baronius's Annals
prejudicial to his pretenses; they have in the Louvre it self printed the
Collection of the Councils of Binnius: and that the Jesuits, who have ever had
all the government of this Royal Press, have left there in the life of Boniface
the VIIIth these outrageous words against all France; Philippum pulchrum,
Galliae Regem, just excommunicavit, This Pope did justly excommunicate Philip
the Fair, King of France: As much as to say, that all France was Schismatical
in that Age, for opposing (as she did) the Excommunication, as judging it very
unjust, and appealing to the future Council; and that she yet continues so, for
having never since changed her opinion.

You see in the mean time what the Jesuits think fit to print in the King's
house, under his own nose, and at his charges, that so they may give the
Enemies of France the advantage to reproach her for owning in this period the
justice of an Excommunication of one of her Kings, against which she has
heretofore so vigorously opposed herself.

The Abridgment of the Councils by Coriolanus, printed at Paris, and revised by
a Doctor of the Faculty, is yet in some sort worse; all the contrary Maxims to
the Liberty of the Gallican Church being set at the Head of the Book, as if
they were so many Catholic Opinions.

Nor is there any thing better to be hoped for from that new Edition of the
Councils which they are undertaking now at Paris, if the Jesuits continue
Masters; seeing we find well enough by the Plan which Father L' Abbe has caused
to be printed, that besides all Binnius's Notes, if any thing be added, it
shall be rather more and more to ruin the Liberties of the Gallican Church,
then to defend them: and in effect we see, that whereas in Binnius the Council
of Basil is called, Concilium Oecumenicum ex part reprobatum, a General
Council in part reproved; Father L' Abbe in his new project totally suppresses
this quality of Oecumenick, by simply calling it Basileense Concilium; though
he be exceedingly exact in giving the title of Oecumenick to all the other
General Councils, and even to those also which as yet France has never
acknowledged for such; as that of Florence for instance, which he styles
Florentinum Oecumenicum sive Universale Concilium, and that of Lateran under
Julius the IId and Leo the Xth, which he calls Lateranense quintum Oecumenicum,
seu Universale decimumseptimum. You see how little they respect the judgment of
the Gallican Church, degrading the Councils which our Ancestors have ever had
in such singular veneration, as that of Basil; and magnifying those which our
Fathers would never receive for Ecumenical, as that of Florence, concerning
which the Cardinal of Lorrain writ to Pope Pius the Vth, In the Collection of
the Memoires and Acts of the Council of Trent, published by Mons. du Puy.
That in France 'twas never received for Legitimate or General, and that all
the French would sooner die then affirm the contrary. Much more that of
Lateran, which Bellarmine himself durst not assert Ecumenical, as not composed
but of a few Italian Bishops, who had no other mark but the ruin of our
Canonical Elections, and against which the French have always protested, as
it is to be seen by the History of the Concordate de Mons. du Puy; and, in
effect, the Council of Constance having decided that a Council is superior to
a Pope, and the Council of Lateran the contrary, one of the two must
necessarily be in an Error, and, by consequent, one of the two is not
Oecumenick: and so all the world avowing, and the Jesuits themselves, that the
Council of Constance was General, Father L' Abbe calling it Constantiense
Concilium Oecumenicum decimum-sextum, that of Lateran, which is repugnant to it
in a certain Decision concerning Faith, has not been so.

But be it what it will, we may judge from hence that the Jesuits design is in
this new Edition of the Councils to favor the pretenses of the Court of Rome
in all that possibly they can; there being nothing she so much desires as to
hinder the Council of Basil from being reputed General; insomuch as those of
the party have presumed to falsify a List of the General Councils at the
beginning of the Epitome of Antonius Augustinus's Canon Law, leaving out that
of Basil, which this learned Archbishop had set down, as may be seen, where,
after these words, Constantiense sub Martino V, there is in these falsified
Editions, Florentinum sub eodem, which is ridiculous, that of Florence, not
having been held under Martin the Vth; but it sufficiently shows what there was
in the uncorrupted Copies after that of Constance, Basileense sub Eugenio IV,
and then, Florentinum sub eodem.

There are a world of other things in this draught of Father L' Abbe, which
ought not to be suffered in France; but above all, it is a thing insupportable,
that these Disciples of Santarel should dare to treat as Heretics and persons
suspected for their Faith both Priests and Divines, better Catholics then
themselves, for defending only the Sovereignty of Kings established by God,
against those who would subject them to the Spiritual power. Thus this Jesuit
injures Roger Widdrington, an English Priest, whom we may believe a very firm
Catholic, since some temporal Interests might have else been able to make him
quit his Religion, had he not held it by a divine obligation. But because he
had several contestations with Bellarmine in favor of Kings, L' Abbe is
pleased to rank him in the same design with Blondel, and to speak of him in
these terms; Non ignoro Davidem Blondellum, Rogerum Widdringtonum, and quosdam
alios aut Haereticos, aut de Fide saltem suspectos, etc.

The Third means which the Court of Rome makes use of to establish her
Pretensions is, to defend and gratify all those who favor her, and to decry,
yea persecute upon all occasions, those that are any ways averse and contrary.
It Is so meritorious an action in their judgment to maintain that which they
call the Rights of the Holy See, that even those whom otherwise they have no
esteem of for any sense of Piety, become recommendable; and it is on the other
side so great a sin to prescribe Canons for a limit of this infinite power,
that whatever Virtue or Piety one might be acknowledged to have had before, he
becomes wicked and Heretical upon an instant.

I find two memorable examples of both in the 18 Tome of Raynaldus.

The one is of Laurentius Valla, whom he affirms in a certain place to have
been an impious fellow, and whom in another place he extolls for having
exceedingly praised Eugenius the IVth, who is one of those Popes that
endeavored to advance his Authority to the utmost.

The other is of an Archbishop of Mentz, a person of great worth and Piety,
that had some contest with Calixtus the IIId touching Canonical Elections. This
Archbishop complains that the Pope did not observe the Concordate which
Eugenius the IVth and Nicolas the Vth his Successor had made on this subject
with the Princes of Germany; and Aeneas Sylvius, who was then Cardinal, and who
writ about it to this Archbishop's Chancellor, was not able to deny it, since
what he says is, that if the Elections were Canonical, they ought to be
confirmed in virtue of the Concordate, and that they were not to be rejected;
unless (says he) the Pope in Council with his Brethren the Cardinals conceive
it fit to put in a Person more advantageous to the Church: as if this last
Clause were not a visible infraction of the Concordate, which this Archbishop
had great reason to complain of; since the right of Elections had no more any
thing solid, if the Pope refusing to confirm them had been acquitted, by
saying, he only did it to constitute a more fitting person for the Church in
place. Be it whatever, it is certain this Contestation concerned one only
Point of Church Discipline, and another in which the Pope was visibly in the
wrong. See yet what Raynaldus teaches us Anno 1457. n. 49. That Pope Calixtus
the IIId wrote to this Archbishop of Mentz upon the complaint he made of the
non-observance of the Concordate touching Elections: In mentem nostram cadere
non potest, te contra Autoritatem S. R. E. Sedis Apostolicae atque nostrae,
aliquid perpetrare; cum te sciamus Pastorem scientificum, and prudentem, and
Dei timoratum, quae sunt contraria offendentibus Autoritatem and potestatem S.
R. E. and summi Pontificis; cum quicumque hoc attentare volens nedum in poenas
a jure divino and humano institutas inciderit, sed etiam crimen Haeresis
atrociter committeret.
I cannot conceive that you should do any thing against the Authority of the
Sacred Roman Church and Apostolical See, knowing you to be a learned and
prudent Pastor, and one that fears God, which are contrary to those who offend
the Authority and Power of the Holy Church of Rome, and of the Sovereign
Bishop; since whoever presumes to commit this attempt incurrs not only the
pains ordained by Divine and humane right, but does also commit the most
heinous crime of Heresy. Thus a man becomes an Heretic, and (as he says) a
wicked Heretic, how knowing, prudent or fearing God soever he be, if he
opposes the Pope in any thing which does purely concern the Discipline of the
Church, whatever reason he may have so to do.

Those of Rome have always pursued the same course; and Bellarmine (though one
of the most moderate of them) forbears not to speak most outragiously against
those who defend the Sovereignty of Kings, and to treat them as Calvinists,
Pagans, Publicans, and Parasites of Kings, to the loss of the Kingdom eternal,
under pretense of conserving to them their Dignity which is temporal.

Alexander Carrerius, de potest. Romans Pont. Abeant moderni illi infipientesque
Politici, qui invidia and ambitione jus Status ad jus Pilati referunt; de
quibus Sancti Dei ita prophetarunt, Astiterunt Reges terrae and Principes
convenerunt in unum adversus Dominum and adversus Christum ejus.
And an Italian Author, who styles them in the Title of his Book impios
politicos, addresses these words to them at the conclusion of his Book: Away
then with these modern insipid Politicians, who, led with envy and ambition,
would derive the Authority of States from that of Pilate; and of whom those
Saints of God have thus prophesied, The Kings of the Earth and the Princes are
met together against the Lord, and against his Anointed. That is to say, The
Pope is Jesus Christ, and all Christian Kings who maintain their Sovereignty
against the Usurpations of Rome are the Herod's and the Pontius Pilates.

This public decry yet in the Books of these Writers is nothing so
considerable as the particular and clandestine traverses that the Court of Rome
excites upon all occasions whatsoever against those whom she believes not
favorable to her Interests.

By that it is she stops the mouths and stays the Pens of almost all Learned
persons, who cannot really possess themselves of that Title, that they are not
inwardly persuaded of the Hypocrisies of these ambitious pretensions; but they
choose rather to be silent, then to speak of it: Because there are but a very
few persons so in love with Truth, as, in resolving to maintain it, will endure
to be tormented and barretted all their lifetime, and to be torn in pieces
when they are dead. They see that Kings and their great Ministers take not for
the most part that care to protect those who maintain and defend their Right,
by some testimony of their acknowledging it, as the Court of Rome does to
persecute them, or at least to deny them all kind of favor. They must be
touched with an extraordinary Zeal, and very disinteress'd, to surmount all
these considerations, and to sacrifice themselves for the Interest of their
Prince and Country, without any hope of advantage, or, to speak more properly,
with reason to apprehend all sort of disadvantage by it. All those principally
who are tied to any Community are thereby obliged to a silence, which they
believe to be just, as holding themselves responsable for the conservation of
their Body. And it is true, these vast Bodies have stricter bonds which tie them
to Rome, and are more exposed to Persecution, because they have more places
which expose them to seizure; to which one may add, that almost all the
Religious and Communities have their Generals resident at Rome, who will never
permit that the Divines of their Orders should undertake to teach things which
would not be well received there, and from which there may lie a grudge against
the whole Order.

They are therefore Private persons only who are fit upon these encounters to
engage for the Truth: but then it is necessary that they be furnished with
Light to know it, with Zeal to love it, with Steadiness, not to fear the ills
it may produce, and with Sincerity and Disinterest, that so they may have no
occasion to be in danger of being thwarted. And when there were only this
last, how rare a thing it is to be found! Well therefore has John Major, that
renowned Doctor of Paris, long since observed, That it was not to be wondered
at, if they were fewer who declared for a Council then for the Pope, since
Councils met but seldom, and gave no Benefices, whereas the Pope does, and
thence it is (says he) men flatter him with an omnipotent power, as well in
Spiritual things as temporal: Hinc homines ei blandiuntur, dicentes quod
solvere potest omnia, quadrare rotundata, and rotundare quadrata, tam in
Spiritualibus quam in temporalibus. Hence it proceeds that the Liberties of the
Gallican Church and the ancient Maxims of the Sorbon are now-a-daies hardly
vindicated but by secular persons, such as We that have less relation to the
Court of Rome then Ecclesiastics have; whereof the wisest of them are rather
satisfied to approve them in their heart, without defending them in their
Books: such power have fear and interest upon the spirit of those who should be
more free from them by the Sanctity of their Profession.

But if there be persons disinterested, so as not to be touched by these
temporal considerations, it often falls out that having little judgment and
less science, their Piety it self engages them into these new Opinions; because
they are published in the World under this artificial veil, That it is,
forsooth, to violate and wound Religion to contest the Pope's Infallibility and
temporal Sovereignty over Kings.

Those in the mean time who have no relation to it but this pretext, without
any mixture of humane interest, may easily be disabus'd, if once they but
consider that the most pious of all our ancient Doctors, as the illustrious
Gerson (wihtout mentioning Dionysius the Carthusian, and the blessed Cardinal
d' Arles) have opposed with greater vigor those ambitious pretenses of the
Court of Rome, and that they have judged that, on the contrary, it is the
sincere Zeal for the Catholic Religion which ought to oblige all judicious
Divines, courageously to resist this temporal Superiority over Kings and
Infallibility, as two inseparable Maxims one from the other, either of them
capable to raise very great mischiefs to the Church. For in effect, what is
there more opposite to the real benefit of the Catholic Religion then this
Doctrine of the Pope's Superiority over Kings in Temporals, which is a
necessary consequence of Infallibility, and of the power which they give him to
depose them? Is not this to render Religion abhorred and suspected of all
Princes, as the Sorbon has judiciously remarked in the Censure of Santarel, to
give them cause to believe that it is impossible they should have Subjects at
the same time good Catholics and faithful to their King? What Infidel Prince
indeed would permit men to preach Faith in the Countries under his obedience,
if he knew that all those who embrace it think themselves by that dispensed
with for obedience to him farther then another Sovereign pleases, who can at
any time cause them to take up arms against their lawful King? Were this for
example a proper expedient to incline the Americans to receive our Faith, to
say to them, as some Spaniards did, that the Pope had bestowed their Country on
the King of Castile? And however Barbarians as they were, had they not reason
to reply, as they did, That they knew no such thing as a Pope, but that if
there were, he must needs be a wicked man, to give away that which was none of
his own? Were not this also to dispose Heretical Princes not to suffer
Catholics in their States, when they shall behold them but as so many subjects
to another Prince, who has power to command them to depose him in the Country
where they live? And do not we know, that it is this has so embittered the King
of England against the Papists, and the almost sole cause of the disturbance
which they suffered in King James's time, as being to this day the greatest
obstacle to the progress of Religion in that Kingdom?

In fine, what Catholic Prince would be willing that his Dominion, which he
takes so much pains to preserve both in Peace and War, should continually
depend upon the judgment of one sole Person, who may be possessed perhaps by
his Enemies, or transported by his proper passions? For it is a weak confidence
to resolve they will give the Pope no occasion to Excommunicate or deprive them
of their Kingdoms. What occasion had Iean d' Albret given, that for all this
was despoiled of his Estate? Really one cannot offer a greater injury either to
the Church or Pope himself, then this attributing of so odious a power to him:
And the Church will have reason to say to these preposterous defenders of her
Interests, as Jacob said to his Children Simeon and Levi upon the Sack of
Sichem; Genesis 24.30
Turbastis me, and odiosam fecistis me Chananaeis and Pherezaeis habitatoribus
terrae hujus, You have troubled me, to make me to stink among the inhabitants
of the Land. Besides, in celebrating the first Advent of the Son of God
himself, she testifies, that all the Kings of the Earth, and even the most
fierce of Tyrants, had no reason to have been jealous of the coming of this new
King, for that he who gives to his the Kingdom of Heaven, ravishes not from
Princes the Kingdoms of the Earth: Non eripit mortalia, Qui Regna dat
coelestia. But our Popes take it for an honor done them, when men attribute to
them praises quite contrary to what the Church gives Jesus Christ; and Kings
are in danger of their Empires, since they can take from Princes both their
States and Kingdoms.

But doubtless, when they shall have considered how unfortunate these pretenses
have proved to them, and how odious they still are, they will easily themselves
acknowledge the truth of these excellent words which the Advocate general Mons.
du Mesnil has, in those Memoirs of his upon the procedures of Rome against the
Queen of Navarre, inserted amongst the Liberties of the Gallican Church.

Whilst the Popes of Rome pursued the footsteps of Charity and Christian
Humility, confining their power to the Spiritual Government established by God
in his Gospel, without arrogating to themselves a magisterial, temporal or
worldly Dominion; so long they received universal reverence and sincere
obedience from all men: But no sooner did they or any of them exalt themselves
by assuming an Authority not only as Peers, but Superiors to Kings, but they
became in danger of losing their own Authority, and that too which they would
have usurped from others, and have created trouble both to the Kingdom of God
and of his Church.

Certainly those Popes who shall but consider these Christian and pious
Reasons, will never suffer themselves to be surprised with the Flatteries of
those about them; and will understand that it is not the Interest of the Holy
See which these Sycophants look after, but their particular profit. Nor do they
always dissemble their low and unworthy pretenses; nor are they afraid
sometimes to sooth the Pope, as one would do the Turk or great Mogul, by those
profusions of money which he spends on his Courtiers. Let the Italians (says
that Italian Carrerius) lift up their heads above all Nations of the Earth, for
that singular grace and favor which God has done them in bestowing on them a
spiritual Prince, namely the Bishop of Rome, who has chased great Kings and
mighty Emperors from their Thrones, to set others in their places; to whom so
many potent Kingdoms paid tribute so long, as never any thing has been seen
like it; and who divides such riches amongst those of his Court, as never any
King or Emperor has done before. But these so lofty Elogies in the eyes of
these base and interested spirits appear but Sacrilegious to those who truly
honor the grandeur of the Spiritual Authority of the Pope.

It is the very same in the matter of Infallibility; the politic Theologues
thinking to procure a great advantage to the Pope by publishing this Doctrine:
never considering that on one side they put a very great obstacle to the
re-uniting of Heretics, who are more scandalized with this pretension then
with all those Points of our Faith in which we disagree; and on the other, that
by this Doctrine they make the Pope in danger to deceive himself, and expose
the Church to Schisms and Divisions. For it is this pretense of Infallibility
which may induce Popes to neglect to take the legitimate and ordinary ways of
deciding Points of Faith, who, by the consent even of Cardinal Bellarmine
himself, ought to assemble Councils, and there only regularly examine
Controversies of Religion; which they will hardly ever be brought to do, so
long as they are persuaded that they are Infallible, without obligation to any
other forms.

Nor let them allege how great an advantage it is, the having an infallible
Authority in the Church, to which there is so easy an access; as if the verity
of things depended upon their commodiousness. Were this so, we must also
conclude that Popes are impeccable too, at least in the Government of the
Church; for who would question but that were likewise very commodious, for
hindering the Damnation of so many persons by these unlawful Dispensations,
which persuade them that whatever the Pope permits is as truly lawful as if
God himself had said it? whereas really there is nothing more true then what an
Ancient has affirmed, namely, That the greatest part of Dispensations are
nothing else but a more easy descent into Hell with the Pope's permission:
Facilis descensus ad inferos cum bona venia Papae.

But as this Impeccability would be exceedingly advantageous if indeed God had
bestowed it upon Popes; so, on the contrary there can nothing be more
pernicious then the Flattery of those who go about to attribute it to him,
since it the more imboldens them blindly to pursue their own Passions, without
fearing to offend God. And this is what those Cardinals and Prelates (chosen by
Paul the IIId for the Reformation of the Church) affirmed really to have
succeeded by means of Coacervavcrunt sibi non-nulli Pontifices Magistros ad
desideria sua, non ut ab eis disecrent quid facere deberent, set ut little
studio and calliditate inveniretur ratio qua liceret id quod liberet: Ita quod
Voluntas Pontificis, qualiscunque ca fucrit, sit regula qua^ ejus operationes
and actiones dirigantur. Ex quo proculdubio efficitur ut quidquid libeat id
etiam liceat. Ex hoc font, Sancte Pater, tanquam ex equo Trojano, irrupere in
Ecclesiam Dei tot abusus and tam gravissimi morbi, quibus nunc conspicimus came
ad desperationem fere salutis laborasse.
some Persons, who would needs persuade some Popes that their Wills were a
sufficient Rule for their Actions; whence it followed, that what they pleased
was lawful; and hence (say they) have (as from a source and spring) flowed such
an infinity of abuses and intestine maladies as have reduced the Church to such
a condition, as her recovery seems in a manner to be desperate.

We may affirm the same of Infallibility: It would be an extraordinary
Privilege; but the Scripture having assured us that Every man is a Lier,
unless some Authority not inferior to it have exempted us from that Rule, it is
a great unhappiness to believe one's self Infallible; because there is nothing
that we are more propense to then the falling into Error by presuming we
cannot err. And on the other side it may truly be said, that the likeliest
means of rendering Popes infallible were, to persuade them that they are not so;
to the end a holy fear may always preserve them in an humble and salutary
diffidence of their own sense, and incline them to a diligent research of those
ways and expedients which God has established to assure them of his divine
Truths.

Paris the 1. of February, 1662.
FINIS.
An ADVERTISEMENT upon the following DISCOURSE.
IT has been long said, that in the precedent Discourse there have been laid
the grounds of pernicious Consequences, etc. that diverse things have been taken
out of the Notes upon the Pope's Infallibility formerly made by the same
Author: But since there has been nothing alleged against what was solidly
discussed in these Notes touching the Authority of the Councils of Constance
and Basil, it is thought pertinent to add it here.

A REFUTATION OF Certain Cavils with which some Theologues endeavor to elude
the Authority of the Councils of CONSTANCE and BASIL.
THE Sense of the Church upon the point of Infallibility did never more
perspicuously appear then in the times of the Councils of Constance and Basil,
so venerably esteemed by all France.

It Is well known that the Doctrine of the Superiority of a Council above the
Pope does necessarily destroy his pretended Infallibility; because all
Authority which is inferior, seeing it may be corrected, it is impossible it
should be infallible; since an Authority that is infallible cannot be
corrected: It follows then of necessity, that if the Pope be inferior to a
Council, he is not infallible. All Divines are agreed upon this consequence;
and there is none who maintain the Infallibility of the Pope, but they likewise
maintain that he is superior to a Council.

Moreover, if Popes be inferior to Councils, it follows clearly that they are
not only fallible, but it is also as evident that they have actually erred:
seeing Leo the Xth has defined the contrary in the Council of Lateran. It is
therefore certain, that the Superiority of a Council above a Pope does by
necessary consequence involve his Fallibility. Now this Superiority was clearly
decided in the 4th Session of the Council of Constance, where the Council
declares, Concilium Generale habere a Christo immediatam Authoritatem, cui
omnes obedire tenentur, etiam si Papalis dignitatis existat. And thus the
Fallibility of the Pope was defined by this Decree.

The novel defenders of the Superiority of Popes above Councils exceedingly
torture themselves about this Decree of the Council of Constance. For they
cannot deny but that Pope Martin the Vth (elected by this Council) did confirm
it in all things which had relation to Faith: Now the Authority of General
Councils is matter of Faith; which forces them thus to precipitate themselves
upon Solutions so ridiculously weak, that it is strange any Divines should be
found who durst propose them.

In the first place they affirm, that the Council of Constance is approved by
Martin the Vth in his quae Conciliariter gesta sunt; but that this Decree was
not made Conciliariter, because (say they) it was made without Examen, and
therefore was not approved.

It Is easy to see how dangerous an Answer this is: since if men be once
permitted to distinguish in Councils after this manner between Decrees examined
and not examined, the way is open to weaken all their Authority. For how many
matters are there which, having been very well examined before Councils have
been called, have no need of being re-examin'd for a long time after, whilst
all Prelates and Divines remain agreed concerning them?

But there is no necessity of insisting upon this, since this Solution is
founded only upon manifest Falsities; there being in the world nothing more
untrue then the pretense of those Authors, that the Decrees of the 4th and 5th
Session about the Superiority of Councils were not of the number of those
things which were decreed Conciliariter. For it is remarkable that the order of
the Council of Constance was, first to propose and examine matters in the
particular Congregations of the principal Nations of Christendom, and then they
were said to have been decreed Nationaliter. After that they were proposed
again in the public Sessions; and when they were concluded there, then they
were pronounced to have been determined Conciliariter. Whereas that which had
only been decreed by the Nations, and not in the public and general Session
of the Council, was never said to be determined Conciliariter, but Nationaliter
only. This is the true explication of these two words, as appears by the place
it self which these Authors would pervert.

For they have not any thing to allege on this subject, save what we read in
the conclusion of the Council, which was in the 45th Session. A Cardinal having
said, according to the custom, Domini ite in pace, and a Dominican gotten up
into the Pulpit to preach; the Ambassadors of the King of Poland and Duke of
Lithuania asked the Pope in the name of their Masters, That before the Council
were dissolved, he should cause to be condemned in a public Session, or else
declare for condemned, the Book of a certain Friar, one John Falkenberg, which
notoriously maintained diverse horrible Errors and Heresies, and which had
already been lawfully condemned for heretical by the Deputies as to what
concerned the Faith; and which had likewise been concluded by all the Nations
of the Council, and by the College of Cardinals: That unless this were
consented to, they did protest denial of Justice in the name of their Masters,
and would appeal to the next Council. Which being done, (the Acts added) Our
holy Father the Pope replying, said, That he would inviolably hold and observe
all and every the things which had been determined, concluded and decreed in
matters of Faith by the present Council Conciliarly, and that he would never in
any kind contradict it: That so he approved and did ratify all that had thus
Conciliarly been done, and no otherwise whatsoever. Dixit respondendo ad
praedicta, Quod omnia and singula determinata, conclusa and decreta in materiis
Fidei per praesens Concilium Conciliariter tenere and inviolabiliter observare
volebat, and nunquam contraire quoquo modo: Ipsaque sic Conciliariter facta
approbat and ratificat, and non aliter, nec alio modo.

See here the only foundation of Cardinal Cajetan's distinction, and the sole
reason which he alleges to pretend that Pope Martin the Vth did not approve
the Decrees touching the Superiority of Councils, as not done Conciliariter.
But by the very same he evidently approves that he has approved them: since the
Pope includes in his Approbation whatsoever had been determined Conciliariter,
and excludes but what having been concluded by the Nations, had only been
determined Nationaliter, and not Conciliariter, forasmuch as it was not
proposed in the public and general Sessions of the Council; so as had been the
condemnation of John Falkenberg's Book, which he refused to ratify for reasons
not known to us. Now it is evident, and no ways doubtful, but the Decrees
touching a Council's Superiority were first examined and concluded by the
Nations, and afterward established and determined in two public and general
Sessions of the Council, that is to say, in the 4th and 5th, where it is noted,
that these Decrees were first of all deliberated and concluded by all the
Nations: Certa Capitula per modum Constitutionum prius per singulas quatuor
Nationes conclusa and deliberata legit and publicavit. And it is said at the end
of the Session, that the Council had uniformly approved and concluded them:
Quibus Articulis sive Constitutionibus lectis, dictum Concilium eos and eas
uniformiter approbavit and conclusit. Were it not then altogether shameful and
most impudent to presume to deny that Martin the Vth had approved these
Decrees, since he has so expressly approved whatsoever was determined in the
Council Conciliariter? and that it is as clear as day, the Decrees were
determined Nationaliter and Conciliariter?

In like manner we see that the two latter Annalists of the Church, Spondanus
and Raynaldus, to give some color to this Cheat, change either in the whole or
in part the subject and occasion which caused Martin the Vth to say, that he
only approved that which had been done Conciliariter. For Raynaldus Anno 1418.
n. 2. falsely supposes that Martin the Vth speaks these words upon the Fathers
of the Council demanding a confirmation of the Acts: Cum veteri more (says he)
a Patribus Martinus rogatus esset, ut Concilii Acta Apostolica authoritate
confirmaret, ita ipsum respondisse tradunt Acta; S. D. N. Papa dixit,
respondendo ad praedicta, nimirum postulata, quod omnia and singula
determinata, etc. Which is a notorious Forgery, since one need only read the
Acts to see, that the Fathers of the Council did not ask for a Confirmation of
the Acts, and that it was not to answer this demand that he says what is
reported by Raynaldus; but that he might not consent to what was required by
the King of Poland's Ambassadors concerning the condemnation of Falkenberg's
Book: so as it is not to be denied but this Historian has committed a shameful
Falsification, in feigning the Pope to answer what was never demanded of him,
and in adding those two words, nimirum postulata, in Italick Characters, to the
word praedicta, to make that agree to the demands of the Fathers of the
Council, which has relation only to the words of the Polonian Ambassadors.

Spondanus durst not be altogether so bold with the Truth, nor deny these words
of Martin the Vth to have been spoken upon occasion of the Polonian's demand:
But he suppresses the protestation of Appealing to the future Council; because
that had too evidently showed how false that which he imagines is, That it was
on design, and in collusion with Martin the V^h, that these Ambassadors
deferred their demand till this last Session, that so they might have an
opportunity to observe what Decrees of the Council he did approve by his
Apostolical Authority, and what he did not approve; lest if they had moved it
before, they might have excited some murmr and trouble among the Fathers, by
reason of that which had been decided after an ambiguous manner touching the
Authority of a Council above a Pope, and their power of reforming the Church
both as to its Head and Members, which Pope Martin would not receive nor
approve by taking these Decisions absolutely, and in the precise significations
of terms. All which is but a pure imagination, without any manner of ground:
For besides that the Polonians, who appealed from the Pope to the Council,
could not be suspected to have conspired with him, since there is nothing which
Popes more abhor then these Appeals to Councils; the answer of Pope Martin
the Vth puts no distinction between the Decrees which are found amongst the
Acts of the Council, as if he had approved the one without the other, but shows
on the contrary, that he approved all these Decrees, and that he did not deny
his Approbation, but as to what did not appear in these Acts as concluded in
the Council, for having been determined only by the Nations; such as was the
condemnation of this Book of Falkenberg.

It cannot therefore be maintained with the least pretense of likelihood, that
Martin the Vth did not approve the Decrees of the Council of Constance touching
the Superiority of General Councils. And that which makes it yet more evident
is, that Pope Eugenius the IVth, though he continually strove to prefer
himself above Councils, durst not yet openly oppose those Decrees of Constance,
nor reject them as not approved by Martin the Vth his Predecessor; but pretends
only that the Council of Basil had abused them by applying them to an ill
sense, Quod Concilium Constantiense in malignum sensum pertraxerint; because it
had taken occasion upon this Definition to depose him, and to create another
Pope.

But toward the latter end of his life the Emperor Frederick and the Princes
of Germany, who kept themselves in a Neutrality between the Council of Basil
and this Pope, being willing to come to an agreement with him, one of the
Conditions of the Accord was, That Eugenius should by a Bull make the same
profession which had already been made in Germany by his Legates, concerning
the Power, Authority and Preeminence of General Councils, representing the
Catholic Church militant. These are the very terms of the Harangue which was
made by Aeneas Sylvius in the name of these Princes. Alterum est, ut professio
Potestatis, Authoritatis and Praeeminentiae Generalium Conciliorum, Catholicam
Militantem Ecclesiam repraesentantium, per tuos Oratores facta, tuis Literis
approbetur. To which the Pope consented by his Bull, as it is recited by
Raynaldus, Tom. 18. ad ann. 1447. n. 15. where he declares, That he embraces
and reverences the General Council of Constance, its Decree FREQUENS, (by which
this Council took upon it an action of Superiority over Popes, in ordaining
them to convoke and assemble Councils every ten years, and disabling their
power of retarding this term, but only to advance it) and all its other
Decrees; as likewise all other Councils representing the Catholic Church
militant: That he did acknowledge their Power, their Authority, their Honor
and their Eminence, as his other Predecessors had done, from whose footsteps
he would not deviate: Concilium autem Generale Constantiense, Decretu^
FREQUENS, and alia ejus Decreta, sicut caetera alia Concilia Catholicam
Militantem Ecclesiam repraesentantia, ipsorum Potestatem, Authoritatem,
Honorem, Eminentiam, sicut and caeteri Praedecessores nostri, a quorum
vestigiis deviare nequaquam intendimus, suscipimus, amplectimur and veneramur.

But the reflection which Raynaldus makes upon these words of Eugenius shows us
what the faith and candor of those persons is: It Is a thing (says he) that
deserves observation, that Eugenius by those Letters gives no more Authority to
the Decree of the Council of Constance, beginning with the word Frequens, but
what Martin the Vth had done before. Now this very Author pretends, An. 1433.
that Martin the Vth had not approved the Chapter FREQUENS of the Council of
Constance; but that on the contrary he had abridg'd it by the Dissolution of
the Council of Siena: so as according to this Author the sense of the words of
Eugenius were, That he receives, embraces and reverences the Decree FREQUENS,
as far as his Predecessors; and that his Predecessor having neither received,
embraced nor reverenced it, neither did he receive, embrace, or reverence it.
Could one offer a greater injury to Pope Eugenius, then to take the words of
his Bull in a sense so estranged from Christian sincerity, and think that he
would juggle with the whole German Church by so gross a Delusion?

But that which does yet farther ruin all these Sophisms is, that Pope Pius
the IId, in the same Bull where he retracts that which he had written for the
Council of Basil against Pope Eugenius, formally approves the Council of
Constance, and in particular that Decree touching the Authority of General
Councils. Cum his (says he) and Generalis Concilii Autoritatem and Potestatem
complectimur, quemadmodum and aevo nostro Constantiae, dum ibi fuit Synodus
Universalis, declaratum definitumque est: Veneramur enim N. Constantiense
Concilium, and cuncta quae praecesserunt a Romany Pontificibus nostris
praedecessoribus approbata. So that if it be pretended that Pius the IId would
maintain that the Pope were superior to a Council, one must also necessarily
pretend that he manifestly contradicted himself. But it is enough to refute
this false Distinction, that he not only authorizes the Council of Constance
in general, but particularly in that which it has defined concerning the
Authority of Councils.

The Second Reply whereof these modern Authors make use is, That the Council of
Constance does not define the Authority of all General Councils, but that only
which it has during a Schism, when there is no lawful Pope in the Church. But
this Solution (as novel as the former) is manifestly ruined by the same words
of the Council of Constance, which expressly particularize that it defines the
Authority of all General Councils, and not only its own in particular. Item
declarat, (says the Council in the Article immediately following after what I
have cited) quo quicunque, cujuscunque status and dignitatis, etiam Papalis,
existat, qui Mandatis, Statutis, seu Ordinationibus aut Praeceptis hujus Sacrae
Synodi, and cujuscunque alterius Concilii legitime congregati, super praemissis
seu ad ea pertinentibus factis vel faciendis, obedire contumaciter
contempserit, nisi resipuerit, condignae poenitentiae subjiciatur, and debite
puniatur.

There can be nothing then imagined more frivolous then such an imagination,
that the Council of Constance spoke only of its own Authority, and not of that
of other Councils; since it clearly decides, that the Popes who despised the
Determinations of any General Councils whatsoever are worthy to be punished.

Moreover Pope Pius the IId, in the fore-alledg'd passage, formally
acknowledged that this Council has determined the Authority of Councils in
general, and not its own in particular: Generalis Concilii Authoritatem and
Potestatem complectimur, quemadmodum and aevo nostro Constantiae, dum ibi fuit
Synodus Universalis, declaratum definitumque est.

In like manner the whole Church in receiving the Council of Constance has
uniformly understood, that it has defined the Superiority of a Council above
the Pope. Therefore France, and the Faculty of the Parisian Divines, which have
particularly adhered to this Council, have likewise always embraced this
Doctrine, nor have ever admitted any other, as Major affirms in c. 18. Matt.
Superius (says he) ostensum est, quod Augustinus and alii Doctores tenent
partem quam insequimur, (nempe Concilium esse supra Papam:) hanc tenuerunt
varii Cardinales, and Ioannes Patriarcha Antiochenus, Petrus de Aliaco
Cardinalis Cameracensis, Nicolaus de Cusa Doctor vocatus Christianissimus,
Ioannes Gerson Cancellarius Parisiensis nunquam satis laudatus, nostra Facultas
Parisiensis a diebus Concilii Constantiensis, in qua plures habebis exercitatos
Theologos quam in duobus vel tribus Regnis, quae sic hanc partem fovent, quod
nulli licuit asserere oppositum probabile. See here what has been the Judgment
of the Faculty of Paris, till Mons. Duval appeared on the stage.

The Council of Basil (held 12 years after) renewed these Decrees of the
Council of Constance of the second Session, Anno 1432. And because Eugenius the
IVth would remove it to Bologna, the Council having maintained that it was not
in the power of the Pope, (because a Council was above him) Eugenius was fain
Anno 1434. to revoke all that which had been done against the Council, and to
declare by a Bull, that it had been lawfully continued from the beginning till
then; whereupon he sent new Legates thither (besides Cardinal Julian, who had
continued all the while there) which in the 17th Session swore to maintain the
Decrees of the Superiority of a Council, which were yet farther renewed in the
18th Session.

All this shows that Bellarmine had no reason to affirm that the Superiority of
a Council above the Pope was not defined till the 33th Session, when Eugenius
had broke the Council by adjourning it to Ferrara; it being evident that the
Decrees of Constance were there several times renewed, during the time that the
Council was acknowledged for Oecumenick by Eugenius himself; and, by
consequence, certain it is, that the Decisions of the former Sessions are the
Decisions of an Ecumenical Council, representing the Church universal, and
approved by a Pope.

FINIS.

