(...)

EMMANVEL

LOVE TRVETH



Our Heart is the Mind of God most high.
Our Being amiable, as the sweet Lilly.
Our faithfullnes Love and Truth upright,
Is Gods Light, life, and Cleernes bright.
THE PROPHECY OF THE SPIRIT of LOVE; Set forth by H. N. And by him perused
anew, and more distinctly declared.

Translated out of Base-Almain into English.

Behold, I will send mine Angel, or Messenger, which shall prepare the way, or
make plain the path, before me.

He shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the heart of the
Children to the Fathers, that I come not, and utterly smite, or destroy the
earth, with the Curse.

Mal. 3. and 4. Math. 11. and 17. Mark 1. Luke 1. London, Printed for Giles
Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle near the West end of Paul's, 1649.

The Preface.
IN the time of the Beginning or Rising of the Joel 2. Wisd. 1 Mal. 3, and 4
great Day of the righteous Judgment of God upon the Earth, and of the
appearing of the Mat. 24 and 25 Luke 17 2 Thessalonians. 1 2 Timothy 1 Titus 2
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in his Majesty, the most highest has poured
out from him (with a mighty and vehement drift, or operation of his holy and
gracious Word) this same Prophecy of his Spirit of Love, upon the Earth, and
brought the same to light through H. N. his elected Minister.

2. Wherewithal the Lord (through the same his elected Minister) makes
manifest and known unto all people, with Correction, Discipline, and
Exhortation, the horrible Isai. 13, and 47 Mal. 4
destruction of all ungodly and unrepentant unregenerated men, together with
the deceit Psalm. 62 and 64 Isaiah 59 Jer. 9
and falsehood of their malicious hearts.

3. Also figureth forth before their Understandings, their Self-wisdom, false
Isai. 5
imagination of the knowledge, and the perverse Isai. 66 4 Eldr. 16, Wis. 1.
thoughts,, which captive and seduce them: and sets even so their
unfaithfulness, Ier. 2, and 3. Ezekiel. 16 Hosea 4, and 5.
as a covered or cloked whoredom, and their unlust to the Love, as a
sluggishness and foolishness, evidently before their eyes: and consequently
warns every one of the destruction, to the end that they all should thereby,
to their Preservation and Salvation, give over, and incline themselves
uprightly to the obedience of the Love; Math. 3 Luke 3 Act. 2, and 3
repent them for their Sins, and take the Mercy of God, or the Grace of the
Lord (which the Lord, through the Spirit of his Love, proffereth or presents
so benignly unto them) groundly Prove. 3, and 4:
to heart; live in all Luke 1 Ephesians. 1, and 4
upright Righteousness; and even so in the Luke 17 Tit. 2
Revealing of the great Day of the Lord, become preserved 2 Pet. 3
in the Godliness.

4. Let every one therefore have a good regard to this same Doctrine of
Prophecy, and take it effectually to heart, what the same requires.

THE PROPHECY OF THE Spirit of Love.
CHAP. I.
THis is the sound of the Voice of the true Spirit of Love: wherewith the Lord
visits the wickedness of the people upon earth; To the end that it might
become fulfilled, which the Lord has spoken through his holy Prophets; like as
there stands written: The Lord Isai. 26 Micha 1
shall go forth out of his dwelling, and visit the wickedness of the inhabiters
of the earth; in such sort, that the earth also shall disclose the Apoc. 18
blood which she has swallowed up, and not hide the same any longer.

2. The Lord, the God of Heaven, moved me, in his mind, or Spirit; his power
encompassed me with a rushing noise; and the glory of the same God of Heaven
became great in my Spirit of his Love; in such wise, that the great clearness
of God wholly environed me, and shined round about me: Where-through the sight
of mine eyes became clearer then crystal, and mine understanding brighter then
the Sun: in such so^, that I insaw with mine eyes the great Ezekiel 18 2 Pet. 3
long-suffering of God, and how large the same extended over the children of
men; and perceived, with mine understanding, the breaking forth of the Isai. 13
Amos 5 Joel 2 Wisd. 1
great Day of the righteous Judgment of God upon the earth: with which breaking
forth of the same great day, God will also now in the last time, as a Nah. 1
revenger against all his Enemies, make up himself, and appear, and Acts 17
judge the universal earth with Righteousness, according to his Promises.

3. I insaw also, that God will pour forth (...) wrath and indignation over all
them that have not (to their Romans 2
amendment) taken heed unto his love, grace, and long-suffering, but in the
mercy of God, and in the time of grace, whenas the mercy was proffered unto
them, Prove. 1
refused the same: and even so, abiding sluggish toward the Will of the Lord,
loved and ensued the worldly foolishness, maliciousness, and self-mindedness,
as also the infidelity of the good-thinking-wise, more then the Salvation of
God.

4. In all this same, wherewith the Lord so moved me in his mind, I took good
heed, in mine understanding, what the Lords meaning and Will was; and whereto,
or to to what manner of service the Lord moved my mind.

5. When I then perceived or understood it, so was the Lords meaning and will
unto me, even such as his Being, or Essence, spoke unto me: For the Being of
God gave forth his sound and Voice, and spoke unto me H. N. through his Spirit
of Love, all these words, and said:

6. Go now out, and abide always in me; and Mal. 3
going before with thy service, e're ever the clearness of the great day of my
righteous Judgment do come) let the sound of the voice of my gracious Word pass
forth over the universal earth; show all people my Will, declare my Laws,
Ordinances, or institutions, to the Ununderstanding ones; forbear not any
longer the transgressing of men, neither wink thou henceforth at the offenses
of any people; but make manifest their Isai. 58
unrighteousness unto them, and correct or reprove them for all their
ignorance, blockishness, self-seeking, and hypocrisy, and for all their lying
imagination of the Knowledge, wherewith they give forth themselves before thee
as though I approved their cause: in which doing they all make manifest their
false righteousness before me, and bring their filthiness before my face,
making themselves even so Isai. 1 Amos 5
to an abomination before mine eyes.

7. Let also the slothful, Prove. 6, and 24
and all such as go on so negligently, (namely, such as follow after the
fashion and Being of the wicked world, Jer. 7, 11, and 13 and 18 Zech. 7
or their good-thinking, and consider not on the service and requiring of my
holy and gracious Word, that passes forth under the obedience of my Love, nor
have any regard thereto) know and understand, that they all are Isai. 1 Amos 5
Luke 16 Tit. 1
an abomination and a loathsomness before mine eyes, and that I cannot away
with them, to the end that they all, through thy service out of my Love, may
turn them uprightly Isai. 55 Ier. 3
to me and my Love, Ezekiel. 17 Joel 2 Math. 3 Luke 3
repent them for their sins, and be 2 Pet. 3
preserved in the clearness of the day of my righteous Judgment.

8. Now, bowing my self in all obedience to my God, I went forth, and did abide
also always in the Lord, even as the Lord had commanded me: and my spirit being
moved through Gods power I gave forth the sound of the voice of the gracious
Word of the Lord, like as I had also done in times past.

9. And even so, out of the love of my God and Christ, became the gracious Word
of the Lord (in living power) out of the living God in sharp reproving,
chastising, and nurturing, as with documents, to the putting away and
mortifying of the sin of death; and also in gentle-dealing or helpfulness to
Salvation, as with sweet Isai. 55 Ioh 4, and 7 Apo. 22
waters, to the raising up of the righteousness of life, John 4, and 7
flowing from my body: and the sound of the same voice enlarged it self wide
abroad upon the earth.

10. Have a good regard therefore (O ye children of men) unto that which
becomes this day (out of the gracious Word of the Lord and his holy Spirit of
Love) spoken and expressed unto you; and harden Psalm. 95 Heb. 3
not your hearts in any case, but Jer. 7, and 18, and 25, and 35
amend your Being, to the end that ye may enter, with the children of God, into
the Isai. 32 Heb. 3, and 4
Rest of the Lord.

CHAP. II.
O Ye Children of men, ye children Genesis 3 Isai 1, and 9 Romans 5
of defection! which will not believe nor understand Gods Truth, give any Prove.
1 Jer. 7
ear to the Lords Will, nor follow after the doctrine and instruction of the
gracious Word and his holy Spirit of Love; how can I, in any case, suffer you
any longer then I have suffered you? seeing that the Lord himself will not
forbear you any longer in your unwillingness to his Righteousness.

2. Thus long have I, with the Romans 2 2 Pet. 3
long-suffering of the Lord, beheld and considered it also with long-suffering,
what manner of ways it might be that ye all loved to walk in; and whether also
any man loved, or desired to enter obediently into the Prove. 3, and 4. Math, 3
Mark 1 Luke 3 Act. 2, and 3
entrance or first School-rule to the way of Life and Peace, in such sort as
the same becomes administered, under the obedience of the Love, according to
the Truth of God.

3. Thus long have I been conversant, in stilness, with many of you, and been
by you like as one that can well abide to look on the wickedness of men, and
yet not correct or reprove the same: But in all this my spirit has been
greatly Jer. 9, and 14 Lam. 1, and 2.
burdened with grief, and (with much heavy cheer) very woeful and sorrowful for
you all, O ye children of men.

4. For, viewing the whole face of the earth, I beheld and noted directly the
exceeding distractedness and 4 Esdr. 14 Math. 24
iniquity of the perverse world, and the manifold Dan. 9, and 11 Mark 13
abominations of desolation, wherewith she has brought her self into a most
confused estate: also the many and manifold Isaiah 5 Romans 1, and 12 1 Cor. 1
self-wisdoms, chosen holinesses Col. 2 2 Timothy 3
, and false god-services, or religions of men, which they have taken on unto
them out of the Scripturely learnedness and imagination of the knowledge, and
made or divided themselves (there-through) into many Sects, Dissentions Mat. 24
1 Cor. 1, and 3. Gal. 5 Jam 3
, and Schisms or Divisions.

5. I have moreover marked, with long-suffering, the forth-going of all such as
boast them of the Love, and persuade themselves that they cleave unto the Love
and the Wisdom, whether that there were any better thing loved by them then by
the world; and also, whether that they approached any nearer to the Truth of
God, and to the upright Being of the Love, then the wise of the world and
Scripture-learned.

6. I have also, for that cause, walked lovely among certain of them, and
behaved my self 2 Cor: 5 Tit 3
very gently with them; hoping even so, that the true fear Prove. 1 Eccl. 1, and
2.
of God, the Psalm. 40
lust to the good and upright Being, the upright Math. 24
zeal to the Righteousness, and the concord Ezekiel. 11 1 Cor. 1 Ephesians. 4
of heart in the Love, should have been found among them, more then among the
worldly wise and Scripture learned.

7. But, alas! like as the world, together with her wise and Scripture-learned,
are darkened or Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
blinded in heart, and deaf in the understanding, (which comprehend not Wisd. 1
Math. 11 1 Cor. 2
the good Being of the Love, nor yet consider on any of all that which God,
through the Spirit of his Love, requires; but have always a lust to
themselves, and cleave unto the covetousness, the voluptuousness of the flesh,
and the self-wisdom, which seduceth them,) even so I have found many of you,
yea, almost all, which make boast of the Love, and talk much thereof, to stand
in such like case: and also advisedly marked, that ye (under the pretense or
color of the house or service of Love) have taken on to your selves the 2 Pet.
2 Jude 1
voluptousness of the flesh, according to the manner of the world, to be your
freedom, and your own Ier 7, and 11, and 18
thoughts of the good-thinking, according to the imagination of the knowledge
(like unto many unillumated 1 Cor. 1
Scripture-learned and good-thinking wise) to be your wisdom; and have no
regard to the godly life of the gracious Word, nor to the Prove. 1
counsel of the Testimony of the holy Spirit of Love, neither yet humble you
obediently to the Love and her service: and yet notwithstanding, when one
asks you, whether ye have adjoined you to the Love, or are minded to continue
with a good will by the same? ye answer and say expressly, O yea; we will cleave
unto the Love, and not forsake the same in any case.

8. Howbeit, ye cover therewithal your false desires, and also the lusts of
your flesh, wherein ye Romans 1 Ephesians. 4 2 Per. 2 Jude 1
live and walk; and remain even so without the obedience of the holy Word, and
of the requiring of his service of Love, and abide also bound or owned to your
selves, and to your own counsel and will; and come not to the Truth of God,
which flows forth serviceably out of the Love, for to be obedient, as right
John 8 Jam: 1
Disciples of the Word, unto the same.

9. But verily, after such a manner ye are, toward the gracious Word of the
Lord and his service of Love, Psalm. 50 Ier. 2, and 3 Hos. 4, and 5
even like unto an whore, which after her hearts good-thinking (to a cloaking
of her whoredom) chooses an husband, and coupleth her self in marriage unto
him, for that she might boast her as a married wife; and under such a covering,
and boasting, that she has an husband, commits her whoredom, seeing that ye
in like manner without Christ, and against Christ (although ye make great boast
of him) commit whoredom, and deal, nor walk not according to the doctrine or
requiring of Christ.

10. For which your covered or cloaked whoredoms cause, and unrighteous
walking, the Lord has moved my mind, and commanded me to figure forth your
whoredom and Ier. 7
unrighteous ways before you, also to Isai. 58
reprove you thereof, and to exhort you to amendment; and to warn you even so
of the destruction that is to come upon the ungodly in the righteous judgment
of God.

11. O thou whorish Nature! Be ashamed, I say, presently before the Lord, and
before the Seat Isaiah 16 Mat. 25
of his Majesty, where-out he declares his upright Righteousness, that thou
boastest thee so of Christ, the gracious Word of the Father, 2 Cor. 11
as of thy Husband, and of the lovely Nature of his Love: and yet, whilst thou
do so, hold thine heart common, or of one Being with the Antichrist, with
the wicked World, and with the self-wisdomes of her Sectaries and
Scripture-learned. Peruse and ponder now well the Isa. 59
falsehood of thine Heart, and consider thoroughly all thy Covetousness, Ier. 7,
and 9
theevery, self-Seeking and whoredom which thou have committed against Christ
and his Love.

12. O ye Children of Men! when ye have once perceived, and clearly seen, in
your inwardnes, into all this same whorish Nature of your unrighteous walking,
then withdraw you first of all therefrom, Jer. 2 and 3
and turn you to the goodness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Ezekiel. 18 and 38
repent you; and let your selves even so (under the Obedience of the holy and
gracious Word, and of his service of Love) become Ephesians. 4
changed to an upright being of Christ, and taught, Pro. 1 and 4
instructed, and counseled (as single-minded Mat. 18 1 Cor. 14
Children, which wholly give over themselves obediently under the tuition or
custody of their Mother) by the Elders in the holy understanding of the Spirit
of the Love of Jesus Christ: and even so, (in all obedience of the love of
Jesus Christ) become fostered and trained up, in the godly Wisdom of the holy
understanding.

13. Hereto apply you first of all with faithful hearts; and come then even so
to the lovely Ephesians. 4
and true being of the Love Jesus Christ, and to the upright Ioh. 1
Freedom of the Children of God.

CHAP. III.
O Ye Children of the Genesis 3 Isai. 1. 59 Romans 5
defecting or off falling Being, which say that ye cleave unto Christ and his
Love, and under such a boasting, commit your whoredom; to you is my cry and
calling: For, I lament and bewail very much your Ier. 2 Hosea 4
unfaithfulness and all your feignedness, wherewith ye think to cover you
before me.

2. But no, beloved, no; ye cannot abide covered before me, nor before the face
of my God: but ye must all, in this very day of the Love, become manifest
before the Majesty of God, and Romans 14 2 Cor. 5
before the Seat of the Judgment of Christ.

3. For although ye dissemble with me, and how craftily soever ye cover, or
feign you before me, yet are nevertheles 1 Cor. 4
all the Counsels and Falsehoods of your Hearts manifest before me, and so much
the more naked and bare Psalm. 44 Heb. 4
before the eyes of my heart and spirit.

4. For so long as your hearts stand not submitted good-willingly to the Heart
and Spirit of my God, nor are wholly given over (to be 1 Peter 1 James 1
obedient Disciples of the Word) unto the gracious Word and his service of
Love: So can I also, through the true John 1 and 3
Light, wherein God has glorified, or thoroughly lighted me, right well
perceive, fee, and note, that all your minds and thoughts are not minded with
the heart and spirit of my God; nor with the requiring of the gracious Word,
and of his service of Love, but, thereagainst, mingled with wicked Genesis 6 and 8
Eccl. 17, and 18
Inclinations or Affections.

5. Seeing now then that I, through the light of my God, do clearly see into
all your pernicious corrupted Nature and wicked Inclinations: and gladly
vouchsafe you all, out of the upright Being of my God, that which were better;
to the end, that, under the obedience of the Love, there might be found by you
all an upright Being Ephesians. 4 2 Pet. 1
of the Love of Jesus Christ; So cannot I, of Natures part, nor of the 2 Cor 5
nature of the Loves part, which drives me thereto, always keep silence, but
must, even out of love, witness unto you the Isa. 13 and 47 Math. 24 1 Timothy 4
2 Timothy 3 2 Pet. 2
perils of destruction, which have bewrapped and encompassed you,

6. For that cause, I admonish you this day of the Destruction, and foretell
you, as truly as the Lord lives, if ye endeavor not your selves to the
Obedience of the requiring of the gracious Word, and 1 Ioh. 3 and 4
of his service of Love, for to become upright of heart, to fear the God of
Life, to love the Virtues of the lovely Being of the Love, to live uprightly,
Romans 12 2 Cor. 12 Ephesians. 4 1 Ioh. 1
in the communiallity of the Love, with all the holiness of God, and to deal or
behave your selves Zac. 7. 8
faithfully with them; and so to become wholly godded with God John 17
and his Christ, or John 15 Ephesians. 3 2 Pet. 1
incorporated to that same godly Being; but seek your selves, or any other
thing, in or by the gracious Word and his service of Love; or else take unto
your selves a good-thinking word, and falsely usurp the Service of Love, and
boast you thereof; and even so hold your hearts common, or of one Being, with
the 1 John 2
worldly Being and fashion, and with the false hearts of the seditious
Scripture-learned; So will it then assuredly go evil with you in this day of
the Love of the righteous Judgment Isai. 13 and 47 Math. 25
of God; yea, much Math. 11
worse then with the worldly ignorant, which have not heard any better then the
manner or Rite of the world, or of the seditious and sectarish
Scripture-learnedness.

7. For unto you all (which presently, in this very day of the Love, hear the
voice or sound of the Spirit of Love) the good Being of the Love becomes
expressly set forth, and the Life of the upright Righteousness figured out
before your eyes; and to the same also ye are all Mat. 11. Ephesians. 1 and 4. 2 Pet.
1
called, and entirely bidden: And the hand reached forth unto you, to your
assisting therein, to the end that ye should all, with willing hearts, wholly
give over your selves (under obedience of the Love) thereunto; and so enter into
the way or entrance to the same.

8. But verily, if ye now, in all this 2 These. 2
love and mercifulness, which this day chances or becomes brought unto you,
through the Spirit of Love, will not give ear to the Voice or Testimony Ier. 25
and 29
of the gracious Word, nor learn (in the service of Love) the Math. 11
humility of heart, nor the meek-mindedness of Spirit; neither yet once laud
nor thank the God of Life for such an appeared Tit. 2
grace, but Prove. 1
refuse the proffered grace, and turn away therefrom; keep off the same from
your hearts, run on light-mindedly with your taken-on knowledge; have no regard
at all to the Wisdom of the Love; nor endeavor to attain to the righteousness
of the upright Being of the Love; and even so, Psalm. 95 Heb. 3
hardening your hearts, follow after your own Jer. 7, and 18, and 44
good-thinking; so think well then hereon, and consider it advisedly, O ye
selfminded ones, and good-thinking wise, that ye, with such pervertedness of
your goodthinking hearts, shall become Isai. 59 Ephesians. 4
estranged from God and his Truth, wax cold toward the right Love, and
altogether unwilling to give over your hearts in the service of Love.

9. Yea, that God will also for that cause (seeing that ye are so Prove. 24
Math. 25
slothful to the service of his Love, and to all that God, in this his holy
day, requires,) Apoc. 3
spew you out of his mouth, and not let you taste his lovely Being, nor find
the Heb. 4
Rest of his holy ones; but will let your hearts rest blinded from his upright
Light, and your time, days, and years, pass away or Wisd. 5 Isaiah 13 and 47
Mal. 4
perish, with the ungodly, in ignorance and darkness.

10. O ye Prove. 6, and 24 Math. 25
sluggish to the Will of the highest God, ye Phil. 2
seekers of your own selfness in the service of the Love, and ye all which are
so wise or Isaiah 5
knowledgful in your own conceit, and (without the counsel of the holy Spirit
of Love) Prove. 1
follow and ensue your own counsel, jet on with stiff Isaiah 3
necks; and even presumptuous boldly Wisd. 1, and 2.
hunt after your own destruction: how long will ye yet, through your
disobedience, bring sorrow and care upon me, and pain me so with anguish in my
heart?

11. How long will ye yet follow your own counsel, and cast behind you the
counsel of the Wisdom?

12. Oh! I fear that ye will not cease from doing your own will, until that the
Destruction have utterly swallowed you up; and that ye shall not find any more
time of converting to Heb. 12
amendment.

13. How are ye, for shame, thus cold, and how slowly come ye forward to the
Service of the Love? How abide ye always so very childish, or 2 Timothy 3 Heb. 5
weak of understanding in the knowledge of the entrance to the first school-rule
of the Christian Doctrine of the Service of Love, and of the heavenly Truth? I
have, doubtess, held forth or expressed all good before you, and evidently
figured forth the upright Being of the Love, and the entrance to the same among
you; through which Service, so extended on you, all my hope has been, that I
should have rejoiced with you (in Ephesians. 4 Col. 1 1 Pet, 5
the growing up in the godly understanding of the upright Being of the Love) as
with loving Children of the Kingdom, in the godly Being of the Love.

14. But alas! (it grieveth my heart sore) now, that ye begin to wax aged or
old in the understanding, and ought, of right, to be Hell: 5
Elders in the holy Understanding, I find that many of you grow not up in the
Ephesians, 4
oldness of the holy Understanding of the gracious Word, or Christ, (according
to the upright Being of the requiring of his service of Love) but in your own,
or selfframed understanding, or destroying Gen 3 1 Cor. 8
knowledge; and yet daily increase therein, and not in the Wisd. 1, and 7 Jam: 3
Wisdom of the Love, that godly Understanding.

CHAP. IV.
OH! where shall I once find such as take to heart the gracious Word, and the
instruction of his Service of Love, or his counsel Deuteronomy. 6 and 11, and 32 Prove.
4
of the Wisdom, and even so, with single-minded Wisd. 1
hearts, follow after the same obediently? For I find by experience, that the
most part of people, which make a 2 Timothy, 3
show as though they turned them to the Love or to the Service of the same,
turn them not Ier. 3,
aright to the Love and her Service.

2. For that cause, such show plainly their unfaithfulness; and, in turning
them away from the requiring of the Love, it becomes manifest (in the bringing
forth, or spreading abroad of their own counsel, lust, and will, which they
take unto them through the imagination of their knowledge) that they are utterly
estranged from the gracious Word of the Lord, and from his requiring, and
turned toward their own word and will.

3. For there are very few to be found, that give over themselves hereto;
namely, to Mat. 16
forsake their Self-wisdom or Imagination of the Knowledge, and to live
obediently 1 Kin. 15 1 Pet. 1
, according to the Counsel and Doctrine of the Testimonies of the holy Spirit
of Love: But almost all (and especially they that refuse the Love and the
Requiring of her Service) set themselves to Judgment, for to Jer. 13
judge, with their own Word and Imagination of the Knowledge, Gods gracious 1
John 3 and 4
Word, and the Isaiah 30
Service of his holy Spirit of Love; as also the Elders in the same Service.

4. Yea, many think also in their hearts, That they will look well hereto, that
they be not in any wise seduced or deceived by the Love, which 1 John 4
nevertheless is God himself; nor by the Spirit of Love, which is the true
godliness of Jesus Christ; nor by the dayed-Elder in the same Spirit, which
witnesses the upright Being of the Love and her Spirit.

5. Behold, such a Circumspection will they almost all occupy or use, supposing
even so (according to their good thinking or own knowledge) to enter into the
Life; and (although they are not regenerated in the Obedience of the Love of
Jesus Christ Wisd. 1 Matthew. 11 and 13 1 Cor. 2
, nor yet understand the Works of God, nor the Mystery of his Kingdom) to be
more prudent and understanding with their knowledge, then God himself, and his
Spirit of Love.

6. Which Spirit has now in this very day, through the mercy of God, and his
elected Minister, made manifest the secret Treasures of God, and the godly and
spiritual Ephesians. 3 Col. 1 2 Timothy 1
Riches of the heavenly Goods so distinctly and nakedly, and also brought the
same so abundantly and liberally unto us, in the obedience of the requiring of
his Service of Love, (where-out also we declare forth the same again among the
children of men,) That the simplest, or very least among the understanding ones
(if he considered thereon) might right easily understand, that this our
Ministration of the holy Word in the Service of Love is Gods working, and not
the man's; and that the same Spirit, and such an holy understanding, Mat. 16.
as is witnessed and declared out of the same Ministration, proceeded not out
of any flesh nor earthly understanding, but out of the living God; and that men
also (without conceiving any evil opinion thereof) ought to be obedient to that
same Spirit in the requiring of his holy Word and Service under the obedience
of the Love.

7. Howbeit, many will not consider hereon, but they turn them almost all to
their own James 3
understanding out of the wisdom of the flesh, and Scripture-learnedness or
imagination of the knowledge, wherein they entangle, disturb or disquiet
themselves among each other, and come not Ephese 1 and 4, 2 Timothy 3
to the Understanding whereunto they are called or required, and wherein they
might understand the Mind or Intent of the Works of God.

8. Out of these ignorant Understandings, according to the imagination of the
Knowledge, very many make up themselves presently, which judge the Administration
of the gracious Word of the holy Spirit of Love out of their ignorant and
unilluminated Understandings, and running forth even so, with their Judgments,
here and there, they know nor understand not themselves what they judge thereof.

9. For the One murmureth here, and will have it Thus after his Mind; the
Other murmureth there, and will have it So after his Mind: The One has seen or
marked This in it, that is unright in his eyes: The Other has heard That
thereof, or else conceived and imagined to himself there-out some strange or
absurd Matter, that sounds unto him, in his ears and in his thoughts, as
unright, or error.

10. Herewith now, and with such like (as there is mentioned) certain have so
much to do, and to talk of, that they for that cause (through the great toil
and business which they incumber themselves withal thereabout) become so
utterly blinded in their hearts, that they, by no means, can consider on the
single-minded 1 Kin. 15 1 Pet. 1
Obedience which the gracious Word and his Service of Love requires; nor yet
on the abundant Treasures and Riches Mat. 13 Col. 2
of God, which, out of the heavenly Truth, become Ephesians. 3 Col. 1
revealed, by Gods Grace, so richly and liberally unto us in the Service of
Love, and, through the holy Spirit of Love, brought unto us to Salvation.

11. They have likewise not once any regard, what an upright and lovely godly
Ephesians. 4 2 Pet. 1
Being the gracious Word brings, in the Obedience of his Service of Love,
unto his Believers.

12. Also they understand not Mat. 16
the time, which is now present and at hand, in which the ending of the
perverse 2 Pet. 3
world, and the appearing of Mat. 24, and 25 Luke 17 Acts 1
the Coming of out Lord Jesus Christ, and the Isai. 26 John 5 1 Cor. 15 1 These.
4
Resurrection of his holy ones, comes to pass.

CHAP. V.
OH! Is it not a very lamentable case, that I have Eccl. 24 2 Cor. 11
labored thus long, with such a fervency and diligence, in the Mystery of the
Works of God, out of the godly powers, among the children of men; and given
abroad the same Mystery of the Works of God unto them, with so full resolution,
to their Salvation (to declare thereby Gods Truth upon the Earth) so openly and
clearly; dealt, or been conversant, in the travel of the godly Testimonies of
the true Light, among so many; and also communed, or spoken thus long (yea so
often and many times) with them, of the Mat. 13 Luke 8
Mystery of the Kingdom of the God of Heaven: and that I yet find so few,
which, with all their heart, give over themselves good-willingly, to be
obedient 1 Pet. 1 Jam. 1
disciples unto the gracious Word of Life and Truth, and to his service of
Love; or that humble them (according to the requiring of the Word, and Prove. 1
Counsel of the Wisdom) aright there-under: For almost they all Phil. 2
seek themselves, and not the Lord, and even so hearing and believing
themselves Jer. 18, and 23
they follow after their own will and understanding, and not the Lords, nor his
gracious Words.

2. Seeing then that they hear, believe, and witness so gladly their own word,
and follow or ensue so gladly their own counsel, wisdom and will, so will they
also very gladly and willingly submit themselves thereunder; also gladly give
them over, and be obedient to the same, Ier. 7, and 11, and 13
but not to the gracious Word of Life, or of the Spirit of Love: Yea, such an
absurd and preposterous dealing against the gracious Word of Life, or of the
Spirit of Love, is used often times much more by them which men have in
estimation, and count to have understanding, then by the little and
single-minded ones.

3. Oh, how much and many times is it mentioned in our Writings, That the Lord
detesteth, and is wholly minded against Isaiah 3 and 30 Rom, 1, and 8, and 11 1
Cor. 1,
all pride of the flesh, against all the wisdoms of the earthly or fleshly men,
and against all their industry, subtle pregnancy, knowledge and counsel? And how
little becomes it taken to heart? or how little thinks and considers the
man, that he (touching Gods Causes) ought to hold himself Psalm. 37 Isaiah 30
still in his wisdom, industry, understanding or knowledge, until that he were
endowed and illuminated, in his spirit, through the obedience of the requiring
of the serviceable Word with the eternal and living 1 John 1
Word of God the Father, and John 15 and 17, Ephesians. 3 2 Pet. 1
incorporated to the upright and lovely Being of the Love of Jesus Christ.

4. Whilst then that the man is so unmindful of this, and brings forth
always so presumptuous boldly (out of his goodthinking prudency or industry,
and out of the imagination of his knowledge) his own word, counsel, and will so
much and manifoldly; witnesses forth the same for truth, and even so,
according to his manly wisdom (out of the mind of his flesh) goes on
therewith; and (because he thinks that his cause is right) wills nor
desires not any thing else; so must I other-whiles let the man alone, or
suffer him to go forth therein for a season, waiting when he will come to a
better mind, and behold, with long-suffering, how it will go with him.

5. Therefore, for the Peace's Cause (to ^he end that I would not contend with
any man) I keep often silence among many, and let pass, in my patience and
long suffering, all false witnessings against me: and even so abide waiting for
the right time, Ecl. 3
wherein the gracious Word of Truth, and the Discipline or Chastising
erudition, might be gladly hearkened unto and believed of the Man, to reform
the Man even so, in convenient time, with long suffering, and to prevent him
with the upright Wisdom and holy Understanding, if happily he might by that
means be found worthy of the Grace, that the Lord would open unto him the Door
of the upright Ephesians. 1
Understanding; and give him yet once to understand, that he ought to keep
silence and become utterly dumb in himself: and first of all to hearken unto
the upright serviceable Word of the holy Understanding, that comes forth
Isaiah 2 Micah 4
out of the holy Jerusalem, and leads in unto the Godliness; to show forth
upright fruits of Repentance; to give over himself, to become obedient
thereunto: and even so to become Ephesians. 4
taught o bediently in the upright Wisdom of the lovely Being, and in the holy
Understanding of the Godliness; and so then to testify thereof.

6. O that the Man gave himself to stilness, also had regard with diligence and
fervency, and that Mat. 11
in humble manner, to the service of the gracious Word under the obedience of
the Love, and desired to do the Psalm. 40 Acts 9
Will of the Lord: so should he then verily learnwell to note or perceive,
wherein the Lord has placed his Heart, Being, and Mind: and wherein He has
declared or revealed himself, together with his Light, Word, Spirit and Truth:
And that it is also wholly the Will of the Lord, that Men Isa. 42 Mat. 3 and 17
should hear and believe his Word, Spirit and Truth there-out; and that Men
ought also to assemble them, as obedient John 8 1 Peter 1 James 1
Disciples of the Word, thereunto.

7. If now the Man once marked and understood this same aright, so should he
then also verily (if he had a Psalm. 40 Acts 9
lust to do the Will of the Lord) endeavor himself, with good will, thereto,
and even so become assembled therewith; turn his hearing to the same; and, out
of the sound of the witnessings of the same, Pro. 4
take to heart the wisdom of Instruction: and even so, growing up therein to
the Ephesians. 4
old age of the Man Christ, learn there-out to speak rightly the holy Wis. 1, 2
Understanding ^f the godly Wisdom.

8. For verily, the true Jerusalem (which in Times past descended, in sumptuous
and gorgeous garnishing, Apoc. 21
from Heaven, and where-out the Word of the Lord is Isa. 2, 25 Ier. 31 Micah 4
promised to go forth) is risen up therein with his glistering Clearness; In
which Jerusalem, the holy Hill of Sion (where-out the Law of the Lord is
promised to go forth, and whereon the Lev. 26 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 12 and 15 21
Isaiah 2 Micah 4
Temple. Tabernacle or House of God is builded) becomes exalted above ( d) all
Hills, and manifested to be a Nurce of the Children of Jerusalem.

9. And that same heavenly State, with all that is of one Being therewith, is
verily the Luke 17 Romans 14
peaceable Kingdom, and Mercy-seat of all Believers in CHRIST; the which is,
from the Grace of God, come unto Us, now in the Isa. 16 Heb. 5
last time, according to the Promises,

10. In which undisturbable and faststablished Kingdom, Romans 14 Apoc. 12
that is come unto us, full of Peace, and full of all spiritual and heavenly
Goods, all holy Souls and godly Understandings, do Isa. 35 51 60, 61 and 65,
66 Ier. 23 31 and 33
live and inhabit, with all Triumph, Glor^ and Christian Joy, free and without
an^ Fear: and there-unto also all Men, the are good of will to assemble them
thereto are called and lovingly bidden.

11. Oh, that the Man understood this same aright Deuteronomy. 32 Isaiah 48
! So should he then assuredly, with all good-willingness of his heart, Heb. 5
humble himself before the Throne of Grace, and sovereign Majesty of God; take
heed unto the Word of the Lord there-out: hear, believe and good-willingly obey
the same; honor, laud, praise, and thank that same God, which has prepared
all this for us, which also lives from everlasting to everlasting, Apoc. 4 and
7
and sits upon the seat of his Majesty: and spread abroad, every where, the
great Acts and wonderful works of God: as also rejoice him with great Joy, for
that such a Throne of Grace and Savinghealth is now, in these last perilous
times, appeared, come, and declared, Apoc. 21
out of the heavenly Being, upon the Earth unto the Children of Men, Luke 2
which hope on God, and on the Comfort of his Salvation: and that also
therethrough the Mat. 6 Luke 11
will of the Lord is accomplished on Earth, as in Heaven.

CHAP. VI.
O Ye Children of Men, consider well now hereon, and have a good regard
thereto, and take the same yet once effectually Deuteronomy. 4 Prove. 4
to heart; namely, how that presently out of this very Throne of Grace (which
is appeared and come unto us, now in the last Time, in the most holy of the
true Tabernacle of God, to an everlasting Stool of Grace, Apoc. 21
upon the Earth) the Glorv of the Lord becomes manifest, and his Isaiah 2
Micah 4
Law, Word and Will, (according to his godly Truth) expressly witnessed.

2. For that cause, have now a distinct Diversity, in whom Gods Spirit and his
Word is revealed or manifested; and in whom it is yet unrevealed.

3. For consider, where God, with his Christ and Spirit, has his John 1 and 17
Apoc. 21
Dwelling in any one, and brings forth his secret Treasures of the Heavenly
Goods thereout; even there is then truly his Wisdom Wis. 1 and 7
to be found; and also the Counsel of God, according to the Truth: And not by
the Strangers, nor by the Disobedient unto the Word; nor yet by the
good-thinking wise, which separate themselves from us and our godly Doctrine:
neither yet by them, whose Spirit is not (in the conformity of being with us)
John 3 Rom 8
begotten or born out of God, but (in the Separation against us) out of the
flesh of the earthly Being, have a good respect hereunto.

4. O ye Earthly Generations (I mean, ye earthly un-Godded Men) that exalt and
prefer your Ier. 23 and 27
own Word, (which notwithstanding is mere lies) so highly, and hear and
believe the same so gladly: also always desire to follow after your own
Counsel, (which notwithstanding is a mere seducing and deceit) and to be
obedient thereunto; and will even so, out of your Darkness, (which is
doubtless nothing else but the cursed Kingdom of Apoc 17
Hell, and the Possession or Habitation of all Devils and wicked Spirits it
self) judge so gladly the Light of Gods Truth, and the Children of Light: Ah,
beloved, consider yet once, in what Being and Nature ye are comprehended: and
then judge, from whence your word and Spirit is, or has his Original,
wherewith ye will judge and speak forth Isaiah 38 Jer. 11
the Divine Matters: and from whence also ye fetch your Counsel, which ye,
without Gods Counsel, wherewith we are of one Being, so earnestly ensue or
follow after, 2 Pet. 2 Jude 1
according to your own Mind of the Flesh: and where-out likewise ye execute
the Judgment, with the which ye judge the Testimonies of the Light, and the
Children of the Love, or of God.

5. Behold, herein now, and according to this manner pronounce forth boldly the
Judgment John 8 1 Cor. 11
over your selves, and give testimony of your own selves, what ye your selves
(in your disobedience to the Requiring of the Word) are, or may be reckoned
for: As likewise of your own Word, which ye speak there-out: for I commit
therein the matter unto your selves to judge.

6. O ye Children of Men, seeing that ye judge another, and all things, so
gladly or willingly: so judge now once also your selves. Ah, beloved, do, I
pray you, even so: for I have now given the matter into your own hands to judge.

7. Thus look well, rightly into your selves, and then pronounce forth, John 8
1 Cor. 11
according to the Truth, the Judgment or Sentence over your selves, what ye
your selves all are, according to your inward Man: and truly, when ye once
begin to see aright into your selves, then shall ye for certain find in your
selves, that ye are no^ minded according to Gods Nature o^ Being; But according
to the Nature of a corrupted, and earthly, consumable, or mortal Man: And that
your Word and Spirit, and all your Will and Counsel, 1 Cor. 2 James 3
is out of the Flesh of Sin John 8
and out of the Lies of Darkness.

8. For, so long as ye yet live in the Romans 8 and 13 1 Pet. 4
Flesh of Sin, and that ye are not (through the Doctrine of the Testimonies of
the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ) restored; neither prepared to the
New Birth in Jesus Christ in your Spirit and Understanding, nor yet humble you
there unto; and that ye are not Mat. 13
taught, with the Administration of the Gracious Word under the Obedience of
the Love, to the Kingdom of the God of Heaven, or that the same is not come
unto you, in your Obedience unto the Word and Service of Love, Apoc. 12 and 21
in your Spirit; and that ye even so direct the course or forth-going of your
life without the Service of the Love and his Requiring: So is then doubtless
all your Word, Spirit and Counsel, proceeding out of the Imagination of your
Knowledge Rom 8. 1 Cor. 2 Iam. 3
, no otherwise minded, but earthly, devilish and fleshly; and ye have not any
sight nor knowledge at all of Gods Matters or Causes, nor of the Kingdom of God,
according to the heavenly Truth: It is very true.

CHAP. VII.
HArken, harken; Psalm 37 Isaiah 30
Hold you still before the Seat of Gods Majesty, O ye children of men, and give
ear diligently, for there comes now forth from the same Seat Psalm 18 Apoc. 4
Lightenings, Thunders, and Voices; yea, even now the Lord lets himself be
heard upon the earth; and He the highest God, which sits upon his Seat, and
lives for ever and ever Isaiah 26 Micha 1
, speaks now out of his holy Dwelling.

2. Have now therefore a good regard unto the particular Unfolding or distinct
Definition of the same sound of the Voice of the Lord; For thus says the Lord,
or in this manner sounds his Voice:

3. Your own Word, O ye children of men, is the Ier. 7, and 8, and 9, and 14,
and 23, and 27, Ezekiel. 13
Lie which seduceth you.

4. Your own Understanding is the destroying and corrupt Knowledge, wherethrough
ye, in your judging, miss the Right and the Truth, and for that cause bear a
false Pro 11, 20 Mich. 6
Balance.

5. Your own forecast, or conceiving, will, and counsel, is the falsehood of
your mind, which beguileth you; in such sort, that your steps, by that
occasion, cannot be upright before me, says the Lord.

6. Your own Being, or false mind of darkness, is the Apoc. 2, and 17
Kingdom of Hell, to a Mat. 12 Luke 11
dwelling for all Devils and false Spirits, where-through ye, with feignedness,
and covering of shame, and with diverse manner of self-mindedness, are held
captive Romans 7
or brought in subjection; yea, so captived, that it is very painful and
cumbersom unto you, to make manifest your selves, uncoveredly or nakedly,
before the Seat of my glorious Majesty, and for that cause also ye obtain Apoc.
3
little lust and love to the Kingdom of Heaven, (the which is the upright Being
and Mind of the everlasting and 1 Pet. 2
unchangeable Light,) wherein I, says the Lord, Lev. 26 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 21
live and dwell as an eternal and living God.

7. Behold, says the Lord, to live John 14
and dwell in all your Inwardness with this same Light and Clearness, that is
my Mat. 6, 22
Righteousness, rindx;
and also the Righteousness of my godly Kingdom: But here-out, says the Lord,
ye thrust Me, and keep Me off daily with your own Word and Will, and abide even
so, with your fleshly Will, always deviled, and devilishly minded, and think
very little, that I have loved you so entirely from the beginning, Jerem. 7
John 14 Apoc. 21
and chosen you to an House for my Dwelling; to which glorious lordliness with
Me ye cannot come, so long as ye resuse the Obedience of my gracious Word, and
Heb. 10
despise my Spirit of Love, and so hearken to your selves, and pass forth after
the direction of your own Judgment.

8. O ye children of men, says the Lord, consider, and call to mind yet once,
what ye all have been thus long, and yet are, so long as ye have heard and
believed your selves, or whilst that ye yet daily do hear and believe your
selves, and abide Ephesians. 4.
estranged from my Service of Love, and upright Being.

9. And if ye now desire to come again unto Me, and to your upright Being and
State, then hear nor believe not your selves any longer; but hear and believe
my Joh 5, and 8,
Word, that (in my Service of Love) flows sorth out of my Mouth.

10. Submit you Eccles. 7 1 Pet. 5
there-under, and do according to my Counsel, says the Lord; so shall ye then
come to right again: also enjoy my Goodness, and inherit all my Treasures Mat.
13 Col. 2
and Riches.

11. O ye children of men, says the Lord, Wherefore will ye thus abide so
gladly by your selves, seeing ye are always so much deceived with your selves?
For by your selves ye find nothing else but Jer 7, and 9 John 8
Lies and Is. 5, and 9
Darkness, where-through ye divide, entangle, and destroy your selves.

12. But by Me, and by my Word and Service of Love, ye find the true Being of
my Dwelling, together with the Truth, the Wisdom, and all good Counsel to your
Preservation; also the Light of Life, Eccles 24
the lovely Being of the Love, and the everlasting Life to your Joy and
Felicity.

13. For that cause, to your Preservation, take now good heed to the gracious
Jer. 31
Word, that I presently in this very day, through my holy Spirit and Service of
Love, Isaiah 2, and 26 Micha 1 and 4
set to be heard, and set forth before you, out of the Tabernacle of my
Dwelling.

14. And even so for my Loves cause, says the Lord, wherewith I have always
loved you; Mat. 16 Luke 9, and 14
forsake now your selves, and all your own Word, Will and Counsel, and hear and
believe only my Word, that flows from Me, out of my holy Spirit and Service
of Love; for otherwise ye cannot come to my Dwelling.

15. Therefore Isaiah 2 Micha 4 Zach. 8
come now all unto Me, says the Lord, and assemble you all to the House of my
Dwelling, namely, to the House of my Love, where-out I let my Isaiah 2 and 26
Word be heard, and wherein I have the Seat of my Majesty.

16. Come now all hither, and, for my Loves cause, Mat. 16
forsake wholly your selves, or your own life, and all what ye your selves, and
for your own selves cause, have taken on; and all that is Mine Psalm. 24 and 146
, or that belongs to Me, bring unto Me, and lay it all down before the 1 Pat.
30 Acts 5
Feet of my Majesty, even the House of my Love; and acknowledge, that it is all
my Psalm 24 and 50
Propriety or very own.

17. When ye now have done all this, says the Lord, then plant all your Hearts
in the only Heart of my gracious Word, and holy Spirit of Love, to the end that
ye all might become John 17 Acts 4
one Heart, Being or Mind in Me; and that I likewise, with my gracious Word,
and holy Spirit of Love, may even so dwell, John 14 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 21
live, and walk in you all.

18. For thereto truly the Service of my Lovestretcheth, which I now in the
last time extend so graciously on you: and even thereto I have also loved and
elected you all, O ye generations of men, to the end that ye all, through the
Service of my Love, might be assembled again unto me, in my godly Being, and
have love and peace among each other.

19. Wherefore seeing now that this is the last time Joel 2 Acts 2
of Grace, in which (says the Lord) I let my voice go forth, to the end that
every one may come to my Rest; so Psalm, 95 Heb, 3 and 4
harden not your hearts, in any case this day, in the hearing of my voice, that
ye abide not without this my holy Rest, which is published unto you, and
whereunto ye are courteously bidden; But become turned about thereunto in your
heart and mind, and, to enter into the same, so gather you now altogether unto
my house of Love, and to my holy Tabernacle, or man of God Ier. 31 Ezekiel 37
, wherein I (as a glorious God) with my perfect Godhead (as with my Christ at
my right hand, and with my holy Spirit of Love, my true Being) do live, dwell,
and walk; and wherein we, as one true Deity, have revealed and John 13, and 17
glorified us, to the end that ye all now may become consubstantiated or
conformably united in me as one Man of God, and inherit my Rest with all the
Children of God.

20. For verily, I say unto you (says the Lord) whosoever now, in this very
day of my Love, assembleth him not to my house, nor becomes, with his heart,
graffed Romans 11
or planted into my heart, he shall not enter into my Heb. 4
Rest, nor yet for evermore inherit or inhabit, with my children of Peace, the
worthy pleasant Land, which I have promised unto them, and Math. 25
prepared for them, from the beginning of the world: neither yet obtain, either
in this time, or in any time to come, any Grace of Salvation, Life of Peace,
nor true Love; nor yet become 2 Pet, 1
one Being with my godly nature: but all such, which so abide without me, and
my holy house, or communality of Love, shall be Ier. 17, and 22, and 25 Wisd. 17
scattered abroad and brought to confusion, and bound, Mat. 25 2 Pet. 2
with the bands of darkness, in the horrible Destruction; and so abide 2 These. 1
estranged from the Light of my lovely face for ever and ever.

21. O ye Children of men (says the Lord) harden Psalm. 95 Heb. 3
not your hearts, in any case, in the hearing of the voice of my Spirit, in the
Service of my Love; but come now all to this my Isai. 12, and 55 Apoc. 21, and
22
Fountain of Life, and refresh Ezekiel 36 Heb. 10
your heart and mind in the same, and in her out-flowing waters: for the same
waters which flow there-out John 4 and 7 Apoc. 21 and 22
are my safe-making waters of Life, to the satisfying of all thirsty Souls
after the Righteousness and the same are also to the health of all them that
drink thereof.

22. O how lovely is my Fountain, and how sweet are my waters which flow forth
there-out, namely, unto all them that love me, and understand Isai 42 1 Pet. 2
that I am friendly! therefore Isai 55 Apoc. 22
come now all unto me, says the Lord.

23. Leave now the friendship of the wicked world, Iam. 4
which is an utter enmity unto God, and full of all manner of iniquity, and
make your friendship with me; for I am in no case churlish, Isai. 42
cruel, horrible, nor destroying, like as the wicked world is; but I am lovely,
gracious, peaceable, and beneficial, or safe-making, to the end that my
dominion may even so, through my lovely and upright Righteousness increase it
self, or Isai. 9 Mal. 1 and 3
become great, now Joel 2 Acts 2
in the last time; and that there be no end of the Peace, from this time forth
for evermore; to the end that I may do even so that Isai. 32 and 42 Ier. 23,
and 33
which is right on the earth, and execute Righteousness among the people: For
all Heathen, which turn their hearts unto God, Isai. 42, and 51
attend on these my Institutions, which come forth out of the Service of my
Love, says the Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
BEhold, and consider, and have a good regard hereon, O ye beloved and
good-willing hearts, what an heart, lust, and love John 3
God has turned or born toward us all, for to rid and lead us all, now in
these last Amos 5 Micha 2 Math. 24
perilous times through his Service of Love, out of the abominations of the
perverse would; and so to bring us, with our will, to the Majesty Isai, 13, and
60 Ier. 3
of his Glory, to the end that we should now in the last time, through his
Love, and through the 1 Timothy 2 Heb 9
Mediator his Christ, become surely saved; live Luke 1 Ephesians. 1, and 4
always, and for ever, uprightly, lovely, and peaceably, in the same Godhead,
with each other; and so 2 Pet. 3
inhabit the world, according to the Promises of God the Father, in
Righteousness for evermore.

2. Therefore (namely, for this same Loves cause, which John 3
God is extending so graciously on us) turn now your Love likewise to the same
God of Life, and Eccl. 7
submit you all under the Obedience of his Love.

3. O ye dearly beloved (ye all, I mean, which say and profess that ye love the
Truth) stand in fear before the great glorious God, and apply you not to any
other thing, then that which is according to his Will; esteem right reverently
Psalm. 19
his Word: have a singular regard to the Law of his Doctrine; and, with your
whole heart, respect well this 2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12
proffered Grace, which, through the gracious Word of the Lord, becomes
expressed or held forth before you under the obedience of his Love.

4. Which Word of Grace and Life God has given in my mouth; Isa. 49, and 51,
and 59 Jer. 1, and 31 Heb. 8 and 10
written the same, together with the Law of his Commandments, in my heart,
mind, and thoughts; and chosen me to be his Minister, to administer now in the
last time (under the obedience of his Love) Ier. 33
the same gracious Word, to declare his Truth, and to set up his most holy
Service of Love through the Belief Number. 14
to the end that the whole world may become full of the glory of God, according
to the Promises.

5. For that cause come now all hither, and refuse not the Lord; but give over
your selves, and all what ye have ( Psalm. 24. and 50
that is the Lords) good-willingly unto the Lord and his Word, to your
preservation: Come now all, and lay down your selves, and all what belongs
unto the Lord, before the Seat of his Majesty.

6. Respect well now this same 2 Cor. 6 Gal. 6 Heb. 12
time of Grace, ere ever the Eccl. 5 Romans 2
wrath of God, and his indignation, fall upon all ungodly; and have a diligent
regard in time, what the Service of Love requires.

7. Howbeit, if ye do Prove. 1
refuse this same Love of God the Father, and withhold from the Lord that which
belongs unto him; not fear the same glorious God; cast his Word, Law, and
Will Isai. 5 4 Esdr. 7
behind you; not regard the hearty mercifulness of his Love, which he shows
so liberally on us; forsake the Comunality of holy ones under the obedience of
the Love, and refuse to assemble you unto the same: and even so cleave much
rather with the ungodly unto the wicked world; become puffed up in pomp, and
light-minded of heart; and even so, according to your lusts and good-thinking,
follow after your own freedom, Ier. 7 and 9 Romans 1 1 Pet. 4 2 Pet. 2 Jude 1
will, and counsel: So will God then also turn away his Love from you, and not
let you taste the lovely being of his Love (which he now in the Joel 2 Acts 2
last time brings unto his elected holy ones, which submit them under his
Love, to an eternal Isai. 32 Wis. 3, and 5 Heb. 3 and 4
Rest of the Godliness) nor inherit the same for evermore; but ye shall John 8
dye in your Sins, and be forced to bear your condemnation Mat. 11, and 25 Heb.
10
and punishment, more then the children of the perverse or wicked world, to
whom this Grace has not been proffered.

8. Ye shall likewise daily (the longer the more) wax blinded Romans 1
from the Way of Life; become incorporated to the wicked and malicious Being of
the ungodly, and end your days and time in ungodliness: and even so the number
of your years shall then perish, or waste away, with the ungodly; and your end
shall be Mal. 4 Wisd. 3 Eccl. 21
horrible.

9. For like as it shall go with all ungodly, even so shall ye also become
Psalm. 37 and 52 Prove. 2
rooted out, in indignation, from the Land of the Living, and condemned in the
Mat. 25 2 Pet. 3
fire of Hell: and I (which am the Lords) cannot likewise, of the holy Natures
part of my God, be moved with any remorse of pity or compassion toward you.

10. For, that be far from the mind of my Soul, that I should set mine
affection of the Love toward any such as love not God, nor his Law, but abide
by their 1 Cor. 1, and 8
own Knowledge, and are ungodly of Will; be he then what he is, Friend, or
Stranger.

11. But Psa 112 and 128 Eccl. 1, and 34
blessed are they to the Lord, and beloved in my heart, which fear the Lord;
also cleave obediently, in the Service of Love, with humble hearts unto the
holy Word of the Spirit of Love, and are godly of Will; yea, my mind stands
good-willing-towards all such, even to all Grace and Mercy; be he then what he
is, Friend, or Stranger.

CHAP. IX.
BUt now, if, happily, certain of the good-willing hearts to the Love should
take these our fore-spoken sayings somewhat heavily or grievously to mind, and
say thereupon, Because we are not altogether perfect, Ye, nor the Lord, have
not, peradventure, any good pleasure in us: and we shall also, possibly, for
our Imperfections cause (seeing that we yet daily stumble, fall, and sin very
much) perish with the wicked world, and all ungodly.

2. O ye Beloved, and all ye good-willing hearts, which are good-willing to the
obedience of the witnessings of the holy Spirit of Love, but are yet too young
Romans 15 Gal. 6
and too weak to enter into the perfection; these fore-spoken sharp sayings,
reprovings and punishments, are not spoken to such as humble themselves
obediently to the gracious Word and his Service of Love, to do the Lords Will;
nor yet to the goodwilling ones unto the same obedience Romans 7
(although they are yet young and weak in the accomplishing of the perfection,)
but to the evil-willing, and to all them that (with perverse Wisd. 1
thoughts and false or deceitful intents) enter in so falsely 1 John 2
besides us, and mean or purpose in no wise the Love, but in all themselves:
and even so, with their Isai. 59 Ier. 9 Wisd. 1
malicious hearts and perverse thoughts, hall away again from us: also slander
or 2 Pet. 2 Jude 1
blaspheme the holy Word, and our upright and godly Service of the Love; and so
spue forth their falsehood, with many lies, over us.

3. Behold, over this Isa. 1
wicked and venomous nature passes forth the Judgment of God Prove. 1 Isa. 13
Wisd. 12 Heb. 10
and his Punishment, to the Condemnation of the same wicked Nature.

4. For that cause, O ye good-willing hearts, set apart such thoughts (as that
God, and the Spirit of his Love, or his holy Ones, should not, for your
weakness cause, have any good pleasure in you) in any case far from you; but
remember (as it is also very true) and look into the same according to the
Truth, that the grace of God the Father, and the mercifulness of his Love,
prevails, or takes in the preeminence Isai. 13 Romans 5
abundantly by or in the Believers of the Word; and that God and the Spirit of
his Love is Romans 2 2 Pet. 3
long-suffering toward all good-willing ones, which humble them under the
obedience of his Love: also Heb. 2 and 5
bears them in all their weakness; and Ier. 31
forgiveth daily all their sins; to the end that they should even so enjoy his
comfort, and grow up, with cheerful hearts or good courage, so much the good
willinger in the obedience Ephesians. 4 Col. 1
of the gracious Word, and so go on, or press forth unto 1 Pet. 5 Phil. 3 Heb. 6
the perfection.

5. For consider and look into it once aright; If the Sin, whilst it was yet
night, have Romans 5
prevailed in us; how much more then shall the Grace and Mercy of God, to the
obtaining of the Righteousness, (seeing that now, to the salvation of men, Romans
13
the Day against the Night, and the Love, with her safe-making Service, against
the Sin and Condemnation, is entered in) prevail or take the pre-eminence over
us? namely, over all them that are Luke 2
good of will, and that submit, or wholly give over themselves, with all their
heart, for to be Deuteronomy. 30 1 Kings 15
obedient unto the holy Word under the Love; and express even so, in the giving
over of their heart, that they have not any will to the Romans 6
sin, or that which is Wisd. 14 Romans 1
unright, nor yet to the Romans 13 Ephesians. 2, and 5
darknesses of the wicked world, but have turned all their lust to the
Righteousness, for to John 8 and 12 1 John 1 and 2
walk uprightly, with the Communality of the Love, in the light of the lovely
Being of God; for God has no pleasure Ezekiel. 18 1 Timothy 2 2 Peter 3
in the perishing of sinners, but his Pleasure is, that they should all convert
unto Him, Acts 17
repent them for their sins, and live in his Righteousness.

6. For that cause, O ye feeble minded of heart, and all ye infirm or weak,
which love the upright Life, permit not any evil surmisings to take effect in
you, nor yet give place to the unbelief, whereby you might be plucked away from
the God of Life, and from the House or Communality of the holy ones of his
Love; but in all things, wherein your memory or understanding might chance to
be moved, apply always Prove. 4
your minds and thoughts to the instruction of the Wisdom, and to the Doctrine
of the holy Understanding of the Spirit of Love, and submit Eccles. 6
even so your whole memory or understanding, with all your minds and thoughts,
to the virtues of the godliness, for to follow after the same in all obedience
of the holy Word, and to become old Ezekiel. 4
and understanding therein, to the end, that ye, in the youngness of your
understanding, seduce or deceive not your selves with any strange and Wisd. 4
Eccles. 3
unprofitable thoughts.

7. But ye shall always, in your youngness and weakness, let the giving over of
your heart, or your good-willingness to the Love, and to the Obedience of the
Requiring of her Service, Eccles. 4 and 17
appear or become expressed before the Eccles. 6 and 7, and 8, and 9,
Elders of the holy Understanding in the Testimonies of the holy Spirit of
Love, and not, at the first, the Perfection; for verily it is not in your power
at the first, in the time of your youngness and weakness, to bring forth the
Perfection.

CHAP. X.
GIve diligent Ear hereto, and understand well the Words of my Voice, O ye
Novises in our holy Communality or Family of Love, wherein God himself dweleth
and walks, and ye all which are yet young Cor. 3 Heb. 5 and 6
in the holy Understanding, and weak in the accomplishing of the upright
Righteousness: Consider and note once aright which is your first School Rule,
or the beginning of the Christian Doctrine in our upright Service of the godly
Love; namely, that ye first of all turn you about from the Isaiah 1 and 55 Jer
7, and 18 and 25, and 35
Iniquity, and from all ungodly Being, utterly forsake all the Ezekiel. 14 Mat. 24
Abominations of the wicked world, and, with all your heart, 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 18
depart therefrom; and even so humble and wholly give over your selves under
John 13 and 15 and 1 John 3, 4
the Obedience of the Love, for to become as single-minded 1 Cor. 14 2 Cor. 11
1 Pet. 1, and 2
and obedient children, by whom no Deceit, nor any Lust or Will unto subtlety
and craftiness, nor any fainedness or doubleness of heart, nor yet any
unfaithfulness is to be found; but which daily (in the 2 Cor. 6 and 7 Apoc. 18
departing from the Iniquity, and in the increasing Ephesians. 4
or growing up in the good Being of the Love) make manifest themselves with
naked or uncovered hearts before the Seat of the Majesty Prove. 28 Ecles. 4 and
17 Romans 14 1 Cor. 5
of God, and even so, in the confessing of their sins, sigh Luke 6 James 4
and complain over all their pernicious or corrupt Nature, and wicked Lusts and
Thoughts, and make up themselves in them, and where-through also they yet
sometimes stumble and fall.

2. Behold, ye dearly Beloved, enter first into this same small 4 Esdr: 7
Matthew 7
Way, for the same brings or reaches to the Perfection.

3. Verily, to such good-willing hearts, which enter even so, according to the
Truth, into the same small Luke 13
Way that leads unto Life, and to all such as apply them thereunto, God has
Ezekiel. 18 Eccles. 12
a good pleasure, and the Spirit of my Mind stands also inclined, to all
goodness and mercy, over those same, because they do, in such an humble
submission, plainly express, that they fear God, Psalm 37 Amos 5
hate the Iniquity with her evil effects or inclination, and, against those
same, are good Luke 2 Romans 2
of will toward God and his Matthew. 7 and 22 Ephesians. 1 and 4
Righteousness.

4. But whereas now such a good will, and giving over of the heart, is not
found, in those I have no confidence, that they mean or purpose in any wise the
true Love, nor yet that they have any lust or will to live in the good Being of
God, neither yet also that the upright Love and Truth is sought, loved or
desired by them.

5. For all such as have not any good will, lust nor desire to the good Being
of God, (but live according to their own self-mindedness, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4 1
Pet. 4 2 Pet. 2
and according to the sensuality, will and pleasure of their flesh,) nor yet
desire to enter obediently into the singleminded good Will, Ezekiel. 18
according to the Pleasure of God, and the Requiring of his Word and Service of
Love, (in which Service all coverings and bewitchings of the heart, and all
darknesses and earthly lying minds become laid off Isaiah 25 2 Cor. 3, 4
or are put away,) nor yet to be brought out of the earthly, lying, and covered
Being, to the beholding of the uncovered Face of God and Christ in the Spirit,
nor to Gods Isaiah 2 Micha 4
Hill of the heavenly Sanctuary, nor to the Isaiah 60 Apoc. 21 and 22
most holy illuminating from on high, the most sovereign 1 Cor. 4 Heb. 4
Majesty of God; those same are not meet to enter into Gods Sanctuary, nor to
live in his good Being.

6. All such then, as is aforesaid, that have not any mind hereunto, but Prove.
1 Heb. 12
refuse this same grace and love of God the Father, (which is appeared,
lovingly granted, and also brought unto us, little ones, and Gods Elect, out of
many thousands in this world,) and despise the same, or make up themselves
there-against: Those cannot I verily account or esteem for any Communality of
Love, nor for any holy ones of God or Christ, nor yet for any such as have any
good in their mind.

7. All such unbelievers, and resisters of the Love and her Service, may be
right-easily known by Mat. 7 and 12
their wicked deeds and inclination; for such false hearts (let them cloak or
hide themselves how they will) do all make themselves 2 Timothy 3 1 John 2.
manifest, that they all (against the Truth, and against the Spirit or Mind of
the supreme God) are or stand with the perverse World (which is worthy of the
fire of Mat. 13 and 25 2 Peter 3
Hell, and of the everlasting Condemnation) altogether earthly and John 8 James
3
devilishly minded; they will also (with their earthly understanding, and
fleshly mind) always surmount or bear sway above the Wisdom of the Love.

8. Ah, consider yet once, ye Beloved, whether that it accorded well, or were
consonant, that the Heaven should lie under, or on the lowest place, and the
Earth drive or lie swaying there-over: Verily, much less accords it, or it is
far more absurd, that Gods Mind of the 4 Esdr. 6 and 7
heavenly Truth, the holy Understanding, and the Wisdom or the Being of the
godly Love should lie beneath, or, as depressed, all under, and the minds of
the earthly and devilish lyingness, and the self-will of the earthly man, with
the wisdom of the flesh reign or bear sway thereover.

9. Therefore be now ashamed, O ye children of the flesh, which presently are
so Isaiah 5
good-thinking-wise, that your hearts, will, and thoughts stand so Isaiah 59
perversely minded against the God of Life and his Truth, and against the
Requiring and Ordinance of his Service of Love, and that ye will always, with
your knowledge and fleshly minds, bear sway above the holy Spirit of Love, and
his godly Testimonies, and, according to the imagination of your knowledge,
reign over his Wisdom.

10. Oh, I cannot wonder sufficiently at this same blindness of men, (which not
withstanding, through the false Isaiah 59
light, look so highly, or are so far seeing in their knowledge,) and
especially, that the man is, in all, so Deuteronomy. 32
void of understanding, that he always, according to the insight of his
knowledge, cleaves unto, and loves the basest for the best, the unpurest for
the beautifullest, the consumable for the everlasting, and the Earthly for, or
in stead of the Heavenly.

11. O ignorant and blockish earthly Man! how gross art thou become of
Understanding, that thou like Esau, sellest or give over thy Genesis 25 Heb. 12
Birthright for any thing wherafter thou suffer thee to lust: and even so
losest the Blessings of Isaac, and the Inheritance of the Heavenly Beauty?

12. Yea, there is yet one thing that makes me exceedingly and much more to
wonder, namely, that many good-thinking Spirits or earthly Men, are now waxen
so presumptuous bold and arrogant of Heart, that they, with a fleshly Genesis 3
Isaiah 1
and wicked Nature, and lying Being, and with their unrenewed or ungodded
hearts, busy themselves or take upon them Isa. 30.
to judge the godly Matters, and the Sentences of the holy Scriptures.

13. Fie on thee, thou wicked Nature of the earthly Man, which art so impudent
or arrogant, that thou sparest not, with thy earthly Knowledge, to set thy self
Romans 2
to judgment, for to give sentence of the godly Matters: and do not, first of
all, judge thy self, and what thou art.

14. If therefore thou cease not from thy wicked Works, and from thy judging
of Gods Matters (which doubtless thou 1 Cor. 2
understandest not, and for that cause also judge those same falsely) nor yet
bear any sorrow for the same, not Ezekiel. 18 Luke 13.
repent thee thereof, but abide boldly by thy false judgments, So will then
verily the Word of the Curse (yea all the Deuteronomy. 27 and 28.
Curses which stand written in the Book of the Law of the Lord) procced and be
executed against thee, now in this same day of the Love of the righteous
Judgment of God, to thy utter rooting out and Mat. 25
eternal Condemnation.

CHAP. XI.
OThou false Isaiah 1
Seed, thou adulterous Generation of the earthly Man, thou which have inhabited
the earth with Unrighteousnes, judged it falsely with thy Lies, Isaiah 1 and 59.
Ier. 5 and 22 Eze. 22
seduced the Simple, oppressed the Little ones, murdered the Holy ones of God,
and spilt or shed the unguilty and innocent or simple Blood upon the Earth,
look to it, what will now come upon thee, and how that the Day of thy Job. 18
and 20 and 21
Rewarding, wherein all thy Wickedness shall be recompensed thee, is Iocl 2
Wisdom 1
hard at hand, yea, even in the Door.

2. Yea, all the Destruction that is forespoken (according to the mentioning of
the Scriptures) to come upon thee, will now, in this same Day, Esai. 13 and 24
and 34 Ier. 7. and 19. Malachi 4
with much calamity, anguish and smart, fall upon thee. And I, H.N, on the
behalf of all the Holy ones of God and Christ which thou 4 Esd. 15 Mat. 23
Apoc. 6 and 9
have murdered without just cause, even from the Beginning until this same
Day, will also wage the Law with thee, and paint out or figure forth thy wicked
Acts be fore thine eyes.

3. Yea, I will, with the power of my God, be upon thy neck; also require Ezekiel.
3 and 34
at thy hand the Blood of all the innocent or unguilty: and traverse the matter
or wage the Law with thee, whether thy Cause be right or wrong, before the true
Judgment of my God.

4. I will not cease nor keep silence, through the Spirit of Jesus Christ my
Savior, before the Judgment of my God Rom 14 2 Cor. 5
, and the Judgment feat of Christ, with 4 Esd. 16
Accusation against thee for all thy unrighteousness and falsehood, until such
time as thy Dominion be brought down, thy Memorial utterly k rooted out from
the Earth, and thy portion had for thee, in the Apoc. 19 and 20 and 21
bottomless Pit, which is prepared for thee and all wicked Spirits.

5. Yea, from hence forth, in the breaking through of this Day of the Love,
which Day is the coming to 1 Cor. 15
Immortallity; neither thy ware or Merchandise, nor yet thy deadly Venom out of
the false felf-wisdome of the Flesh, wherewith thou have used and practiced
thy deceit upon the Earth, and born so long thy Dominion, shall be Apoc. 18
of value any more.

6. For now in this same Day, O thou deceitful Seed, thou shall become taken
away or Psalm, 37 Pro. 2
rooted out from the Earth, and buried in the Psalm. 9 Isa. 14
Hell: where thy death and the burning of thy condemnation shall Isa. 66 Mat. 25
endure for ever and ever, the which is thy Portion and thine Inheritance.

7. O thou Brood Apoc. 12 and 13 and 16
of the venomous Dragon (yea, of the Devil, and of the earthly lying
Generation) which art begotten of the seed of the Serpent and Viperous
Generation, and have always been a false and wicked Ezekiel. 16 Apoc. 17 and 18
whore upon the Earth: Ah come now forth, and let it appear before the
righteous Judgment of God, wherein thou, of Rights part, should execute the
judgment, and bear the Dominion, or have the prehemmence on the Earth.

8. Behold, I give thee to understand, and protest against thee, before the
judgment of God, that all thy Matters, Judgment and Affairs, are utterly
unright, or that thou errest greatly in them all; and have always dealt, as an
Ier. 2 and 3 Eze. 16. Apoc. 17 and 18
adulterous Harlot, falsely and unfaithfully upon the Earth.

9. If case now, thou have right in thy Cause, then justify or clear thy self
now, before the righteousness of Christ and his holy ones. Therefore come now,
and appear by the John 3 1 Cor. 4 Ephesians. 5
Light of Love, or by the Day of Christ, and behold thy self once, by the
Light, how defiled thou art with thy Jer. 4 Hosea 2 Apoc. 17
whoredom: and whether also there be any right or equity by thee, conformable
to the upright Being of the Bride of Christ.

10. Come on now, and let me hear and see whether thou art able to excuse or
clear thy self by any means, that thou have right in thy Cause, or any
inheritance with Christ, either conformity with the holy Romans 12 1 Cor, 12 Ephesians.
4, and 5 Apoc. 21
Church or Bride of Christ: But what shall be the sequel? Truly thou John 3
Ephesians. 7
thy self shall not choose but acknowledge by the Light, that thou art false,
and a mere stranger unto Christ and his Church; and that thou likewise have
judged falsely in all thy judgment, and always dealt or walked wickedly: that
thou also art worthy Apoc. 17
of the everlasting condemnation, and that it appertains or belongs not
unto thee to have or bear any dominion upon the earth.

11. But if thou refuse to come by the Light and wilt yet notwithstanding
excuse or go about to clear thy self before all eyes of the flesh Isai. 58
, as though thou had right in thy cause, and maintain that thou art the 2 Cor
11 Apoc. 21
Bride or Church of Christ; and that thou have not dealt as an adulterous
whore, but faithfully, as an upright married wife: So will I then, out of my
jealousy which I bear over thee (O thou false Nature Isai 1 John 8
, thou lying and unfaithful earthly man, which art consubstantiated, or an
incorporated Body, with Antichrist) cause thee to appear before the Priests or
Elders of the holy Understanding; and make thee to drink out (according to the
Law of the Lord) Number. 5
this cup of the bitter cursed water of my jealousy; yea, Jer. 25, and 49
Ezekiel. 9 ^^
the same shall thou be constrained to drink, to the end that it may even so
thereby become manifest and known, whether thou art an adulterous Whore, or the
upright and faithful married Wife of the Man Christ.

12. For verily, like as the jealousy of an husband stands over his wife,
that she deals not faithfully, but as an adulterous whore; even so stands
also my jealousy over thee thou earthly man, which wilt 2 Cor. 11
be the espoused Wife of the Man Christ, or vauntest and give forth thy self
for the same; and also over all such as, with the spirit of the earthly and
John 8
devilish Being, boast them to be the married wife of Christ, or of his Spirit
of Love.

13. For that cause, if thou now account not thy self for an whore, but
esteemest thee for the faithful espoused Wife of Christ, and that my jealous
conceiving cannot stand otherwise toward thee, but that thou art a
presumptuous Whore, which dissembleth or plays the hypocrite with Christ, and
coveredly Jer 2, and 3 Ezekiel. 16 Hosea 4 and 5
commits whoredom, and yet nevertheless wilt be judged as a faithful
espoused Wife of Christ; so shall thou then presently be constrained to drink
this bitter Numb. 5
cursed water of my jealousy, and to bear the cursing of an adulterous Whore,
or of an unfaithful Wife

14. But if now thou be faithful, and the upright espoused Wife of Chrst, then
fear not to drink these bitter Waters, for any destruction that can chance unto
thee there out, or endamage thee thereby. For the upright married Wife or Bride
of the Man Christ, [namely, the faithful Rom, 12 1 Cor. 12 Ephesians. 4 and 5
Communiallity of the Holy ones of God, or the fellow Members of Christ] has
been constrained in times past, by her Adversaries, to drink such like: and the
bitter Waters have not hurt or endamaged her.

15. But truly as for thee, O thou corrapt Nature of the earthly Man, thou
shall in thy vainglorious Boasting, that thou art the right Espoused Wife of
Christ, be found a Liar, and as a wicked mischievous and Apo. 17 and 18
false whore: and through these bitter cursed Waters, thy hips or thighs shall
rot, and thy Number. 5
womb break: and so shall thou then become made manifest in thy whorish Nature.

CHAP. XII.
BEhold, hereto thou must needs come, and it shall now also fall upon thee, O
thou unfaithful Seed Isaiah 1 John 8
thou earthly and lying Man, which have at all times dealt or behaved thee
hipocritically and Ier. 6 and 7 and 9.
falsely against God the Father, by his service of the Law; against Christ the
Savior, by his Service of the Belief, against the Holy Ghost, by his Service
of the Love: and even so vanted or given forth thy self, to be the
Communjallity of Holy ones, or Romans 12 1 Cor. 12 Ephesians. 4 and 5.
the co-joyned body of the Body of Christ all over the universal Earth. But
thou shall presently be forced to bear thy just Sentence of Judgment and
Accusation, As that thou art false, and (against the pure 2 Cor. 11 Apoc. 21
Bride, Church or co-joyned Body of Christ) a polluted or Apoc. 17 and 18
defiled Whore, and that thou art worthy of the eternal Condemnation Mat. 25 2
Peter 3
and fire of Hell.

2. And although thou would never so fain cover thee, with thy Hypocrisy,
and give forth thy self, in this Day of the Love, as faithful and upright, yet
shall thou not be able so to do. For here avails now no longer any Hypocrisy
or Coveredness: neither yet likewise shall any man know how to cover himself
before this same Light of the Love, but they must all now become John 3 1 Cor.
4 Ephesians. 5
apparently mafested, even the same that they are, by the same Light.

3. Whosoever now therefore is earthly minded, false and covered of heart, and
desires to continue therein, his Nature shall now right-soon be seen or
perceived. For the Light of this Day 1 Ioh. 2
shines now so perfect bright and clear, that no ungodly, nor any hypocrites
or false hearts (let them then hold themselves so presumptuous on their false
righteousness as they will) shall any way be able Mal. 3 Apoc. 6
to endure or abide standing in this same day of the righteous Judgment of God.

4. But, whosoever is heavenly minded, and upright of heart; humbles himself,
with a good-willing heart, under the Love and her Service; wholly gives over
himself under the Majesty of God; and even so, without any perverse Wisd. 1
thoughts, loves the upright and godly Being: By such a one the same shall
likewise certainly appear; and, in the expressing of his deed, be very well
perceived.

5. For to those same upright hearts, which walk 1 Pet. 1
obediently in the Doctrine of the gracious Word and Service of Love, and show
all faithfulness thereunto, it is granted to understand in their Spirit
(according to the heavenly Truth of the upright Being) Mat. 1;
the mystery of the Kingdom of the God of Heaven; where-through they make
manifest the powers of the holy Ghost, and the Testimonies of his living
waters, John 4, and 7
which flow, at that time, from the body of their spirit, and reach even unto
the everlasting Life.

6. But the strangers (which walk without the Family of Love, or deal falsely
therewith) Mat. 22 Luke 14
taste not the lovely Being of the spiritual and heavenly goods: For they
understand, nor Isa. 6 Acts 28
know not the same any otherwise, but according to an earthly and fleshly
Being; For earthly and fleshly are all their minds and thoughts.

7. But, alas! this cannot an earthly man (which truly is always nothing Romans 8
1 Cor. 2
but fleshly minded) comprehend nor understand; yet will he nevertheless always
go on with his lying, earthly, and fleshly minds, and judge even so the
spiritual and heavenly Understandings there-out: For that cause he cannot have
any lust nor bear any love toward the true, spiritual, and heavenly; but well
toward the lying, earthly, and fleshly: where-out he likewise (as it is right
well to be perceived) brings forth nothing else but the Gal. 5.
works of the Flesh and of the lying Being.

8. But a Spiritual Man Romans 8
is clothed with the Spirit of God and the Truth; for that cause he is also
according to the Truth spiritually minded: his forth-going and the lust of his
works is in all, to the Gal. 5 and 6
Fruits of the Holy Ghost, for to bring forth those same out of the Spirit of
God, and so to publish or declare forth the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness.

9. For he knows, out of the secret Mystery of the Kingdom of God, how to
discern and distinguish the spiritual Goods, according to the heavenly Truth or
holy Levit. 10
Understanding; to wit, that he shows and declares an express Difference
betwixt the Mat. 13 John. 3
earthly and the heavenly, and betwixt the Lying and the True: the which to all
earthly unregenerated Men, with all their Industry and Prudency, is a thing
Romans 8 1 Cor. 2
unpossible.

CHAP. XIII.
SEeing now that Gods wonde: full Works, the Spirit of his Power, and the Mat.
13
Mystery of his Kingdom of Heaven, is Wis. 1 Mat. 11.
known and understood, only of the heavenly and spiritual Man: So has not an
earthly and fleshly Man, out of his natural and Scripture learned
understanding, any Sight nor knowledge Romans 8 1 Cor. 2
at all thereof: Yea he is so utterly void of the same, that he cannot
understand the smallest title thereof: much less then, expound or interpret the
same, according to the Truth, unto another.

2. But he may well hear witnessed thereof, according to the manly manner,
through the serviceable or written Word, and also speak forth the same again
afterward: but through himself, or out of his own Understanding, he 1 Cor. 2
understands not any thing at all of the same, according to the Truth: but it
is all covered and Mat. 13 Luke 8 2 Cor. 4
secret before him, or in Similitudes, Images, Figures and Parrables. For cause
he cannot likewise, out of his own Wisdom, once conceive nor Wis. 9
comprehend in his Knowledge, what the same, according to the Truth, is, in the
godly Being.

3. If he will therefore judge, speak forth, and interpret any thing thereof,
according to the imagination of his own knowledge, So is it all, doubtless,
false, and lies, what he both conceives and also speaks thereof: where-out
it becomes that a fleshly Man, out of his natural Understanding, 1 Cor. 1, 2
knows not any thing at all of the Spirit of God; and that it is all
foolishness what he judges or speaks thereof.

4. Verily, therefore they all do err very much, that judge according to their
understanding (out of the earthly Being, or out of the Flesh or Letter) Gods
Truth, which is heavenly and spiritual, Isaiah 41 and 48
and his wonderful Acts (whether it be of that which is passed, or of that
which is present, or of that which is to come,) or take upon them to discuss
the same, and will teach, instruct or order the ignorant people according to
their judgment.

5. For verily, Gods Truth, and his Works, (which He works not through any
fleshly understanding, but Mat. 12 Luke 11
through the Power of his Spirit, out of his holy Heaven) are far above all
understandings of the flesh; yea, not any one of all the children of men can
(through his natural understanding out of blood) Wisd. 1 and 9 1 Cor. 2.
comprehend nor understand the same, nor yet find out the ground thereof.

6. Therefore surely Gods Truth, the excellent Beauty of his heavenly Kingdom,
and his godly and heavenly Works, are Matthew. 11 and 13 Acts 28
unknown unto all flesh, and unto all fleshly earthly men; but it is given unto
the children of the Kingdom, the Communality of the Love, to understand the
secret Mystery thereof.

7. It is likewise, verily, a great folly upon the earth, yea a presumptuous
and arrogant enterprise or dealing (which is also utterly without all Equity
and reasonable Understanding) that the earthly and fleshly men set themselves
to Judgment, for to judge (out of their natural comprehending and industry, or
out of their scripturely learnedness according to the flesh) the spiritual
Truth of God, and Gods heavenly wonderful Acts, whereof there is not any thing
at all Mat. 11 and 13
given them to understand; wherein they all, with their understandings, run to
an end; yea, they come so to an end, or grow to such an exigent therein, that
they know not often times Micha 7 Luke 21
where to catch or take hold of the same again.

8. But many are herein very Isaiah 30
arrogantly minded; for when as they, with their understanding, are run to an
end in the godly Matters, to wit, that they have not, nor cannot comprehend nor
understand those same aright, yet persevere they notwithstanding searching
there-after and prosecuting or ensuing the same with their imagination of Romans 1
the Knowledge, they will nevertheless always be judged to have right: Yea
they would much rather judge Moses, the Prophets of God, together with the
Apostles of Christ, and Gods elected Minister H N. to err or miss the right,
then that they would, by any means, confess and acknowledge, that they, in the
Imagination of their Knowledge concerning the godly Matters, are ignorant and
lying.

CHAP. XIV.
O Ye blind People, ye arrogant distracted earthly Men, and all ye subtle or
pregnant self-wise of the Flesh, together with all ye false hearts of the
Scripture-learned, ye Genesis 4 Jude 1
Cain-ish Ceremonie-Ministers, and ye Persecuters and Murderers of the
Abel-ish upright Hearts: Wherefore Isaiah 14
exalt ye your selves so arrogantly, against the high excellent Majesty of God,
and his righteous Judgment? Consider and look yet once into it, what ye have
done.

2. Oh, alas, ye have, (the which will now fall out painfully or sharply
against you) set your selves, with your false Nature, to Isa. 30
Judgment: judged Gods Causes, out of your Lies altogether falsely; seduced the
Simple, believed your own judgment, which is unright and false, and born
dominion therewith, over the Earth, Also been John 8 Romans 2 2 These. 2
unbelieving of God in his Truth, and resisting of the Love; and even so, with
your falfe judgments, falsely Wis. 2 Dan. 13
accused or defamed the upright Hearts, as men worthy to be rooted out from the
Earth.

3. For that cause, let your selves now be counseled by the wisdom, and look
betimes into all your Ignorances, and let it all fall away from you, or give it
all over, wherein ye have supposed to be wise or understanding, and Ezekiel. 18
Joel 2 Mat. 3 Acts 2 and 3.
show forth repentance for your sins, under the Obedience of the Love of Jesus
Christ.

4. For verily, when ye look, according to the Truth, into your selves, and all
that ye have done: So shall ye not choose but perceive and acknowledge, that ye
have 1 Wis. 5 and 9
not understood, known or judged, the earthly and natural Things, which ye
have passed through, and are yet daily a passing through, truly or aright.

5. Seeing then that ye have not been able to understand nor judge rightly
those things, which, according to the Earthly Being, are like unto you, and
where about ye daily have to do; How should ye then, O ye blockish and
ignorant earthly Men* be able to understand or judge the heavenly or spiritual
Things which are Wis. 9 Mat. 11 and 13
secret or hidden before you, and which ye have never seen, nor are passed
through them? But, for your own Honors sake 1 Ioh. 12
, which ye seek at the hands of the unregenerated Men, and more esteem and
covet then the honor of God, many of you will not acknowledge the same, nor
yet confess your Blindness.

6. Ye Ier. 6 and 8 Ezekiel. 13
comfort your selves apace with Lies; and provoke even so Gods righteous
Judgment to come upon you; In which Jude 1
Judgment it becomes now discovered unto you, and ye are let 1 Cor. 4
to see, or it becomes made known unto you in your hearts, That ye all, which
are of the Earth, and have resisted the Truth of the Life, have spoken
presumptuously against the Lord, despised the Love in her lovely Nature and
upright Service, ^ Heb. 10
and blasphemed the Spirit of Love, which is the true Holy Ghost.

7. Behold, it shall now in this same Day Acts 17 1 Cor. 4 Jude 1
of the righteous Judgment of God, wher-through all false Judgments, and
Unrighteousnesses become made manifest be given unto you to see into orplainly
to perceive, all this your falsehood or horrible Iniquity: And the recompense
for the same shall likewise, O ye false earthly Men, fall upon you, Isa. 13
Wis. 5 Luke 21
with much Affliction, Distress Misery and Woe, in all your hearts.

8. If ye now then, perceiving well all your Falsehood, and in the time of your
Affliction and distress, lay not your selves prostrate, to a Psalm. 110 1 Cor.
15
Bench for the Lords feet, before the Seat of the Majesty of God: but will
needs, with your false Judgments and Unrighteousness, bear the Dominion against
God and his Majesty: So shall ye yet nevertheless (whether it be then with your
will, or against your will) be trodden down, as the Enemies of God, Psalm. 91
Romans 16
with the feet of the Saints, and laid under the feet of the Lord.

9. For our God, the Lord of Hoasts, comes presently Esa. 3 Mat. 25 Jude 1
to Judgment, and will plainly show and make known the House of his dwelling;
namely, that the Heaven, and the heavenly Man, is his Isa. 66 Acts 6
Seat, and the Earth and the earthly Man the Bench of his Feet, even as the
Lord has spoken the same in times past, through the mouth of his holy Prophets.

CHAP. XV.
O Ye good-willing Hearts, Amos 5 Micah 2 Mat. 24
which have now, in these last perilous Times, adjoined your selves, with a
good Will, under the Obedience of the Love, with Us Litle-ones and Elected ones
of God! Consider well presently on the Strangers, which have nothing else in
their mind but Psalm. 10 and 52 and 56 and 58 and 120
subtilty and guilet and also on all such as come in with all Phil. 3
Self-seeking, with their fleshly Romans 1
Lusts and Desires, and with their good-thinking Ier. 7 1 Cor. 1
and Self-wisdom, besides our holy Communiallity of the Love, and then at the
last, when as they are aware that the gracious Word is against or contrary to
their Selfe-seeking and Good-thinking, separate them again from Us, and from
the Word and Requiring of the Service of Love: Yea, consider well what a
Nature, Being or Disposition they show forth, and how that they, to the lenting
Romans 16
and dividing of our Communiallity of the Love, make up themselves against us
and our godly Doctrine: so shall ye then find out in the Deed and Truth, that
all such do make manifest themselves, with their Self-wisdom and Ier. 7 and 9
and 11 and 13
good-thinking Knowledge, to be contrary minded against the holy Word of the
Spirit of Love, and also turn them away from the true Obedience of the
Requiring of his Service.

2. For that cause, take now good heed and beware of all them, that, with their
Self-wisdome or Imagination of the Knowledge, Romans 16
besides the Doctrine of the godliness, which is taught you through the Spirit
of Love, institute or bring in, according to the self-seeking of the Flesh,
their strange or forged Doctrines and false Dealings, (wherewith they breed
Division and cause Offense:) and separate you from such persons: But abide
steadfastly grounded in our most holy Ephesians. 3 2 Timothy 1.3
Belief of the Love of Christ, Mat. 10 and 24 Heb. 12
and persevere therein, even to the End: that is, till unto the lovely Being of
the Godliness.

3. Turn not aside, in any case, to any foreign Being without the Love; fall
not away likewise from the Service of the Love, for the ignorant ones cause,
which make often times, by reason of their disorderliness, discord and offense:
and for that cause also they must (as the matter or case requires) be Gal. 6 2 Timothy 2, and 4
punished, chastised, and instructed: Also become not sluggish, nor careless,
with the Prove. 6, and 24
slothful persons; but, with diligence and lust of your heart unto the upright
Mat. 22 Ephesians. 1, and 4
Righteousness and Holiness, submit you always obediently and humbly under the
godly Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, until that the gracious Word and
his Love be planted in you, Iam. 1
with meek-mindedness: the which is the Salvation of your Souls, and the
establishing of the Promises of God the Father.

4. For in the same upright Being God will bring unto you all his treasures,
Mat. 13 Col. 2
and heavenly goods; also all peace John 10
, and the everlasting life abundantly. It is very true.

5. O ye holy ones of God (thou lovely Communiality of the Love) fear not; but
be now of good cheer upon the earth against all your enemies: For behold, Isai.
35
your God comes to be avenged on all your enemies, for to lay them (that they
may be trodden down) under the feet of your Lord and and Savior Jesus Christ;
and even so, in your Mat. 19 John 3
second birth, out of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, to transport
or yield over the Judgment and Dominion (upon the earth) unto you and your
Savior Jesus Christ, to the end that ye with him and he with you and your
Savior Jesus Christ, and with his holy Spirit, should (from henceforth world
without end) reign with Apoc. 5 and 22
Righteousness upon the earth; and Isaiah 3 Wisd. 3 Jude 1
judge the same with equity, according to the Promises.

CHAP. XVI.
MAke you to the flight, Isa 52
Make you to the flight; yea, get you now all out of the way, ye enemies of the
Lord and his Service of Love; and give the Lord, with his holy ones, Isa. 40,
and 57, and 62
his room: Yet shall ye not escape the Vengeance of God.

2. For the Lord comes forth now in mighty power, with his righteous Judgment,
upon the earth, for to purge the same of all her weeds: yea, even now, in the
right Mat. ^3
Time of Harvest, the Lord comes Mat. 24 and 25
with his Angels, for to root out all Weeds from off the Earth.

3. O God, Apoc. 14
smite now in with thy Sickle, and begin even so, with thy Angels, to reap the
whole Earth; For the weed is become ripe 4 Esd. 4
upon the earth, and his Ears are thorough dry: for that cause root the same
now clean out: for whereto, or to what profit has it his place, among the good
Wheat, upon the Earth? for as much as there is not any good to be looked for
there out.

4. Behold, the Mat. 13
Weed is the manifold sort of Lies against the Truth of God, the many manner of
Iniquities against the Righteousness of Christ, and the unmeasurable ungodlines
of all Ungodly against the Godliness, and against the true Being of the holy
Spirit of Love, which are all worthy Apoc. 19
to be rooted out from the Earth, and condemned in the Mat. 13 and 25 2 Peter 3
hellish Fire.

5. For, for this same Weeds Cause, Genesis 3 Heb. 6
the Earth has been thus long cursed, and the good Wheat (which the ignorant
Reapers have also judged to be the Weed, and worthy to be rooted out, or could
not often times discern the one from the other) Mat. 13 Luke 8
oppressed or kept under.

6. Therefore the Lord comes now, Mat. 13 and 24
in the End of the World and makes a plain difference, and a right discerning,
betwixt the Weed and the good Wheat; Yea, the Lord has made up himself, and
he comes now, in the right or due time, Isa. 66 Mal. 4 2 These. 1
with the heat of his burning Fire, for to consume, with his Fire, all the
Weeds, and to empty or disburthen the Earth thereof; to the end she might come
again to her Blessing, and upright Fruitfulness: Psalm. 18 Ier. 10 Nahum 1 Mat.
24. Luke 21 2 Pet. 3
where through the Earth is now moved, the Heavens troubled the Elements melt
with heat, and the Token of the coming of the Son of Man, appears in the
Heaven.

7. With which Rumor or rushing Noise of the Power of God, and his Holy ones,
Mat. 24 1 Cor. 15 1 Thessalonians. 4
the last Trumpet does also presently give forth her sound: through whose blast
of her vehement sound, and through the appearing of the Coming of Christ, Dan.
12 John 5 1 Cor. 15 1 Thessalonians. 4
the Dead stand up, or arise unto the Judgment of God: In such sort, that
Daniel, the holy Prophet, is also risen up Dan. 12
in his part, for to execute now in the last time, or ending of the World, the
Judgment, with God and his Righteous ones, Isa. 3 Jude 1
upon the Earth, against all ungodly, to the end, that they all, together with
the Works of their ungodliness, might now become rooted out and condemned, like
as there is written thereof:

8. Rejoice now in this same Day, Apoc. 18
all ye holy Prophets Angels and Apostles, for this is the Deuteronomy. 5 Nahum 1
Day of the vengeance of our Lord and God, for to revenge the Blood of his Holy
ones Mat. 25 Apoc. 16
, that the Sinners have spilt or shed upon the Earth, and for to declare or
reveal his Holy ones again gloriously upon the Earth, to the end that they
might Peter 3
inhabit the same peaceably in all love, and reign there over or Apoc. 5 and 22
judge the same with Righteousness, from henceforth World without end.

CHAP. XVII.
O All ye Prove. 6 and 24 Mat. 25
Sluggish and Slothful, which have walked thus long very unlustly, as though ye
had been drowzie of sleep, in the Service of the Love, and had very little love
unto Gods Righteousness; yea, which have been so over-careless or negligent,
that ye have not taken the Service of the Love, and the upright Righteousness
of the same any thing at all to heart, in such wise, that, by that occasion,
your field (whilst ye have been so slothsul) is waxen barren of the good Corn,
and your Vineyard likewise of the good Wine, Prove. 24
and and are overgrown with Nettles and Thistles; become yet now once awaked
Romans 13 Epnes. 5
, and make your way or steps speedy, for to enter into the Life of the upright
and lovely Being of the Love, ere ever the Door of the lovely Kingdom and
Paradise of the Lord (whilst ye come forwards so sluggishly and drowsily) Mat.
25
be locked or shut-to.

2. For behold, Ezekiel. 7
the end comes, (yea, the end comes swiftly on) and the last time is now at
hand; after which Apoc. 10
time there shall not be any Salvation of the Life, nor health of Souls more to
be obtained.

3. O ye foolish people, which are now so sluggish, call to mind the foolish
Virgins, how they neglected their time Mat. 25
for to gather or prepare them oil in their Vessels; and how that they for that
cause (when the time appeared, or was come, that every one, which had oil and
light in his Vessel or Lamp, should enter in with the Bridegroom) must abide
without the lovely Kingdom of the Bridegroom.

4. Verily, in this same day of the Love, of the true Bridegrooms coming, it
will also go in such like sort with you all, ye foolish and sluggish people,
which follow so incessantly your own counsel, will, and freedom Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
1 Pet. 4 2 Pet. 2
according to the mind of the flesh, and have no regard to the Sanctification
in the Spirit, wherein the godly Oil becomes brought unto us.

5. Therefore look now to it betimes, and take good heed unto the 1 These. 4 2
These. 2
Sanctification in the Spirit, or unto an upright Being and Mind, to the end
that the like happen not unto you, as chanced to the foolish Virgins.

6. Behold, Heb. 3 and 10
presently in this same day ye are yet all warned, respect well therefore this
same Prove. 6 2 Cor. 6 Gal. 6 Heb. 12
time of Grace, whilst there is yet Grace and Comfort at hand, and to be
obtained; and have a diligent regard unto the Service of Love, and what the
same requires.

7. Verily, it requires not this nor that according to the flesh of the
worldly dealing, nor according to the dealing of the false hearts, and
unregenerated hypocrites, but Ephesians. 4
an upright Being in the Love of Jesus Christ; that is, to become Luke 1
released from all ownedness or selfness, and hallowed Romans 12 1 These. 4
and justified in the Spirit of our Mind through Jesus Christ and his Service
of Love.

8. Whosoever then, in all Obedience of the Requiring of the gracious Word and
of his service of Love, does, in such sort, respect well, or take good heed
unto the same, he shall also be John 14
loved of God the Father, of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the holy Ghost; yea,
they shall come to him, and make a godly dwelling with him.

9. Hereunto give you now all wholly over, and turn all your understanding to
the godly Doctrine of the Service of Love, and be even so Deuteronomy. 30
obedient unto the holy Word of the Spirit of Love in his Requiring, to the end
that ye all may now in this same day of Love, in which Christ comes unto us,
with the holy Oil or Anointing of the holy Spirit of Christ, 2 These. 4
meet Christ, the upright Bridegroom, in his Coming, and live and triumph Apoc.
7 and 21, and 22
everlastingly with Him, and all his holy ones, in the Kingdom of God his
Father.

10. For I say unto you verily, Whosoever now, in this same day of Love,
abides slothful and careless toward the upright lovely Being, and even so
estrangeth his heart from the Ministration of the Elders in the Service of
Love, either holds it common, or of one Being with the consumable Romans 12 1
Cor. 7
Being of the perverse world, he shall not be anointed with the holy Oil of the
holy Spirit of Christ, nor with his lovely nature; nor yet let in, with the
sanctified holy ones of God, or Communality of Love, to the Heb. 3 and 4
Rest of the peaceable Kingdom; but be Apoc. 21 and 22
shut there-without with the wicked world, and with all self-wise and ungodly.

11. Therefore remember now betimes (ye all which are now, in this same day, so
slothful or sluggish toward the Service and entrance of the upright Being of
God, and so self-wise against the holy Spirit, and the Requiring of Service of
his Love) what a misery and Wisd. 5
painful grief it will be for you to behold, when as all the holy ones of God
shall gather them together, in the perfection of the Love, Mat. 24 Luke 21
from the four ends of the earth, to a Kingdom of God; and that ye shall find
your selves shut there-without.

12. Verily, then will it fall out too late for many to gather or prepare them,
out of the Ministration of the proffered Grace, the godly Oil, or holy
anointing of the Spirit of Love, in their Vessels.

13. Whosoever now therefore respects not the right Eccles. 3 Prove. 6 Gal. 6
Time of Grace, and of the fruitfulness of the good Seed, that he in the
harvest, or fullness of the time, may get his Mat. 13
Barns full of good corn; but is careless and slothful toward the entrance of
the Requiring of the gracious Word and of his Service of Love, Prove. 6 and 18
he shall likewise have lack of Prove. 20 Amos 8
Corn, (namely, of the Fruits of the Word;) and then afterward (when he
finds himself poor and Luke 15 Apoc. 3
empty, and sees well that the holy ones of God are filled with great store of
Goods) be constrained to bewail his case with Wisd. 5 Luke 13
grievous misery, and shall not find any more meet or convenient time for to
gather any thing; but, out of doubtfulness, fall into Wisd. 5 Luke 21
great despair; and even so, in gnawing or torment of his heart, and in
wringing of his hands, greatly lament the time which he has neglected and
misspent, and which also is not to be recovered again, and rufully bewail his
condemnation and misery for ever and ever.

CHAP. XVIII.
LOok to it betimes, and Jer. 7, and 18, and 25, and 35
amend your Being, O ye children of men, and take mine Admonition to heart;
make not, in any case, light account of the grief of mind that is coming,
which shall fall, and is also already fallen upon Isai. 13 Luke 21
the ungodly, with much calamity and misery; but endevor you, with good-willing
hearts, to enter into the Deuteronomy. 4 and 30 1 Pet, 1
obedience of the requiring of the gracious Word, and of his Service of Love,
ere ever that that same misery (whereof there is told you) fall likewise upon
you.

2. Be Mat. 24 Luke 21
wakeful now therefore, and keep always a sharp or diligent watch against all
your Enemies, namely, against all the minds and thoughts, which make them up
in you out of the flesh of sin, and would even so (contrary to the Counsel,
Will, and Doctrine of the holy Spirit, and of his Service of Love) pluck or
allure you Romans 6 Gal. 5
after the pleasure of the flesh.

3. Behold, I tell it you, and heartily exhort you, even out of all the love of
my heart and spirit, Hearken not to them; believe nor follow not their will or
counsel; but (against all your own minds and thoughts of the flesh, and
against all your corrupted nature, lust, and desires) give or apply you wholly
to the Deuteronomy. 30 1 Pet. 1
obedience of the requiring of the gracious Word, and of his holy Spirit of
Love; So shall ye then assuredly out of the same obedience, Romans 6
in manner of suffering, find another Nature and Being by you, which shall
show it self much uprighter and lovelier, then that which ye have had out of
the will or self-mindedness of the flesh: For, doing even so, ye shall, through
the obedience of the requiring of the gracious Word and of his Service of Love,
become John 15 Romans 11 Ephesians. 3
incorporated to the lovely John 17 2 Pet. 1
Nature of God, and to the everlasting peaceable Being of the holy Spirit of
Love.

4. If ye now hear and understand all this same well, that the holy Spirit
says unto you all, out of the Service of his Love; So consider then with
diligence, what a Deuteronomy. 30
Life of Righteousness is required of you; and give or endeavor you unto the
same. I have, for certain, told it you plainly enough, and tell it you yet
again, to the end that ye may well understand it aright; namely, that ye should
incline and give over all your inwardness to the requiring of the gracious Word
and of his Service of Love, for to become John 15 and 17 Ephesians, 3 2 Pet, 1
incorporated, through the obedience of the requiring of the same Word and of
his Service, to the upright and lovely. Being of the Love, to the end that God
in you, and ye in God, and so forth ye all, among each other, might live
peaceably in all Love.

5. But, alas, although ye hear and understand all the same, yet do many of
you nevertheless refuse the Romans 2
Goodness of the Lord, and follow almost all your Ier. 7 and 91
good-thinking Knowledge.

6. Ah Beloved, wherefore refuse ye thus the good Being, wherefore do ye,
through your good-thinking Knowledge, always hold your selves thus back? And
wherefore take ye not the matter, which is to the preservation and salvation of
you all, with whole mind, to heart, for that ye might enter obediently into the
true Heb. 5 and 6
School-rule of the Christian Doctrine of the Service of Love, and Ephesians. 4 Col. 1
grow up, according to the Requiring of the same, in the Godly Understanding?
Judge it now your selves, whether that the same, whereunto I exhort you out of
the right Service of Love, be not the upright Life, and lovely Being of the
Love, Genesis 1 and 2 Wis. 1 and 2 Eccles. 17
whereunto the Man is created and Ephesians. 1
chosen, for to live therein?

7. For consider I pray you, Is not the upright and lovely Eccl. 24 1 Cor. 13
Being of the Love, whereunto I exhort and demonstrate you, much decenter,
uprighter and peaceabler, then your own Being of the Flesh Romans 1
, and the wicked Being of the perverse World?

8. Seeing now, that ye, in your own Conscience, cannot choose but acknowledge,
that the lovely, upright and peaceable Being of the Love, is the best; and that
the same, brings the upright Isa. 32 Wis. 3 Apoc. 21
Rest unto the Man: So is it truly a great wonder unto me, why ye do not then,
with more diligence and fervency, love and seek after the same; and that
certain turn them away so lightly from the Doctrine stretching there unto.

9. How are ye thus lingering or holding back of your selves, that ye come
forward so slowly, for to enter obediently into the first Entrance Mat. 3 Luke
3 Acts 2 and 3
of the Requiring of the gracious Word, and wholly to give over your selves to
the best, and so to go forth therein, Ephesians. 4 Phil. 3 Heb. 6
till unto the good Being of the Perfection? O take hold yet once of a good
willing Mind and Purpose, with a good Will, not to 3 Kin. 18
halt any longer on both sides: but let all your Thoughts stretch hereto,
namely, to cleave, obediently, unto the good Being of the Love with all your
Heart and Mind, and obediently to follow after the Service of the Word, in his
Requiring, until that ye be grown up to the Ephesians, 4
perfect old age of the holy and godly Understanding, and Ephesians. 3 2 Peter 1
incorporated, with Spirit, Heart, Mind and Soul, to the good Being of the
Love.

CHAP. XIX.
O All ye Ecles. 33
People, which hear this Day the Voice or Testimony of the Spirit of Love,
Prove. 5
take this effectually to heart; incline all your Minds and Understandings to
the holy Word of Truth, and have even so your joy, in all Col. 3
thanksgiving to the Lord, among each other.

2. But let not your Joy and Thanksgiving to the Lord be in the fleshly 1 Pet. 2
Voluptuousness, nor in the joy of the perverse World: but rejoice you, with
Thanksgiving to the Lord, in the great Psalm. 96 and 97 and 103 and 145
Grace and Mercy, which is appeared and come unto us, now in the last Time,
under the Obedience of the Love, to wit, that we, through the Romans 12 Ephesians. 4
renewing of our Spirit and Mind, obtain to become Children of God, in the
Obedience of the Love of God the Father; Romans 3
also co-heires with Christ in the spiritual Riches of God, or heavenly goods:
and to live Apoc. 5 and 21 and 22
everlastingly with God, as his chosen Holy ones, in his Isai. 31 Wisd. 3 Heb.
3 and 4
holy Rest, and in his lovely Nature or Being.

3. Behold, hereto, as to a Kingdom of God full of all lovely Being, has God
chosen us; and Mat. 25
prepared from the Beginning for us, and for all Isaiah 60 Ezekiel. 1 and 3 1 Pet.
2
believing Heathen, which assemble them through Jesus Christ unto his People,
this same Kingdom of his upright and lovely Being, which we now inherit in this
same Day of his Love, to the end, that now, in the very last, the Scripture,
and all what God has spoken through his holy Prophets, and what is written of
Christ, should also, in us, and with us, become fulfilled Luke 24
, to the Honor or Glory of God, and to our Joy; like as there stands written:

4. Be glad, and Deuteronomy. 32 Romans 15
rejoice ye Heathen with his People; for the Lord will revenge the Blood of his
Servants Apoc. 19
on his Enemies, and be favorable to the Land of his People.

5. The upright ones or Wis. 3
Believers, shall be obedient, in the Love, unto the Lord, and judge the People.

6. They shall receive a Wis. 5
glorious Kingdom, and a beautiful Crown, at the Lords hand.

7. They are a Eccl. 3
Congregation of Righteous ones, and their exercise is Obedience and Love.

8. They shall Wisd. 3 Mat. 13
shine like as the Sun, in their Fathers Kingdom.

9. The Lamb of God Apoc. 5
has redeemed them with his Blood, out of all Generations and People; and has
made them Kings and Priests unto God, and they shall reign upon the Eaerth.

10. They are a Apoc. 21
Tabernacle of God among Men; God will dwell with them, and they shall be his
People; and He, God himself with them, will be their God.

11. See, this is, assuredly, the hearty mercifulness of God over us now in the
last Time, to the end that now, in the last Time. Isai. 40
the glorious Lordliness of God should, in us, become manifested or declared,
and the Scripture fulfilled.

12. Yea, this is the Reward or Recompense of Jesus Christ, unto us Litleones
and Gods Elect in the last Time, to wit, that we are made through the gracious
Word of the Lord in his Service of Love, and through the Apo. 1, 5
Blood of the pure and undefiled Lamb, Kings unto God, and Priests or elders in
the holy Understanding, for that weshould now in these last days, Mat. 24 1
Cor. 4
as faithful Saints of God and upright Elders in the holy Understanding of the
Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, Wisd. ^ Apoc. 5 and 22
reign upon the earth in Righteousness, and, under the obedience of the Love,
Isaiah 3 Wisdom 3
judge the world with Equity, according to the Isai. 3, and 32, and 42 Jer. 23,
and 33 Acts 17 1 Cor. 6 Jude 1
prophesying of the holy Prophets and Apostles of Christ, and of the holy Ghost.

13. Herein, ye dearly Beloved, rejoice you now all with laud and thanksgiving
unto God, Psalm. 96 and 98, and 99, and 103 and 145
and praise high-worthily his holy Name; not only for the bountiful Acts of God
extended on you, but also that presently, in this same day, his holy Spirit of
Love is Joel 2 Acts 2
poured forth so abundantly over us and in us; and that the true Doctrine to
the same holy Spirit is likewise, as a John 4 and 7
living and safe making water, flowing forth out of us, to the salvation or
safe-making of all Believers of the gracious Word; and that even so, to
Righteousness upon the Earth, the Scripture becomes fulfilled, namely, by all
the Believers, which now humble themselves good-willingly and faithfully under
the Love, take to heart the Word of Truth, and grow up bed ently therein Ephesians.
4
till unto the old age of the Man Christ.

14 Whosoever now therefore, under the obedience of the Love, has a good
regard unto the holy Word of Truth that is administered out of the holy Spirit
of Love, and exercises him therein for to be obedient unto his Requiring; and
even so, to that effect, furthereth or becomes helpful unto the Service of
Love, he shall likewise according to the Truth enjoy and be partaker of all the
bountiful Acts which God extends on us, his chosen holy ones; and also
evidently see how that Christ, the righteous One, appears presently Mat. 24
Luke 17 and 21
in Glory, and becomes Psalm 68
wonderful in all his Believers; and that also, through the same Christ, and
his holy ones, the universal Acts 17
Earth shall, in this day of the Love which God himself has appointed or
ordained, be judged with Equity, and purged from all his unrighteousness; and
that all the Saints of God (namely, the Communiality of the Love) shall inhabit
the same with 2 Pet. 3
Righteousness, and reign with Faithfulness and Truth, from henceforth world
without end. Amen.

This shall all assuredly come even so to pass, and in his time be found even
thus.

15. Herewithall, O ye beloved and obedient children, and all ye constant
faithful ones in this our upright Service of Love, my hearty Exhortation and
desire is unto you all, I hat ye will take this effectually to heart, and not
seek nor desire any thing else with your will and mind, but that the Love of
Jesus Christ, with her virtuous Nature, and upright Being, may obtain a Gal. 4
Ephesians. 3
shape in you; and that the Service of the same Love may also, thereto, be
furthered or assisted among all people, to the intent that the same Service may
in all Truth and Love, to the welfare and salvation of all men, obtain the
pre-eminence, and, to Concord and Love in Jesus Christ, prosperously flourish
over the universal Earth; that grant us the Lord, the Almighty God, through his
Love. Amen.

H. N.

An Introduction to the Glass of Righteousness.
they set forth, besides the everlasting God of Israel and his Law, Esa.
44.45.46. Ier. 10.
is nothing else but foolishness and ignorance.

48. Many of them have no understanding in the Law of the Lord, nor knowledge
of his Ordinances, and of their calling through Jesus Christ Luke 2.
of the tribe of Juda, of the House of David, they have no right discerning at
all.

49. And therefore it is, that they miss of the meaning or intention of God,
and are thereby grounded on the glimmering of their knowledge, and not on the
stock of the upright olive tree, Romans 11.
to the which they are called, to be grafted thereunto.

50. But now when we consider all this, and that we are not partakers of the
Sap of the stock of our calling, Romans 11.
but to find our selves breken off from the same, and thereby miss of all
that, which is of God, and which his Ordinances are one with, if then we have
any love to the riches of God, and do consider and know the damagefull Mat. 16.
loss, with all the desolation Dan. 9.11.12. Mat. 24.
and abominations, which are come in between, then comes upon us, Esa. 13.
Dan. 12.
all woe and anguish, and we greatly bewail the loss of these riches of God,
above all the damages or losses of this world.

51. For where is there a more damagefull loss, Mat. 16.
then where one finds no righteousness of God, and where the Law of God
and his Statutes and Ordidances are in the loss so utterly darkened?

52. Oh what shall I more write, of this damagefull loss of the most
precious riches? my heart is heavy, and my soul is pained, in such sort, Ier.
9.13.14. Lam. 1.2.3.
that oftentimes I am forced to sigh and mourn, because my mind will not be
pacified.

53. O God, that they all savv, how they are Psalm. 14. Romans 3.
turned herefrom, and that no man has continued in thy truth, and how they
are Romans 7.
taken captive under the sin, and strayed from thee; (yea these precious riches
of God, they scarcely know,) and how poor Apo. 3 3.
and naked in themselves they are, without thy Sanctuary, to the end (out of
deep necessity) they might cry unto thee, Psa. 130.
for grace, and obtain (in their spirit) an inclined mind, to the obeying of
thy love, that thou might have mercy on them all.

54. For if so be they come not to thy love, nor to the obedience of the
requiring of her service, nor thereunto have no good will, belief or hope,
surely there shall then no life of Gods Sanctuary be found in them, how wise,
how skillful, and execllent or rich of Spirit, how learned and expert in
Scriptures, Languages or tongues soever they may be.

55. If moreover they lay not down their knowledge in the silence, even as
though they knew nothing at all; and that (through the service of the holy
Word) they reform not themselves under the obedience of the love, nor suffer
their understanding to be stirred up to obedience, whereby to be wholly
inclined to the love, to pass forth toward the same, Mat. 10.16. Mar. 8. Luke
9.14.
to take up daily their Cross with humble hearts, and to persevere Ephesians. 6.
Phil. 4. Col. 4.
in prayer and faith, with a firm hope, Ephesians. 3.
till the establishing in the love, they can by no means inherit any richcs of
God or Christ, nor 1 Cor. 2.
understand or know any wisdom of God at all, how skilfully soever they
search, or study in Scriptures after it.

56. For there is no wisdom nor knowledge of Christ, nor understanding of the
Scriptures, to be had in any thing, but only in the love, or among them, who
are inclined, and well-affected thereunto.

57. They may many of them (I grant) seek much wisdom and understanding,
whereby to comprehend the same, and (in conceit) be satisfied and appeased with
a taken on wisdom; but if they come not to the love, neither are taught in her
service to the true wisdom, they shall then find no wisdom nor understanding,
nor yet any righteousness nor life, but must Joh. 8.
die in their sins, and in their conceit of truth, for there is no right Spirit
of truth, nor wisdom without the love.

58. Wherefore every thing, which is Amos. 8.
decayed or broken down, must even now (through the love and her service) be
set up again, and all that straieth and is dispersed, must again be gathered
together, nEzek. 34. Mic. 4. Soph. 3.
through the love and her service: namely, all those that hope for the
Salvation of the only body of Christ, for that is the promise, to the children
of the Testament, in the Jer. 23.30, 31.33. Joel. 2.
last time, in the which God will magnify himself against all heathen or
uncircumcised ones.

59. This has God in former times promised, and he will perform it for his
holy names sake, Ezekiel. 38. Mic. 5.
to make it known and honorable far and wide, that his honor and Sanctuary
Psalm. 74. Dan. 8.
may no longer be trodden down, but may appear pure and clear: and he will show
in the last time, how that he only is the Lord, and that his office, work and
doing, is not bound nor tied to men's working, but that he performs the same
according to his will and pleasure.

60. O how happy is he, which is Esa. 5. Romans 12.
not wise in his own conceit, neither is with any spiritual Deuteronomy. 12. Jer. 7.
imagination bewitched, tied, or bound; but (in the sin) is daily against
himself, and loves not the evil, but is well-affected to the love, and so
Luke 21.
possesses his soul with patience, till the promises of Almighty God, that he
might live unto God in all truth.

CHAP. IX.
1. A Complaint over the greatest sort of People, that neither regard nor
expect the promises of Gods Righteousness, out of the love, but set up a
righteousness of their own, as being persuaded that the same is of God. 15.
The abuse of marriage. 22. The middle wall. 25. Shame to disclose the inward
evilnesse. 33. A Prediction of calamity to come upon the conceited wise. 34.
None can come to the new Man or Kingdom of God, but by the love.

BUt who has regard hereunto? who thinks on the righteousness which God
esteems.

2. Does not the most part of people intend to set up their Romans 10.
own righteousness?

3. Who thinks on the Communion of Saints, Ioh. 6.
whom God the Father draws, to justification through Jesus Christ, in the
love?

4. Does not every one (which is come or risen up before the love) seek to
gather a private Congregation to himself, to advance his own word, and with
contention to stick to the same? not thinking that the Lord shall Esa. 66.
himself bring forth, through his Word and service of love, and that his
Salvation shall come from his right hand; and that so through himself, he will
bring forth unity in the love, and his children Esa. 66.
out of Sion, according to the word of his promise.

5. But who looks after it? who longs for it? who depends upon Gods
promises, that (in time to come) they shall be established, who hungreth or
thirsts after it? who thinks on the comfort of Israel, and upon the
consolation of Juda?

6. Every one supposes without fail, that he has the blessing of God already,
and that there is for to come, no more then is present with him, or which he
himself passes forth in.

7. Herein do the conceited Christians comfort them, and cheer up themselves
(among each other) but they have caught an hand full of wind, and do make
themselves glad with chafe.

8. They thresh the straw, Esa. 33.
and crush it very hard, but what avails it, in their binnes 4 Esd 6.
shall no bread be found, nor any corn in their barns, yea such things shall
come upon them from the Lord, and (for their stoutnesse cause) shall not bide
away.

9. Many of them cry also now: we have it, we have it, we are the Congregation
of Christ, we are Israel, Lo here it is, Lo there it is, this is the truth,
that is the truth, Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luke 17.
here is Christ, there is Christ.

10. But when Christ shall show himself, Mat. 24. Luke 17.
even as the lightning arises from the East, and shines unto the West, then
shall their own word (which now is one with them) be clean against them,
because they have not esteemed the love, wherein the truth of God or Christ is
sealed for ever.

11. Moreover diverse have gathered many people or companies every where
together, by sentences of Scripture, and with glistering knowledges, terming
them by the name of Christ, and by the name of Israel, but the love they have
shut out at doors, and thereof had least respect and regard.

12. For who stands now in the love to the end Deuteronomy. 6.10. Mat. 22.
to cleave fast to the God of Life, and to love him, with his whole heart,
soul, and thoughts, and besides, to love another as himself, that God (who only
is the Lord) might be their arm, fortress, and strength.

13. Is not every man's eye that accounts not God, for the only Lord, fixed
upon Ier. 17.
flesh and blood, or upon the vain corruptible created things in this world?
and does not every one set his assurance on the same? does he not count it for
his arm or strength.

14. And thus living in such love to the corruptible things, and in that false
considence, every one loves his own self, and ( Esa. 29. Ezekiel. 33. Mat. 15.
with his heart) turns from the Lord, and so passes on his error, and
merrily singing, Tob. 13. Apo. 19.
Alleluia: even, as though that God had his delight in such abomination, and
that Jerusalem were likewise builded up, and lay no longer trodden down.

15. In such a show or simulation, and in such pleasure of their own conceit
(not having Ioh. 5.
the love of God, nor bearing the Law of the Lord Ier. 31. Heb. 8.10.
in their hearts) they betake themselves to marriage, with bold courage,
bringing forth their children Ose. 5.
in the unrighteousness, and account that same for pure wedlock ordained of
God, the which yet among them, is but mere adultery, Ezekiel. 16.23.
and impudent whoredom.

16. For consider, who is now (I pray you) within the right matrimony or
conjunction of man and wife?

17. Was it not expedient that Gods Law and will Psalm. 40. Esa. 51. Ier. 31.
should be in the man's heart, and that so the same man should in his will and
disposition cleave unto that God, which has made heaven and earth? In like
manner ought not the woman also to follow the man, and (with the like
disposition) Ephesians. 5.
cleave only to the man's will, and so in her heart bear that which concerns
God, or at least, labor, hope, and long after it, and in that sort bring forth
her children, to the end to bring them up Tob. 1. Eccl. 7.30. Ephesians. 6.
according to the Law of the Lord, in the upright being, that the name of the
living God might therein be magnified, from their birth, and from Generation to
Generation for evermore.

18. But if we observe and note this thing aright, there are but few (alas)
that proceed by this rule, and therefore they are generally Esa. 57. Mat. 12.16.
adulterers and adulteresses.

19. For such as come not together by the Lord, but Tob. 6.
keep or shut God and his Law out at doors, are they not all Sap. 3.4.
children of adultery? lives not every one of them that are such, in his own
matrimony and conjunction, contrary to Gods Ordinance or conjunction, Sap. 3.
Heb. 13.
of the undefiled bed?

20. Therefore pass they not at all, for the pure begetting, procreating, or
bearing, to the bringing up of children in godliness, to the praise of the
most highest.

21. Oh! this same is with many, yet far from home, for every one desires
generally to bring up his children to himself, even to his own pleasure, that
he may thereby spread his own name, and not the Lords; and therefore there is
no love of God, nor unity in the love among them.

22. For every where there is a middle wall and division between God, Esa. 59.4
Esd. 9.13.15. Mat. 24. Luke 21.
and the man, between the spirituality and the temporality, between the Prince
and the Subjects, between the husband and the wife, between the Parents and the
children, between one brother and another, and between one friend and another.

23. Every one minds his own, and would fain have another agreeing to his
mind: yea the man is now come to such presumption and stoutnesse, Esa. 45.
that every one in particular would gladly have, that (in all things) he might
use the everlasting God at his own will, and that God would give success to
all things, according to his pleasure.

24. And in such a manner is the wife minded toward the husband, the children
toward the parents, and moreover one people toward another, whether it be in
Ordinances, Religions, and Righteousnesses, or in temporal Laws. In every
thing there is own wills desire, middle wall, destruction, suspicion, mistrust,
and covernesse.

25. Yet who takes it to heart? who does forgo himself? who considers it ^
does not every man cover himself, that his shame might not be laid open?

26. Who can now (I pray you) acknowledge, that he himself is so unclean,
unjust, wicked, Esa. 1.
and dissembling, and that he ought to turn him from his unrighteousness?

27. Truly not many (alas) can brook it, nor yet well endure or bear the shame
thereof, by reason that they will not do away nor forsake the covering or show
of virtue, wherewithal they are covered.

28. For in this regard, the husbands will be much too upright, the wives too
honest, and the children much too proud Esa. 3.
and haughty, for to be content to acknowledge that they are open sinners, and
no better then whores and naughty packs, Mat. 22.
for thereby they might not in any wise come into the Kingdom of God.

29. So perversely are the children of men minded against God. For albeit they
are guilty in all respects, (if not with the deed, yet at least with the heart
in secret) yet notwithstanding they do all keep themselves covered before the
face of God, and his Saints; and would much rather be respected and accounted
for just persons, (even as the Pharisees Luke 7.
and letter-learned were) then with the Publicans to acknowledge their sins,
Luke 18.
convert and pray to Almighty God for his grace.

30. Whilst then the children of men will not understand nor acknowledge this
same, Joh. 9.
therefore remain they in their sins. Notwithstanding (out of their unconverted
hearts, and unacknowledgement of their errors) they search the Scripture, Joh.
5.
thinking to have the understanding of life therein, whereas the same is it,
Ioh. 5.
that accuses them, and gives testimony of the upright life: but to the same
life they desire not to come, for they know it not, neither the way that
leads thereunto: howbeit they persuade themselves that they are wise, and do
well know, how they ought or ought not to live.

31. But that which they ought before all things to know, they do not know,
understand nor see, for they ought necessarily to have seen, that they are,
(like broken of branches) Romans 11.
separated and straied from the upright stock, and likewise to know the
defection, Esa. 59.
from their God and his Christ, and the lying against the Lord.

32. Seeing then they are blinded, in regard of the discerning of the fall from
their God, and are not come to the incorporating with Christ, and yet say they
are Christians (and indeed are not, but are a Synagogue of the devil) and do
boast themselves of God, and God finds them liars in his sight, therefore
will he even Apo. 3.
spew such out of his mouth, and not suffer his holy name to be any longer
blasphemed by them, because they should see and know that they have Esa. 1.
blasphemed the holy one in Israel, 1 Mac. 3.
trodden down his Sanctuary with their feet, contemned him and his gentleness,
and in their presumptuousnesse, esteemed themselves great and wise.

33. Inasmuch as this same is still unknown to the world, and unto all
wel-conceited wise, and is of few looked into, and that the man learneth not to
know himself, whereby he might judge righteously; neither is with the
inclination of his heart, disposed to the love, nor hungreth nor lusts the
convertion to his God, and will 2 Timothy 4.
not abide the godly doctrine, but remain selfe-wise and stout of heart,
therefore do I even truly perceive great infelicity, sorrow, Mat. 24.
and misery, to be ready to come in this perilous time; yea such an estate
shall fall upon the children of men, as shall be out of measure horrible, and
all this same must needs light upon them, because every one is much too
self-wise in his own conceit, also too self-expert in the Scripture: and for
that every one supposes Jer. 8.
when he has the Scripture, and reads or hears the same, that he cannot
then err nor be deceived.

34. This say they, and yet do they all err, because the upright judgment
(out of a discerning of love) is not in them, and because out of the breasts of
the love, they have not sucked, and tasted the godly wisdom.

35. For it is certainly mere lies, what the letter-learned, Jer. 1.
and what the wel-concerned wise of spirit also do without the love, institute
or set forth, how clear soever in understanding, and how expert soever of good
and evil they are become thereby, for they must all submit them to the love,
and be reformed in herservice, otherwise they can never, although (in their
imagination) they know, perceive, and com prehend all things, come to the new
man, Joh. 3.
nor to the Kingdom of God, for the love is only it, wherein every thing
(which is the truth and wisdom of God) is comprehended. She Col. 3. 2 Timothy 1.
is also the band or establishing of the perfection.

36. Whilst the sove then has every thing (which is of God, Christ, or Truth,
contained or included in it, therefore might some man demand, shall we then let
the Scriptures pass? O no, God forbid: but men are not to use them for the
knowledge, nor to the end to teach them forth historically, but to the intent
they may give regard to such an upright spirit or life, as is set forth
therein, or required thereby (even as is 3 Clas. 24.
partly also set forth and declared, both of this, and of the knowledge, in the
third book of the Glass of Righteousness) that so through comfort of the
Scriptures, we should (to our rejoicing) Romans 15.
have our hope on the promises, and on the foreshewing of God, by his Prophets,
and by the Apostles of Christ (who have prophesied of the healthful life, which
abides sure in the love for ever) and so passing on toward it in the belief,
Romans 4.
give credit unto God, that he in his promises is true.

37. But it is to be lamented, that the Scripture is by so few at this day
discerned, out of the understanding of the truth, and of the love, whereby to
understand the same rightly, according to the mind of God.

38. True it is, there is much written, and diverse have set forth many
writings, and have had much provoking of spirit, and great inclination to
teach, howbeit every one severally, according to the sight or knowledge that he
has had, being in the state of the fall from God, and in the estranging from
his Salvation.

39. But inasmuch as they were not come to the love, and that their hearts were
not inclined to the love in all things, as they were to the spirit of their
glistering knowledge and comprehension; therefore did many of them err and
mistake, for the mind of God, Deuteronomy. 6.10. Mat. 22. Romans 13.
and the fulfilling of the Scriptures, is the love.

40. And the same is Col. 3.
the perfection, wherein every thing [to a life and truth of peace] stands
firm to our joy, and Ephesians. 1.
to the praise of the glory of God, to all and on all, that hope upon it and
long thereafter.

CHAP. X.
1. Great calamity shall come upon the children of Men, because of the
contentious knowledge. 2. Knowledge and truth differ. 5. The way of life
clearly showed. 6. Yet through ignorance mistaken. 16. A lamentation over man's
ignorance. 24. The author by his writings shows what is commendable, and what
is discommendable: counselling to learn upright understanding, and the special
Virtues of the Love, and to shun all disputing with the partial.

FOrasmuch as the man is now persuaded, that he himself (with his cies of the
Spirit) does so clearly and nakedly discern and understand the right, as he
cannot be deceived, and for that every one which stands in partiality, is by
his sight or spirit contentious, howsoever each several party maintains his
own matter, and defends the same to be of God, and will in all things have
the right only and alone pass with his own matter, and will not effect the
love above all, to the unity of heart, therefore even through the same
glittering, in case they have not all their understanding captive under the
obedience of the love, there shall come horrible calamity upon the children of
men, in such sort, that upon this earth, they shall become an 4 Esd. 5.
abhorring one to another, for that every one standing stiff in the knowledge
and in the clearness thereof, will not [for the loves sake] give over his own
matter, thinking that the truth ought not to give place.

2. It is true indeed that the truth ought not to give place, but betwixt the
knowledge and the truth, there is great difference: for much knowledge [which
yet men call truth] can easily arise out of the subtilty of wit; but the truth
of God proceeds out of the love, and is even of one being with the love.

3. Therefore is the knowledge 1 Cor. 13.
divided and broken, but the love is the truth, Ioh. 17.
and the true being it self, and the perfection.

4. But [alas] this do not many of them know, to wit, that they should come to
the love, and so bear the love, for a mark of the righteous Spirit, and rejoice
them with the truth: Ioh. 17. 1 Ioh. 1.
that same is the word of life which was spoken of according to the promises.

5. Inasmuch now as I have noted, and do yet at this present find so much
boldness in men, by reason of their knowledge, and imagination of the truth,
whereon they are very stout and bold, and yet for the most part, it still
fails them of the truth and love, and for that the right way to the true
life, and the loves nature, is thereby missed of many: And seeing moreover,
that the right way and entrance into the true life, and into the loves nature,
is (by Gods grace) granted me to be seen into, therefore have I out of the
inclination of Love, clearly and nakedly, with uncovered words set forth the
right way or entrance into the true life, and the upright nature or being of
the love in the Glass of Righteousness, distinctly noting the divine, and the
humane, the spiritual, and the natural, and what is decent and meet to be
used, for a discerning, which is the establishing of the promises of God,
according to the Scripture, that both Gods righteousness and man's
righteousness might be known, and that we likewise in an inclination of love,
might with consenting minds, pass forth toward the same.

6. But alas, what avails it any man, that one point him out a good way, and
an even and plain path, if he walk not in the same, nor have no liking
thereunto?

7. What avails it to knock, and in diverse manners to call, if there be no
ears to hear, nor any understanding to comprehend, or to understand the same,
nor any heart to embrace such things?

8. Or, how shall one be able, I pray you, to declare conveniently unto such a
man his error, and the entrance into the good life, that he might rightly
regard and understand wherein his salvation consists, whereby he might be
delivered from the bewitching of his heart, and so know what right is, to the
intent he might once comprehend understanding rightly.

9. If a man say unto him, the increase, and the blessing 1 Cor. 3
comes only of God, Prove. 2. Sap. 8. Eccl. 1.
he is the giver of wisdom, and no man nor Letter, then runeth he clean away
from the same illuminated man, which points him to the life of wisdom, and
utterly gives over the Scriptures, and the daily Services of the holy Word,
which direct him to the upright life, and are service-^^^^ thereunto; and so
departs from the wisdom, Jer. 7.11.13.
cleaving either to his vain imagination, or else to the world in her
foolishness and error.

10. If one say unto him, that he must suffer himself to be Romans 10 1 Cor. 3 2
Cor. 3.4 5. 1 Pet. 4. 2 Pet. 1.
served to the peace of life, by some illuminated man, to the intent, that by
hearing he may grow up in the belief to the salvation, then observes he no
difference often times between the unlightened men, and the Elders of the holy
Understanding in the Family of Love; but gives such respect to the unlightned
men for their knowledge, that he suffers himself to be Gal. 1.6 Col. 2
taken captive thereby, to a bondage under their knowledges, and so becomes a
servant unto men, and is by the unregenerated men bewitched with something that
is not of God, not leads to the life of salvation, in such sort, that through
his liking unto that which he hears of them, and by which he is seduced and
beguiled, he betaketh him to the vain things of the flesh, and forsakes or
forgeteth the true ministration of the Word of the Lord, and likewise also the
good exercises, wherethrough he might have come, or been brought unto God, and
to Psalm. 36 Ier. 2.17.
the fountain of upright and perfect wisdom.

11. Unto which fountain of upright and perfect wisdom, the man should of right
be always subject, and long after it: and moreover, according to the requiring
of the good exercise that leads thereto, hope thereon; turn all his affection
and inclination of heart thereunto, love the Wsdome and Pro. 4.
information, and submit himself obediently to the Service of the gracious
Word, that so he might come to the Prove. 2.
life of the upright righteousness, and then take part therewith, and not with
any of those things that lead not to the salvation.

12. If one say unto him that he must be spiritually minded, then climeth he up
(with his wit) very high, after the spiritual understanding, and will likewise
take upon him to understand the spiritual things, by his own knowledge, and
will be so utterly spiritual, and so quite and clean change himself out of
flesh into Spirit, that thereby he forgets and forgoeth the humane Ordinance
and equity, and to show love to his Neighbor, and unto all men likewise: Out
of which bewitched opinion of spiritualnesse, many divisions and corruptions do
arise.

13. If a man say unto him, that he should have regard unto the equity of
nature, seeing God has Genesis 1.
created the natural things also for the man's good, then does he on the other
side, so wholly adict himself to the natural and visible things, that he
receives them to his own bondage, and slavish delectation, and tyeth his heart
thereunto, and so shuteth or keeps off the most holiest being, and the true
holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, out of his heart.

14. If the man read the Scripture, and do out of the testimonies of the same,
hear that the Law of Moses and the Prophets have their Office and Ministry
Mat. 11. Luke 26. Gal. 3.
till unto Christ, and that in like manner all is in Christ fulfilled, and that
Christ Romans 10
is the end or fulfilling of the Law, whereout the Gospel, or second Testament
of the Holy Ghost proceeds, according to the fore-shewing of the Prophets,
then he thinks he will in any wise take the best, and in his spirit receive
Christ, and the Gospel, and that which is spiritual and heavenly of God,
supposing thus (with his understanding and knowledge) to run clean beyond the
law of Moses and the Prophets of the Old Testament [to wit beyond the obedience
of the foregoing Service,] and so will rely upon Christ, and be a child of the
New Testament; for he reads, that that is the most best, and imagines, that
if he should regard the Law and the Prophets, and should obey the foregoing
Service and requiring thereof, he should then go back and finish his beginning
of righteousness Gal. 3.
in the flesh or outward; for the Scripture and the foregoing Service makes
mention, that the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, is Luke 18.24.
in Christ, and that the spiritual and heavenly goods, be inherited in the
Spirit: And thus will he be one of Christ's, of the Gospells, and of the New
Testaments, and apprehend in his spirit the spiritual heavenly goods,
e're-ever he be passed through the Law or the Old Testament, or has understood
the Prophets of the foregoing Service in their requiring, Gal. 3.4 Heb. 7
how they lead him to Christ, and how, or in what sort all is in Christ
fulfilled.

15. Herein lies the man wrapped and snarled, and makes nothing thereof, Esa.
59
but desolation and destruction, altogether troubling his understanding and
conscience, and in like manner more others also, by his ignorance.

16. O God how is the understanding of the noble generation of man destroyed,
being become less of godly worthiness, then the beasts of the field! howbeit,
thou have chosen and created thee the man to this end, Genesis 1 Sap. 2.
that he should carry and bear the Image of thy living Godhead, to the laud
and praise of thy glory, to the intent he should be unto thee (O God) Lev. 26 2
Cor. 6. Apo. 21.
a Temple and Tabernacle for thy holy dwelling.

17. But alas, the man is quite contrary, and against this same, and has very
little mind or desire Ier. 5.8
to come to his God again.

18. And therefore the fall and straying of men from their God, is become so
deep and far, that there is Psa. 14 Romans 3
scarcely any understanding, will, or desire of right conversion to be found
among them.

19. O God, how are we blinded from the right knowledge of thy requiring, and
become resisters and despisers of thee!

20. We have Esa. 59 Ier. 2, 32
turned the back unto thee, as those that know thee not, and are become as
children that are brought up of strangers, and are so fond upon strangers, that
they utterly despise and detest the sight of their Parents, and forget their
Fathers house.

21. We are even so far, O God, become strange toward thee, that we have
almost no pleasure in thee; for thou art unto us as the very contemptiblest and
most despised'st thing: Esa. 53.
Yea, so little have we rightly thought of thee, that (in respect of thy right
worthiness) we have counted thee utterly of no value, and esteemed thee
nothing worth; nevertheless, thou bear 1 Pet. 2.
our sins, and have compassion in our affliction, and art our Physician,
healing us of our offenses, for thou make us whole of the deadly wounds of
our souls.

22. O God, Psa. 25.79
impute not our sins unto us, because of our ignorance, Luke 23. Act. 7.
forgive them also their offenses, that know not what they do.

23. For seeing the children of men know not thee aright, nor submit themselves
obediently to the requiring of thy Word and Service of Love, therefore surely
they fall here, or err there; in such sort, that often times they keep no
measure nor rule at all.

24. But seeing that such things are now sufficiently known unto me, and that
my spirit out of Gods grace, perceives a godlier life, then is found with many
of the children of men, therefore the inclination to the righteousness
constrains me distinctly to show both that which is commendable, and that
also which is utterly discommendable before God and among men.

25. Therefore O ye children of men, note (I pray you) your ignorance, and
think once upon that which is right, and learn an upright understanding, and a
right knowledge of the wisdom, that tends to the love.

26. Learn of the Love in her Service Mat. 11.
lowliness, long-sufferance, meekness, soberness, chastnesse, and
righteousness, in faithfulness and truth; that same shall be wholesome to your
reigns, do good to your Pro. 3.
navell, refresh your bones, and rejoice your heart, and shall be unto you a
living fountain Ioh. 7.
that springs to the everlasting life, and as a fruitful tree Psalm. 1. Ier.
17 Ezekiel. 47 Apoc. 22
planted by the waters side, that bring forth his timely fruits, whose greens
or leaves do not wither or fade.

27. Take this same to heart, and be not as the wild beasts; be Psalm. 32.
not like horses and mules, that have no understanding of wisdom.

28. Inrage not your selves in any wise, as the mad furious world does; set no
horns on your heads; thrust not your selves out, Prove. 1 Sap. 2.
like the unwise or fools, neither let your part be among the greedy or
covetous.

29. Keep you from the society of them that are forward to do violence, and of
such as count it a small thing to shed men's blood.

30. Have not much disputation nor reasoning with them that (by their will) are
desirous to have the matter to go on their side, or that are partially minded;
but rather in all things, observe what is right and equal, and what Romans 14
serves to peace and love.

CHAP. XI.
1 An Exhortation to the Family of Love, to embrace the loves nature, and to
pray with confidence for the godly wisdom. 18. Many pray for wisdom, that will
not acknowledge themselves to be unwise. 20. The poor of spirit are blessed,
23. The self-wise will happily for a time, like of the Love and her Wisdom,
yet according to his own sense. 25. H. N. fears least the Glass of
Righteousness shall be misunderstood, as other Sentences are. 35. The Alarm
is stricken up, to preparemen to the battle. 43. The Lord indeed works all;
but not without us, nor without our obedience. 47. The well-willing are not to
be dismayed. 51. The Christian fight is not with cursing nor killing, but with
patience to subdue the sin within us. 56. God is pleased to save the world by a
foolish Preaching under the obedience of the Love.

O Ye children of the Family of the Love of Jesu Christ, if so be ye love the
Love, then consider also the Loves nature; for the Love is clothed with
righteousness, which also rejoices not 1 Cor. 13
in the iniquity, for her joy is in the truth.

2. After such a fashion consider ye the Love, and not after a vain course,
according to the mind of the flesh, Esa. 40.
for all flesh waxes old and changes; but the Spirit that cleaves to the
Love, does neither wax old nor change, but it abides for ever.

3. Hereunto have regard, that your life may be in the preservation of the
righteous, and fear not, like the fools or ignorant.

4. For why should ye perish with the fools and ignorant? wherefore should ye
inherit the cursing Mat. 25.
with the goats?

5. Separate 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 18.
from them, and behold Gods right hand; for from thence comes unto us the life
of salvation, and the light of the holy understanding.

6. Even there learn with the wise, the godly wisdom, that according to the
Spirit, ye may be not earthly, Col. 3.
but heavenly minded.

7. Suck also in like manner all gentleness out of the breasts of the Love, and
seek the peace of concord.

8. And when ye have gotten all this same, then play, sing, Psalm. 96.87.
and praise the Lord as his little lambs, and Psa. 79.95.100.
as the sheep of his pasture, and as little children, 1 Pet. 2.
in whom there is no guilefull heart hidden, and so get you a naked lovely
heart, such as uncoveredly grows up in the Love, and 1 These. 3 2 These. 1.
increases therein more and more; and increase ye likewise in wisdom, and in
holy understanding.

9. If now ye be hereunto well minded, then shall your portion be with the
Kings and Priests, or with the Elders of the holy Understanding, and your
fellowship with such Senetors, as do further the Righteousness and your
Service of the Word, with the peacemakers, that do earnesty seek the unity in
the Love.

10. And thus shall then the slandering lips, Tit 2. 1 Pet. 2.3
which defame you with all evil, by your good conversation with the wise, in
the wisdom, and with the just or virtuous, in all righteousness and integrity,
be put to silence.

11. Therefore be now (through the love and her service) wholly Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
renewed, and purified in the spirit of your mind, pass now through the river
of the love, even to the rest of life, the holy land of promise, that the
ungodly bear no dominion over you.

12. Be altogether with one consent minded hereunto, and let the love have the
pre-eminence and dominion with you all, that the little ones may be protected,
and the simple defended.

13. Therefore, O ye lovers of the truth, seek unity, and labor for it, and
make a departure out of all heathenish being, which is after the course of the
worlds foolishness.

14. Do away the foreskin Deuteronomy. 10 Ier. 4
of your uncircumcised hearts: lay away from you (according to the former
conversation) the bewitching of the imagination, which glimmereth unto you
before the eyes of your spirit, and glittereth before your understanding, as if
it were some excellent thing.

15. Renew your understanding in the Service of the holy and gracious Word,
under the obedience of the Love, and so in the spirit of your mind betake you 1
Cor. 14
to the Love, and and as deer children be subject thereunto, whereby you may in
the love obtain eyes of clearness.

16. If notwithstanding ye be Iam. 1.
unwise, Apoc. 3.
blind, and Mat. 5
poor of spirit, yet grieve not your selves for all that; for then ye draw
near to the Kingdom of God.

17. If you desire godly wisdom, then Iam. 1
pray and believe, she shall be given you, so far forth as your prayer Romans 12.
is steadfast, and as ye pray to God, in a lowly heart, with such a prostrated
soul, as has a desire or pleasure to do, and to fulfill the Lords will.

18. Men may find many which pray unto God for wisdom, and for the right sight
of his Kingdom; but they will not acknowledge, nor Joh. 9. Apoc. 3.
understand, that they are unwise, poor, and blind, therefore they obtain
nothing.

19. For although that the wisdom stood even at their door, yet so well seen
are they, and so rich of spirit, through their own wisdom of the knowledge,
that the upright wisdom of God and the being of his Kingdom, must be feign to
tarry without.

20. Therefore right well speaks the mouth of the Wisdom, Blessed Mat. 5.
are the poor of spirit; for the Kingdom of heaven belongs unto them, or the
wisdom of God arises (as light) upon them, and not upon the rich, or upon the
great knowers.

21. For when we of our selves are become poor, blind, or unwise, or do forsake
that which is ours, and do come to contrition and meekness of heart, Psalm. ^1.
Esa
then will God dwell with us, and appear in such hearts, as also the Scripture
makes mention, and then are we also poor; but God is become rich in us, by
means of our vileness, or because we are poor in the knowledge: It is true.

22. These and other like things have I in many places distinctly set forth in
the Glass of Righteousness, and do here also set forth the same in this
Introduction to the holy Understanding; if any man regard it, let him consider
the inclination of mine understanding.

23. But what shall I say? I find the man much too self-wise Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1.
in his own conceit, and too void of understanding, in the mind of the love;
for commonly when the man hears of the love, and of the right understanding
of wisdom, he rejoices him in the hearing, and it seems as if it liked him
well, likewise for a time he commends it.

24. But in conclusion there is nothing among the greatest sort but
self-feeking, and very little do they understand the first Schoole-rule of the
Christian Doctrine of the service of love, for an entrance into the upright
life in Jesus Christ; but do understand every thing, which is held forth before
them out of Gods wisdom and love, according to their imagination, and
according to the mind of their liking. They seek thereout their own commodity,
2 Phil. 2.
and not the Lords; they run clean back from the mind of the love, and use all
subtilty to manitain their own opinion.

25. Whereout I observe, that the man (which is thus minded) conceives of the
wisdom and of the love utterly amiss. For which cause I likewise fear, least
the Glass of Righteousness (how plainly and rightly, evidently and clearly
soever it is set forth) shall not of many be discerned aright, nor yet be
conceived of, according to the truth.

26. If therefore they discern or conceive not a right of such apparent
sentences (as are so clearly and plainly uttered) that even every one (which
loves lowliness and righteousness) must needs approve the same, and
acknowledge that the man and the world is created thereunto) how should they
then be able rightly to understand or judge of all the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God?

27. For which causes sake (to the intent no man might have occasion to
estrange himself from the truth, unless it might be by his own revolting
heart) we have hidden or covertly set forth nothing, in the Glass of
Righteousness.

28. Notvvithstanding, if any thing be covered or hidden unto any, 2 Cor. 4.
it is hidden to the unbelievers, who have no desire nor love to the truth, nor
to the life which is of God, for such are darkened Romans 1.
in their understanding, through pleasure in their own mind, and through the
ignorance which is in them, Ephesians. 4.
and through the blindness of their hearts, do gather unto themselves, Romans 2.
a treasure of wickedness, to an horrible destruction; and so through their
own wisdom, do turn away and separate themselves, from the love, and from her
service.

29. But unto all lovers of equity, which have a desire and belief toward the
love, [to the intent that by her service, they might taste of 1 Pet. 2.
the uncorrupted milk, the Word of God, that Psa. 40. 1 Pet. 1.
lives for ever] we have out of the inclination of love, so openly and
clearly, according to the life painted out, and set forth the Glass of
Righteousness that every one, who with an humble heart has regard thereunto,
and desires the understand of Righteousness, shall be well satisfied therein.

30. If also any man turn his heart unto God, and desire to do his will, the
same shall likewise well understand, that the testimonies of the upright life
in the love, (as it is set forth in the Glass of Righteousness) is the
upright ground of righteousness, that God from the beginning has required of
the man, which also in the restoring thereof shall continue for ever, to the
Salvation of the world, according to the promises, even as God has spoken the
same aforetimes, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, who have all Esa.
2.60.61.62. Jer. 31. Joel. 2.3. Zach. 2.8. Mich. 4. Soph. 3. Mal. 4.
witnessed and prophesied of that same upright life, for to come in the last
time, and in the same shall also all consciences be appeased.

31. For the end or fullness of the same, is the revealing or coming of the
Kingdom of God, and the beholding of the joys and Salvation of the eternal,
Esa. 35.51.60.65. Apo. 21.22.
perfect and uncorruptible being.

32. Oh that the man had any understanding in the godliness, and did perceive
whereunto God calls him, and did in like manner prepare his heart after the
meaning of the written sentences, and did let alone judging by the knowledge!

33. But no, the man is much too selfwise by his knowledge, and therefore he is
more inclined to judge of every thing after his knowledge, then to prepare his
heart to the good, under the obedience of the love.

34. Therefore it is very much to be lamented, that many among the children of
men, do oftentimes judge the sentences and writings (which have out of the
service of love, their ministration to the good life) according to their
Knowledge. For as soon as they read or hear the same, they suppose by and by
that thet have rightly apprehended, and well understood them, not first minding
to enter in, to obtain, and to live in that which they bear witness of,
whereas yet the service of our writing tends hereunto, even that men's hearts
(as is there set forth) should be prepared to the same.

35. For men strike up no alarm, in the host, to the intent to make the people
unlusty to the battle, nor yet that they should but know the exercise of the
war, or judge of the Alarm-stroak, but that (with good courage) they should
prepare themselves to the battle or fight. Thereby every one (that has
courage to fight) does then make himself ready to encounter with his enemies,
and to root out his adversary, or to subdue him.

36. But (alas) I find it with many, otherwise in that alarm by which the man
is called to the spiritual Ephesians. 6.
fight, to the vanquishing of his enemies, which (inwardly in him) are killers
and murderers of his soul.

37. Therefore it is very true, that the children of this world are much Luke
16.
wiser in their dealing, as concerning the flesh, then the children of the
Kingdom are, in that which concerns the spirit.

38. What avails I pray you, an alarm made, if men prepare them not to the
battle? for many are persuaded, that this is no time of fighting, and that
there shall be no need thereof; supposing, because of their unbelief, that
nothing shall come of it; and lay their hands behind on the back, or put them
up in the bosom. Their heads are giddy, as if their hearts were utterly
unlusty, or dismayed to the fight.

39. If one should seek for men of war, where I pray you, should he find
them? Are they not for the most part gone back, Levit. 26. Jer. 48.
and become faint hearted as women?

40. If they do but once suffer harm, and be wounded; or forced by any evil
defamation, or assault of the wicked) to sustain any molestation or reproach,
then are they persuaded, that the cause is altogether naught, and so running
again after their case, they suffer themselves to be ruled by women, Esa. 3.
their enemy to reign over them; and in like manner make truth Esa. 28.
with death, and a league with hell, retain peace with the sin and accuser, and
become of one mind with the world, supposing that then all shall be well:
moreover they make an appointment or conclusion with themselves, that they will
no more trouble themselves with the doctrine of the Family of Love, nor yet
with the battle, thinking, Let them run that will.

41. For to resist the evil, to break and subdue the wicked heart and evil
thoughts, and to suffer much distress, contempt, and reproach, for the same
likes them not; they will none of that Howbeit, we are always to fight
against the evil, and to keep good watch continually: we are always to think
night and day upon the virtue of the godly life, always to long, and to hunger
and thirst after it, alvvaies to speak and to treat thereof, with such as do so
labor thereafter; and yet then of many sorts of people (and letter-learned) to
be despised and reproached.

42. Because of this toil, and for the shame and reproaches cause, which
meets them (and because they love not the righteousness of the godly life,
with the heart) they let the matter pass, saying, out of unbelief, I cannot
further it, I hold me still or unoccupied about it: let the Lord work it, I
will commit it unto him. Supposing when they thus pass on according to their
imagination, or do live after the fashion of the world, and (with an Romans 2.
unrepenting heart toward God, do hold peace with the blasphemers and
strivers, against the truth of Christ and his love, that then God will make it
to be well with them.

43. Deceive not your selves ye dearly beloved, the saying is very right, Act.
16. Ephesians. 3. Gol. 1.
that the Lord works it, and that he will also cause it to go well with us,
Phil. 1.2.
and prepare us after his will and pleasure: howbeit not without us, nor yet
without the obedience of the requiring of the service of his holy and gracious
word, and of his love; and whilst that we turn us away in such a sort from
him, and from the Ministers of his word, and do refuse him; Luke 17.
but it is done inwardly in us, under the obedience of the requiring of his
gracious word and service of love, so as we stand subject unto him with good
will) therein, and be of one mind with him, against the ungodly being, that God
may so in us magnify his holy name 2 Reg. 7.
and be called Ier. 10.
a God of Hosts, a Esa. 47.
God of Israel, or a God of such a one as bears dominion with God over his
enemies.

44. After this manner is God a Lord of his Army. He is only the Lord; but we
the instrument of his hands.

45. Out of such an understanding under the obedience of the Law of the Lord,
did the Kingly Prophet David, eftsoons apprehend a zealous stoutnesse, even as
in diverse manners we read in his Psalms, how valiantly and courageously he
sets himself on Gods part, against his enemies, as well in fighting with
good courage, as also sometimes in praying and making supplication, that God
might be his helper.

46. After the same manner ought it also to go with us inwardly in our hearts,
under the obedience of the love, 2 Cor. 3.
for no man can do any thing of himself, how stout, strong, or wise soever he
be, unless God be with him, who strengthens him, whom under the obedience of
the Word and his love, he finds to be of good will, and that prays unto him
for his help.

47. If then any man be weak, finding himself infirm yet to the battle, the
same is not Eccl. 2.
rejected nor despised, no nor any one that has been in error, so that they
do but trust in God, and be good of will, do abide in the faith, and so in
process of time do increase in strength, and be not unwilling in the word of
the Lord.

48. Therefore, Oye little and sorrowful hearts, Esa. 35.41.
be not dismayed, but be confident in hope, the Lord will not suffer you to be
Esa. 54.
put to shame: Therefore be of good courage.

49. Though that the battle come unto you, and that ye be despised by the
unbelievers of the gracious word, and by the blasphemers of the love of God,
and of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ, and that moreover, Mat. 5. 1 Pet. 2.3.
all evil be lyingly spoken of you, yet be not therefore dismayed.

50. For the God of Israel is Esa. 51.
our comfort, and he the same God will be our redeemer and our King, wherefore
have your refuge only on him, to the intent ye may not fear your adversary in
the fight. For truly this fight is godly and amiable.

51. Men curse nor swear not there, they do not there kill nor destroy any,
Ephesians. 6.
save only that opposite being against God, for it is no outward battle or war.

52. They use there no outward Esa. 2. Mic. 4.
swords or spears, they seek there to destroy no flesh of men, but it is a
fight of the cross and patience, Romans 6.
to the subduing of the sin.

53. This fight is also no disputation, bravvling, nor wrangling for the
knowledges sake of the Scriptures. It is likewise no contention with men,
howsoever the most part of factious men (which do every faction in particular
call themselves the right Christians) have even to this day so used it; and do
also yet still bravvle, 1 Cor. 3. Jam. 3.
contend, and strive one against another, (and that with a secret, hatred, and
envy) who should be best, wisest and holiest, and how to have right and equity,
every one in his conceiving, whereby they entangle themselves every way one
with another.

54. But such brawling and discord, do not I hold for any Christian-like fight,
seeing men do thereby forsake the love, therefore such a fight does nothing
further toward the life, nor toward the upright understanding of the divine
wisdom.

55. Moreover, all those which stand minded to such a kind of outward fight,
brawling, wrangling, and railing, have never rightly perceived nor understood
Ephesians. 7.
the inward fight. For inasmuch as they know not the virtue of the love, nor
that whereout she proceeds, therefore do they account the battle of the
righteous spirit (which through the cross, in the spirit of wel-vvilling
hearts, carries forth the fight against death, sin, devil, and hell) for an
ignorance and foolishness, because they do no more esteem of such a chosen
Salvation, as is brought forth after the manner of men, and which the man has
his glorying in, then of the righteous spirit of love and life, which God
himself brings forth, for Esa. 60.
a true light, and salvation of men, after his godly nature and manner: the
Esa. 42.48.
glorying whereof belongs only unto God, and to himself he also keeps it.

56. Wherefore seeing God has considered, that all man's wisdom is vain, and
that men by their wisdom know not Gods work (in his wisdom) nor his Salvation
through his Christ, 1 Cor. 1.
it has therefore pleased God through foolish preaching (under the obedience
of the love of Christ) to save the world [that is to say, all those that
believe in him] that he might catch the wise, Esa. 29. 1 Cor^ 3^
in their wisdom, the crafty in their subtilty and craftiness, and the
letter-learned in their knowledge of the Scripture, thereby making known unto
them, Psalm. 94. 1 Cor. 3.
how vain and void of understanding they are in the purpose of God; and how
that (by all wisdom and prudency, and by all their learnednesse in the letter)
they have not known any thing of Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 2.
Gods vvisdome at all, wherethrough the Almighty God is magnified, and by which
it is known, that his foolishness is much wiser, then all the wisdom of the
world, or prudence of man's wit.

57. Now whosoever believes the same, but on the contrary party is yet so
selfvvise, that he gives no ear at all, nor is inclined to the love, or to our
communion through the loves service (wherein Gods purpose is known or
understood) the same man surely shall not understand the mind of God, nor yet
his secret, Kom. 8. 1 Cor. 2.
for it is unpossible to understand the vvisdome of God, without obeying of
the love.

CHAP. XII.
1. It is meet, that every one submit himself to the appeared grace. 2. The new
day. 3. Patience toward the unbelievers. 4. Wherein the upright understanding
is to be found. 5. The worldly wise find it not, but will rest upon their own
wisdom. 13. An exhortation to cleave to the truth, without bondage to outward
things 15. What the perfect righteousness is. 19. And how we ought to cleave
thereunto, and to esteem of the outward things, so far as they are profitable,
and no further. 21. And that not for their own sakes, but for the Ordinances
sake. 22. How to behave our selves toward all men, wives, children servants.
26. He exhorts to give our minds to a lovely behavior toward all. 32. Not
to regard any thing that may cause dissension, but to set our chief respect
upon the inward, and not upon the outward. 43. The upright life is the same
that the Fathers lived in. 45. Whereunto also the Gentiles were called by the
Gospel. 46. He requires all people to take heed to their calling. 50. And to
turn away from the self-minded thoughts that do tempt and entice us. 51. Our
union with God in the spirit, is the stone that is disallowed of men, 55. The
Glass of Righteousness serves to try our selves by. 56. The man is diversely
perverted. How H. N. passed forth under the love in his humane nature, and how
God received him unto grace. 61. His little regard to the outward. 63. Yet not
despising it, because it is profitable to train up the man in his youngnesse.
65. Men ought to esteem the greatest, more then the least, and to put
difference in the Age of the Disciples. 66. That teacher, which is not entered,
nor has not accomplished the Righteousness in the love, is both himself, and
also his hearers far from the truth. 67. The Priesthood out of Levi is good in
his right use; but the Priesthood of Messiah is yet more excellent. 71. Why he
points not to the outward.

FOrasmuch then as (through the 1 Cor. 8.
revealing of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the resurrection of the
dead) there is out of grace, such an holy office or service of the love, to a
renewing of the world, now in the last time come unto us, and (according to
the secret counsel and will of God) committed unto us, in upright
righteousness and holiness to be ministered, therefore it were very meet,
that every one which is avvakened thereby, should submit himself thereunto,
and give ear unto us in the same service, to the obeying of the love in the
spirit, that every man's eyes might be made bright, and become clearer and
clearer, to Act. 7.
behold with a clear sight of their eyes, Gods Kingdom of heaven, the which
now manifests it self unto us, and comes unto us under the obedience of the
love; and likewise with the same do appear and come unto us, livingly and
gloriously all Gods 1 Cor. 15.
Saints, which in times past died, and fell asleep in God.

2. Behold this manifestation or appearing of Gods Kingdom of heaven, Mat.
24.25.
and of the coming of Christ, together with all his Saints, Esa. 65. 2 Pet. 3.
is the new day of life, and the Dan. 12. 4 Esd. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
Resurrection of the dead, according to the Scriptures; which manifestation of
the Kingdom of God, and of the glorious coming of Christ, with his Saints, and
of the new day, we now under the obedience of the love, publish abroad in
all the world (for a Gospel Mat. 24.
of the Kingdom) according to the promises.

3. But if any man hears not, nor believes the same, neither is vvakened out
of the Esa. 29.
sleep of his ignorance, or will not hear this voice of the love, him do we
let alone therein, still bearing a favorable good will toward him, and do
cleave fast to the love, bear patience, with his ignorance and blindness, and
do consider, that all of us have heretofore been unvvise, 2 Pet. 2.
and have been blinded from this glorious light of life, yea we do yet
doubtless often find in our selves the lack of understanding, until the light
of life do manifest it self perfectly in us.

4. Howbeit, the right understanding consists not in many words 1 Cor. 2.
or sayings, nor in high or deep knowledge, as is aforesaid: but it is found in
long-suffering, and in such a heart as fears the true God, under the
obedience of the love, where men use temperance, 2 Pet. 1
discretion and kind-heartednesse, and where men love righteousness and
information of equity.

5. But where is it now, where may one seek and find it? who does earnestly
desire lust, or long for it? who applies his heart wholly thereunto?

6. Truly not the children of this world, which are the lovers of error, nor
yet the self-wise of the vain-conceited hearts, neither the lovers of their own
companies of Religion: For all these think not upon the service of the love,
neither will admit any thing, but what they have chosen: they blaspheme also
every thing, besides their own opinion, and have no regard to the Statutes and
Exodus 20. Deu. 4.5.6.
Ordinances of the most highest, nor to the Mat. 5.6.7.11.16.19.22.
doctrine of Jesus Christ, neither to the requiring of his Catholic Church.

7. And therefore will the man to maintain his own cause, be always above the
understanding of the love, and so be the loves Master: For there are few found
that do with whole heart submit themselves under the Love, to the intent they
might obtain (through concord and Joh. 17. Ephesians. 4. Phil. 1.
equality in the Love) one like mind to the good, to the one manner of
subduing or mortifying of the evil hearts, minds, and thoughts.

8. For that, or him that directs thereunto, they can by no means abide, nor
yet be minded to the lovely life of upright Righteousness, which I H. N. out
of entire love do bear witness of, because with many the same is not
(according to his upright being) hearkened unto, nor rightly understood; for
every one (with his conceited imagination, and unclean heart) will fain be
himself he, whom men ought to esteem for wise: in such sort, that many of them
do arrogantly aseribe understanding to themselves, as if they knew already all
that they should know, and were wholly such as in Jesus Christ they ought to be.

9. Moreover many of them are so rich Apo. 3.
and wise, as though they needed no more; and many persuade themselves that
they are such as do live free, and that they are every whit the same that they
should be, that also the Service of the love concerns them not, and that they
are past it all.

10. Lo, such things think the fools and unwise (those unfruitful Jude 1.
trees) that love their self-wisdom, and their own ease in the flesh, and are
quite dead therein; yea, though he be an Infidel or Heathen, yet scarcely
thinks he that he has any wrong understanding for all that; what might then
one that is wise think, or he that persuades himself that he is holy?

11. Now because many of them do esteem their own matter for such a fairness
1 Cor. 1.
or wisdom, therefore besides their own wisdom, they will in no wise hear any
Acts 7.
other understanding, nor esteem it for wisdom; for every thing is evil or
unclean in their eyes, which is without their wisdom; yet must they needs
acknowledge, that the inside of their vessel, Mat. 23.
is not cleansed from the filthiness, neither do they believe to be cleansed
through Jesus Christ, or to be justified from the sin under the Obedience of
the Love.

12. What helps it then, or whereto is it profitable, that one should show
any precious ornament or jewel of godly fairness unto such, if in their
hearts, it were against them, or that they loved not the same? Even so is it
also with the testimony of the Word in the Love, when there is no love joined
thereunto, for to love that which is heard or witnessed.

13. Therefore let us in all things [and before all] grow like minded to
concord Romans 12 1 Pet. 3.
in the Love, 1 Pet. 5.
humble our hearts to the living God, and so love the virtue and the
godliness, and cleave to no ungodly being, or unorderlinesse of this world;
but let us (with impartial minds) hearken to the truth (for an instruction to
the wisdom) with long suffering, and cleave to the virtue of the good life,
with him that bears witness only thereunto, and takes part with no flesh.

14. Wherefore let no man bind his heart unto any outward thing which he is
served with to the righteousness of life, much less to the worldly things, or
to any thing which the desires of the flesh are inclined unto, that he be not
disappointed of the entrance to the life, which thing would be a great grief
unto me.

15. For this cause (that no man should err, but perceive whereunto our
calling tends) hear and understand what the chief sum of the perfect
Righteousness is.

16. It is an humble heart, Psa. 51.
that departs from all earthly and corruptible things, and with a lowly and
meek spirit is incorporated with God in pure Love, according to the Spirit,
living in the form of Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 1
in an unspotted conscience, and to have an inclined mind or desire to do the
Lords will, and to fulfill all righteousness.

17. Toward this let us pass on (with a good hope) in a sure faith and
confidence, let every one turn him Esa. 55. Jer. 18.25 35 Ezekiel. 118. Jon. 3.
from the ways of his error, and withdraw his heart from the bands of
selfnesse, to the intent (in an upright being) to serve 1 These. 1 Heb. 9.
the living God only, and turn away his senses and thoughts from that which
hangs on, to a bondage of the heart, [that is to say, from all that is
created outward or vain, how holy, how good, how fair, or how amiable a grace
soever (according to the outward appearance) it may show forth unto the man:]
to the end, that no man be taken, or remain captive in any bewitching (to a
thraledome of his mind) with that wherewith the Heathen, and the unwise, or
uncircumcised of heart, are still bewitched, tied and bound, not only with the
outward show of holiness, or wisdom, but also with the delight of the outward
created things Romans 2
in this world, wherein with their hearts they become vain.

18. Therefore let us reckon all these things for such as they are, and repute
some of them (in that whereunto they are commodious) for good in their degree
and quality, to the end our heart may stand free in the everlasting uncreated
Godhead, according to the Spirit; that is, in the God of Israel, the Creator of
all good things: and moreover, let us suffer our hearts to be prepared
thereunto in the obeying of the requiring of the Service of Love.

19. That is truly the everlasting life, which in times past was preached unto
the world, and is now in the last time (by Gods grace) come unto us, under the
obedience of the Love, that our fellowship 1 John 1
should be with God the Father, and with his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, and
that our joy in the Love might be perfect.

20. On this only and true God settle your hearts, to a union with him, and
with his Christ, and love him Deuteronomy. 6.
from your whole souls, minds, and thoughts, and so then love all created
things in their degree, or as they are profitable.

21. Yet not for their own sakes, but for the Ordinances sake that God has
created them unto, and whereunto he has appointed them, as good; then shall
God be loved, honored, and served by you above your selves, and above all
visible things, and Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 4.
you shall also neither have nor serve any Idols which are besides him.

22. In such a degree love ye also all men Lev. 19. Mat. 22. Mar. 12. Romans 13.
as your selves, or as your fellow-brethren, so shall there be no dissension
nor division found among you: and then (in the same sort) Ephesians. 5.
love your wives, which are minded with you in one heart and spirit to God
ward, as fellow members of your bodies, or else should ye be no married folks.

23. To the same good being of concord in the Love, Eccl. 7.30
love ye likewise your children that they may be brought up in righteousness
after the Law of the Lord, to serve the living God.

24. If any man has servants, whether menservants, or miad-servants, Eccl.
7.33. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
let him not overcharge them with slavery, but use moderation: give them also
now and then time to rest and to recreate their hearts in the things that God
requires.

25. But beware of the stout servants, Eccl. 33.
such as in their leisure time seek nothing but unseemlinesse, pride, disorder
and lightness; for, for such, whether they be sons or daughters,
menservants or maid servants (if so be they exercise nor desire no
righteousness) labor serves much better then leisure; yet with discretion,
according to time and measure, always be holding the good before them upon
hope of amendment.

26. Hereunto let us be minded, and give over our hearts and minds, to live
therein, and always exercise love Romans 12 1 These. 3. 1 Pet. 1.3.
one toward another, and so Heb. 10. James 5.
with patience, and long-suffering, wait Luke 2.
for the consolation of Israel, and for the health of the house of Jacob, whom
God (in his time) shall call together from all the ends Mat. 24.
or coasts of the earth, where now they are dispersed.

27. Wherefore increase ye in the good, Ephesians. 4. Col. 1. 1 Pet. 1.
and grow up in the Lord, and for the communion of the Loves sake, and that we
with consent of heart, may be joined to the same, let us incline our hearts to
each other, to the end we may all become one, such as love righteousness, and
forsake dissension, and which despise nor reject none, neither Jew, Mahomet,
Heathen, nor any Sect or Faction, but rather draw all that will follow to our
communion under the obedience of the Love, that the Service of the Love may
become prosperous, and (in all upright righteousness) obtain the pre-eminence.

28. Whosoever then joyneth himself to our communion of the Love, yields
himself to the love, and to the requiring of her Service obediently, loves
the righteousness, Psalm. 15.24. Esa. 33. John 9. Acts 10.
and has no guile in his heart, the same is acceptable to God, and all such
shall be unied in the Love, and love one manner of righteousness, according to
the mentioning of the Glass of Righteousness.

29. Hereunto let every one be humbly minded, and so incline his fatherly heart
Mal. 4. Luke 1
to the children, to unity in the Love.

30. Let the children Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
bow themselves (in holiness) to the humility, and so (for the unities sake in
the Love) turn their hearts to the Fathers.

31. The like also let every one do toward his brother, and one man toward
another, and that all under the obedience of the Love.

32. Do away from you Esa. 59.
the middle walls, and have love all that love righteousness, proceed on after
it, with one accord, have no regard to the foolishness of the Heathen, nor to
any such dealings or witnessings, as cause Sects, dissension or renting, nor
yet to their teachings and unprofitable devices, nor to the witching of their
God-services, nor to the subtle knowledge of their wisdom: For their ways
Jer. 5.
are snares, and their wisdom Esa. 19.42.58.
nets; who so has no regard to the Law of the Lord, nor to Abraham's God, he
shall be bewitched, tied, or taken, and be led away from the requiring of the
service of love by them.

33. But all ye which turn you to the living God, which made heaven and earth,
fear not the Gods of the Heathen, neither regard the nets of the wisdom of the
uncircumcised, seeing they reject the Lords Word and his Ordinances.

34. For the nets of the Heathen are like Spiders webs, which do soon rent and
fall asunder; but the Law or Ordinance of the Lord is steadfast, and abides
everlastingly.

35. Therefore let the Law of the Lord, and his Ordinances, be always for a
teaching unto you, and fear the God of Israel, and let his love be still your
rejoicing.

36. Mark the ground of the Love, ye deerly beloved, and let your ears of the
Spirit, that you may hear, your eyes of the heart, that you may see, and your
understanding, that you may understand, be opened or unlocked, not only to the
outward, earthly and corruptible, but chiefly to that which is inward,
spiritual and eternal.

37. For behold, I do verily witness this same distinctly enough unto you, to
the intent we might all have regard to the upright life inwardly in our hearts,
Romans 8.
become spiritually minded, and through the grace of the bountiful Godhead,
serve in the upright life, the living God only.

38. Let every one Gal. 6.
take heed to his time; for if we be already separated with our heart from
whoring with stocks and stones, (as from such Idolatries) doubtless it is then
so much the more expedient (inasmuch as such grace is extended on us) that we
observe our hearts and cogitations, and cleanse them from all outward
unprofitable things, to be made free and unbound therefrom, to the intent our
hearts abide not bound unto any manner elementish, created or worldly matter,
nor yet unto any kind of appearance of Col. 2.
spiritual or holy things, whereby (in case our hearts stood bound therein) we
may be lead awhoring, and our hearts be bewitched therewith.

39. Therefore let us not regard, nor give respect unto, or esteem any outward
things higher then for elementish, or so much as they are in their degree, or
as they are profitable in their Service: neither let us go a whoring with them,
to the intent our eyes of the Spirit may still have respect to the only God and
his upright life, for to cleave with true understanding, unto the same.

40. For whatsoever is outward, whether it be man or beast, and whatsoever is
to be seen, heard or felt, how fair, good, holy, or wise soever it seems to
be, must certainly every whit (so far forth as it stands in his right degree)
1 Cor. 15 Ephesians. 1. Heb. 2.
be subdued under the only God and his love.

41. This same verily should the man once consider and understand, to the
intent he might once be delivered and rid of his foolish witchery, and of
dissension, and of whoring with this or that.

42. Therefore let no man be tied or bound to the lusts of whoredom with any
outward thing, but give all his respect to that God, 1 Cor. 15
which is all in all, and inwardly in his mind let him take heed to the upright
life, which is godly, holy, and good, that he may bear the Image or like being
of his God; 1 Cor. 15
for as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we also in like
manner, bear the image of the heavenly, to the land and praise of the glory of
God.

43. Lo, thereunto is my testimony, namely, that the upright life is the life
of the upright Fathers, which served and worshipped the invisible, great, Deuteronomy.
4.5.6. etc.
and almighty God only, (who still was God in Israel, and in Israel also
wrought wonderfully) who is Exodus 3. Mat. 22.
che God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

44. Now in that these Tribes of Israel knew the God of heaven as a true God,
and lived and cleave unto him, therefore did they stand free and untied from
all the God-services of the Heathenish Sorceries, and were unbound from all
whorings with outward things.

45. To obtain this grace in God, that is the Gospel, which is through Christ
published to the Heathen, to the intent they should be released from their
foolish bewitched God-services, and from all their lusts of whoredom, whereby
they may with Israel, be incorporated into the stock of Abraham, and may
altogether as one manner of people, serve the only living God in one manner,
Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, even as the second Book of the Glass of
Righteousness makes mention.

46. Therefore, O all ye people, Nations, and Tribes, if ye will not consider
whereto ye are called of the God of heaven, through the seed of Abraham,
according to the promises, neither do regard your heavenly calling aright in
her degree, nor give your selves over thereunto, nor fear Abraham's God, nor
love his Laws and Ordinances, but do build upon another foundation, Ephesians. 2
then surely shall ye be banished from God, and from the Citizenship of Israel,
and be constrained to serve vain things, Deuteronomy. ^^
and to keep such Ordinances as you do not know.

47. That same shall entangle your hearts, bewitch your understanding, and make
you bond-servants, which indeed we are, so long as we willingly remain Romans 6
subject to the sin, and to the Sorcery of the heathen.

48. Therefore take heed to your time, and seek God, Esa. 55.
while he is near, and may be found, and while ye have yet space to turn you
unto him.

49. Let the ungodly Ezekiel. 18
forsake his ungodly being, and so come to the life through the death of the
Cross of Jesus Christ, then shall he live and die no more.

50. Let us apply our minds to the same, and turn our hearts away from all
sensuality of the flesh, not only from that which outwardly we look upon; but
chiefly from the self-minded thoughts which do arise Sap. 2. Mat. 15.
out of our selves, and do tempt or entice us thereunto, for to hold our
hearts in bondage to the vain corruptiblenesse, which (through the works of
unbelief) leads away from the living God, whereby we may be deprived of the
fellowship with God in the Spirit; for the unity and Ephesians. 2.
peace with God the Father in the Spirit (for to live one with another in all
Love) is the glorious liberty of the children of God, whereunto we are called
by Jesus Christ.

51. Lo, this is the stone Psa. 118 1 Pet. 2.
which was not allowed of the workmen, yet is there Acts 4.
salvation in none other; which stone is clean against all sense of the flesh,
and against all them that are minded only upon the outward: therefore of those
builders, [which will themselves act, or set up the salvation] he is rejected,
Esa. 8.28 Mat. 21.
and is unto them a stone of stumbling and offense: Psalm. 118 Mat. 21.
and this is a wonderful work in our eyes.

52. Behold herein we have likewise all sinned, and trespassed.

53. Therefore it stands us now upon, to regard well from the heart the mind of
the truth, and with humble hearts to pray unto the Lord, that he will not
punish us for our misdeeds of ignorance, Psa. 25 79. Dan. 9.
but will think upon us according to his mercy, and guide our hearts after his
will, that we might walk in his Ordinances, and be named after his Name, as
our God and Savior, who through the Service of his love makes our errors
known unto us, and releaseth or makes us free from all perverse or covered
nature of sin, from all arrogance and haughtiness of the revolters, and from
all falsehood, dissension and deceit, which at this time do every where bear
sway, and among many, have even hitherto had the pre-eminence.

54. O God, Dan. 9
let us in this dangerous time find grace in thine eyes, and incline thou our
hearts toward thee, and toward thy righteousness: bring our spirit out of
this desolation, and cleanse our hearts, minds, and thoughts from all
dissension, Psa. 51
and create in us an upright mind, that no evil come upon us.

55. Of which upright mind, and upright course of life of all upright hearts, I
have set forth a clear instruction in the tree of life, the fourth book of the
Glass of Righteousness, which Glass of Righteousness, with other more like
testimonies, I have heretofore set forth, to the intent that every one might
look into himself and know, whether he were of the upright communalty of the
righteous, and lived and walked in the upright ways of the just, and so
served the living God only, or not: For I wist not how to call any by name, for
to show outwardly, what sort I might judge for the rightfullest.

56. For I found the man Jer. 9
so altogether deceivable, so bewitched of understanding, so given to cover or
dissemble his lies, so lordly (...) because of his understanding, so double of
heart, so earnestly bent to destroying and oppressing, against those that were
not like minded with his hearts conceiving, so Ier. 18.25.29.35.
declining from him, that according to the truth, pointed him to the way of
life, so self-seeking and partial for himself, so resolute in his opinion, so
reproachful and malicious with accusation at him, that desired to bring him
into the right way of the holy Fathers, so vvel-conceited and affected toward
his own phansies and errors, so hipocriticall in the virtue, so divided from
the righteousness, so separated from conscience, so little seeking that which
is the Lords only, so unstable in fidelity, so slothful and slow to turn him
to God, Pro. 6.24.
so without regard to the upright ways, so little reckning of the straying
from his God, so affectioned to the earthly visible things, and so
self-captived of heart, that I was altogether suspicious, jealous, and
doubtful of the man.

57. And not only of another, but also even of mine own humane nature, insomuch
that I held it straight unto all virtues and righteous dealings, for to do the
Lords will, in all my proceedings, for in that sort did I pass forth under the
obedience of the love with my humane nature, to the intent to obtain the
virtuous 1 Cor. 13.
disposition of the love, and to be incorporated to the same, with soul and
body, and with all the senses and thoughts of my humane nature, and
endeavoring me in this same, with all diligence the Lord received me into the
grace of his love, and into him and his love incorporated my mind, together
with my senses and thoughts, and so gave me inheritance with Christ and his
Saints, in his heavenly riches, Romans 16. Ephesians. 1.2.3. Col. 1.
and revealed his last will unto me.

58. But not according to any conceiving of the flesh, or after the
outwardnesse, namely, in any outward appearance, that likes the man, and the
sight of his fleshly eyes, or whereunto the man does sometimes set his heart
and understanding, as though he could satisfy God thereby, or as if a man with
his outward humanity, and with a show after the outward appearance, might be
incorporated into the God of heaven, and into his heavenly goods, or could live
in the Godhead according to the flesh.

59. O no, ye dearly beloved, Gods working in renewing of the man through Jesus
Christ, is not after the pleasing of men, nor according to any affection of the
flesh; nor yet such as any man by his fleshly conceiving or learned
understanding, should be able after the outward, to judge of the same working
of God in the spirit, or of him which is renewed in God.

60. For Gods working, and the renewing of the man, Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
is brought to pass inwardly in the spirit, and in the inward senses and
thoughts, through the power of his holy spirit of love, wherethrough men are
abundantly filled with love toward the living God, and with love toward all
men.

61. My respect also (in my zeal to the virtuous nature of the love) was least
upon the outward show after the flesh, but it was most upon an upright heart
and mind, such as consists in a good willing obedience, and tieth or binds
it self to no elementish things, whether they be earthly riches, or worldly
possessions, because I would in spirit and mind, serve and please the living
God only, and likewise thereby love every man as my self.

62. And for this upright beings sake (because in all love, the same should
have and keep an 1 Cor. 4. Gal. 4.
essential form in me) I did (as is aforesaid) examine the senses and
cogitations of my human nature, whether by them, any other thing were loved or
desired besides, or whether they tied themselves unto any thing else. To the
intent I might for the loves sake of God and Christ, Mat. 16. Luke 9.14.
renounce, hate, and forsake it every whit, and crucify, Romans 6. Gal. 5. Cole
3.
and kill my humane senses and thoughts with their lusts and desires, so far
forth as they were not incorporated or subject to the good being of God, or to
his virtuous nature of the love, whereby I might live through the power of God,
and by the gifts of his grace, and through the co-incorporating of the upright
being of Jesu Christ, Luke 1. Ephesians. 4.
in all upright righteousness and holiness: that is, in the upright life and
mind of the living Godhead.

63. Now although I have here showed, that my respect was less upon the
outward obedience, then upon the inward godly obedience, and that I thus
labored for such an upright heart and mind, as was required by the outward
obedience, because I would Deuteronomy. 6.10.
serve the living God in his upright righteousness, yet did I not therefore
despise the outward obedience, nor the good Ordinances in their right use,
neither is it my mind or will, that men should not observe nor obey the right
use of the Churches services, or the Priests or Elders Ordinances, which are
exercised for a good outward discipline and decency, and to a bringing in of
the said upright righteousness! O yes, my meaning and desire is, that men
should observe Romans 14.
and obey them (as is said) in their right use, and likewise that the Elders
and Ministers of the word in the family of love, should by them require the
true righteousness of the upright inward being and mind which God esteems.

64. For so in that behalf, men are greatly to esteem the outward Ordinances,
and the obedience to the same, yet with difference in the understanding, as
according to their worth, and in respect of them for whom they are necessary,
namely, in such consideration, as the Ordinances and Ceremonies of the Law of
the Lord Romans 10. Gal. 3.4. Heb. 7.
and of the belief of Jesu Christ, have their ministration for, that is, by
them to train the man up, and so to support him in the youngnesse of his
understanding, until he be released from all self-mindednesse, ignorance, and
own wisdom or vain imagination, and the sight of the upright life, 2 Pet. 1.
come unto him in the spirit, and so of himself he love all that (with whole
heart and mind) which is right and just, and have a desire both before God Romans
14.
and amongst men, to live and to walk in all upright righteousness, and and to
fulfill the requiring of the gracious word of the Lord, and his service of
love: Lo, to show such obedience, is the best obedience, inasmuch as the
obeyers thereof, do inwardly before God, and outwardly amongst men, live by the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke 1.
in the upright righteousness and holiness, and so not of compulsion but of
faith, are obedient unto all inward righteousness, and outward Ordinances of
the holy word and service of love, Mat. 22.23. 1 Timothy 1.
and that is the principal obedience, whereto men are to give the greatest
respect; for it is the principallest, which the outward services or ceremonies
have their ministration unto: It is true.

65. Wherefore men ought even before all things, to give the worthiest praise
and greatest honor to the greatest or best, and not to respect or esteem the
smallest, for the principallest: Likewise to observe a difference, between the
prudent, good-willing, and stable ones, and those that are without
understanding, evil willers, and revolters, that they minister not the
services and Ordinances confusedly or mixtly out of the knowledge, nor
disorderly require the obeying of the same, as if any man should urge them
without difference, and should not distinguish between the state of the age of
such Disciples as had obediently accomplished the requiring of the services,
and attained unto the appointed Gal. 4.
time of the father and of the age of Christ, or were obediently grown up unto
the same, and the state of those Disciples that had not yet accomplished the
requiring of the services, nor attained unto the appointed time of the age of
Christ, but should give like honor unto, and esteem of equal value, eithers
age and obedience.

66. When a man then ministers an office of teaching, and yet is not entered
into the Disciples beginning of the Christian life, among the Elders in the
family of the Love, neither has obediently accomplished the righteousness,
which is wont to be required of the Disciples from their first entrance into
the Christian life, until the age of the elder Christ, and even for that cause
cannot distinguish the same passage in his right Ordination; surely the same
man, and likewise the Congregation that hears him, does stray very far from
the truth, and also from the right use of the Doctrine and Ordinances of the
ancient Fathers, tending to the Christian life, and from the upright being of
the love of Jesu Christ, and of his holy spirit, and do become both together
one with another, [namely, the teacher and the Congregation which he teacheth]
alike ignorant and unexpert in that which is of value before God, and likewise
in that which is most needfullest to be used amongst men, to their preserving
in the godliness.

67. For mark, the Exo. 28.29. Levit. 1.2.3.4.5.6. etc.
Priesthood out of Levi, which is ministered after the manner of Aaron is
upright and good in his right use, and is also in his service, (with the Law
and Ordinances of the Lord, and with the letter, and through the Letter) in the
Family of the Lord, very profitable and necessary, while the Gal. 4.
heir is yet a child, and has not attained or reached unto the appointed time
of his Father or Elder.

68. But the Priesthood out of Messiah called Jesus, who is unto his Believers
Psalm. 110. Heb. 3.9.10.
an High Priest at the right hand of the Almighty in the heavenly being, and a
Ioh. 1.14.
true light, in the light of the ministration of his truth, is much more
worthily to be esteemed, then the Priesthood out of Levi, for the same
High Priest does in his office, bring unto the Romans 3. Gal. 2.3.
believers in his name, [namely those that are obediently grown up under their
tutors and Governors until the appointed time of their age] the upright
righteousness, and the upright being of his love, and accomplisheth with them
(in their spirit and mind) all that which (with the Letter, and with the Law
or Ordinance, in the foregoing Priesthood) is taught and required in the
ministration of the Elders, whereby the Lord Jesus Christ (called Messiah) is
unto his believers and good willing obeyers in their spirit and mind, an
everlasting Joh. 14.
life, and a Heb. 8.9.
minister of the spiritual and heavenly goods, whose service also with them is
done in the 2 Cor. 3.
spirit, and by the spirit, and so is he unto them, an heavenly Heb. 5.6.7.
Ephesians. 1.2.
High Priest for evermore, not of the earth, nor of flesh and blood, but a son
of the most high God, in the heavenly powers of the invisible being, and is now
in the last time appeared and come unto us the chosen of God (in his glory and
triumph) from the right hand of God his Father: and so has with us (with the
spiritual and heavenly goods) his ministration Heb. 7.8.9.10.
in the most holy of his Tabernacle, under the obedience of the love, afthe
manner of Melchisedech, to the erecting of the perfection.

69. Thus (as is said) Jesus Christ has his ministration even from the
beinning, until the perfection through his Saints and Elect, and so is in his
teaching to his Heb. 9.
people a Salvation from their sins, and a blessing and reviving 1 Cor. 15.
Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.2.
from the death, and has then in that manner with them [namely, with the
living, his Believers] his ministration with the spiritual and heavenly goods:
And so in the same ministration he is manifested by his believers, that he is
he right Messiah and King of the Jews, and the true Psalm. 110. Heb. 7.
high Priest for ever, after the manner of Melchizedeck, who in his Priesthood,
is greater and more excellent then the man, because he abides for ever.

70. Behold this same high Priest, in the ministration of the spiritual and
heavenly goods, and this noble King of Israel and Juda, which rules in
righteousness, and of God is chosen to such an excellent glory, before the
foundation of the world was laid, is by inheritance sealed, to possess the 2
Reg. 7. Esa. 9.32. Ier. 23.33. Dan. 7. Mic. 4. Luke 1.
feat of David his Father, to the intent there may be no end of the peace upon
the same, from this time forth for evermore, and that so he may rule and reign
(as an everlasting peaceable King) over the house of Jacob, according to the
promises.

71. For in this sort, and to the finishing thereof, is he revealed unto men,
and published Ioh. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 1 John 2.
to the world for a Savior, because all people should believe in him, by him
inherit the everlasting life, and so confess him, and that sameis the true
righteousness which is availeable before God, and well pleasing unto those men
which are of a good will.

72. Now inasmuch as the rich bountiful God has (out of his grace) granted me
to perceive, that we are all called and loved to the same glory of God, and to
the upright being of the love of his Christ, because we should inherit with all
what is of God and Christ, the everlasting life, and for that the same is the
Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
principal point of our godliness, therefore have I pointed none unto flesh
and blood, nor to any elementish or visible things; neither does my teaching
tend to the outward, but from the outward, to pass on to the same inward and
heavenly, and to Gods Kingdom of heaven, whereof is spoken before, to the
intent that no man should set the consolation of his soul, nor the comfort of
his Salvation upon the outvvard nor earthly, nor put his confidence thereon,
but only on the upright life of the righteous spirit, and upon the coming of
the godly glory in Jesu Christ, of which things I have (according to my sight
out of the heavenly revelation of God) much and abundantly spoken in the Glass
of Righteousness, and in this Introduction, mine exhortation is out of love,
also to the same, to the intent we should have an earnest love, and be provoked
with desire toward it.

73. Which life of Righteousness, whereof we witness, is inwardly, godly,
according to the divine nature, and outwardly brotherly, after the upright
humane nature; and that same is the upright righteousness, before God and
amongst men.

74. Who so now from the heart seeks God and his righteousness, and rightly
has regard to the upright life, the same person will acknowledge that my
teaching and ministration is of God, and that it tends to the upright life:
and who so likewise to this end searches the Scripture for the promises,
shall assuredly find, that it makes mention of such things, and that the Law,
the Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ, d^ all point and witness to the
very same.

75. When the man now according to the truth perceives this same, then will he
(for the love of righteousness sake) be also inclined there unto, and yield
his understanding 2 Gor. 10.
captive under the obedience of the love, praise God highly for his grace, and
through the belief pass on toward the upright life in all love.

76. Though he now and then fail, stumble, or fall, yet if his eyes of the
spirit have respect to the upright life, and to the love, and that he glass
himself daily in the Glass of Rightousnesse, doubtless the same shall cause
him to see, and shall rightly show him his spots, and shall be unto him, Ioh.
4.7.
as an open fountain of life, against the sin and way of death.

CHAP. XIII.
1. None can know God nor Christ rightly, but in the Spirit of the love. 11. No
better grounds then the Doctrine of the love. 14. An exhortation to the obeyers
of her service, that they blaspheme not other men's writings, nor condemn any
for Sects, but rather allure all to the love. 19. and that they put away the
evil as much as they can, out of themselves. 20. The despisers are vain. 23.
The consenters hereunto are counseled, not to think they have already
obtained, but to labor, and to continue in the doctrine of the love, till the
laying away of the mortal body. 32. Not to be dismayed at the enemies, but like
soldiers to prepare themselves to the battle. 33. Though we be sometimes
hurt, yet to take new courage still. 36. Considering whereunto we are called
through Jesus Christ.

TAke it to heart, O ye children of men, and let your understanding be renewed,
Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
according to the spirit, to such an upright knowledge as God esteems, to
wit, with the word of truth, in the spirit of the love, to an assured living
hope and good conscience in Jesu Christ.

2. For who so after the spirit, conceives not the same, nor is renewed in
his understanding (to the same upright knowledge) under the obedience of the
love, in such a one there is no knowledge of Christ, neither can he be rightly
turned to Christ, or to the upright belief, but only through the same.

3. For the fall from Christ is come, and it is according to the Prophecy
understood, known, and well perceived, how that the same, 2 These. 1.
through the child of perdition (according to the mention of the Scriptures)
has in every respect so utterly Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
blinded, depraved, and corrupted the understanding of men, concerning God and
Christ, that the children of men (how wise or learned soever they of themselves
be) do neither Ioh. 8.16.
of the Father, nor yet of the Son, know any thing at all.

4. And surely, whosoever does not submit his understanding, under the service
of the love, the same man shows thereby, that he is without understanding,
because by his understanding he perceives not, how that he which has not the
love, 1 Ioh. 1
has not also the Son, nor the Father, but is without Christ and his Church,
and can please God by no other means, also can neither now nor evermore without
the inclination of love, neither through any other services or literal
wisdom, come to the holy knowledge of God, or attain unto the same.

5. But if any now believe not this same by reason of the high regard to their
knowledge, or by means of any respect unto their holiness Col. 2.
or spiritual humility; such as they have chosen or taken to themselves, and
as is not according to the promises, as God in times past has spoken by Moses
his servant, and by the mouth of his holy Prophets, doubtless they (howsoever
they suppose or maintain Esa. 59.
that they have the light) must needs abide in 1 Ioh. 2.
darkness, for their unbelievers cause, whose unbelief cannot hurt the
believers, neither can the Work of God for all that abide back.

6. O deep and unsearchable vvisdome of God! Esa. 40. Sap. 9. Romans 11. 1 Cor. 2.
which of the great and high glorious wise, or of the self-chosen holy ones,
has ever attained unto thee?

7. Unto which of them, is thine arm known, that has heard or understood thy
holy word, or thy mind aright?

8. Therefore needs must they all in lowliness of heart be humbled under thee,
and become subject to thy true love (that they may rejoice them in the truth:)
otherwise they must remain blind in their imagination Ioh. 3.
and may not see the Kingdom of God, for ever.

9. For so long as they through the love, or her inclination Mat. 18.
be not in their corrupt understanding, turned about by the word of truth, and
are not well minded to the virtue of the love, certainly there can appear unto
them no light of the truth, to Salvation; for God has foreseen the perfection
Deuteronomy. 6.10. 1 Cor. 13. 1 Timothy 1.
in the love, according to the promises, and not in the knowledge.

10. Therefore let every one be lowly of spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.
and humble of heart in his knowledge, even as though he knew nothing, and so
have regard to the service of the love, what it requires; and let him hope and
long for it, to the intent he may be comprehended therein [that is to say in
the doctrine thereof] for therein is the godliness understood and known; and
so let him endeavor toward the best.

11. And I hope that I shall always toward the lovers of the truth do even
so, and not omit to set before them the most best; for thereunto tend all my
intents and desires, neither know I at all any better thing then the teaching
and ministering of the holy word, under the obedience of the love.

12. True it is, I have as far as I might examined many sorts of Foundations
and understandings, and have likewise considered and scanned whereon they stood
grounded, but there is yet no better thing come to my hand.

13. The Lord grant me his mercy, and strengthen my mind to do and accomplish
his will, to the Salvation of men in the love.

14. O ye lovers of the truth, that have humbled your souls under the love and
her service, Deuteronomy. 6.11.22. Pro. 4.
take (I pray you) the truth to heart, and reproach no man's writings, teaching,
nor exhortations, that have their ministration to the righteousness, and to
the concord, but draw it all under the love, that every one may give up and
bring all what he has taken on, or wherein he is learned, according to his
humane imagination, to the communion of the love: give ear only to the godly
Word of Life, under the obedience of the love, according to the manifestation
of the glorious and godly light, set forth in the Glass of Righteousness, and
so above all his humane knowledge, love the Concord, and the upright life.

15. Moreover condemn none particularly by name, and be not offended at any,
that your hearts Gal. 5. Acb. 12.
be not moved to anger, stumble not at any thing, and reproach nor reject none
for Sects, but love all them that endeavor toward righteousness, 2 Pet. 1.
with a like love, to that upright righteousness which God esteems, and thus
draw all wel-willing ones to the true righeousnesse, under the obedience of the
love.

16. And if any man seek the truth of you, and his heart be inclined to the
love, then join your selves with him in the love, and so speak 1 Pet. 3.
of the hope which is in you.

17. For who so loves the good, though yet for a while he be in error, may
for all that come to amendment in the love, unless he should give over his
heart in a wilful contentiousnesse, and despise the love and her service, for
his self-minds sake.

18. But unto every one that will follow, and is well minded to the love and
her service, Ephesians. 4.
unto such reach forth the hand to the unity of the upright life, and that all
in the love.

19. If the evil assail you, then put it from you, as much as is possible for
you, until the same evil get a going down in you, and go into silence: give
it no respite to follow after his desire, but become (according to the spirit)
Col. 1. 1 These. 3. 1 Pet. 5
strong and firm in the good life, Deuteronomy. 7. 1 Pet. 2.
to a peculiar possession of God, even as it is here in this Introduction, and
in the Glass of Righteousness, according to the life showed and declared.

20. If so be ye cast this same behind the back, to wit, that ye refuse it, or
have no belief nor lust thereunto, nor do hope thereon; and yet by your
self-wisdom persuade your selves to be wise, then are ye vain, and utterly
unmeet to the Kingdom of God, and how wise soever ye be, yet shall you be
found vain, and without understanding, and void of the true light of life.

21. Now if any man say, that he is already in the life, and needs no more,
or that it is needful no more for him to hearken after any other
understanding, and therefore contemns this form of the upright life, and his
service to the same life whereunto we bear witness, and neither has it, nor
indeavoureth toward it, in the service of the love, certainly he is yet in the
death 1 Ioh. 2.
and darkness, and knows nothing at all either of Christ, or of the life
which is of God, even as the darknesses also have never perceived nor known him.

22. If any man then despise this good mind or spirit of love, and with the
heart withstandeth, and blasphemeth it; and does not entertain the upright
virtue of the love, the same man has beguiled his own heart, and after the
requiring of the knowledge of the old serpent, seeks his own advantage, and
not to do the will of the Lord.

23. But if on the other side (O ye dearly beloved) any do accept this which we
bear witness of, for right and truth, let him not hardly over-hastily persuade
himself, that he by his knowledge has already gotten it; for there must at the
first belief be joined thereto, and then look whose belief through the increase
of God blossometh 4 Esd. 6.
and is fruitful, let the same man attempt the battle in hope against that
which makes up it self against the same; Let him have regard to the Word of
life, and so pass on toward it, Luke 21.
with patience or in long sufferance.

24. That truly is the right Cross of Christ, Mat. 16. Luke 14.
which we are daily with good will, in the obedience of the requiring of the
service of love, to take up Act. 14.
in the belief, until we be well exercised in the love, and in the holy
understanding (whereunto we bear witness) and not only in the knowledge.

25. Lo to this present, I find nor know no way else to the life, therefore,
whosoever loves the same, let him endeavor toward it, Joh. 8.
and so abide steadfast in the requiring of the gracious Word, and of the
doctrine of the holy spirit of love, until the Romans 6.8. Col. 2.
laying away of his mortal body; then shall he with Christ and all Gods Saints
inherit the Kingdom of God and the everlasting life, in the heavenly being.

26. Let every one take heed to his time, and Gal. 6.
let no man deceive himself, with any vain Opinion, that he do not err.

27. For if any man Mat. 10. Luke 14.
loves or esteems any thing, better then the godly life (which is the very
Savior himself) such a one is not worthy of the Salvation, nor yet of the life
eternal.

28. And who so takes not up his Cross, and follows after the godliness
with his heart, Luke 14.
the same may not be his Disciple, that is, he cannot be taught in the
godliness, nor born a child of God in the heavenly being.

29. Therefore it is all nothing; that any man speaks much of it, if so be
(with the heart) he Esa. 29. Mat. 7.15.
follow not after the same, yea it is before God much more an abomination,
Psalm. 50. Ezekiel. 33.
that any man speaks of Gods righteousness, with talking or reasoning, and
does not with the heart follow after it, then any pleasure or delight unto him,
and yet may one find an hundred men, which reason and talk of it, where there
is not one of them that lives rightly therein, or loves it from the whole
heart.

30. Notwithstanding, though men do now and then (through some imagination)
think they have it, and have nevertheless failed therein, yet are they not
therefore to step back, tarry behind, or to lose the courage, but rather out of
the inclination of love, to take good courage again, and to Phil. 3. Heb. 6.10.
pass on toward the same godliness, until that it be in us, and that we
(according to the truth, be comprehended in the same, for by stumbling,
falling, and creeping, and by being sometimes lead, does a child (at length)
learn rightly to go.

31. By going wrong, and by hurting ones self, by means of passing in unpathed
ways, with breaking through thistles, thorns, and hedges, also sometimes by
doubting, and then by inquiring (and that all in hope) men come at last, or in
process of time to the right way, which we ought to walk to the life of truth
in the love, therefore let no man be without courage.

32. Though we find our selves sometimes without understanding, how to enter
into the life, or the Ephesians. 6. 1 Pet. 5.
enemies encounter with us and so hardly beset us, that we know not how to get
thither, yet let us for all that, though it seem not credible, take a good
courage or mind Heb. 11.
in the belief, and not forsake the hope, for the hope Romans 5.
leaves none ashamed, and so give our attention, Pro 4.
to understanding and information, whereby we may attain thereunto, and to the
very same arm our selves, even as an unexpert soldier, that has a desire to
become a good man of war, armeth himself to the warfare.

33. Though at first he sustaineth some damage, as to be sometimes wounded,
smitten, shot, hurt to death, and by his enemies to be taken captive, yet
takes he still a fresh courage, and abides firm in hope, until he be well
exercised in the feat of war, who then is known for a man of war, that is one
that understands and knows well, where any thing is to be won or lost, and
wherein damage or advantage lies.

34. If therefore earthly warriors be so bold in hope, for the corruptible
things sake; how much more then ought we so to be toward the everlasting
uncorruptiblenesse, in case we have any desire or hope to the everlasting
uncorruptiblenesse at all, Ose. 23. 1 Cor. 15.
wherein death is swallowed up, and the everlasting immortality abides, where
all destruction passes away, and in it self as a smoke vanishes in such sort,
that there is even nothing remaining in it but the pure and clear, the fullness
and fairness of all virtues, according to the promises.

35. But a slothful and unbelieving man that always fears, and is Pro. 6.24.
negligent and disobedient hereunto, or a doubtful and vvavering person, that
still doubts of error, wounds, damage, and loss, such a one thinks not
upon obtaining 4 Esd. 2. Sap. 5. Apo. 2.
the royal Crown of everlasting life, and therefore gives no credit
thereunto; for so through his unbelief and disobedience he distrusteth God in
his promises, and is self-wise against Gods truth and his omnipotency, and
lying still on his lees or dregs, he prieth from far, how it shall fare with
the obedient believers in the service of the love; truly such as remain so
minded, enter not into the Kingdom of God, not in the 1 Heb. 4.
rest or inheritance of eternal life.

36. Therefore let every one consider once rightly, whereunto we are called,
through Jesus Christ. Is it not Mat. 25. Luke 22. Joh. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
to the everlasting uncorruptiblenesse and immortality, or kingly 1 Cor. 9. 2 Timothy 4. Jam. 1. 1 Pet. 5.
Crown of eternal life, to Romans 8. Gal. 5. Ephesians. 3.
the inheriting in the spirit, of the infinite treasures of the divine heavenly
goods, and moreover (through the belief) to be justified from the sin, for to
bring forth the Joh. 15. Ephesians. 4. Phil. 1.
fruits of God, which God has pleasure in, and to live in God eternally?

37. But (alas) this calling, the man has utterly forgotten, and through his
glosing which he has invented thereon, he is quite strayed from the sense of
his calling, and from the holy understanding.

An INTRODUCTION To the Holy Understanding.
CHAP. XIIII.
1. An admonition to awake, and observe our calling. 4. All without exception
are called. 5. We have all been ignorant of our calling. 6. But God does now
graciously let us see our blindness. 7. Therefore let us regard this grace,
and that the rather because of the borrible destruction that is for to come. 9.
The wicked must be endured with patience. 12. the Love is stronger then the
Belief. 15. If we fall, let us rise up again. 20. The way to the life. 21. Few
do find. 23. The evil must be overcomed of the good in patience. 26. much
written, yet great misunderstanding. 28. Those that have pleasure, and do
continue in iniquity, are like the devil; and be incorporated into his son.
33. Their certain punishment.

OH! awake yet once (I pray you) from the Esa. 29.56.
sleep of your ignorance, O ye children of men, and have a sure confidence Joh.
5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
on the Resurrection of the dead, so shall Christ Ephesians. 5.
inlighten you.

2. Take heed to your calling, that whereunto ye are bidden, therein ye may be
established according to the promises, that is for to obtain the high price or
Crown of everlasting life, for this price or Crown of everlasting life, is not
like a Crown of the Kings of this world, 1 Cor. 9.
which many of them stand for, and is of many greatly desired, and yet there is
no more but one that obtains it, and becomes King.

3. But according to the calling of God, we may all obtain 4 Esd. 2. Sap. 5.
Kingly Crowns, and be endowed with one manner fullness of divine treasures,
and be all Priests 1 Pet. 2. Apo. 1.5.
and Kings, according to the promises.

4. Hereunto we are all called to one, Ioh. 17.
and in one, no man exempted, Gal. 3.
the Gentiles as well as the Jews, the Commons of the people, as well as the
Magistrates, the sinners as well as the righteous, the poor as well as the
rich, the simple as well as the wise, the wives as well as the husbands, the
children as well as the parents, Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
the bond as well as the free, the servants as well as the masters, and the
handmaids as well as the Mistresses, Act. 10. Romans 2.10. Gal. 2.
God is no respecter of persons; for all those that turn them to God and love
his Righteousness, are acceptable unto him.

5. Doubtless it is now made known unto many of us, that we have all in our
understanding been utterly estranged and Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
darkened from the knowledge of our calling, and have cleaved to the 1 Timothy 4.
spirits of error, vvalking in the death, and not in the light of life,
likewise in sundry divisions, and not in the unity of our calling.

6. Nevertheless, that God which is rich of mercy, Ezekiel. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 2 Pet.
3.
and would not that we should perish, lets us now see through the
ministration of his gracious word, and through his bountiful and kind love,
the ways of our blindness, Esa. 59. Sap. 5.
and the deadly darknesses of our misunderstanding, pulling us to the light of
his clearness, to the intent that all we which are estranged from God, and
dead because of sin, might through the love of God the Father, and through the
ministration of his gracious Word be renewed again, for to quicken us again
Romans 6.8. 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3.
in Jesu Christ, out of the death of sin, into the true unity of our
vocation, to wit, in this day of the coming of Jesu Christ in his glory, for
had not the same Jesus Christ been with the Amighty for a remnant, Esa. 1.
we had all in our estrangeing been as Sodoma and Gomorra, and must needs all
in like manner have perished.

7. Since God therefore does now show on us such love, that he profereth his
grace unto us, through the coming of his Christ, when as we (in our estranging
from his good being) were openly his Romans 1. Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.2.
enemies, and that he remembers not our ignorance, to revenge on us such
things, but out of the bountiful grace of his love, is inclined to help us,
and by the ministration of his gracious word, to reach us the hand, for to
pluck us to himself again in his love, let us then also make much of such a 2
Cor. 6. Heb. 1.2
grace, that through the bountiful grace of his love, we may in this horrible
time, be reconciled unto him, and not be punished with the wicked world: The
rather, for that there has been enough before hand showed us, of the horrible
Esa. 13. Ier. 20.25. Mat. 24.
destruction of the wicked world and of all damned men, in the last days,
wherein few shall remain, or be saved; but not by the Lords fault, for God
desires instantly to draw us all to his salvation.

8. But because there are many now adays, that 2 These. 1. 2 Pet. 3.
believe not God in his promises, but count him a lier, and 2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
do not regard the time of his grace, neither will be saved, but have much more
desire and will to the iniquity, Ephesians. 4. 2 Pet. 2. Judah. 1.
and to all uncleanness, therefore also in this day, Romans 2.
comes the wrath of God upon those children of unbelief; and they shall not be
able to escape the horrible and fearful destruction.

9. Therefore let every one convert him from the errors of his blindness, Ephesians.
6. 1 Pet. 5.
and arm himself in the belief, and stand fast in the hope Ia. 4.
against the wicked, that makes it self up against Gods righteousness, the
which must be endured with patience, for Romans 5.8.
Patience brings forth in us a firmness, or a persevering in the hope, and
hope suffers us not to be ashamed, but prepares for us the peace with God in
the love.

10. But though now and then it pinch somewhat hard to show patience, yet have
confidence, Apo. 2.3.
and keep still what ye have, turn not back in any case.

11. Though happily you think that it falls heavy, find your selves impotent
or weak, and the ways dark, desolate, unpathed, very long, 4 Esd. 7. Mat. 7.
Luke 13.
small or narrow, the hills seem high to get over, and the gates very strait to
go through, yet doubt not therefore ye beloved, give no regard to the unbelief,
that says it is impossible; but contrariwise, with belief and hope enter ye
in, for the belief is strong and mighty, Mat. 17.21. Luke 17.
she removes mountains out of their places, vanquisheth the enemies, Heb. 11.
and is a certain assurance of that which is hoped for.

12. Look then what ye out of belief, and according to the truth do desire in
God to obtain, that love ye with whole heart; for the love which in her
service, holds the heart fast with earnest love, is yet stronger then the
belief, 1 Cor. 13.
and goes far beyond it all, and not regarding any difficulty, she overcomes
it all, for the things sake which she loves, for the love makes that light,
which appears heavy; and brings life out of that, which seems to be death.

13. Therefore the love is not wearied with any thing, for that which a man
loves is precious in his sight, and he esteems it of great value: Romans 8.
moreover he regards neither loss nor trouble, to get or to come by that
which he loves best.

14. And therefore men are to 1 Cor. 14. Col. 3.
seek for the most best, that they may obtain the same, and not to respect any
of those things, that would oppose themselves, or be hindersome there-against;
for who so seeks not, obtains not, who so tastes not of the sour, shall
not partake of the sweet.

15. If any man fall, let him rise again, if ye be hurt or wounded, believe, so
shall ye be made whole, yea though ye were already dead; or were as dead in
your minds, yet if ye believe the gracious word and Salvation in the obedience
of his service of love, and put your trust in the power of God, Joh. 5.
ye shall surely live and not abide dead, for the saving from death Joh. 11.
is the Resurrection and eternal life.

16. Though ye find your selves even damned in the hell, and taken captive of
sin and devil, yet fear not but believe, Psalm. 18.23.33.116.
ye shall be delivered and saved from thence.

17. For the belief and hope toward the Salvation, and the love to
righteousness, in the grace of God, neither can nor may abide in the sin,
death, devil or hell, but they must prevail, vanquish, and bring to naught or
destroy, all that is not of God.

18. Therefore have neither the Mat. 16.
gates of hell, nor the bands of the devil, nor the Romans 8.
pangs of death, nor the strength of sin, nor the lusts of the world, nor the
mind of the flesh, any power over such believers, either to hold or to reign
over them, 1 Cor. 15.
but they bring them all under them to a victory.

19. But if at any time through the slenderness of our understanding, we be
plucked away from our good mind, or be after the nature of the Serpent, Genesis 3.
Sap. 2. 2 Cor. 11.
beguiled by the wisdom of the flesh, and thereby through weakness full, and
be made so senseless, that we cannot discern the life from the death, yea,
become so feeble and fainthearted, that we have scarcely any desire at all to
the good, but do daily Romans 7.
suffer and feel the sting of death, yet let us not therefore be dismayed, nor
despair in mind, but rather so much the more cheer up our selves in the belief,
and through the serviceable word of truth, take unto us a new stomach and fresh
courage again, to a stouter going forwards, keep so much the sharper watch, and
still have diligent regard on the thing that may annoy us to the entrance of
the life, whereby we may through the belief and obedience of the Word, Ephesians. 6.
1 Pet. 5.
keep of and vanquish it every whit, and so with a good will have our passage
toward God in the spirit, until the love abide firm in us, and that we have
such a free heart and mind, as may be subject to nothing, but to the high
Majesty of the living Godhead only.

20. Now to come hereunto, we must renounce our selves and all created visible
things, not only outwardly after the flesh, but quite and clean inwardly with
the heart according to the spirit, and so give over our selves obediently under
the service of love, unto the God of life and his gracious word, Romans 6.8.
to a dying in the spirit, from every thing whereunto our will and mind
(according to the flesh or outward fashion) is tied, and keep our selves
diligently from all holy appearances, and worldly fashions, that so then 1 Pet.
1.
in the obeying of the gracious word and his service of love, our inward mind
for to come to a submitted being, may be made tender, soft, and lowly, and we
in like manner with humble hearts find our selves Psalm. 57.
ready to do the Lords will, Romans 6.
the end whereof is eternal life. It is true.

21. Which way to the life few do Mat. 7.
find, because it is unknown Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1.2.
and hidden unto all understandings of the flesh, and unto all wise ones of the
world, and her Scripture learned.

22. Who is there now rightly inclined to the life and peace, but those that
endure all deadly things, dissension, and whatsoever comes upon them thereby,
until it Romans 6.8. 2 Cor. 4.
wholly vanish, and come to naught in them? and which have the life and peace
always before their eyes, and do pray with great fervency unto God in the
spirit, that he will be their power and strength.

23. After this manner ought we with humble hearts to be minded in every
thing that comes upon us against the good, for the evil must by the good be
Rom 12.
overcomed in patience.

24. Yet not out of our works or own power, Romans 3 4. Ephesians. 2.
O no, but through the belief in affiance toward God, and so abiding Gods
leisure in his work, we are daily to pray unto God in the spirit, that he will
destroy and take away, or root out the evil out of our hearts, and choose and
set up the good again therein.

25. Hereunto are we to 1 Pet. 5.
humble our hearts before God in his service of love, that we may find such
healthful grace before his eyes, in the coming of Jesu Christ, who now to the
Salvation of all those that hope in Christ, 2 Pet. 3.
and long for his coming, comes to a righteous judgment over the world with
equity.

26. Oh hereof there is surely much written, showed, and testified, were it but
observed and understood aright, but there is great negligence and much
misunderstanding among the children of men, for we find many lamentable
errors, not only in the erring world, but also in those that persuade
themselves to be wise, and to love the good.

27. Awake once O thou precious man, and consider that the eternal God Ezekiel.
18. 1 Timothy 2. 2 Pet. 3.
has no pleasure in such unprofitable living, as is mixed with contrariety
unto God.

28. But if so be O ye children of men ye have pleasure in the destruction,
according to the course of the blind world, and do Sap. 2. Romans 1. Ephesians. 4. 2
Pet. 3. Jude. 1.
delight in the strange life of the ungodly being, go on thus boldly in the
same, and do show no Romans 2.
upright obedience to the word, Mat. 3. Lu. 3.13.
nor amendment from sin, then hardly think also that ye are certainly minded
Joh. 8.
against God, even like the devil himself, and incorporated with the child of
perdition, or of the devil that extolleth himself in the desire of his
errors, by means of the pleasure or reward of unrighteousness against God,
and against all that men worship God in, saying in his heart or essential
mind, that he himself is the Lord, 2 These. 2.
and exalts himself in like manner, in the hearts of the unbelieving and
disobedient men, to a ruling above God, and above the godly nature, and so
setting himself in the Temple of God, [that is, in man's heart] Dan. 8.9.12.
Mat. 24.
he utterly lays wast the House of the Lord, and in like manner works in
the man, a secret wickedness, which is not soon to be perceived.

29. Truly, who so with the desires of their souls do cleave unto this
pernicious nature, they are very abominable in their doings; for there is none
of them that does good, no not one.

30. Their best virtue is a covered sin, and an abominable hypocrisy before
God and his Saints.

31. Their throat is an Psalm. 5. Romans 3.
open Sepulcher; their tongue flattereth, their mouth speaks anogancy, and
they deal with unprofitable and false things.

32. Their lurking is Psalm. 10. Pro. 1.
how to beguile the simple, and to oppress the poor and innocent with tyranny,
not once thinking that there is a God, which will revenge such things, and
recompense it all unto them. O yes, he will certainly find them out, and render
them their just reward.

33. For if God spared not the old world, but Genesis 7. 2 Pet. 2.
condemned the same through the flood because of sin, nor Sodoma and Gomorra,
Genesis 19. 2 Pet. 2.
but for their ungodliness sake, caused fire and brimstone to fall from heaven
upon them, to their destruction, then will he not also assuredly spare this
wicked nature, but recompense his wickedness upon his own pate.

34. Seeing then the Almighty God did in times past, cause so great punishment
to come upon the ungodly for their unrighteousness sake, Mat. 11. Luke 10.
how much horribler punishment are they worthy of, 2 Pet. 2. Jude. 1.
that do now in this evil world commit ungodliness, because all those former
punishments upon them, who in times past committed ungodliness, are set forth
before these for example, that they should fear these last plagues of the
wicked world, Mat. 25. 2 Pet. 3.
which wicked world, is reserved for the fire, that it may perish thereby,
according to the promises.

CHAP. XV.
1. An expostulating with the man, for his bold and wilful cleaving to the
abominations of the wicked world. 5. The curse of such boldness. 7. The
fulfilling of the Law is the way to Christ, but the man by his wisdom will
have other ways, by cleaving whereunto the Antichrist is brought forth, in the
hearts of the Unbelievers. 11. This embracing of Antichrist the man will deny
with the mouth, and contrariwise will confess the Law of the Lord, but in the
deed, he does the contrary. 14. An admonition against misunderstanding of
certain Scriptures and sentences. 24. Which sentences he explaineth. And first,
how the righteous spirit is procreated. 34 How those that are taught by the
righteous Spirit, are no longer the servants of the Prophets.

O Thou man that do yet with thy will cleave to the obominations, and vain
things of the evil world, will thou not once fear before the God of all Gods,
before the King of all Kings, before the wisdom of all wise-ones, before the
righteousness of all righteous ones, and before the highest judgment of all
Judges?

2. Will thou not indeed once remember that there is such a God, Esa. 45.
as requires righteousness? yes assuredly, he Esa. 28.
will make up himself with the same, terrify the earth and fall upon his
enemies, for they shall not be able to Lam. 2.
escape the hand of his vengeance; for he will Esa. 4 Ezekiel. 37. Ephesians. 5.
cleanse the earth of the uncleanness of the ungodly being.

3. Or think thou (O man) that God is dead, and thou shall live? Or that God
is blind, and thou see? think thou still to reign, and that God shall lie
down under thee, and be according to thy mind, as though that thou were the
head, and God the feet, and that he should be driven as a footstool to be put
under thee, and that his Law, Statutes, and Ordinances, shall still be trodden
down, and forgotten?

4. Make not too much ado (thou Esa. 28 45. Romans 9
earthen vessel) against thy Creator; for truly thy stoutnesse is too
presumptuous and arrogant against one that is much stronger then thou art.

5. Therefore look into it, all that have eyes to see, whether that all
haughtiness of the flesh does not exalt it self above God, and how gladly
every one bears dominion against Gods truth, and how that there be many do
cover themselves with the appearance of holiness, wherewith the eyes of many
men are bewitched, supposing that such haughtiness and appearance of holiness
is of God.

6. Under which covering of the show of holiness, and under the glorying Mat.
24
of the Lords Name, the man boldly forces on his arrogant conceiving, and
advances his own will, and forsakes or rejects utterly the Law of the most
highest, and the Statutes and Ordinances of his people Israel, which God in
times past gave them by Moses his servant, and ratified by the mouth of his
holy Prophets.

7. For at the end, or Gal. 4
in the fulfilling of all the same, has God brought forth his Son (the Sap. 7.
Heb. 1.
like Image of his Godhead) to the salvation of his people: which Son of God
Mat. 5
is not come to break the Law, but to accomplish the same, to the intent, that
the Law and the Prophets may still remain in their state and office until
Christ, whereby through the same Christ, men may be saved or justified Acts 15.
Romans 3.4. Gal. 2.3. Ephesians. 2.
from the sin by faith, and not by the works of the Law: Lo, thus comes the
Kingdom of God, and the everlasting life.

8. But whilst the man has by his wisdom, set himself above the wisdom of
God, he has brought in other Laws besides these, which are none of Gods, but
are false and lies, and has made none account of the Law of the Lord.

9. Therefore are also the Prophets which are thereout risen up, Mat. 24 2 Timothy
3, 4 2 Pet. 2
found false, and lying; and thereout likewise does the Devil at the end of
these same, bring forth the Image of his likeness [namely, the son or 2 These. 2
child of the Devil, full of deceit and lies] in the hearts of lying and
unbelieving men, to a destroying and desolation of the people, and to an
abominable evil world, such as is full of wickedness and falsehood, even like
the Devil himself.

10. That same is the adversary of God and Christ, which is now revealed unto
us as a child of damnation, who (for as much as the fall from Christ is come)
has set himself 1 These. 2
as a God in Gods Temple, [that is in men's hearts] and boasts himself as a
God, and so (with his own holiness and wisdom) polluteth it all,
presumptuously and proudly with great boldness Apo. 13
blaspheming Gods holy Name; which wicked nature, and adversary or enemy of God
and Christ, the man does in all respects cleave unto, and becomes of one
nature or coessence therewith.

11. Howbeit, that the man is joined to the adversary of God and Christ, and
deals so ill and unkindly with God and his Christ, that he will not willingly
confess with the mouth, but he is not ashamed to show it by his works and
deeds.

12. Let every one glass himself once aright, and then acknowledge according
to the truth, whom he loves, serves and cleaves unto, whether to the world
or to God, to Belial or to Christ, to his own mind, or to the mind of God or
Christ, with the mouth no doubt he will say, to God, and to the mind or will of
Christ, Tit. 1.
but with the deed it will be found quite otherwise.

13. In like sort fares it also with the understanding of the testimonies or
sentences of Scripture, with the mouth many happily will confess, that they
have well conceived all the sense and understanding of the holy Scripture; but
to follow that which the sense of the holy testimonies do betoken, point to,
and require, they clean omit, whereby it does sufficiently appear, that (with
the life and heart) they are minded against the same, and have not understood
the holy Scripture.

14. O ye deerly beloved, err not so wholly with the erring blind world, nor
with the conceitednesse of the letter-learned, that ye should forsake the Law
of the Lord: be not also Prove. 3 Romans 12
too wise in your own sight, and judge not of all sentences according to your
imagination: for much ignorance has taken the hearts of men captive, whereby
often times they judge ignorantly, because by their wisdom Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1
they understand not the wisdom of God.

15. It is all reasonably well known unto me with what a perverse eye the man
does often times out of the testimony of the writings or sentences which he
hears, draw a perverse sense, as it goes now every where very brief amongst
men: of which sentences (wherein there do many err) there is both partly in
these writings and likewise in the Glass of Righteousness, plain Declaration
made, and how that many men do err therein, because they understand not the
Scripture.

16. But to the intent that no man through any wrong conceiving of the
sentences (which are now much treated of by the man) might receive any
hinderance to salvation, and that likewise every one may be guided into the
Holy Understanding of the Glass of Righteousness, and to an upright
conceiving of the same, we will recite certain sentences here following, and
uncover and clear the right understanding of the same, not only in this
Introduction, but also in many places besides of the Glass of Righteousness,
and show the wrong conceiving or fight of them, and warn every one to beware of
the judgment of his sight, which he gives by the ignorance of his imagination.

17. True it is, I have heretofore (in the beginning of my calling by God, to
the ministration of his holy and gracious word, under the obedience of the
love) set forth certain writings, but inasmuch as some sentences happily in
them, were not uttered in the plainest manner, therefore have I with the Supra.
foresaid principal Elders of the Family of Love, more amply and plainly
expressed them.

18. Also in the beginning of my vvriting, I could not find that among any of
the children of men, there was any such communalty of God or Christ, as was
comprehended in the upright life of Christ (as is also before mentioned) but
the everlasting God, who is Ioh. 4.
spirit and life, 1 Ioh. 4.
and the essential love it self, has in my office or service under the
obedience of the love, manifested the same unto me, and so the true Communalty
of God or Christ, which also is spiritual, lovely, and upright of life, has
he made known unto me in the spirit, I have also seen, heard, and touched, or
felt it, and being of one substance therewith, have my fellowship as one body
Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12.
, in Christ with the same.

19. Oh would to God that all men had the grace, to humble them under the love
and her servite, that so then in the obeying of the service of love, the same
true Communalty of God or Christ, might also every where appear and come unto
the children of men; and that in the spirit of Jesu Christ or of the love, to
the intent that all error, contention, and wrangling among them all might once
have an end, and so we all one with another, might be of Romans 12.15. 1 Cor. 1.
2 Cor. 13. Phil. 1.
one mind in Jesus Christ.

20. But inasmuch as I could not heretofore in the beginning of my writing
perceive, or find among the children of men, that true and lovely Communalty
which is comprehended in the upright life of Christ, and that all my desire and
love was bent to the upright life of the same Communaltie, therefore have I
also from the beginning of my writing (out of the Service of Love) witnessed of
such a life of upright righteousness, and of such upright hearts, as the
communalty of God or Christ has her life in, according as the Glass of
Righteousness does also mention, and make relation of the same upright life of
the true communalty of God or Christ: neither can I yet perceive nor know any
other thing, then that the upright communalty of God or Christ (where she in
Christ appears or is revealed) lives therein, and shall still be minded so
to do.

21. And whosoever also Sap. 8.
loves the righteousness with whole heart, and has a desire to be joined and
incorporated to the only God and his true Christ, or to have his fellowship
with them, such a one will likewise (according to the sight of the true life,
which is appeared unto me out of the living God) be inclined or bent unto such
an upright being of the upright communalty of Christ (whereof we bear witness)
for to live, or to be comprehended therein under the obedience of the love,
through the belief.

22. Wherefore let every one note and mark our testimonies of truth according
to love, and not with perverseness of heart, nor in reproach or partiality,
that they appear not unto him in a cross or a contrary sense.

23. For sure it is very lamentable, that the testimonies of truth (which are
brought forth to the best) should be taken overthwartly and not aright; because
the perverse sight makes many to judge perversely and falsely, and unrightly to
understand the director, causes many greatly to stray. It is true.

24. It is recorded in the first book of the Glass of Righteousness, 1 Glass. 2
that the upright procreation of the righteous spirit, comes not of men but
Luke 1.
out of God only; this same word or sentence is very right, yea unchangeable
for ever. For otherwise God has never wrought among his holy ones, and yet
has testified of such things (afterward to come) by the mouth of his holy Eze.
36. Joel. 2. Act. 2.
Prophets, to the intent that men should think upon his wonders of old time,
and trust firmly upon those of the time to come, according to the promises,
namely, how that God is the Salvation, and will establish his holy Covenant,
Luke 1.
according as he has made the same with Abrabam and his Seed.

25. Now when men have read this saying, and heard such a sentence, to wit,
that God will work things by his righteous spirit, they must then have regard
to the counsel that directs the way to God, and from the heart follow the
same with humble souls, Romans 12
still persevere in prayer until the coming of the promises, Tob. 4. Romans 13.
and not consent to the sin, but so take heed to such a healthful grace, as
being out of Gods mercy called to the very same, according to the promises.

26. For aforetimes the heathen were no people of the God of Israel, but were
Ephesians. 2.
strangers in the Testaments of the holy Fathers, and in the inheritance of the
godly promises, and Ephesians. 4. 1 Pet. 4.
every one walked his way in ungodliness, and in sundry Idolatries, and were
ignorant of the Lord.

27. But the everlasting God of Israel forgot not his Covenant, Luke 1.
but was mindful of the oath which he had sworn to Abraham his beloved, to a
blessing of the Gentiles, and looked on Act. 17.
the time of their ignorance, and did in like manner for a season cast off his
people, and show his hearty love on all the Generations of the earth, or
heathen, and caused a joyful message, through his Christ, to be published unto
them, Mat. 3. Luke 3.13. Act. 2.3.
to a repentance and amendment from their offenses, calling and bidding them
Ephesians. 2.3.
to be coheirs with the Citizenship of his people Israel, Esa. 2. Amos. 9.
Zach. 8. Act. 15.
that unto his people Israel, he might prepare him an upright people also out
of the heathen, according to the promises and foreshewing of his holy Prophets.

28. Hereon ought all Generations of the earth to have regard, and duly to
consider, whether they do accordingly take heed aright to their calling, which
is out of grace come unto them from the bountiful God of Israel, and whether
they do also with lowly hearts (as those that are unworthy the same) humble
themselves for to obtain the right Ioh. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.
birth of the righteous spirit out of God, to be fellow brethren with the
children of the house of Jacob for to serve the living God, and in those days
(when Act. 3.
the refreshing shall appear from the presence of God) to celebrate and
glorify the same God of Israel with them, what time as he ingrafteth his
branches into their right stock again, who for the Gentiles sakes, have been
broken off and scattered, Lu. 21. Romans 12.
until the fullness of the Gentiles should be come in, the treading down of
Jerusalem have her end, and so all Israel be saved, according to the promises.

29. Therefore let us have a right regard to our calling, and separate our
selves according to the spirit, from the foolish course, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4, 5 1
Pet. 4
vain walking, and ignorant boasting of people, and humble our souls to the
grace of our calling.

30. For if God in times past spared not his own people, but did cast out,
break off, and scatter them abroad for their stiffeneckednesse, and prides
sake, and Act. 13 Romans 11
rejected the hearthen in their room, how much less will he then spare the
proud heathen, but cast out, break off, lay wast and scatter them, and in their
stead, receive his own people Israel again, that they may serve him all the
days of their lives, Luke 1. Ephesians. 4
in such righteousness and holiness as is pleasing unto him, they shall be
his people, and he God with them, shall be their God from Generation to
Generation everlastingly.

31. For thus says the Lord concerning Israel, Esa. 59 Romans 11
there shall come a redeemer unto them in Sion, and to them that turn them from
fin in Jacob, says the Lord, and I make this Covenant with him says the Lord,
Esa. 59
my Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy Seed, and
childrens-children (says the Lord) from henceforth for evermore.

32. In those days shall the treading down of Jerusalem have an end, and the
word of the Lord shall be fulfilled concerning her; and unto her he said, Esa.
60
arise Jerusalem, be bright, for thy light comes, and the glory of the Lord
arises upon thee; (then also will the Lord cause himself to be heard, even to
the worlds end) Esa. 62
And they shall say to the daughter Sion, Lo thy Salvation comes, behold he
brings his Treasure with himself, and his revvard is now prepared before him,
they shall name them the holy People, the redeemed of the Lord, and thee [O
Jerusalem] they shall call, the visited, and not the forsaken City.

33. Lo these are the promises concerning Jerusalem, and concerning Israel in
the last time; let every one take heed to his time, according to his calling
through Jesus Christ, and the end or principal scope of all righteousness, 1 Timothy ^
is the love, wherein the promises of God are established; and that same is the
true 1 John 3.4
token of the birth out of God, through the righteous spirit: It is true.

34. It is also there [in the same book] recorded, 1 Glass.
that those which are taught by the righteous spirit, are no longer servants of
the Prophets, which (forsooth) some have read or heard thereof, and have by
that means forsaken the requiring of the Prophet call Word of the Apostles of
Christ, before they were (according to the mention of the Word) confirmed in
their calling, and through the persuasion that they had the truth or Spirit of
God, they are stopped out of their calling, turned to the liking of their own
opinion, Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
and so become vain in their understanding.

35. Some would needs account themselves free through the Spirit, 1 Glass 3.4
before they have tasted or known the Spirit of Promise, and so have run forth
before the time, and have not by their wisdom, understood the promises of God,
nor the calling of the Gentiles.

36. When the man now regards not his calling (according to the requiring
thereof) rightly, but looks about to some other understanding, and will count
himself free through the spirit, before the first or foregoing service (which
Gal. 3. Heb. 7.
directs or leads thereunto) be accomplished or fufilled by him, then
forsakes he the service of the fore-witnessed or foregoing Word, and goes
forth in a liberty, which yet is false, according to his own spirit, before he
has fulfilled his servantship in the service of the foregoing holy Word, Luke
21.
wherein he should possess his soul with patience, 1 Cor. 11
and so show forth the death of Christ, upon hope and confidence of his coming
for an holy anointing, and for an upright freedom in Jesu Christ unto him.

37. Who so therefore reads these sentences in the first book, let him
observe thereby what they require, and how they sound; namely, that those which
desire to come to the blessedness and freedom of Christ, must Romans 6 Gal. 3.4
be at the first, servants or Disciples of the righteousness, deny and forsake
themselves for Christ his sake, and always long to come to the true obedience
of the righteousness in all love, 1 Glass. 7.
not according to men's imaginations, but according to Gods calling, that so
they might live John 8 Romans 6
free in the righteousness of God, and not in the sin, nor as servants of
men: this same is there distinctly set forth, were it but rightly understood.

38. But who so has regard to his own liberty, and not to the calling of his
salvation, nor in the obeying of the foregoing Service ( Romans 6 13. Ephesians. 4.
Col. 2.3 1 Pet. 2.4
to the mortifying and laying away of the sin in the flesh) does not take
heed to the same, that so he may be incorporated to the good spirit of Christ;
the same man erreth not only from the doctrine of the Word after the manner of
men, but also from the wisdom of the truth of God, and so gets a delight in
his own understanding; in such sort, that he neither hearkeneth, longs, nor
cares for the good any more, but has a desire to error and perversity.

39. Oh! it is sure very lamentable, that the man out of such a mind cleaves
to the unrighteousness, or else chooses another calling, and practices a
selfe-made humility, Col. 2.
or spiritualnesse, and cares not for Gods promises, nor establishing of his
Word, Luke 1 Acts 3
in such a sort as God has heretofore spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets
from the beginning of the world.

CHAP. XVI.
1. Of the saying, that men should be impartial, how it ought to be
understood. 12. How the Common Love is profitable to impartiality. 16. Of those
that are outwardly just unto men, but unjust before God. 22. Of such as think
themselves to be impartial, because they regard no outward Religions, and in
the mean space withold from God that which is his. 28. Diverse rail at all
that observe any Religion. 35. How we are to judge of all outward God Services
and Ceremonies.

THere goes also a sentence abroad among many, (whereof likewise much mention
is made in our writings) that according to the requiring of Christian Doctrine,
men should stand 1 Cor. 3
impartial.

2. O ye deerly beloved, err not through any conceit of the imagination, but
have regard to the Word concerning the upright impartialnesse, and if ye mark
the same well, you shall understand, that men are to be impartial in the
truth, and with those that witness the truth under the obedience of the Love,
to the intent that no man take part with flesh and blood, but with the truth,
and be in the unity of the love, Romans 12 15 1 Cor. 1 2 Cor. 13. Phil. 2
well minded to a like life of righteousness, namely, with all them that do
under the obedience of the love, witness and minister the gracious word of
truth, and be comprehended in the upright brotherly love.

3. But men may not thus be impartial with the world, or with those that with
heart and will do cleave unto the world, that lie still in the vanity and sin,
and that are not believing nor desirous to obtain any better thing: no, nor
with the conceited wise, nor with the maintainers of factious ceremonies, 2
Cor. 12 Gal. 3 1 Timothy 6. 2 Pet. 2.
who are envyers, blasphemers, and evil speakers against the holy Word of
Truth, and of the service of his Love.

4. Truly, with such men are not to stand impartial, but with spirit and life
to be against them utterly, and yet to show forth the upright nature of the
love unto them, if happily by some means they might be drawn (to their
preservation in the godliness) unto the communion of the Love.

5. But with the Infra. 18
lovers of righteousness (as is aforesaid) and likewise with the sinners (such
as cleave not by their will to the unrighteousness, but do daily depart
therefrom, and have a servent desire to the righteousness, under the obedience
of the love) men are to stand impartial, and to stick fast unto that which is
godly, and that tends to the concord and peace.

6. Therefore judge of the impartialnesse with understanding, and put a
difference between the godly life, and the life of the world, and try your
selves, if so be you know your selves.

7. Look into your hearts (observing whom you cleave unto, desire, and love)
how, or with what manner disposition, ye stand impartial, whether ye would
rather suffer Heb. 11.
or endure disgrace, reproach, and contmpt, with the Lovers of the
Righteousness, then cleave unto the honor, voluptuousness and riches, or
ease of this world: Oh! I fear that many of them boast themselves to stand
impartial with the truth, who notwithstanding are altogether partially minded
against the truth.

8. Nevertheless, let no man take any thing unto him out of any choosing,
whether it be out of loathing or of liking, but let every one search his own
heart, how he finds the same disposed, and examine once himself, whether he
stand impartial rightly or not.

9. And when the man has seriously tried and proved himself herein, in such
sort that he knows assuredly how his heart stands, (in case he wholly love
God and his righteousness, intend the truth in the Love with his whole soul,
and desire to deny and to forsake himself, Mat. 16. Luke 9.14
with all that is in the world, for the godliness sake) then shall he very
well know and understand a difference between the cleavers to the world, and
those that from the bottom of their souls love the righeousnesse.

10. Wheresoevea then any upright impartial hearts are found, and that they do
show forth under the obedience of the Love, the praise of God, the salvation of
men and the truth, out of the love of righteousness, and do point none unto
flesh and blood, nor to any visible elements, but only to the good life of the
true essential Godhead, and are thereunto serviceable to all men, to all
concord in the love of Jesu Christ, with those are the Lovers of righteousness
and truth, to stand impartial to the unity of heart in the love, and so to
have regard to the ministration of the godly testimonies of the holy spirit of
the Love unto obedience, for to walk in such a life of godliness, as is
pointed out and witnessed thereby, and in that manner to grow up in the good
Ephesians. 2. Apo. 21
to an house or tabernacle of the living God or Christ, and to give no further
respect to the outward, then as it is serviceable thereunto, to the intent,
that no man may be bewitched in his spirit, but may cleave to the virtue and
nature of the love, and that the Col. 3.
love may obtain a dwelling place or form in him.

11. Lo, after this manner ought men to live impartially in the good, Esa. 1.
Psa. 37. 2 Pet 3.
to turn from all ungodly being, and not to maintain the evil.

12. There goes also a saying about among diverse, that to show the 2 Pet. 1.
common love is the most best means to keep ones self thus impartial.

13. It is true, our writings do also testify such things; howbeit, let every
one for all that look to it, and beware of his own judgment, that by the Genesis
3. Sap. 2. 2 Cor. 11.
subtilty of the Serpent, or of her nature, or else by the mind of the flesh, he
be not beguiled; the saying in it self is very right, but many that mark not
the saying according to the truth, do speak the same with a wrong sight or
understanding.

14. For some use such sentences for their own seekings cause, and so in such a
show of virtue, their heart (in regard of being incorporated with God in the
spirit) remains covered, Esa. 29 Jer. 23
and estranged from God, and many also give great respect unto such sayings,
insomuch that by occasion thereof, they do oft-times (according to men's private
conceit) cleave to some outward virtue, which surely is the very smallest of
all, and do leave the principallest Mat. 23 1 Cor. 13 1 Timothy 1
or greatest, which God requires. The like did also many heretofore that were
learned in the Law, upon whom the Lord pronounced woe, because they observed the
least things of the Law (whilst they tythed Mint, Anise, and Cummin) and left
the greatest matters of the Law, Mat. 23 Luke 11
to wit, judgment, mercy and faithfulness.

15. For albeit they observed all this after an outward show, so as they seemed
thereby to be righteous, yet was it all surely of no value, seeing they were
not joined with whole heart unto God, Ioh. 15
nor according to the spirit incorporated with him.

16. Furthermore, diverse men there are found, which (after the outward fashion)
give every one his own, and unto diverse (out of common love) show outward mercy
indifferently, who also carry themselves so justly, that Phil. 3
outwardly they are not to be reproved in any thing, howbeit, they are inwardly
before God thieves and Mat. 23 Ioh. 10
false men, because they withold from God that which is his, Esa. 29 Ezekiel.
33. Mat. 15
that is to say, their heart, which is far from him, and stands subject or
tied unto visible things, which heart or inward mind, belongs wholly, yea
only unto God.

17. Therefore God is not appeased nor satisfied with the least, when the heart
is not turned from all visible and mutable things, and does not cleave
perfectly unto him, or at least endeavor to wards it, to wit, that the man
desire of God out of his grace, that God will strengthen him to the obeying of
his will, and Eccl. 3
prepare his heart to his will and pleasure.

18. Look whose hearts are not thus minded, Deuteronomy. 6 Mat. 22
for to love and cleave unto God with all their souls, their common love is
false and altogether unclean, Romans ^
for they have yet willingly a pleasure in their own concupiscence, and are yet
far distant from the upright love of God, nevertheless they do sometimes
persuade themselves that they have the very best conceiving of the
righteousness, and so proceed on according to the common course of worldly
hearts.

19. Therefore there is great diversity between the unpartiall men, who addict
their hearts unto God, and to the good, and those men whose hearts have minded
worldly things, and yet do boast them of the unpartiallnesse. For look what
unto worldly hearts [namely, unto such hearts as are turned from God and his
service of Love] is a pleasure, lust, and life, that same is unto all the
children of righteousnhsse, Luke 16
an abomination and a horrible death.

20. Wherefore mark well the meaning, in what state or being the right
unpartiality consists, and out of what heart it is, that men are to exercise
the common-love, rightly; verily with such an heart, as out of all his mind
Eccl. 1.2
fears God, and is inclined to the upright virtue in the love, or is
comprehended therein, and not with an unadvised heart, which is without
understanding in his common-love, and in his unpartialnesse that distinguishes
not the godliness, or the worldly righteousness, one from the other, or that
has a pleasure to run on crookedly and erringly, Luke 12
to set his rest or to fix his heart in the earthly love, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4 1 Pet.
4.
according to the course of the blind world, or mind of the flesh.

21. Be not utterly I pray you Ephesians. 5
without understanding, but learn well to discern the truth, and let the Lord
and his righteousness be a pleasure unto you, and err not by any wrong sight
that stands in opinion or imagination, but observe judgment, and regard the
thing which is right and just.

22. There is found moreover a certain kind of people, which persuade
themselves that they are unpartiall, because they stand untied and unbound from
all outward Religions or God-services, and from all such as are called Sects,
supposing that in such a sort it is altogether well with them, and that so
standing they are in good case, because they are so free, and have such a
conscience as passes not for such things: they set up their rest also, that
they will not trouble themselves about any thing, nor respect or have any
regard, either of Jerusalem or of Sion, or else of Gods Communion of Saints, but
do earnestly care how they may get their living and welfare, maintain their
Family, and vvithall do that which is equal and right to every man, having a
Proverb: Let Gods Water run over Gods Field, and let us take our rest.

23. Is not this to have utterly mistaken the life of the truth, and the
testimonies of the upright unpartiallnesse? Shall there be no Esa. 2 40, 59
Mat. 5 1 Pet 1
word of life then, nor service of love ministered, nor any thing thereout to be
expected, or Romans 8
longed for? Are then the promises of God (which concern Esa. 51 52, 60 etc.
Jerusalem and Sion) come all to an end? And shall the oath of God which he
has sworn (as that the world Nu. 14 Mac. 2
shall be filled with his glory) be thus utterly forgotten? Will he not then
gather together his holiness again, Esa. 43 Baruc. 5. Mat. 24
from all Coasts of the earth, and be gracious unto them? Yes assuredly, he
will not be slack, nor forslow his time.

24. But alas this is least thought upon; howbeit, that which concerns
themselves they think much of; but Lam. 1.4 Ezekiel. 8.9 23 Dan. 8
whether God has that which is his, or that he remains (as a stranger)
without his Sanctuary, that care they not for; they will be sure to take to
themselves the earthly things, which (as true it is) God has created for the
man, and for the man's welfare, but their hearts, which God (according to the
inward man) has created for Lev. 26 Ezekiel. 36.37 2 Cor. 6
his own dwelling, and for the praise of his glory, they draw to the earthly
gap. 2. Romans 1
and corruptible things, and so steal or with hold-from God, that which is his,
and are thieves in Gods honor, and in his earthly created goods.

25. Note once I pray you and consider, whether the same be a right
unpartiallnesse or not; Notwithstanding in such a state they seem to be
righteous men for all that: yea such a one shall with many welenough pass for
a brother of the Gospel, but truly according to such a course (if we will
come no nearer unto God) we are before God Esa. ^ John 10
all thieves and robbers, Idolaters, Adulterers, and Adulteresses.

26. This is doubtless a great abomination or abhorring, that the man tieth
himself to such things as God has Genesis ^
created unto good for him, I say nothing yet of such as use them so unseemly
and inordinately, and so shuts his God out at doors, and keeps the godly
being out of his heart.

27. Therefore let us learn to stand upright in the unpartialnesse, according
to the truth, and not after the manner of men, and (before all things) give unto
God, Deuteronomy. ^ Mat. 22
that which belongs unto him, [namely, the heart and mind] and likewise 1 Timothy 4
use that well which belongs unto us, to the laud and praise of his glory,
that he (blessed may he be) who is all in all, may also be glorified and
praised in all, and that we in like manner might be made an Tit. 2
acceptable people unto him, as his own Creation, Genesis 1. Ephesians. 2
and work of his own hands, wherein he lives and reigns, and might moreover
be made the Sheep of his Pasture, a City of Peace, and an house 1 Cor. 3
or Temple for his dwelling. To this end should we take heed to his holy
calling, that we may be made children or Romans 8 Ephesians 3
heirs of his spiritual and heavenly goods. O yea, even so be it.

28. Again there are found certain others, which persuade themselves to be
unpartiall, who boldly reproach or revile others, and rail at those whom they
hold for Factions, or that are called Sects, and 2 Pet. 2 Jude. 1
so speak evil of that which themselves know not, neither can they discern
the matter, according to the truth, but despise the thing that seems amiss
in their eyes, and yet cannot point the erring or wandering ones to any better.

29. Oh when shall the perverse mouth once keep silence, the Psalm. 34 1 Pet. 3.
reproaching lips be put far from us, and that once sought (from the heart, and
out of love) which is equal?

30. O rail not ye beloved, and pluck no man from his zeal, to any fleshly or
worldly understanding, as some have done, whilst they have turned those from
their zeal, that were zealous after righteousness, and because they could not
point them to any better, then that was, which before they had their zeal in,
therefore fell they to the world, and became more erring and blind then ever
they were before, but in this manner ought it not to go ye dearly beloved.

31. But if there were any godly wisdom and upright love, men should use it in
this sort; that is to wit, they should testify that Phil. 4 Heb. 10
which were right and reasonable, according to the requiring of God and the
truth, they should cleave unto God with the whole heart in the spirit, and so
Ephesians. 4
reach one another the hand to the love, and not reproach nor despise any, nor
yet turn any aside to the earthly and mutable things, or to any partiality, to
the intent that they which had the right teaching and did minister the
gracious Word of the Lord, might then likewise be heard and understood aright
and according to the truth; and that all zealous hearts might be united Col. 3
in one band of love, and all they likewise which love the equity Sap. 8
and righteousness, become one heart Act. 4.
and mind, Ephesians. 4
as there is one God, one Faith, and one manner Salvation, in all and with all.

32. After such a manner ought men to stand unpartiall, and to this effect, 2
Pet. 1
to use the common love, and not to destroy that which is good, or to make
division, nor yet to strengthen the world in her wickedness, but to have a
desire that the zeal to righteousness, under the obedience of the love, might
be spread abroad among many, with a loathing of the sin, and all
unrighteousness.

33. Howbeit, to exhort any man that he suffer not his heart to be bound nor
entangled with any thing that is outward, is very meet, so far forth as his
heart may thereby be turned to have regard to the upright virtue of a pure
heart and to the love, Gal. 3
whereby to be subject to the outward things no more, but to serve the living
God with a willing spirit.

34. Thus or to this effect men shall loose the binding of the heart, and
proceed toward the upright righteousness, with a free mind and humble heart
to God; for such things does God require above all, and not the Romans 3 Gal. 3.6
tying to the outward, wherein neither life nor death of souls consists, nor
any life of righteousness required.

35. For indeed it is true, yea certain and sure, both by the testimony of the
godly truth in the spirit, and also by the testimony of the Prophets and
Apostles of Christ, that neither in any thing whatsoever is visible or
feelable, nor in any factious God services or ceremonies, which are observed
with men's hands in contention, and do not require any life of righteousness
consists either any salvation nor condemnation, before God; Romans 14 1 Cor. 8
neither can they bring any vantage or damage at all unto the souls of them,
whose hearts are not entangled therewith, or have not any abhorring thereof.

36. Notwithstanding, if the God-services and ceremonies be Jewish, or
Christian, Romans 3
then do they testify of the life which God commands, and Romans 8 Gal. 3.4
Heb. 7
requires by them: but if the ceremonies or God services be heathenish, or
men's invention, or if they be ministered in strife, and in schism or partiality,
then do those ceremonies and services show, that the life of those people that
minister them, is bewitched, and that they 1 Gor. 1.2
know not God, nor Romans 10
his righteousness, nor yet undeastand his Law or will, and that they do walk
in a Ier. 7.11 Ephesians. 4
mere imagination, and not after the Lords will, and that is the thing which
God forbids.

37. For surely it is thick darkness over the children of men, Esa. 59
that they be so utterly blinded and bewitched of spirit, that they cannot
comprehend nor understand the upright life of righteousness; for men are not
to be subject in the spirit to the outward things wherewith they are served,
but should let themselves be served therewith to the upright righteousness,
and should cleave unto that which is spirit and the true life it self, and
which is required by those outward services.

38. After this manner Romans 14 1 Cor. 8
if the heart be not tied with lusting and liking unto the outward things,
neither does through any fear or disliking abhor them, the Ceremonies do stand
free for the Believers, indifferently to be used.

CHAP. XVII.
In this Chapter is showed the right difference between the true God-service
and the Idol-service, and also the Ceremonies of eithers Services.

NOw there are certain also that (being entangled) make conscience, that men
must necessarily use the Christian Ceremonies (after the counterfeiting out of
the Letter) as a Commandment of the Lord.

2. Therefore seeing we now find many such people, as in their consciences are
tied or bound, that they must necessarily use the services and ceremonies,
which after the testimonies of the Christian Services and Ceremonies, are
counterfeited out of the Letter, as a Commandment of the Lord, and because
they understand nothing at all of the difference between the right Services and
Ceremonies, and the counterfeit, I could not for the Loves sake omit, to show
also a right difference of the same.

3. Thus mark now, ye Lovers of the truth, how that between the true Services
and Christian Ceremonies, which are administered Mat. 28 Mat. 16 Acts 2.3 4. etc.
out of the true light and word of life, and the counterfeit services and
ceremontes which are administered out of the knowledge of the Letter, there must
a right difference be noted and observed, and so then must be considered, to
what intent or to what sense the true services and Christian ceremonies are
Gods Commandment, and whether the services and ceremonies be Gods everlasting
Commandment, or else be but annexed Gal. 3 Heb 7
or joined to the everlasting Commandment of God or Christ, for to serve the
man withal in the obeying of them, and to bring him in to the everlasting
Commandment and life of God, and that he should by such a means understand
Gods everliving Commandment Romans 12
and Will, and live therein: For Gods true Commandment has been from
everlasting, and Esa. 4 Mat. 24 1 Pet. 1.
and remains unchangeable, to everlasting.

4. It is Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 5.
commanded in the Law, that men should rest upon the Sabbath day, or sanctify
the same, and such other like; and after that the mouth of the the Wisdom and
Truth says, Mar. 2
that the man is not made for the Sabbath days sake, but the Sabbath day for
the man's sake, showing a difference in Gods Commandment, [namely, between that
thing which was Gods commandment from everlasting, and abides unchangeable,
and that which for men's sake was annexed thereunto] because they should
understand Gods righteousness, and his everlasting commandment thereby.

5. And thus were the Exodus 12 38.39.40 Luke 1.2.3 4, 5, 6. etc.
ceremonies of the Law annexed to Gods everlasting commandment, [that is, unto
that which has been Gods commandment from everlalasting, and shall abide for
ever,] because the people of Israel should out of the ceremonies of the Law,
and out of the outward Godservices of the same, Deuteronomy. 30 4 Esd. 7
understand the life of godliness and the righteousness which God requires,
and so live therein [namely, to love their God Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 4.6.10 Mat. 22
with all their hearts, and their neighbor as themselves] after all the manner
of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom the ceremonies were not
commanded, and yet for all that (being obedient to the Lords commandments)
they walked ways in his statutes and ordinances, which obedience or walking in
the upright life, was required by the Law, and by the obeying of the ceremonies
or outward Godservices, services, and were published through Christ in the
world.

6. But whilst now that in times past, there came a Romans 11
blindness upon the learned in the Law, insomuch that they knew no difference
between the upright life that God requires (which is his commandment from
everlasting) and the ceremonies of the Law, which were annexed thereunto, and
that the upright life ( Mat. 3.17 2 Pet. 1
wherein God had his delight) was appeared and come, therefore rose there up
many controversies about the services and ceremonies amongst them that Mat.
12.15, 19, 21, 22.
knew not the upright life, and there fell out many questions and janglings,
and that all for the law and the ceremonies cause; but God had no pleasure in
any thing save only his beloved, the like life of his being, in whom he had
good pleasure: And this is his Commandment, Deuteronomy. 18 Mat. 17. Act. 3
even that men should hear, believe, and obey the same, and live for ever
therein, and that men should obey the services and ceremonies administered out
of the true light and word of life, to an incorporating thereinto.

7. Now inasmuch as diverse in times past, Mat. 15, 23. Joh. 9
gave greater respect to the ceremonies, and works of the Law, then to the life
of godliness; therefore they did cleave to the ceremonies and works of the
Law, and believed not the life that was required thereby, but fell away from
the right stock of the Job. 8
father Abraham.

8. But the believers (that gave more regard to the life of godliness, then to
the ceremonies or works of the Law) abode still Ioh. 6
by the word of life, and were not bound, albeit they forsook the ceremonies of
the Law, which were out of the Letter commanded, by the unilluminate and
unbelievers of the word of life; for the ceremonies could not in themselves
without the word or light of life, extend to any commandment of God.

9. Therefore was the upright life at that time Deuteronomy. 13
published and taught, because men should believe the same as a precept or
commandment of the Lord, and be obedient unto his requiring, that so (through
the belief) they might be made free Act. 15 Romans 3 Ephesians. 2
from the sin, or be justified therefrom, and might live thereby with God the
Father to an everlasting peace according to the promises.

10. This communalty or believers of the good life, were as children of the
belief and obedience, Mat. 26.28 Acts 2.4.
joined together to a bringing in to the same life, under the service of the
holy Word, and the hand reached them thereunto, with the Christian ceremonies
of Baptism, and the Supper of Christ, which Christian ceremonies were
administered unto them out of the word of life, and observed by them to
obedience; yet not for the ceremonies, but for the upright life's sake, which
(being afterward to come) was Infra. 23
required therewith. And thus the Christian ceremonies were not the everlasting
commandment of God, but the word of life was it.

11. Howbeit, the ceremonies were annexed thereunto for an assistance Gal. 3.4
Heb. 7
and bringing in of the believers into the life, as is aforesaid, even as the
same is prefigured unto us, by the ceremonies of the Catholic Church of Jesu
Christ, to the intent that the believers of the holy word, and of the good life
or Christ, should through the service of the ceremonies, 2 Pet. 1
have regard to the same word of life, being afterward to come.

12. Even thus for the good life's cause, and for the man's sake, are the true
Christian ceremonies of the gracious word, and of his service of love now in
the last time annexed unto Gods everlasting Commandment, for an assistance of
all them to the 2 Pet. 1
entrance of the upright life, which believe in Jesu Christ, and humble
themselves to the service of his love, to the end they should be brought
thereby to the life, which is Gods everlasting commandment, and still abides
[namely, to Deuteronomy. 10 30 Mat 22
love our God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our selves, and to
obtain the same Romans 3 Ephesians. 2.
through the belief] even as it is preached and written, because no man should
trust upon the ceremonies, and find himself deceived by being without the
upright life.

13. Nevertheless after those days of the foresaid ministration of the
Christian ceremonies, many 1 Timothy 4 Tim. 3. 2 Pet. 2
fell away from the true belief of Christ, or of the good life, knowing no
difference in Gods precept or commandment, wherethrough there are now also
many become vain in their understandings, in such sort, that they themselves
know not the meaning of the christian ceremonies, nor yet to what purpose they
were adjoined to Gods commandment; and by that occasion there is risen up (for
the Christian ceremonies cause) much discord and debate, even as heretofore it
came to pass, for 2 Cor. 11 Gal. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6
the Jewish ceremonies.

14. Wherefore seeing the services of the former Christian ceremonies after the
Letter, do bring in controversy, and are not set forth or observed out of the
word of life, nor out of the love of Jesu Christ, to the unity of heart in the
love, but out of the letter with different understandings, and in diffention,
and cannot alone in themselves extend to any commandment of God, therefore are
not the believers of the good life [namely, the communalty under the obedience
of the love of Jesus Christ] bound (as is rehearsed) thereunto, as of necessity
outwardly to observe them, but they stand free unto them either to keep, or to
omit them, to wit Romans 14
as they serve them to peace, and are edifiable unto men; for Gods commandment
Ioh. 12
is the everlasting life, and that is the very love it self, even Deuteronomy.: 0.30.
Mat. 19.22 Romans 13
to love God above all things, and our neighbor as our selves.

15. Lo, this (to be short) is the difference of the Jewish and Christian
ceremonies, and of those of the Family of the Love of Jesu Christ, namely, to
what purpose their office or service is commanded, and to what intent they are
annexed to the everlasting Commandment of God and observed.

16. Now there are likewise diverse people that will not use some ceremonies
(because they judge them as heathenish or idolatrous services, and as a
forbidding of the Lord) by means of abhorring and fear that they have of them,
least any harm or hinderance should hoppen unto their souls thereby; concereing
the which it also must be considered, how and wherefore the same should be
idolatrous services, and a forbidding of God, for every unright usage has his
occasion, sense, and signification,

17. For whilst the heathen or the uncircumcised people (are in respect of the
knowledge of God, become vain, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
blind, and insensible, (as being utterly estranged from the upright life which
God esteems,) therefore do they make or counterfeit unto themselves out of
the vanity of their thoughts, services and ceremonies, which the vain hearts
that understand not Gods Law and Ordinance, are bewitched and bound with.

18. So then the vain, corrupt, and bewitched life [which neither knows, nor
loves the living God, nor his Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
righteousness; but is rebellious and unfaithful to God] is Gods forbidding.
And out of it have the blind people which know not the upright life, joined
thereunto their services and ceremonies, Deuteronomy. 12
wherefore the contary life to God is the forbidding of the Lord, [to wit, that
men shall not believe, serve, nor be subject to the same] and not alone the
heathenish services and ceremonies in themselves.

19. And for the bewitched life's cause, all is idol-service, and against Gods
will, which such people as are held captive under it, or in their inwardnesse
are corrupted and bewitched by it, do observe and use, not for the services,
but Esa. 1.58 Am^s. 5 Mic. 6
for their corrupt lives sake.

20. For albeit they do out of such a bewitched life of unbelief take on them
or counterfeit any thing, which men call Jewish or Christian ceremonies, yet it
is not that which avails before God, Ephesians. 2.4
because they are strangers from the life which is of God.

21. Therefore seeing they are become Romans 1
vain and dark in their understanding, insomuch that they know neither the true
God, or his true God-service, nor the Idol or his Idol-service, therefore
neither are their outward Gods which men call Idols in themselves, 1 Cor. 8
the right Idols (but they are that they are) neither are their services or
ceremonies, the right Idol-services: For the Idol and the Idol-service (which
God accounts for such, and shuts for ever without him and his Kingdom,
and will not have it to be in his Temple or Tabernacle, but inwardly to be
rooted out) 1 Reg. 15. 1 Cor. 6 Ephesians. 5 Col. 3
is the depraved or corrupt life as is aforesaid; by which corrupt life, the
people that are holden therewith, are bewitched and tied to the unprositable
and vain things, which indeed are all Idol-services.

22. Forasmuch then as the services and ceremonies of the vain minded people
(which are ministered in their estranging from Gods true righteousness) cannot
bewitch our hearts, whilst that we are not, nor may not be made partakers of
their vain, perverse and corrupt life with the heart, neither do suffer our
selves to take pleasure in such things, 1 Cor. 10
how should their outward services and ceremonies (simply of themselves) be in
any wise unto us a forbidding of the Lord, or any idolatrous service? John 4
For God is a Spirit, and in the Spirit makes known unto us, that he beyond
all and above all, desirefh Deuteronomy. 6.10 Mat. 22
only our hearts, and that therein (as in his living Temple) he will Lev. 26
Ezekiel. 37 John 14 2 Cor. 6 Apo. 21
live and dwell, and only in the same be served and honored, in all upright
righteousness and holiness.

23. Therefore mark this ground, and consider in your understanding, to what
purpose God commands to be obedient unto his services and ceremonies, which
are administered out of his word of life, and wherefore the heathenish services
and ceremonies be against God: and how that the right God-services and
ceremonies do cleave, and are knit to the good life and upright being of the
living God, and the right Idol-services and idolatrous ceremonies do cleave,
and are knit to the corrupt life and word of vain imagination.

24. Now if ye mark this according to the truth, then shall ye well understand,
how or in what sort Mat. 15 23 Romans
that the outward services of the heathen or uncircuncised, be esteemed least
of before God, and how also that the outward Ordinances of God, are the
smallest services in the service of his Saints, and that God does most of all
regard that we (through his Ordinances and ceremonies) be joined unto him, and
so then (according to the requiring of his ceremonies) Deuteronomy. 6 Mat. 22
love him with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our our selves, and John. 17
know him as a true God, how that he only is the Lord, and the everlasting life.

25. Nevertheless it is unto me well known, that sundry speeches go about among
the children of men, wherewith they despise and blaspheme our godly
testimonies, and according to their conceit out of the Scripture or Letter, or
out of the imagination of their knowledge, do allege much there-against,
saying, this is Gods commandment, hereby must we abide, or this is Gods
forbidding, who can say against it?

26. It is true concerning the outwad, they can (out of the Scripture) speak
very much, do make therewith much Romans 16
division, strife, and discord among each other; but they seldom think or
consider that they ought to come in the spirit, to Joh. 5
that which the Scripture points unto.

27. Oh that they all knew the right meaning of the commandment or forbidding
of God, according to the truth, then should the strife for outward things be
soon ended and laid down!

28. But look into the matter ye dearly beloved, whether it goes not now also
as it did heretofore with the Galathians (when many of them were bound with the
outward circumcision) Gal. 3, 5, 6
whilst certain caused themselves to be circumcised, supposing out of the
testimonies of the Scripture according to the letter, that the same (although
notwithstanding it was not administered unto them out of the Word of life, under
the obedience of the belief) was yet a commandment of the Lord, such as
according to the letter men were necessarily to keep; but inasmuch as they
distinguished not the services and ceremonies, which were administered unto them
out of the Word of Life, from the services which were administered unto them out
of the letter, without the word and light of Life, neither had the sight of the
living commandment of the Lord, or of God, nor yet discerned or knew the same
from the commandment according to the letter, therefore were they Gal. 3.5
lead away with the outward, from proceeding in the spirit, and were very
miserably bewitched with the outward, because they thought that even the
salvation of souls lay therein.

29. On the other side, there were also many among the Corinthians, that 1 Cor.
3
made conscience, and counted it for an abomination, to buy, eat, or use the
offering of the Idols, after the manner of the heathens ceremonies, supposing
that Gods forbidding and the hurt of souls, lay in the outward ceremonies of
the heathen, and that of themselves alone they were Idol-services. But what (I
pray you) is there on the one side or on the other, or in any such like that
concerns us?

30. Verily in case we be come to the knowledge of the truth, and to the right
discerning of this difference, then we know that all the outward services of
the heathen (so that the heart stand free from them) are not of force to Mat. 15
desile the inward man, Cor. 4 Gal. 4
in whom Christ has his form.

31. Also there consists in them alone, neither salvation nor condemnation,
such as God respects. For look what the heathen or the vain minded
uncircumcised people do observe, as concerning their God-services that is their
ignorance, Ephesians. 2.4
because they know not the true God, neither do hunger nor thirst after his
upright righteousness.

32. In case then that we be come to the true knowledge John 17
of the living God, (the which is our calling,) and do from the heart love his
life of righteousness in the spirit, shall we then say, and in such an
ignorance rest persuaded, that the God-service after the heathenish manner
should be any thing, or that it were the very Idol-service it self, that be far
from us.

33. We confess before God and his truth, and before all that believe thereon,
that there is Cor. 8
no outward Idol, nor any outward Idol-service in heaven, nor on earth, but
that there is one only God, (whose God-service requires the upright
righteousness, and likewise reaches to the Heb. 8.9
ministration of the spiritual and heavenly goods in the living being of God,
according to the spirit, wherethrough all things are, and out of the same and
his spiritual and heavenly ministration in the spirit, preceedeth John 17 Ephesians. 4
the upright righteousness and the unity of the heart in the love, and the
true God-service on the earth, whose Altar is Heb. 9
not made with men's hands, but is prepared of God from the beinning of the
world for evermore; and on the other side, we confess that all the
God-services and Gods of the heathen are but vain Ier. 10
mockeries, and for naught else to be respected, then for a foolish enchantment
in the ignorance, wherewith the vain hearts (which know nothing of God, nor of
his Law) are bewitched and tied.

34. Whilst then the ceremonies which (in contention) men call God services,
and as it were Ordinances of Christianity, and which in sundry manners are
brought in out of the Letter, do now bring much wrangling, strife, and
dissension in, therefore busy we not our selves much about them (whilst that
our heart is very little, or nothing at all tied unto them) but rather have
more regard, Gal. 5. Heb. 10
to give heed after the spirit unto that which the ceremonies of the Law, and
the services of the holy, Church of Jesu Christ do require, or whereunto they
are administered and used by the holy ones of God, and by the ancient Fathers of
the holy Church of Jesus Christ, out of the true light.

35. Nevertheless though we say we have more regard to attend unto that which
the ceremonies and services of the holy Church of Jesus Christ do require, yet
do we not therefore despise the Christian ceremonies or services, as though
they were of no value, or were besides the mind of the Spirit of Jesu Christ; O
no, that be far from us, but we esteem them great in their right degree and
use, Genesis 17 Mat. 28 Mar. 16.
as that the salvavation is with the ceremonies (but not through them) promised
unto the believers, Romans 3.9 Gal. 2.3
yet not that it should appear or come out of them.

36. For if the salvation were bound to the ceremonies, then must God needs be
a liar, whilst he had not ability to show mercifulness unto men out of his
grace, nor to save them, Romans 3.11 Ephesians. 2.
but that they must deserve the salvation through the works of the ceremonies.

37. Howbeit God abides true, and gracious, Psalm. 116 Romans 3
but the man is unfaithful and lying; for the man has forsaken the covenant
of his God, and has 4 Esd. 7.8
not regarded his promises, but abused his ceremonies, broken and despised the
right ordinances, and in the ministration of them, has not attended unto the
salvation of the belief, nor yet trusted in God, to obtain the same according
to the promises, but is 1 Timothy 4
fallen away from the meaning of the belief, gone forth after his own taken on
faith, and has forgotten the rock Deuteronomy. 32 Romans 9 1 Pet. 2
of his salvation.

38. Nevertheless, though (through infidelity, and the ignorance of men) the
right use of the ceremonies, and the meaning of the true belief, and of the
godly promises, be of many men forsaken, Number. 23 Deuteronomy. 4 Romans 3 2 Timothy 2
yet is God true notwithstanding, and he withholds not that which he has
promised, for his holy names sake; hereby declaring, that he is not unfaithful
or lying as the man is, but an everlasting, Eccl. 2
gracious and true God toward those that love him, that seek his
righteousness from the heart, and Mat. 5
hunger and thirst after it.

39. For he Deuteronomy. 4
forgets not his Covenant which he has made with the Fathers, neither does
he break his promises in Luke 1
such manner as he has spoken them (aforetimes) by the mouth of his holy
Pruphets, but will (for his own sake establish them, and cause the man Psalm. 50
to see his own human unfaithfulness and lying against his God, how that the
man has not regarded Gods Covenant nor his promises, under the services and
ceremonies, which were ordained for him of God; to this end that he Exodus 12 13
Mat. 26 Luke 22 1 Cor. 11
should think upon the same, to the intent he might be saved, accordiag to the
promises.

40. But not To. 9.11
that Gods promises are established out of the ceremonies, or through the works
of the ceremonies. O no, but Romans 5 Gal. 5
in the love, according to the spirit, and according to the truth out of the
heavenly being, through the belief, even as it is promised, and as the
Scripture makes mention.

41. Wherefore seeing that God has now out of his grace given us 2 Cor. 4
such clearness (under the obedience of the requiring of his service of love)
in the spirit of our hearts, therefore look we more upon the promises, giving
heed unto that [namely the 1 Timothy 1
love] which the promises are established in, then we do upon the like
counterfeited services or ceremonies: And for this cause we cannot let our
hearts be bound or entangled with any thing that is ministered without the true
light and service of love, nor yet yield to take part either against or with
it, but do endeavor our selves to the upright Ephesians. 4
righteousness and holiness in Jesus Christ, and to all concord in the love
and her service.

42. For thereunto were we and all men called heretofore of God the Father,
through the spirit of Christ, even that we should come through faith Romans 3.5, 8
to the righteousness in Jesu Christ, and to his true Mat. 22 John 17 1 Timothy 1
love, and that the ceremonies out of the true light, should for the same
intent be serviceable unto us.

43. Now might one here demand if the matter be so, why then have some yet
regard to taking part with flesh and blood? And wherefore do some yet make
conscience to themselves, to account the Schismatic ceremonies indifferent
unto them for some are held captive with affections, in their conscience, Romans
14 Gal. 3.4, 5
insomuch that they must yet observe certain ceremonies, and others again have
such an 1 Cor. 8.10.
abhorring of them, that they must necessarily leave them?

Answer.

44. Their unbelief Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
and blindness is the cause of it, inasmuch as they believe not the promises
of God, nor yet understand that the same are avouched in the spirit, but will
justify and esteem themselves faithful, either by cleaving to these, or by
leaving of those ceremonies, and think that before God they should be counted
unfaithful, if their hear^s were not steadfastly bound unto those things, which
they Col. 2
have chosen to themselves, and which without the word of life, and requiring
of his service of love, they judge their faithfulness to consist in, not
perceiving how unfaithful Esa. 59
and lying themselves are in their inwardnesse unto God and his upright
righteousness. For the Lord requires by his services and ceremonies
principally, the inward Ezekiel. 36 Mat. 23 Luke 11
cleanness according to the spirit. And even to that end did the old Fathers
of the holy Church of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.8 10. etc.
use the ceremonies among Christ his believers.

45. But because this is not understood nor believed aright by the children of
men, therefore know they not also what is reckned unto them for salvation, nor
yet wherein consists the condemnation.

46. For seeing they give respect to their unclean consciences, and are fast
tied to something that directs not to God and his righteousness, they cannot
therefore perceive nor understand what God requires of them, for their
consciences are stained with something which they esteem for holy, and yet is
not of God, and therefore they fear.

47. But if they came to the Joh. 1 2 Pet. 1 1 Ioh. 1
sight of the living being of God, which only is boly, and whereby all visible
things are hallowed, and be used or ministered uprightly, then would they
(through the ministering of the Sap. 13 Romans 1
visible things) have regard to the everlasting, and not to the corruptible,
either for to fear it, or else for to esteem the outward, above the profit
thereof, as whereby they might in any wise be accused, and would in the spirit
love that, which all is comprehended in, and which the ceremonies of the Law of
the belief, and of the service of love do point and direct unto.

48. So then the sum of all that God requires of us, is 1 Reg. 15
an obedience which is after God, and not after the manner of men, or according
to elementish working; namely, An Ezekiel. 36 1 Timothy 1
upright heart toward God and his righteousness, a Psalm. 5.
willing spirit, and a pure unspotted conscience in Jesu Christ.

49. Heb. 6.10
Let us hereunto, in the obedience of the requiring of the service of Love,
proceed on with 1 Timothy 1
unfeigned faith, in Romans 12 1 Pet. 1.3
brotherly love, and in Romans 12 2 Cor. 13 Heb. 12
a peaceable mind; for thereunto are we called, and this same is the upright
Salvation, which God makes choice of in us.

Take it to heart.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. We are exhorted to accept of the proffered Grace, and to grow up in
Righteousness, unto the Glory which shall be revealed at the last. 3. Not to
bind our Consciences to any outward thing, nor to assume any Liberty to our
selves. 11. To take heed of Halting on both sides, and of Mixing with the
World. 15. We are at first, called to Sanctification, and not to much
Confessing with the mouth. 16. Christ (indeed) is to be confessed: but how?

SEeing then (Dearly-beloved) that such a godly sight is now in these dangerous
times by Gods Grace appeared unto us, that we sensibly perceive in our selves
the divine Calling to the same: (which appears unto us, not out of Flesh nor
Blood; but is brought unto us out of the heavenly Truth, or Loins of Jesu
Christ, through Acts 2.
the holy Ghost, Acts 15.
for to cleanse our hearts through Faith, according to the Promises; the which
is 1 Cor. 3.
the blessing and increase of God, that is not tied unto any working of men,
but is the power of God the Father himself, for Ephesians. 1.
a pledge of our Inheritance:) therefore let us take heed to such an appeared 2
Cor. 6. Hebr. 12.
Grace, and Heb. 3.
Grace, and Heb. 3.
not turn us away in the time of the godly calling of Salvation, but give over
our hearts (in the belief) thereunto [namely, to the obedience of the Love, in
the Spirit] and so (with all inclination of love, with lowly hearts unto God,
and with long-suffering) Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.
grow up and increase in the Righteousness and Holiness that are pleasing
unto God, that we may be a seat of the holy Triumph of our Lord Jesu Christ in
his Coming. Which heavenly cleernesse of the godly Triumph, and of the glory of
his Christ in the Spirit, Romans 16. Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
has hitherto been hidden from the World, and has ceased, because it should
be 1 Pet. 1.
disclosed and made manifest (in holy Glory) in the last time, to the joy of
the Believers, that hope for the salvation of upright hearts.

2. That truly is it which God requires, and whereunto all Gods Prophets have
born witness: And Joel. 2. Acts 2.
it shall come to pass (says God) in the last days.

3. Therefore let no man now make to himself any conscience, Col. 2. Gal. 4.5
nor suffer his heart to be bound or tied by any earthly outward thing, that he
be not thereby hindered for coming to the purity or sanctification of the heart,
which (out of God) comes to pass in the Spirit.

4. Let no man also take any thing upon him to any intent of Liberty, whereby
to live Genesis 3. Ephesians. 4.
in the apple of conscience, after the mind of this World. For (in such a
course) the Liberty should be wholly abused, and be unto us an occasion Gal. 5.
1 Pet. 2.
to use liberty according to the Flesh, and utterly to fail of the upright John
8. Romans 6.
Liberty in Jesus Christ.

5. But seeing that we have now obtained an upright liberty in Jesu Christ
(under the obedience of the Love) in the using of the Services and Ceremonies;
and that both it, and the manner how we are to use the Ceremonies uprightly (in
these dangerous times, is risen up unto us in our hearts, and vouchsafed us of
God, therefore are we to look into this Liberty after the Spirit, for to use it
to a growth of the upright life in the Spirit, that there may Isa. 1.10. Romans 9.
remain a seed to preservation: for then will the God of heaven (now in the
last time) make his holy Name, and his secret Wisdom famous and notable,
against all the wise of this World, Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1. and 2. and 3.
who by their own wisdom, do not understand the secret Wisdom of God.

6. Hereunto let your hearts be inclined, ye Dearly-beloved, and not to the
infidelity of the blind World, nor to the contention of the seditious
Letter-learned. And in any case take heed to your Eccl. 4. and 27. Gal. 6.
time, ye that are come to such a sight, and to the holy calling of the godly
love; and thank God from the heart (with a cheerful mind) Tit. 2.
for such an appeared grace, out of the bountiful kindness of his love, in
this last abominable time, whose end reaches to the destruction Mat. 25. Romans
2. 2 Pet. 3.
or condemnation of all wicked men.

7. Let your eyes of the spirit, and Prove. 4.
your whole heart of Understanding stand ever fixed or bent upon the upright
life. Look not about after the corruptible being, but love the happiness of
preservation, which is (through the Word of truth) in all love proffered unto
you; else shall you be found empty and without understanding, with all the Jer.
7.8.
conceited Wise of the blind World, which, with all her own wisdom, must needs
Isa. 29. 1 Cor. 1.
go down, and Gods wisdom (though unto the World it be a foolishness) shall
in the love stand firm for ever.

8. For Gods foolishness it 1 Cor. 1.
wiser then all the wisdom of the subtle wit, or understanding of the flesh.
For, if the man should have the right in his wisdom, doubtless God must needs
be in the wrong.

9. Therefore abides the Saying ever steadfast; Psalm. 116 Romans 3.
God only good and true in trying, and all men (of themselves) deceivable and
lying.

10. Which deceivable and lying Eccl. 21.
being the man ought, before all things, to eschew, even as a Canker, and with
the heart to cleave to none Pro. 1.3. 1 John 2.
whose mind, will, and desire has any delight and pleasure in the ungodly
being of the confused world: Mat. 10. Luke 14.
yea, though it were even Husband, Wife, Children and Kinsfolks, Father or
Mother, Sister or Brother, Master or Servant; Nay, be he who he will, so far
as he cleaves willingly to the evil.

11. Oh! Take heed to your selves, that in any wise ye go not (with the heart)
lame or limping 3 Reg. 18
, nor halt on both sides: that ye seek not the living God, with retaining the
Devils nature; 2 Cor. 6
nor Christ, with keeping the Belialish spirit of Antichrist; nor the
righteousness, by retaining any unrighteousness, to the intent that in such a
mixture ye perish not with the wicked erring World, which desires to serve God
and the Devil together.

12. With those which are so minded, Supra 16
hold not your hearts common, or at unity; you [I mean] that have a longing to
God and his Righteousness; but rather be ye against them, [namely, against such
as withstand all Righteousness, and the Uuitie in the Love;] yet not with the
Mouth, lest ye be burdened with any thing to your hinderance in Godliness:
Pro. 4.
but with the Heart, Mind, and Life. For in the same opposition is the right
Preservation in Jesus Christ which God esteems.

13. Nevertheless, unto the lovers of Righteousness, who have minded Love,
Concord and Peace, or do endeavor thereafter, we are to speak (according as
their Understanding can bear) 1 Pet. 3.
of the lively hope which is in us, [to wit, so much as serves to edification,
and may be godly to hear;] and so become full of the Spirit, and Ephesians. 1. Phil.
1. Col. 1.
knowledge of spiritual wisdom in all love.

14. Many have indeed heretofore (as it is reasonably well known unto many of
us) spoken of Letter and Scripture abundantly, rehearsed every man's Fails,
both of the Spiritual and Temporal, and (according to the Histories of the
Scriptures) confessed their Understanding; and yet have not marked nor known in
what sort or being they should prepare their Eccl. 2.
hearts before God: and so, by their untimely zeal, have cast themselves into
the hands of the World, and plucked a yoke Act. 15.
or burden upon their necks, which they were not able to bear.

15. Keep your selves, ye Deerly-beloved, from such things. For, at first, God
calls us 1 These. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
unto Sanctification in the Spirit, and not unto much Confessing with the Mouth.

16. Now, if any man say, Christ has taught to Mat. 10. Mat. 8. Luke 9. and 12.
confess him; That is right indeed, if it were well understood.

17. But, O Beloved! tell me, I pray you, How will ye confess Christ, Joh. 1.5.
whom ye know not, or before ye have, in Romans 6.8 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3. Col. 2.
death and life, followed and put him on?

18. True it is, ye have read or heard of Him in the Scripture; nevertheless,
many have never seen Joh. 5.
his shape, and his love dwells not in them: and therefore they understand
not what they confess. For how should you by any means confess Christ, before
Gal. 4.
he have his shape in you, and that ye Joh. 17. Heb. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
be made partakers of his being?

19. Know ye not, that it is written, how that Christ says to his Father,
Joh. 17.
I have given them the cleernesse which thou have given me, that they should
be one, even as we are one: I in them, and Thou in Me, that they may be
perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and thou
have loved them, as thou have loved Me. Father, I will, that where I am, there
may they also be with me, whom thou have given me?

20. Ruminate upon the sense, mark well the ground, understand the Scripture,
and take a view of your selves, whether ye have received of Christ such a
cleernesse or not; and whether he be one with you, and ye with him, and with
the Father.

21. Now, if it be thus with you, to wit, that ye be come to such a 1 These. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
sanctification in the Spirit, through Christ, then ye know who he is for to
confess him; and ye know him, how that he is Heb. 1.
the like image of his Father, one Being, Spirit or Life with the Godhead Apoc.
1.22.
, who has neither beginning nor ending.

22. He says also, Joh. 14.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes to the Father, but only
through Me.

23. Moreover, Joh. 10.
I am the door of the Sheep; if any man enter in by me, he shall be saved.

24. Therefore have regard to the ground of the Scriptures, how (in all things)
they point us unto Christ, to the intent that he should have his Gal. 4.
shape in us; and that we should be in all upright righteousness and holiness
Joh. 17. Heb. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
partakers of his Being, if it were but rightly understood. For it is
unpossible Exo. 33. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 2.
to know the Spirit of Christ, with an heart that is clothed or covered with a
mind of the Flesh.

25. If Christ therefore has a Shape in you, Joh. 7. How men shall rightly
confess Christ.
and you believe in him, as the Scripture says, then may you confess him
rightly: Howbeit, not out of your imagining, nor according to your knowledge
out of the letter, as the learned in the letter and the common people do, that
are without the communiality of the love of Jesus Christ; but confess him out
of the shape that he has in you, through such a cleernesse as Joh. 1. Acts 2.
2 Cor. 12 Gal. 1. 2 Pet. 1.
his Apostles confessed him by; even as it is written,

26. That which was 1 John 1.
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of life. And
the life appeared, and we have seen it, and do testify and publish unto you
the eternal life, which was with the Father, and is appeared unto us.

27. Here may every one look into himself, whether he also do thus know Christ,
before he testify or confess much of him: otherwise he knows not what he
confesses.

28. Therefore, we must first be turned unto Christ according to the Truth;
that is, Romans 5. Gal. 5. 1 Pet. 1.
in Hope, through Faith, unto the righteousness, and so, with good will, stand
firm thereunto in the belief, Mat. 10. and 16. Lu. 9.14.
take up daily our cross in the obedience of the holy Word of the Spirit of
the love of Christ, and follow him with patience in our souls, to the
salvation, until he obtain a Gal. 4.
Shape in us, and his death Gal. 6.
of the cross become a joy unto us; and so in the truth know him, to the intent
we might confess him rightly.

29. For the heart must be turned into him, and he into our hearts; and then
may we rightly confess him with the mouth. Or think thou, O thou man, that
this pleases God, to speak of God sometimes Mat. 7.
with the mouth, and so to confess his Chirst (not respecting among whom, or
to whom) of whom a man knows nothing at all, and whiles your Isa. 29. Mat. 15.
heart remains so far estranged from Christ, and from his upright
Righteousnesss and Holiness in the Spirit? O no: whosoever takes it so, shall
be deceived therein.

30. For, if thine heart be not turned to Christ and his Service of love,
neither be inclined to the 1 These. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
sanctification in the Spirit, and thou, through the belief of the truth, do
not, with inclination of the love, Ephesians. 4.
grow up therein, then is all thy faith and confessing unprofitable, and
unpleasing to God and his Christ.

31. If thou therefore, O man, do either despise, or have no regard unto that
which is [out of love] held forth, or witnessed unto thee, thou shall surely
lament it at the last: namely, in those days when Misery shall fall upon thee,
and that thou shall see the Triumph of the gloriousness of Christ, Jude 1.
in many thousand Saints, coming Isa. 43. and 49.
from the rising of the Sun, and going down; from the midday, and from the
North or midnight; and that they Isa. 51. and 52.60.61.62.
shall with gladness be assembled (as a Kingdom of God their Father) unto Mat.
8.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and unto all the holy Prophets; Mat. 8. and 25.
Luke 13.
and thou then shall find thy self shut out of doors.

32. And therefore now have ye all regard Psalm. 51. Isa. 57.66. Micah 6.
to an upright heart and meek spirit, according to the spirit or life of
Christ, and Pro. 1.
separate your selves from the ways of all the uncircumcised and unbeleeving.

33. Howbeit, not outwardly with the body, or with words; 1 Cor. 5.
for then must ye go out of the world, and abide in no place, for the
unbeleeving darknesses Isa. 5.9 60. 4 Esd. 14.
have covered the world everywhere. But 2 Cor. 6.
separate you from them with heart and spirit; Believe the good in the love,
and become likewise a light in the Lord; Apo. 18.
so shall ye not be partakers of their ungodliness.

34. This write I unto you, ye Deerly-beloved, for this intent, even to stir
you up hereby to a pure mind, and to that piety which God regards: also for
a warning of destruction to come; and that ye may perceive, how that men are to
stand unpartiall (according to the requiring of the Truth) for to use well the
2 Pet. 1.
common love, and to know the upright confessing of Jesus Christ: whereby to
understand (so much as the Lord, out of his grace, permits us to see)
wherein the calling of our salvation consists, to the intent that no man,
through misunderstanding or vain imagination, deceive himself, or be deceived
by others.

35. If now any man be drawn away, Gal. 1.
or lead aside from this good understanding which we bear witness unto, let
such a one turn him again to the Good (that his inclination to Gods requiring
be not in vain,) and lament and bewail his ignorance, that the Lord may be
gracious unto him; and so apply himself, with whole heart, mind, and will, to
the upright righteousness, which in the Love abides firm for ever.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Of the common Saying, They shall be all taught of God; How it is mistaken,
and with what hurt. 11. Who they are, and how they order themselves, that shall
be taught of God.

THere goes also a common Saying abroad amongst many, and it is Scripture,
[the which is recited in the first Book of the Glass of Right cousnesse; and
also in many mo places of our Writings] Isa. 54. Jer. 31.
They shall all be taught aright of God, and Ezekiel. 11. and 36. Joel 2. Acts 2.
by his Spirit.

2. Now, whiles some that have heard and spoken of this Sentence, understood
not the Scripture, nor rightly took heed to the sense of the Word, therefore
they have not explained the meaning of the Word aright.

3. Also some that have heard it, have let the counsel of the Word go, and so
are fallen into the sorgetting of the good, turned away from the desire to the
Righteousness, and from the hope of Salvation, according to the Promises, and
have sticked unto Romans 1. Epes. 4.
covetousness and lusts, the snares of the confused world.

4. Truly, those that cleave to the Word, and his Service of Love in such a
sort, and do so take and understand it, they have conceived altogether amiss
of the Word and his requiring; and therefore they are Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
become vain in their understanding: Insomuch, that they forsake the Scriptures
and Exhortations to the good all alike, and do let the conversion to God, and
to his Righteousness, utterly dye out of their hearts; speaking thus with
unrepentant hearts, out of the vanity of their mind, (not discerning the
upright understanding) It must all come of God; There is One that gives all;
For it is God only that can teach us; Of him must we receive all, and no men
can give it us.

5. This they say well; and run yet nevertheless forth, as if there were no
God, nor Ministering of his Word, that loved or required the Righteousness; and
do not once know, nor consider the estranging or Isa. 1.59.
falling from their God, whereby to turn them again to him and his
Righteousness, and to show repentance or Matt. 3. Luke 3. Acts 3.
amendment for their sins; and so in all humility to have regard to what
purpose God has given his Promises, and annexed or ordained the Ministration
of his Word under the obedience of the love thereunto, whereby they might receive
of him the virtue of salvation. For out of such a heart of humility Isa. 57.66.
4 Esd. 8. Eccl. 3. Jam. 4. 1 Pet. 5.
the humble do always in God find their salvation; and not the stout hearts,
that do not esteem of Gods righteousness.

6. O God! How dangerous a time is it now 1 Timothy 4 2 Timothy 3 2 Pet. 3. Jude 1.
in these last days, through the misunderstanding of the children of men!

7. What a number of false and venomous winds do there blow among the children
of men, to the hurt of their souls, and to a drawing of them away from the
Righteousness!

8. Oh, That there were in every one an hearty desire to the good! then might
they be protected and defended from the bewitching of the false winds, which
make the heart negligent to the upright Good, and bring it either to the
bewitched Humility, or to the Lusts of the vain world.

9. Therefore it is expedient to have a regard to Understanding, Prove.
1.2.3.4.8.
to take heed to the Wisdom, to esteem much of Godliness, to account the
upright Righteousness Sap. 7.8
for the most precious, above all Riches, and to make choice of the
Long-sufferance, with the foresightfulnesse as Superintendents.

10. This did the holy Fathers in times past give heed unto; Sap. 11. Eccl.
44.45, 46.
and so God taught them in his wisdom, and preserved them, that they were not
partakers of the plagues of the ungodly.

11. Wherefore let every one understand the meaning of the Word aright, and
take a right view, that he may know who he is, and how he ought to apply
himself to be taught of God, and to be endowed with his Spirit, and what manner
of people God will choose for his holy people.

12. Truly not such, Sap. 1.
as with their hearts cleave unto the world, love the Evil, Pro. 1.
and in all things let go the counsel of God. Neither yet such, Mat. ^ Luke
17.21
as hang their Hearts in buying and selling, upon coveteousnesse, or Romans i 3 1
Cor. 10
in eating and drinking, upon gluttony; or in marrying, or being married, upon
unchastnesse; or upon any vain transitory rejoicing, whether it be in building
or in planting; and who in all their doings do not attend nor have regard unto
the works of the Lord, as it came to pass in the times Genesis 7.
of Noe, and in the Genesis 19
times of Lot.

13. For all those, whose hearts in the time of Noe, clave not to Gods
righteousness, but had a Lust, and gave over their hearts to the vain corrupt
things: they marked not the work of the Lord, neither had any respect to the
preservation of the Righteous, nor yet feared the punishment, which then was
ready to come upon all wicked men. Of all this they knew nothing, till the
Flood came upon them, and took them clean away.

14. Therefore understand and know the preservation of godly men in these last
days, and consider well the meaning, who or which they are, that shall be
taught of God, and in what course they walk (the which we have in some measure
expressed, 1 Glass.
in the first Book of the Glass of Righteousness, and do here at this
present express it:) namely, they are those that Mat. 5.
have hunger and thirst after the Righteousness, Judith. 8 Eccl. 2.3
that submit their souls to the obedience of the gracious Word, and his
Service, Luke 18
and continue daily in prayer (not in many words, John 4. Ephesians. 6. Phil. 4.
but in the Spirit, with desire to the Lord and his Righteousness) that they may
obtain grace at the hands of God, to live Luke 1
in his righteousness, with an upright heart, and pure spirit.

15. These are sorrowful for their sins, and sighing over them, suffer not
their souls to be quiet, so long as they know or feel in themselves any vain
or naughty Being, which their hearts are tied or bound unto: or so long as any
thing in them does reign over them, which is not GOD, because they may not in
all things serve their God only.

16. These that love the good Being from the heart, do seek in God to obtain
the same, and do labor and zealously endeavor thereafter: Deuteronomy. 4 Jer. 29.
Mat. 7. Luke 12.
For they seek and find, they knock and it is opened unto them, they ask and
receive: not in presumptuousnesse, as though God owed it them, because of their
seeking, knocking, and asking. O no: they look not upon their own doings, but
labor only for this, even how to please the Lord, giving themselves over
thereunto with humble hearts, according to the Spirit, and acknowledge that
they are not worthy of such Grace, thus to be accepted and established in Gods
truth and love.

17. With such humble hearts do they through the Love and her Service, seek to
find grace and peace at the hands of God the Father, and not the subtle
knowledge, 1 Cor. 6
which makes the heart stout and lofty: Mat. 6.
but they seek above all, and before all things, the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness. The which are the gifts of God, that God richly brings in the
everlasting life, unto such as worship and love him.

18 For those that pray unto him for an upright heart, and for a new and pure
Spirit, Luke 11
he does not endow with an evil heart or a wicked spirit (though sometimes the
evil heart, or unrighteous spirit make up it self there-against: yet is the
same taken away Ephesians. 6.
through the Belief, in the Cross or patience of Christ, upon hope of the
good that is for to come:) but they obtain faithfulness and truth, Luke 11
and the righteous Spirit, with an heart of meekness and love. And that is
Christ, or the Anointed, which is holy, and teaches right. It is true.

19. After this manner do they apply themselves that will be taught of God, and
his Christ, out of whom God will prepare him an Tit. 1.
acceptable people, to be a remnant for himself in the destruction of the
wicked world. Yea it shall be a Esa. 41 Soph. 3. Luke 12.
poor plain people: (not after the outward sight of the eye, but according to
the hidden inward man) such as hope on the Lord, and in the Spirit, rely and
trust upon his Name. And these same, yea such does God choose unto him for his
people, for to magnify his holy Name in them for evermore.

20. For consider, ye beloved, how should any man be taught of God, or Christ,
that will not give ear to his teaching or counsel, but does as Gods enemy,
cleave unto and love the Joh. 8.1 John 2.
Devil and the World, which do openly resist God?

21. Therefore oughr the lovers of the Truth, which hope for the salvation of
the perfect Being, utterly to put out of their hearts Prove. 1
whatsoever concerns the vanity or misbehaviour, and every thing which the
heart, contrary to God and his Righteousness, is bound or tied with, so much as
in the Lord they are able, and so to give over themselves to God, that Gods
goodness may have his place in them, and not any ungodly Being.

22. Also all lovers of the Righteousness ought to Ephesians. 4.
reach the hand, and to Romans 15. 2 These. 5 Heb. 3.10.
exhort one another to the same: and so in one manner of Belief, to strengthen
each other toward salvation with a good courage: 2 Pet. 1
and to have regard to the sure prophetical Word [to wit, to the Service of
the Love, administered in his time] to treat thereof: Act. 2.20
to break that same bread among each other in stillness: and to persevere or
abide stedfest in prayer, till Esa. 25 2 Cor. 3.
all coverings (wherewith their hearts, after the flesh, or according to the
visible, are covered) be done away: and that the pure or clear [that is to
say, the spiritual, heavenly, and uncovered Being of Christ] 2 Cor. 3.
appear and come in their spirit, to the intent that so they might 1 John 4. 2
Cor. 5.
know, and cleave fast unto the living God, and his Christ, in the spirit (even
as he, blessed may he be, is a Spirit) and in all Love (wherein the Law and the
Gospel of the Kingdom and the doctrine thereof, is Romans 15 Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
fulfilled) might with all their understanding, will and desire, live the
upright righteousness of God: Deuteronomy. 4 Mat. 22.
and that God likewise may be the most best beloved, and his Righteousness
Mat. 13. 2 Cor. 4.
their most precious Treasure, worthy to be esteemed high above all.

23. Whosoever now do thus, with an inclination to the same, stand in a good
will, to them belongs the blessing and happiness promised of God: to whom it
is also promised, Psalm. 82. John 1.
that they shall be made the children of God, and be blessed with the dew of
his increase, and be anointed for Psa. 45
Christians with the oil of Love and of his Spirit or Christian nature: yet
not out of flesh and blood, but out of the holy Divine Being.

24. When the man therefore is thus joined unto God, then may he with God,
rightly possess all things, and understand and know, whereout the horrible
destruction comes upon the Children of men.

25. Wherefore the man should fear his God, that he might come to the godly
wisdom, and might cleave unto that which is right and reasonable, to the
intent, that he might not perish with the wicked.

26. For wisdom, Pro. 8. Sap. 7.
is much better then Gold and Silver. Righteousness much worthier and
preciouser, than all Pearls and precious stones; and prudence much more
honorable, puissant, and strong, than all Castles, Cities, and Fortresses,
also mightier than the multitudes of the Armed. The fear of God does more
quiet the heart in a little, than do abundant Riches in all the pleasures and
delights of the world. It shall in his time be found and known to be even so.

27. Unto this holy and divine wisdom, apply ye your hearts, ye dearly beloved,
and be ye warned in this dangerous time, in which, all foolishnes and
ungodlines bears sway: whose end reaches Heb. 10
to the most horriblest destruction.

28. For so it comes, which is for to come, and all ungodly being shall make
up it self and be astonished, after that it shall Esa. 13.
fear, tremble, and quake, and be compelled in the beholding of his own
destruction, to suffer the vengeance of the fire, but the godly shall obtain
peace.

29. Therefore take heed, fear God, stick fast to virtue, humility, and
meeknes, least ye remain in the ungodlines, Apo. 18
and be made partakers of her plagues.

30. Watch Mat. 24. Luke 21. 1 Pet. 5.
and pray, and be reformed or justified, and stand fast upon Gods promises.

31. Observe your time, Gal. 6.
unto sanctification, Jam. 1.
and behold in you daily the spots of your spirit, in the Glass of
Righteousness, and wash you, Esa. 1. Jer. 4. Ezekiel. 36 John 3.
with the clean waters, in the laver of the Love; and be purged in your
spirit, Eccl. 2.
in the Furnace of the lowlines of heart, and so love that thing which is right
and reasonable.

CHAP. XX.
1. The Author has kept back nothing, that is necessary to Salvation. 5. And
therefore eleareth himself of the Man's destruction. 8. Yet if any do know any
better thing, he desires that they will show it out of love, as he has done.
10. A Council to all lovers of the truth, how to behave themselves. 19. Showing
them what God requires. 26. He wills, that men desire not to have all at
once. 30. Many ignorant beginnings, have brought men into diverse
misunderstandings: especially, into security. 39. From which he exhorts to
return with a new courage, unto the service of the love. 43. Of diverse that are
diversely disposed to error. Some to rest upon themselves, some upon their
Liberty, some regard neither sin nor Grace, some straiten themselves to get the
promises: and afterward grow inselent upon their own worthiness. 57. Whereof he
wills to beware.

BEhold ye beloved, according to all that in my labor I have been able to do,
howsoever the same be plain, and not to be compared to the style of the subtle
and flowred eloquence) I cannot tell that I have (according to the sight which
is Romans 16 Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
revealed unto me, out of Gods grace) kept back any thing from the man, that
serves, or is needful for him to know either to his Salvation, or else for a
warning unto him, of the present destruction, and of that that is to come.

2. Have regard to the time, and respect an unpartial heart in the Righteousness
Ephesians. 3.
Be established in the love, and be still mindful of the same.

3. I have showed my service out of the inclination of love: howbeit, I have
written against none in particular, but before all understandings
indifferently: I have weighed the equity, Esa. 28 Eccli. 21.
in the balance, measured the Righteousness with the Square and Line, and
described the Righteousness in Letters, according to the life, the inward life
out of God, [to wit, his good nature] I have expressed, and the outward
righteousness of man, have I not left out. To the intent, that it might all go
rightly forward in the true Being, and that no man might be bewitched, or
bound with any opinion or bewitching of spirit; but that every one might
according to the truth, and in the love stand free in God.

4. Lo, God Deuteronomy. 30. Act. 20.
is my witness, and Heaven and Earth also; that in all my writing, I have
neither sought nor desired any other thing, but the salvation of men in the
love. The Lord of his mercy vouchsafe us to find grace in his sight, Psalm. 86
and lead us in his ways, for to cleanse our hearts by Psalm. 51. Act. 15.
his righteous spirit and by faith, to the end, we may know him in the truth,
and be defended from all the errors and abominations of the wicked world.

5. Behold and awake, Ephesians. 5.
in the spirit of your minds lay hold of understanding: look to your selves, 1 John 2.
and let not the errors of this world delight you. I clear my self this day
before you all, and before all those that willingly desire or be minded to
error, or to the wicked world, that my Council and will is not so.

6. If any man therefore take pleasure, or be addicted to the world or to her
vanity and abominations: and do desire to fix his heart thereon. The same
erreth through the pleasing of his own mind. But as for me, I clear my self of
his destruction.

7. For lo, I have out of the inclination of love, called and bidden you all
out of the abominable World, unto conversion to God, and unto Repentance, and
unto Amendment, and have herein warned you all sufficiently: I have distingtly
showed you (as much as I might do and saw necessary) both death Deuteronomy. 11 Jer.
21. Eccl. 15.
and life, destruction and preservation: I have witnessed and pointed forth the
God of life, which has made Heaven and Earth, his Statutes Deuteronomy. 4
and Ordinances which stand fast for ever, (wherein all the upright Fathers
have lived, and which all Gods Prophets have born witness of) I have also
distinctly marked out. Therefore shall no man (that hears or reads our
writings, be able to John 15
excuse himself, as though that we have hidden the Council or Will of God from
him in any thing.

8. Nevertheles, if there be any greater God, then the God of Israel, which
has made Heaven and Earth: If there be now any better Law or Ordination, then
his Law: Deuteronomy. 4
Or better Statutes and Ordinances, then Gods Statutes and Ordinances,
according to his Ordination: If there be any perfecter life then the 1 Cor. 13
Col. 3. 1 John 4.
love, as is witnessed by his Christ: (for through the very same was John 1.
the life aforetimes published, which is everlasting: and on that same, or to
that same everlasting life, is even our service and pointing also.) Or if three
be any thing in any body, or if any man has any better thing, that excels
the everlasting life and the Love, which we bear witness unto, let him manifest
the same unto us, or let it out of Love be known unto us, to the unity of heart
in the Love, even as we to the self same unity, do witness, manifest and
publish, the everlasting life, and his righteousness of the Love and of the
upright being.

9. Or if any man persuade himself, that he knows some better thing, which
points nearer or clearer to the Almighty, than the holy Spirit of the Love
and of th everlasting Truth does testify and point unto us, (by which
Testimonies, he Ioh. 14.
brings, and leads us into all Truth:) Let the same man make himself
apparent unto us under the obedience of the Love, with an unpartiall mind; and
not withhold from us the most best, for to serve in the unity of heart in the
Love, as is said, in upright godliness, the living God only; For even thus
stands our whole heart affected.

10. Hereunto be ye now all armed and well disposed, O ye lovers of the Truth.
Beware that ye sleep not, Romans 13. Ephesians. 5.
seeing it is now a time to Watch; but awake in the Spirit: and abide in any
wise in the Hope, until ye see the light to the life your salvation.

11. Make not hardly any light account of it: cast it not with the unregarding
ones, in the wind; but have respect always unto the good, and this service of
the Love showed on you; which is in Letters described and ministered unto you,
to a godly life, stretching to the Love, turn not aside from you; but take
Deuteronomy. 6. Prove. 4.
the same to heart: and grow therein, to an upright being of the Love. And so
then show your unpartiall service toward one another, according to the upright
nature and being of the Love; For the Love to the unity of the brotherly nature
requires such things, to the intent that the everlasting true God, might in
such upright Ephesians. 4.
righteousness and holiness as pleases him, and in the establishment of his
promises only be observed; and the earth likewise Esa. 60.61. 2 Pet. 3.
with righteousness, faithfulness and Truth, be inhabited. Toward this let
us go forward, in a meek spirit.

If ye hear any thing that sounds unto you strange or Hos. 8.
absurd in your ears, yet be not bitterly minded: but follow after long
suffering, and blaspheme nothing.

13. Let every one which is not to be spoken to, or to be councelled, run to
an end, with his understanding; and grow ye up in stilnes, and singlenes of
heart, Sap. 9. Jam. 1.
praying God for Wisdom, and for an upright sight in the Truth; But tie not
your hearts unto any thing, save only, to the good life of the Truth; Ioh. 8.
For that shall make you free.

14 Above all things ye beloved 1 Cor. 14. Col. 3.
follow still after the Love, For there neither is, nor shall be, any thing
that may excel her. Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22 1 Cor. 13 1 Timothy 1
The Love is the cheifest good, the Truth a light to the life, and the
Righteousness our joy. Hereunto let our hearts be affected: for herein stands
the praise of the Lord.

15. Thus let us forsake all bewitching of the Spirit: and depart from the
evil, and increase or grow up in the good: And that all in stillnes, and in
the hidden wisdom of God. For the time peradventure will yet a little while
remain troublous, to speak freely before all people, of the Truth and godliness;
For at this time, she is Esa. 59. 3 Esd. 14.
yet with the World much too base, but love and esteem ye her so much the more:
and gather ye her to your selves, for a treasure in your hearts.

16. All what the wicked world loves, all the enormities and abominations,
that the Ministers of the wicked world, do gather in their hearts, and all the
envy, contentiousnes, and strife of the obstinate Teachers against us, and our
most holiest service of the Love, cast and hurl them all out of your hearts,
and inwardly have nothing to do with them; For their inwardnes is full of
vanity, falsehood and malieiousnes, and their joy is only in their foolish
knowledge, and in the earthly and transitory things.

17. But let your hearts be full of the life and being of the true Godhead,
and your joy only in his righteousness, that therein ye may live, in the
Spirit, and according to the Truth.

18. Let it be a pleasure unto you that God becomes Lord and King over all.
Have a desirous heart to the good, to the same reach also Ephesians. 4.
one another the hand, and retain no offense of mis-doing one toward another;
but exhort to amendment, Eccle. 28. Mat. 6. Col. 3.
and forgive in the Love, that so we may grow up with each other, in one band
of Love unto the godliness, as a reconciled or Tit. 2.
acceptable people of the Lord, through Jesus Christ, such as have found grace,
and mercy at the hands of God the father, for to inhe^i^ his promises, and to
serve him with pure hearts in all love.

19. Behold, to be comprehended herein, is the life which is everlasting: and
to reach one another the hand to the same godliness, and to exort to amendment
of life, and to retain no man his sins, is the Hos. 6. Matt. 9.
Mercy which God requires of us, and not Sacrifices.

20. He requires Righteousness, and nates the ungodly being; He shows his
longsuffering toward them of good will, Esa. 53. Heb. 2.
and bears their infirmity or weakness, as one that would not have any man to
perish or to turn back.

21. For a willing heart, is a delight unto him: and a broken or troubled
Spirit, Psalm. 51.
for his sins cause will he not despise.

22. A good confidence toward his grace of a converting sinner, is a joy unto
him: Luke 15.
and it causes also a joy in the heavenly Being.

23. Therefore Deuteronomy. 20. Esa. 55.
let no man be dismayed, nor faint-hearted: but let every one from the heart,
upon hope in the Belief; apply himself to the good: and Luke 21.
possess his soul with patience, unto the godly promises.

24. Let no man take any yoke upon him, out of his own choice, least by some
means of his unablenes, he fall into a loathing toward the good, but grow up
by little and little, and profit ye still from time to time.

25. Keep always what ye have: go not Apo. 2.
back in any case, that you loose not the Crown of Salvation. Go still forward
increasing in the good, and in the knowledge of the holy understanding: Heb. 6.
and so pass on toward the perfection.

26. Nevertheless, desire not to have every thing at once; but grow up in the
good, from the Heb. 5.
beginning of the Christian life (That is, from the repentance for sin, Matt. 3.
to go on in amendment of life, and to abide steadfast therein, even to the
Matt. 24.
end) until the true life of perfection: That is, Ephesians. 4.
until the old age of the Man Christ. The which is inwardly to obtain the
Love essentially.

27. And that is the perfection of our godliness, wherein we are to grow up,
from the beginning of our turning to God, and to the entrance of the first
School-rule of the Christian Doctrine of the gracious Word, and his Service of
Love; until we be established in God and his true Love, according to the
Promises.

28. If therefore any man love the good, and his soul desire to inherit the
same, let him go thereunto with an humble heart: and follow after it out of
undetstanding, that ignorance grieve not his soul.

29. For there have been many in times past, that would by force, have all the
righteousness all at once, and would feine, according to their fancy, consume
and destroy the sin altogether by heaps; but they have fallen into greater and
grievouser sins.

30. But in as much now as many beginnings, are with lack of understanding taken
in hand; therefore diverse men, are become vnlustfull to the Matt. 24.
Righteousness, and have turned themselves back again: and do cleave to the
world, and to her misunderstanding, more than ever they did before.

31. Diverse others perceive no difference between the illuminated and
vnilluminated Men; and so whiles they are not yet illuminated themselves, they
give regard both to their own Imagination of the Knowledge, and also to the
Precepts of unilluminated men because they trust upon such things: and suppose,
that in such sort all is well with them.

32. They discern not also the life from the death in their inwardnes, nor yet
the hearing Pro. 4.
of Council and Doctrine, whereby to draw near to the living Commandment of
God, and to live therein.

33. Many others hold Apo. 3.
at a stay, and have no righteousness: neither do they ask, hunger, nor thirst
after it: and do neither go backwards nor forwards, which is indeed a great
shame.

34. It were better for one, to suffer now and then some Inconvenience for lack
of experience t so that he abide in the Hope; than to hold himself still, or
idle to the righteousness before he be come to the salvation.

35. For albeit one do sometimes by stumbling and falling, suffer some
inconvenience, yet he rises again for all that, and bewaileth his Ignorance:
and so then he takes a new courage again, with a more circumspect
understanding in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.
against the craftines of the sin; and thereby profits and increases in the
righteousness.

36. Now when a man perceives, or is aware of the gain, to wit, that he
increases in the good; then is he of good cheer, and much stronger in the
belief, and firmer in the hope. Thus, in process of time, he grows up in the
Spirit of the good life, until he come to the perfection: that is to the Love.

37. Wherefore the loss teaches Prudence and Wit, for to attend unto the word
with understanding; but the gain brings weetnes, it makes firm, in the
hope, and begets a gladness in our hearts. When as, to abide in undesire to
the righteousness, and to be Apo. 3.
neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, is by all means to be utterly
discommended.

38. I esteem in this behalf, much better of that man, Lu. 15.
who like the lost Son, has spent and consumed all his Treasure and Riches,
and out of great poverty turns him again, and seeks at his Fathers hands
the room of a servant (out of which humbling a man comes again to his
riches: and through such loss gets understanding, how to govern to a
multiplying the riches of God) then of such a lazy, slothful, and ane
loitering man, as for fear of loss Matt. 25. Luke 19.
burieth his Talent: and will neither make gain nor loss therewith.

39. Hereof beware ye dearly beloved, that ye bury not that little which you
have received of God, nor yet withold or withdraw your selves for any manner
of cause, from this our undeceivable and most holiest service of the Love.

40. For though that many people, have partly through the sundry partial
instigations of men, (risen up before our said service) been entangled, and
darkened in that understanding; and that therefore they could not rightly know
the truth in her degree; but did oftentimes stumble, fall, and and suffer
harm; yet, all ye that love the Truth with us, and have likewise fallen in the
same, learn Prudence now thereby: and turn again Esa. 55 Jer. 3. Ezekiel. 18.
into the way of righteousness. Refresh your selves in the belief with a new
cheer; and so through the service of the holy Word, be ye renewed in your
understanding under the obedience of the Love.

41. Under the same service give ear to the Elders of the holy understanding,
Deuteronomy. 11.
and follow not the Will or Council of your own mind; but Eccl. 6.
with the Elders, under the service of the Love, follow the mind and Pro. 1.
Eccl. 16.
Council of the Wisdom, and always keep your selves with the Elders in the
family of Love, 1 These. 5. Heb. 13.
to the concord, and to the multiplying in the good, and of the peaceable
Kingdom in all Love.

42. Become not wavering in any wise; But in case ye stumble, or fall, yet rise
again; and think, that it is sometimes better, that a child do in his good
willingness commit an error, or that a thing be done of him yet unperfectly,
than that he should remain brutish or untaught. Be not afraid, Matt. 25. Luke
19.
like the unfaithful Servant, that buried his Masters Talent: which was not
very well taken at his hands.

43. Men may find diverse that will take very great heed to themselves, least
they should be deceived or beguiled, and so will stay only upon themselves;
But because they so staying upon themselves, give no heed to the grace under
the obedience of the Love, therefore remain they such as they are: and come not
at any time to the light of life or day of Love: but abide still in the
Captivity of the blindness, because they know not her blindness, or bands of
her darknesses, wherewith they are bound.

44. Some others will in their unregenerate estate and deprivation, account
themselves free, and will not be subject unto any thing, neither to the
Scripture, nor to any Teaching, nor yet to the Service of Love; and therefore
in that sort do never come to the Ioh. 8. Romans 6.
Freedom of the children of God.

45. For in as much as they have not perceived, nor observed in the sight of
their understanding, the bondage of Ioh. 8. Romans 6. 2 Pet. 2.
sin, nor her dominion; thereforr remain they unproved and unexperienced:
neither do they sigh nor Jer. 8.
complain for the yoke of sin, which has taken them Captive; and do know
nothing at all, either of the Bondage, or of the Freedom, nor yet that they are
so utterly deprived, or estranged from God and his Christ as they are.

46. Now men may also find diverse, that are altogether light-hearted, and
clearlyminded: and so, in the range of their misunderstanding, have taken unto
them, Esa. 59.
a false light or conceited knowledge. These according to their natural
understanding, are well at quiet: their hearts are not once grieved for their
mis-doings any more. They have also no regard, either of sin, or of Grace: they
fear no Condemnation, nor hope for Salvation, or for any Redemption.

47. When it goes well with them but in their creature, and in their
Occupation or Trade, then are they content, and say, God be praised, we are in
very goodcase: we are rid of all intanglement of heart: we now get our living
godly and credibly, and toil not our selves with any thing.

48. But alas, howsoever the godly nature, or the Image of God Heb. 6.
be trodden down in them, and constrained daily to suffer the death of the
Cross for their sins, that pass they not once for.

49. Because they will not suffer with the godly nature, 1 Pet. 4.
or Christ, against the sin, they desire even nothing else, but according to
the Phil. 3.
flesh to sit still in ease, and look what in this behalf crosses them, that
reckon they to be utterly evil and unright: and and so wax wanton, or lustful
in the flesh, and licencious, or light-minded in their Spirit, following still
Sap. 2. Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
that which likes them, after the property of ignorant fools: and despise the
godly Council of the Elders; as also the wisdom, and unity under the obedience
of the Love.

50. These are surely in very bad case, although they think not so; For Esa. 5.
they have no consideration on the work of the Lord, nor on the work of the
Devil; nor any regard unto that that shall perish, nor desire to that which
shall continue; This verily is a lamentable misery, the Lord keep us from such
a Plague.

51. Again, some may be found which do endure much straightnes in dying from
sin, for to receive the Promises which are made thereunto, according to the
Scriptures; and that they might so become honorable Saints, and be also
respected therefore. Yea they regard no affliction, so as they may receive or
get that; and thus they fall into a choosing, applying to themselves the honor
of the Promises.

52. And therefore, when according to their desire, they have gotten all that
honor, then persuade they themselves, yea, it is already certain, that they
have greatly merited, because they have suffered so much, strived and
vanquished so valiantly, and have so much knowledge, and do assume unto them,
that they are then holy; and that God on the other side is indebted unto them,
of all the Promises, and of the Blessing mentioned in the Scripture, being well
assured hereof, that it does of right and equity appertain unto them.

53, Now because they have chosen to themselves such an opinion, they suppose
that the Scripture witnesses of them, as the people of God, and that likewise
in regard of their holiness, the honor of Gods Promises belongs unto them.
They hold also so greatly of themselves, that they know themselves to be worthy
of all the high style of the holy Titles that men do give them: also all the
services that men show unto them, they boldly arrogate unto themselves and a
great deal more.

54. For in their own eyes, they are the most understandingest, and the most
best or holiest: yea, they are so exceeding proud upon their own knowledge and
righteousness, as if there were no God any where else, save only with them,
according to the knowledge of their cogitations; and as though that the true
God, had utterly excluded all others his creatures.

55. Oh! What an abominable thing is it to assume and feine to ones self such a
spiritual conceit? For thereout is able to spring great abomination and
wickedness, such as is much worse then any fact of open sinners.

56. For there is no greater sin, then a spititual pride; Act. 12.
in which, the man ascribes holiness to himself by his works, and exalts
himself therewith; Mat. 12 Luke 11.
which last error is much worse than the first.

57. O ye dearly beloved, beware of such a nature of bold arrogance, that you
become not back-sliders thereby, from the single humility and meeknes of the
upright being of Jesus Christ; and that you fall not into the abominations and
dreadful punishments of ungodly Men.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Of the upright hearts, and their lowly estimation of themselves, 8. The
ground of upright repentance is showed in the thirteenth chapter of the third
Book of The Glass of Righteousness.

MOreover, men may also find diverse upright, and wel-willing to the
righteousness, who in all obeying of the holy and gracious word, under the
obedience of the Love, endure great straitnes, for the righteousness sake; who
also regard no straitnes so as they might obtain but such Grace, Romans 6.14.
that the Sun might not have Dominion over them; but that they might be Ioh.
8. Romans 6.18.
freed from it, for to serve in righteousness, and love the living God only,
and to be obedient to the requiring of his word, not thinking what they are
then worthy of, or how they are then to reign, or what does then belong unto
them.

2. O no, their thoughts reach not so far; but they are still inclined for to
walk brother-like in the Love, and with earnest desire to do the will of the
Lord. They have regard unto Gods Promises, trusting even upon this, that God is
true of his word, as one that shows his Grace on such as love him, Esa. 57.66.
and are lowly of heart.

3. When as they have now, with singlenes of heart showed all obedience, in the
service of the gracious Word of the Lord, and of his holy Spirit of Love,
suffered much grief and affliction for their sins cause; and have tasted of the
refreshing or anointing to the health of their souls, then become they but so
much the more lowly and humble of heart Romans 12 1 Pet. 1.
and so much the more brotherly and peaceable toward all men; and count
themselves unworthy of such grace: neither know they how they shall be able to
be serviceable enough in the Love.

4. They esteem moreover very little of their own word, that arises out of
themselves according to the flesh; but the requiring of the serviceable Word of
the Lord, where-under their hearts stand humbly submitted, to all upright
righteousness and holiness, they make great account of, and hold it very worthy
to be obeyed unto: Moreover the life of righteousness, which is ministered and
set forth in the service of the love, they cleave unto with all their hearts,
and above all praise it exceedingly; and gladly would that all men were in the
godly nature and brotherly love, obediently come thereunto.

5. These show always toward God and his service of Love true humility and
obedience, and toward men true love, faithfulness, and Truth: and do not
desire according to the foolish pride of the world, any praise or service of
men to themselves; but rather that the righteousness in the Love, might have his
proceeding, and all people might under the obedience of the Love serve God, and
inherit the peace of Christ.

6. Out of such an upright heart (being Ephesians. 4.
grown up to the old age of the holy understanding, and Matt. 13.
taught to the Kingdom of God) they testify Psalm. 1 15.
that all Laud, Honor and Praise, belongs to God only, and not unto them.
And so in their proceeding in the same upright life; they likewise serve or
reach the hand either to other; and thus in their service they point the man
only unto God, and to the salvation of God in Jesus Christ.

7. this mind or nature is far the most best, because by it the man esteems
the Grace of the Lord to be great, and all his own doings or works, and anguish
respeceth or judges he, as Phil. 2.
of no value, The Lord of his Grace, bring us all to such a mind, Amen.

8. The Ground of upright repentance and amendment for sin, is at large plainly
CApressed and with clear distinction uttered unto you in the third book of the
Glass of Righteousness, in the thirteenth chapter according as the same is
practiced and used of all good willing ones, which seek and love the good life
of the upright and lovely being from the heart, and do out of all their soul
pass forth toward it, under the obedience of the Love.

Take it to Heart.

CHAP. XXII.
1. Sundry Opinions are taken from the Scriptures. 2. Diverse do contend about
the Kingdom of God, both what it is, and whence to be had, and when. 5. But the
Scripture is clear enough, and the matter it self is explained. 24. He
exhorts to the Reading and hearing of the Glass of Righteousness: where men
shall see the everlasting Ordinances of God, and the upright life, wherein Gods
people have ever lived. 30. The same Ordinances were renewed by Moses, and the
life published by Christ for a Gospel. 31. In sure hope whereof, the Believers
rested, and are now with Christ manifested in Glory. 45. He calls upon such
as have too soon named themselves Christians, that they lay away their vain
boasting, and turn to the Love and her Service.

THere are also diverse men that draw sundry Opinions of Understandings, out of
the Scripture: But every one particularly, after his own conceiving. Howbeit in
as much as they know not the Council of God, nor comprehended his wisdom,
therefore do those Opinions and Understandings fall out to be of several sorts
and do for the most part run all one against another, and are among each other
entangled.

2. Some strive for the Kingdom of God, or inward life of Christ (which is
called the new Man:) and suppose that it is this or that, or that it is
here-hence or there-hence after the outward appearance; for to come or to be
obtained.

3. Others think, that it shall be first found and obtained, after the death of
the Creature. Yea, the Principallest of the Learned in the Letter: who will
(forsooth be the understandingest in the Scripture, do maintain such a ground
of Belief.

4. O God! How long shall the Scripture through the false and unright light or
sight, be yet set forth and taught?

5. It is doubtless plainly and clearly enough written, Luke 17.
that the Kingdom of God is inwardly within us. He is in the midst of you
(says John 1.
John) whom ye know not: The same is he, that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

6. But many (as it well appears) know him not. For he, who is the very Col.
1.
Image of God; or the Christ, and the Kingdom of the glory of God, has his
going down in us, inwardly: and suffers the Romans 6.
Death of the Cross, for the Sins cause.

7. Nevertheles, if any man be baptized inwardly in the death of Christ, and
Romans 6. Col. 2.
with his like Death, be, until his burying, planted into him, the same arises
also with Christ, and lives. For then, inwardly is Gods Kingdom of Heaven even
in him, and not specially, here or there, as among these, or among those: but
the Kingdom of God is here and there: among these, and among those: namely, in
every one, in us. Howbeit unknown to many, as is already said.

8. Now if the Kingdom of God be within us, and that we (as the Scripture
says) John 7.
believe in Christ, then ought we, after the Council of the Wisdom, and of the
holy understanding, to seek it inwardly there: for even thither shall it come,
and so be found inwardly within us.

9. But who so seeks it only at the hands of another, and does not attend the
coming thereof inwardly, according to the direction of the holy word and
service of love, the same shall in no wise find it.

10. For this cause men are not in the seeking of the Kingdom of God, to
despise the Council and Service of the holy word, which under the obedience of
the Love, teaches and directs rightly to the same; but, with lowly hearts to
give good ear thereunto.

11. Therefore believe the truth, and follow the Council of the Scriptures,
Mat. 7
seek and ye shall find, etc. Mat. 18
Turn you about, and become as little Children, and not subtle, cunning, Prove.
3. Romans 12.
or wise in your own selves. For who so receives not the Kingdom of God Mar.
10 Luke 18
as a Child, he shall not enter therein.

12. Wherefore it is all to no purpose, to set ones mind upon any thing, that
is above in the Heaven, or that is beneath under the earth: either what people,
this or that is: or where hence Christ shall come, or not: or with what outward
appearance the Kingdom of God comes.

13. For behold, if ye find not the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Lu. 17.
inwardly in your souls, and the form of Christ in his glory, appeared not in
your 2 Cor. 4. Gal. 4.
inwardnes, then shall ye be constrained to miss, or be without the Kingdom of
God and Christ; John 6.
and shall likewise not eat the bread from Heaven with Christ, Lu. 14.
in the Kingdom of God his Almighty Father.

14. Therefore seek it, where it is to be found: and take right regard, whether
it comes: hunger and thirst ye after it. Nevertheles, have you not after it,
out of your own choosing, through misunderstanding; but go ye Psalm. 84.
from one virtue to another.

15. Posses ye your Lu. 21.
souls with patience, have regard on the coming of Christ, contend not any
more, 1 Timothy 6 2 Timothy 2. Tit. 3.
and strive no longer with flesh and blood.

16. Let it once suffice that ye have contended and wrangled for the Scriptures
cause: rather now endeavor you, in obeying of the requiring of the service of
love, Jam. 1.
to receive or put on the gracious word of the Lord in your hearts, and labor
ye Ephesians. 4.
for the unity of the love. For in such a sort shall the Kingdom of God come.

17. Now when you have thus received or put on the serviceable gracious word of
the Lord, the true Christ after the flesh, in your hearts or inwardnes, then
apply your selves therewithal, in your inwardnes, to the good being which the
gracious word of the Lord requires in his service, for to overcome in like
manner with Christ, every thing that is against him, to the intent his enemies,
Psalm. 110.
for a footstool; may be laid under his feet.

18. And when you exercise your selves herein, be ye likewise baptized in the
death of Christ, (that is, in his patience) Romans 6. Col. 2.
and with his like death or patience be ye planted into him and so Ephesians. 6.
overcome ye through the belief, with the like cross or patience of Christ,
the sin, death, flesh, and the world, Devil and Hell, and all sensuality,
which arises out of your own wisdom of the flesh: and be ye likewise in your
inward man; Romans 12 Ephesians. 4.
renewed unto righteousness, 2 Cor. 4 Phil. 3.
in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Lo, thus does the Scripture teach us, if
it were but rightly understood.

19. When we are now passed through this, Col. 1.
and have through the death of Christ, even until his Resurrection, overcomed
all those deadly things, then have we peace Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
with God the Father, and stand firm in the love, which is the end or
fulsilling of all the spiritual Testimonies. And therein is comprehended the
perfection.

20. Not that we come hereunto, out of our own strength. But when, with lowly
hearts we Esa. 55
turn us obediently to God, and the service of his gracious word, then does God
also offer himself unto us, and out of his Calling in the spirit, allureth or
draws he us unto himself, justifying us through the belief, in Col. 1. Heb.
9. Apo. 7
the blood of Jesus Christ, and makes us clean from our sins, and gives us
the everlasting life.

21. This is verily the word of Faith, Act. 2.3 4, 5, 7, 8. etc. Romans 10. 1
Pet. 1.
which was published by the Apostles, through Christ, for a Righteousness unto
us. 2 Cor. 11. Gal. 1. Phil. 1.
Whosoever therefore preaches any other Christ, or preaches Christ any other
way: publishes any other Gospel, or publishes the Gospel upon any other
fashion or ground: or believes any otherwise, or builds upon any other
foundation, 1 Cor. 3
than God has from the beginning, through his Prophets and Apostles, required
and willed, the same man remains Gal. 1.
execrable or accursed, according to the mention of the Scriptures.

22. For 1 Cor. 3
no other Foundation may there be laid, than the same that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, who from everlasting was, and is, and abides for ever. Through
whom God made all whatsoever is any thing: and Heb. 1.
he bears up all things by the power of his might, and makes the clensing of
our sins, through himself. Unto him as a Father of all, be Land, Honor, and
Praise, for evermore, Amen.

23. These and such like things, was I partly of necessity moved to rehearse
unto you, ye dearly beloved, to the intent, you might consider them aright, and
understand the diversity of every thing, that concerns the Salvation of men.

24. Furthermore, see that ye humbly, with meditation to God, apply your selves
out of the inclination of love, to read, or to hear the Glass of
Righteousness; and consider or mark the life which is witnessed and set forth in
the same. Behold there in the spirit of your understanding, the everlasting
unchangeable Statutes and Ordinances of Almighty God, which also shall remain
unchangeable for ever. For that which is there witnessed, is such an upright
life, (...) 1. (...)
as the man is created unto, for to live therein. In which Statutes and
Ordinances, the Lords people have lived from the beginning.

25. Yea, such a Life, Statutes and Ordinances, are a delight and joy to all
upright hearts and Prophets, to live therein; and they have heretofore born
witness thereunto, that in time to come, men should live in them. For through
the truth, they saw into the life of peace in the love; and that through the
life of peace in the love, every thing is made perfect, and therein stands
firm, or abides steadfast.

26. That verily is the life which is true, Joh. 1.
and that life is the light of men, Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
and the head of the holy Commonalty. Who so goes out of it, comes to the
death, blindness and darkness.

27. But the souls of those that live therein, are blessed in the Lord. For
such people does God require, as do walk in his Ordinances, (that is to say, in
the life and peace of love) Deuteronomy. 6.2.
and do love the only God from the heart.

28. Lo, it is the true God, that requires such upright Righteousness: and he
himself cleaves to his Righteousness; his Statutes and Ordinances,
everlastingly. Joh. 1.2
For he is the spirit of his life, the life of his word, the word of his
Spirit, Exodus 3 Mat. 22.
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacoh, or Israel.

29. That verily is the true life of peace, and love: and the Statutes and
Ordinances, are the same upright righteousness, which the holy Fathers have
lived and walked in.

30. The same Statutes and Ordinances of the holy Fathers were by Moses
renewed, Exed. 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
and witnessed unto a life before all people. And that life was through Jesus
Christ (being risen from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven) Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
published unto all people for a Gospel, because they should live therein. And
unto all that believed thereon, was the Resurrection from the dead, and the
everlasting life, witnessed and promised through Jesus Christ.

31. In sure and firm hope whereof, the upright Believers have rested in the
Lord Jesus Christ, till the appearing of his coming, which is now in this day
of the love, revealed out of the heavenly being, with which Jesus Christ, the
former Believers of Christ; John 5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
who were fallen a sleep, rested, or dyed in him, are now also manifested in
Glory.

32. For Christ in the appearing of his coming, raises his deceased from the
dead, 1 Cor. 15.
to the intent that they should reign alive, with him over all his enemies:
Mat. 25. John 5. Romans 2. 2 These. 1.
and condemns all the ungodly, which have not liked of him.

33. This is the joyful Message, published to the Gentiles, whereby Ephesians. 2.3
as fellow-Heires in the Testaments of promise; they are bidden and called to
the house of Jacob, and to the Citizenship of Jerusalem, To the intent, they
should depart from the brutishnes of their errors, and from the sundry
intanglements of their Idolatries, and turn them to the God of Israel, for to
serve him only, and to live in his Statutes and Ordinances, through the belief.

34. Which Righteousness To. 2.3.
is required out of the Law: and is now in this last time openly and evidently
witnessed out of the inclination of love, and through the insight of the same
upright life, to a view of the upright righteousness, which the man is created
unto: and to a demonstration, whereunto, or to what end or fulfilling, God has
given his promises, and made his Covenant with the Fathers.

35. Behold hereunto (namely, to that which we bear witness of) is the Calling
of the Gentiles made, Romans 11. Ephesians. 2.
who are out of grace, called thereunto, for to serve with the Stock of
Abraham, one God in one manner of Righteousness.

36. Lo, these are the promises, Genesis 17.
which were committed to the Jews in the Circumcision: And Jesus Christ, Act.
13. Romans 9.
the safemaking word of the Lord is amongst them, Romans 15.
for the truth of Gods sake become a Minister of the Circumcision, to confirm
the promises made unto the Fathers, that the name of the God of Abraham might
be magnified likewise among the Gentiles. And for the mercies sake toward the
Gentiles, is the Grace of life published also to the Gentiles, to the intent,
Act. 10.11.13. Romans 11.
they should praise God, and know the God of Israel, and his Ordinances.

37. Which God and his righteousness, we do now know in the love, through the
spirit of truth, which according to the spirit, Joh. 14.
leads us into all truth: that is, into all love, according to the promises.
Col. 5.
For the love is the band of perfection. By which Band, we are sealed and
confirmed for ever in the same perfection, to the intent, that Gods Glory, his
Covenant and promises, may likewise abide firm, from everlasting to
everlasting, Amen.

38. Behold the same God of Israel (who out of his Grace, prepares and
brings all this unto us) is the God, Genesis 1.
that has made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is therein. He it is
that does wonders, who neither breaks his promises, Deuteronomy. 4. Luke 1.
nor forgets his Covenant: who also suffers not his Law and Righteousness
to be trodden down for ever: but he sets up the Children of Israel, his
beloved: Not for their Righteousness; Deuteronomy. 9
but for their Fathers sakes, toward whom he had a desire, according as he
promised, and spoke the same in times past, by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

39. Therefore have regard unto the everlasting unchangeable God, being an
invisible living God: the God that has made you, created every thing that
lives and has breath. He Heb. 13.
it is, which was, which is, and which is to come: who lives everlastingly,
and shall still continue. And so is also his Life, Law, or righteousness.

40. Wherefore give heed unto the thing that is right and reasonable, and shall
continue for ever: glass your selves in the glass of Righteousness, and
therein behold according to the spirit, the upright life, and the Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.
Lords Statutes and Ordinances, which stand firm in God for evermore.

41. Let not the matter in any wise seem too slender or too small unto you.
For though the Righteousness whereof we testify, be 1 Cor. 2
no eloquent speech, and that the same seems to be but as a small brook, yet
is it notwithstanding Ezekiel. 47.
a bottomless Sea, which all Rivers do run into. And whatsoever can be uttered
concerning the Righteousness (were it even by so great multitudes of Books, as
is the sand by the Seaside) it is every whit comprehended or grounded in the
very same.

42. Who so lives therein, or in the obedience of the same life the gracious
word, Prove. 4
loves the same life, and with a lowly and humble heart, applies himself
obediently thereunto, Ecl. 39
such a one shall become wise in the hidden wisdom of God. For the obeying of
the requiring of the service of the gracious word of the Lord, and of the Law
of his Statutes and Ordinances, Psalm. 119.
does make the man wiser, than all his chosen Masters or Teachers: and in that
manner comes he to the holy understanding of the godly wisdom.

43. Hereunto let us be minded from the heart, ye dearly beloved, and regard ye
the kind mercy of God showed on us, out of his love. For such a perseverance or
clearnes of the healthful or safe-making Being, is showed unto us worthy in
open sight, and has in these last days, given us to know his requiring in our
spirit and understanding, to a right distinguishing of life, Deuteronomy. 30 Jer. 21.
Eccl. 15
and death, to the intent, that we who are yet in peril of death, and do suffer
grief and heavines for the sins cause, should conceive hope toward such an
healthful life, and rejoice us in the Godliness.

44. Therefore let no man be 2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12.
negligent in such an appeared Grace; but every one give God the Honor, and so
sigh over his wretchedness, that he may be reformed of his errors.

45. O ye Children of men, ye that have named your selves before the time, or
much too soon, with the name of Christ, or with the name of Israel: Lay away
from you your vain boasting, Mat. 3. Luke 3. Act. 2.
repent, and amend you, and betake your selves to the love and her service,
that ye may be saved.

46. Do not think in your hearts, that ye yet remaining, without the gracious
word and his service of love; do nevertheles stand sure in Gods Covenant: or
that ye may not have transgressed nor forsaken the Covenant of your God.

47. Think not also that ye are before God (howsoever after your conceit, ye
have hallowed your selves) any worthier, than all other Heathen are, which are
without you. For truly, ye are subject with them all unto vanity,
misunderstanding, and destruction and alike, covered under the darknesses, not
knowing, what ways ye all walk. For your own righteousness is strange and
unknown before the God of Israel: inasmuch as the same is not his life of
righteousness, nor yet his Statutes and Ordinances.

48. Therefore ye, which live and walk without the Doctrine and Service of the
gracious word, are even altogether, touching the inward man; one manner of
people with all Heathen, although outwardly ye have sundry several sorts of
good Services or Ceremonies; but truly they are to no advantage or unity unto
you, but to all controversy and division: they are not to the life, but much
rather to a death, and destroying one of another.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. Whether the Christians and their Ceremonies have any preferment, or not. 6.
They have been blinded as well as the Jews were in times past. 7. So as there
was no difference between them and other people. 8. Every one has made a
chosen Righteousness to himself. 10. But now the godly knowledge is revealed
out of the Love. And men ought to regard it, else to be found of no value. 15.
Not the outward Christianity, but the inward man is the thing that God
esteems. 20. But almost all turn them to the earthly things. 22. He leaves
every one free: but touching himself, he will hold him always to the good
life. 25. The godliness shall surely come forth: but who shall be partakers of
it, is known to the Lord. 27. He exhorts to Unity and Peace, etc. 31. And
requesteth that none will be offended at his Writings. 33. If any man have
gifts, let him not be proud thereof, but ascribe all unto God.

NOw some might here demand, whether the Christian Ceremonies be nothing at all
furthersome, or whether they (omitting all other ceremonies) have not in them
some advantage toward the life? For if the Christian ceremonies had no benefit
in them, then to what end are the Christian ceremonies? And what preferment
then have the Christians by them? Or to what purpose bear they the Name of
Christ?

2. Truly, (as we have also showed before) the Christians and their ceremonies
have in their right quality and use, much advantage: for unto the Christians is
committed the ministration of the gracious Word of the Lord, and the revealing
of the everlasting life: and to this end are the Christian Ceremonies given
them, that all those which believe in Christ, the gracious Word of the Lord,
should have a firm or sure confidence on the revealing of that same life, 2
Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 11. Gal. 3.
the which is with the Christian Services and Ceremonies, promised for to come
unto them, to an everlasting light and beholding of the naked clearness of
God, through the uncovered face of Christ: 1 Cor. 13 2 Cor. 3.


For thus with the same Services and Ceremonies, are the promises of Salvation
to come committed to the Christians, Romans 9.11.15. Ephesians. 2.
or to the Christian communalty. They are also the children of the Testament of
the holy Fathers, Acts 3.
through the Belief, and that in all respects, after the same manner as the
Jews are the children of the Testament, in the promises of their Fathers, out
of whom are born the Jews as heirs, and not as thereunto called. Genesis 17.
Which promises were committed unto them in or with the Circumcision, which the
God of Heaven ordained for an everlasting covenant between Himself and Abraham
and his Seed; Namely, that the God of their Fathers (according to the promises,
and according to the same covenant) is even their God, and remains a God of
their seed for ever.

4. Which Jews, (howsoever they are as Branches broken off from their right
Stock) are also grafted upon no strange Stock, Romans 11.
nor yet set or built upon any strange foundation, but upon the foundation of
the Promises, and Stock of their Fathers, to which salvation the Gentiles are,
through the Belief, called, out of Grace, as fellowheires of the same promises
in Israel, for to serve the living God. Ephesians. 2.3.


5. Lo, these promises made to the Fathers, to the salvation of the Gentiles,
are committed to the Christians in Belief: and the Christian ceremonies are
witnesses of the truth of the same.

6. Howbeit, forasmuch as such a holy Belief, and service of Ceremonies to
such a salvation (as was evangelized in the preaching of the Apostles of
Christ) has ceased, and by the Christians been forsaken, therefore have they
been covered under the sin, blinded from the knowledge of their calling, and
estranged from the understanding of Gods promises, even as the Jews also in
the time when they knew not the godliness of life, were blinded and estranged
from the understanding of the promises. Yet were they Jews notwithstanding
outwardly: Romans 2.
but no Jews according to the inward hidden man, such as God esteems,
according to the life of their Father Abraham: John 8.
And therefore there was no difference between them and the Grecians, Romans 3.
but they stood alike under the sin.

7. Inasmuch as it goes now also thus with the Christians (or which men so
call) therefore is there between them and other people, no difference but they
are all alike under the sin. And in regard of the righteousness which avails
before God, they are no otherwise to be distinguished, save only by the
ceremonies.

8. And every one, because of his misunderstanding, makes a righteousness or
an Ordinance unto himself; which through the glistering of his knowledge, he
chooses or respects for a (very) Righteousness, and makes to himself in
like manner with the same, a Congregation, not attending upon the promises of
God, nor upon the upright righteousness which through Jesus Christ he is
called of God unto.

9. Now whiles all this comes to pass out of misunderstanding and bare
imagination, Jer. 7.
and out of the ignorance of the upright Righteousness, therefore is there
dissension likewise. For every congregation in particular, Mat. 24.
persuade themselves that they are the Christians, or the people of Isrrael:
and do diligently use all dexterity and sharpness of wit in their cause, for
to maintain the same in his proceeding, and think by their wit to obtain the
salvation, and so walk their own way; Romans 3.
whereby also they are all void of the grace of God, to the knowing of their
error and blindness.

10. But inasmuch as this godly Knowledge is now out of grace revealed unto us,
as that we through the clearness which God has powered into our hearts, 2 Cor.
4.2.
do understand to what salvation, or to what manner of health of the earth God
has given his promises (to which purposefor to establish the salvation, the
Belief is preached) Therefore for the loves sake can we not omit it, but must
needs witness the same, and reveal the Peace, and the true Love whereunto we
are called, if happily there might or may be found any which had a desire or
inclination thereunto: and then likewise we with them and they with us (whether
they were far or near) might be gathered together in the Love, according to
the promises.

11. Seeing then that God neglects not his mercy toward us, but has made
known unto us his will (to the intent his Word may stand firm, according as he
in times past has spoken by his Prophets) that unto his people Israel he will
gather him a people out of the Heathen, which shall serve him in
righteousness: 2 Mac. 2 Amos 9 2 Mac. 2 Act. 15.
(at which time God will gather his people together again, and be gracious unto
them, and build again the Tabernacle of David, and again sep up his people
Israel, according to the promises:) therefore ought we in like manner, from the
whole heart, and with good will, to give heed unto that which is now by Gods
grace, according to the truth, made known and tendered, under the obedience of
the Love unto us: and in the same appeared grace to believe the salvation
whereunto we are called, and to prepare our hearts in lowly minds thereunto,
that we might inherit our calling according to the promises.

12. But if any people refuse it, and for all that should persuade themselves
in their hearts to be still Christians, or that their Congregation is the very
people of Israel (not thinking of the restoring of Israel, which in times past
was fallen: and thus suppose that they have attained to the best) and in their
blindness set their confidence upon their own wisdom, righteousness and
ceremonies, and upon their faith; then shall it likewise go with them in these
days, as it did heretofore with the Jews that believed not on the grace which
was appeared unto them.

13. For in his time shall their full storehouses be found empty, 4 Esd. 6.
and the empty be filled with goods. For their Christianity according to the
inward man shall be judged and known for an unchristianity, and their belief
for an unbelief.

14. Therefore let no man boast himelf of his Christiany because of his outward
baptism, nor because of his outward righteousness, or narrow ways of his
walking, according to his choosing, or bare imagination: but let him give heed
to the promises, and unto what the Gentiles are called, and whom the
Christianity consists: the which is a Christendom according to the inward
man, in the Spirit; as also Paul in the preaching of his Gospel testifies.

15. For the true inward man is the thing that avails before God: namely, 2
Cor. 4. Phil. 2. Col. 1. Heb. 1. 1 Cor. 15. Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. Ephesians. 1.
the very like Being of God, which the love is formed in, and the man created
unto, to the intent he should bear it, to the land and praise of the glory of
his God.

16 And through the revealing of such a heavenly clearness (as that we
discern, that many, yea almost all, which do boast themselves to be
Christians, are yet mere strangers therefrom) we do well know the fall from
the right ground of the Christianity, and the bands of darkness wherewith we
were all held captive: And therefore we are all void of the grace of God, that
he may have mercy upon us all, Romans 3.
to the intent he alone may have the glory.

17. Now whosoever perceives this same, let such a one turn him to the Spirit, to
the God of life, and to his righteousness, according to the requiring of the
Love, and her service; that his understanding may, Ephesians. 1.
through the Love and her service, be enlightened according to the Truth, in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and that likewise he might love God the Father, and
live in his statutes with an upright heart. Deuteronomy. 5.


18. For out of the God that has made Heaven and Earth, goes the right
judgment, Heb. 4.
his Word is living and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword: and his
burning is as a flame of fire, to a consuming or devouring of all ungodly
Being. Deuteronomy. 4. Heb. 12.


19. Whosoever fears not him, as a true God, nor loves his Righteousness,
over such a one stands his severity for ever. Romans 2. Exodus 20
But many thousands find grace in his sight, that do but turn them unto him,
love him, and keep his Commandments

20. But, who has any regard hereunto? Whose attention is toward the Lord?
Who is there that is spiritually minded? Who gives ear? Whose heart and eyes
turn them to the inwardnesse of the Being of God? Truly very few: But they turn
them almost all unto themselves, to the earthly things, or unto Flesh and
Blood: and do very gladly hear that which foundeth pleasant unto them, 2 Timothy
4.
according to the delight of their fleshly ears: and so shut the ears of
their heart against the God of Life and all the World, alienate their spirit
from his holy wisdom, and will not hear him, nor accept him for their King,
that they might live in his Law and Ordinances.

21. Therefore will not he also count them for his people, neither regard them.
Psalm. 1. Esa. 29.
But they shall be compelled in their estranging, to become like the tossing of
chafe, wherein the whirlwind, to a scattering, mingleth it self.

22. Behold, ye dearly beloved, of these and other like things, I have opened
much unto you in the Glass of Righteousness, to a distinction of the
knowledge of righteousness: look unto which ye are minded, Deuteronomy. 30. Eccles. 15
into that may ye go; whether into the sin, to the death; or into the
righteousness, to the life. I leave every one free, unbound, uncompelled.

23. But as for Me, my whole heart and mind stands altogether inclined to the
good life of upright righteousness, and all my confidence is in the God of
Life, Romans 12. 2 Cor. 3.
that I shall not forsake the ways of his Rightenesse (which are by the grace
of God brought and given unto me in the sight and being of my Spirit) but shall
still observe the same, and under the obedience of the Love, administer them
unto the children of men: according to all the manner, as I have set forth and
described them, according to the life, out of the inclination of Love, in all
my service of writing, for a serviceablenes to many.

24. Whosoevr therefore with me, has any desire to God and his righteousness,
let such a one then from his whole heart, apply himself also with me unto the
same. He also that strayeth, and has no regard unto God nor his
righteousness, neither is minded to the Love and her concord; but will rather
mix his heart with the World and her abominations, and go on after his own
imagination, I must needs look upon it: howbeit, it makes me sorry, and I
suffer grief for it, because he does willingly thus hunt after his own
destruction.

25. For behold, it shall come to pass, that the Esa. 60 61.62. Abac. 2.
godliness, uncompelled through the belief out of the Love of righteousness,
shall come to light, according to the Promises

26. But who they are that shall be made partakers of it, and find such Grace
in the sight of God, or from whence they shall come to join with us, for the
concord of the Love and her service, that is only known to the Almighty and his
Spirit; But the unity of us all shall be Ioh. 17. Act. 4. Ephesians. 4.
one heart and mind in the Love. To the which one-minded Communalty mine heart
stands always inclined. The Lord give us all Grace, to be joined to his
People in righteousness of heart, Amen.

27. Let every one also from his whole heart be minded thereunto, and apply
himself for the same unities cause, to the Love and her service, and to the
righteousness of heart before God: and so stand for the good with all
diligence. Let him likewise, daily apply himself Ephesians. 6. Col. 4. 2 These. 3.
in prayer unto the God of life, that he will vouchsafe to enlighten him and
all lovers of the Truth, together with all People, with the knowledge of his
wisdom and understanding, to the intent they might all incline their hearts,
to the Love and her service, and so Gods matters be well understood, and
interpreted according to the Truth, to the health of the earth, and renewing of
the World with righteousness.

28. Wherefore Romans 14. Gal. 6.
bear one with another, out of Love: receive also unto you all welwilling
hearts, to the concord in the Love, and understand their testimony to the good
^ and repair one another understanding, to the unity of heart in the Love,
and let no man rail, nor make Sedition or Division but let every one oyn
himself unto us in Jesus Christ, under the obedience of the Love: and let him
likewise in Jesus Christ seek the good to his preservation, that the service of
the Love be not hindered.

29. If now by any it should be found, that some man should bring forth any
chaff amongst us, with the Corn; yet shall not men despise him for it, but
repair him in his understanding, with good Gal. 6. 2 Timothy 2.
instruction to the meekness, and to the obedience of the Love in the Spirit,
that so through the service of the Love, men mav gather the good Corn, the
treasure of righteousness, Matt. 13.
into the Barn, the man's heart, and that in like manner, the vain being
together with that which is deadly and pernicious, may utterly perish.

30. Whosoever now can rightly judge let not him rail; but let him try the
matter, 1 The. 5.
and take or conceive the best out of it: and thus meet the little ones: and
draw all to the Love, that no man may be offended, nor made bitter-minded. Let
every one be minded hereunto from the heart, Matt. 13.
that all offense may be rooted out, and destroyed from the Lords Kingdom.

31. After the same manner also my request is, that those which read or hear
our Writings, will not take them to offense; but bow their hearts under the
Love, and receive that only which is right and reasonable.

32. But if so be any man do suspect any misunderstanding in our writings, let
him bear with the same through Love, that through the Love, all may be amended
and repaired; For my service is to unpartiality and to unity of heart in the
Love, and that according to the gifts of the holy and godly understanding;
which are of God given and committed unto me.

33 Moreover, if any man persuade himself, that he is more richly endowed with
gifts, 1 Cor. 4
let him not be proud upon the riches of his gifts; hut let him humble himself
among us, under the obedience of the Love: and then show likewise with his
gifts according to the mind of the Love, and according to the requiring of her
service, his good willing service, without offense, and unseperated from us and
our Communalty, to the intent the fellowship of the lovers of righteousness, 1
Ioh. 1.
may in every respect be in the Love, and be drawn and served out of Love to
that purpose.

34. For who art thou O man, that thou do proudly lift up thy self, for the
gifts cause of thy God, and that thou should not be content to submit thy
self with thy gifts or understanding, under the obedience of the Love of God
and of Christ? 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 3. James 1.
Know thou not, that there is no man, that of himself can have any good
thing or upright understanding, except it be given him of God? Wherefore bring
and submit all under God and his Love, Es. 42.
whatsoever does belong unto him; and separate not thy self from us, seeing we
are also well-willing thereunto.

35. If then thy gifts, be all gifts of God, see that thou Psalm. 34.
praise God in those gifts of his, under the obedience of his Love, and make no
breach or division with the same, nor in any wise despise not another
therewith, that has received less then thou have; but show forth Love in all
that is given, or committed unto thee of God: and so join thy self with us,
unto the gracious Word of the Lord, which the God of heaven has raised up
among us, according to his Promises.

36. Be also not Ezekiel. 34.
Lordly, neither advance thy self by accusation against thy inseriour brother:
likewise desire not to 1 Pet. 5. 1 These. 5.
quench any man's small godly gifts, which he obtains under the obedience of
the Love, nor judge, that any man besides his godly gifts has taken on in his
Council any Flesh and blood; but be at peace with all them, which to a concord
with the Elders in the family of Love, do obediently submit and give over
themselves, with all their gifts and understandings under the Love and her
service; For Romans 2 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
the gifts of God are manifold, yet minded all to concord and Peace, forasmuch
as the true God of life, is with his gifts no God of discord, but of Peace.

37. Wherefore there is also in the manifold gifts of God, no more but one God
1 Cor. 12.
which works all: to whom of right belongs the highest respect, above al
things; For he is the most highest, the living, and the Everlasting: Psa. 139.
whose Works are wonderful, and his Sap. 17. Romans 11.
Judgments incomprehensible.

38. His height is unmeasurable, his depth unsearchable, his glory unspeakable,
his wisdom unwritable, his grace infinite, his word is unchangeable, his Law
inviolable, his Truth uncorruptible, his Spirit unmovable, his mighty Arm
unfrayable: and his glorious Majesty remains stable for evermore.

39. Behold, this living and true God, of whom we have received our godly
gifts, is an everlasting and true Light. John 1.
The same Light is an everlasting true Life: that Life is an everlasting
steadfast Word: that Word is John 6.
a true Spirit.

40. The same Spirit is Sap. 7.
the holy Wisdom, and the upright Understanding. The holy Wisdom and upright
Understanding is the Providence. The Providence is the Will, which wills that
all what good is may be. In this Will is the Belief. The Belief is the Power
and Might to accomplish. In the Power is the Work and Deed. The Work and Deed
is all the visible and invisible Being which God for himself has brought forth.

41. But all the things that are Gods, and which the true God has brought
forth and made [both the invisible Being, and the visible created Things] are
all Witnesses, Romans 1.
that He, the same our living God, is the Creator of all things, the giver of
all good gifts, and the eternal and true God, to the intent men should serve,
honor, and worship him Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 4.
only as God, Lord, and King.

42. And that same like Being of his Godhead Genesis 1. Eccle. 17.
was in the beginning formed in the man: Which like Being of the Godhead, and
the light of his clearness, the man has, Genesis 3 Romans 5.
through the fall from his God, been deprived of. But the coming of the same
light is in the resurrection of the dead; to a godly glory, Esai. 60.62. Joel
2. Acts 2. 2 Pet. 3.
promised to be in the last time. And that same [as a new World, full of Light
and Life, wherein Apoc. 21.
God himself dwelleth] Psalm. 97.
appears unto us now in the Love, and in the Righteousness of the
everlasting uncorruptiblenesse, according to the Promises.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. GOD has ever spoken to the Fathers concerning his Son, or like-being,
who is the Heira of all things, and the end of the Law and the Prophets. 5. The
same Son promised to the Believers, that the true Life should be deelared in
the last times. 8. Which is now fulfilled in the Love. 10. But not understood
by many. 12. An exhorvation to lay down all contending under the Love. 22.
Every Father of a Family, in the Love, has liberty to use special Ceremonies.
23. All to be done to the Love and Peace. 25. As GOD extends his mercy, on
us: so should we take heed unto it. 26. H. N. witnesses of this grace: and it
shall in time be manifested over all. 28. He glories not in his Revelations,
but in God: Neither does he despise any others therewith. 32. Howbeit his beurt
is inclined unto them that embrace the Love. 34. There are no other people of
the LORD, but such as obey the Love. 35. He has not by his writings defamed
any; but called all to the Unity of Heart.

THis Almighty God, which was, which is, and which abides for ever (who gives
his honor to Esa. 42
none other) spoke in times past by Moses and his Prophets, unto the Fathers,
Heb. 1.
and that oftentimes, and in sundry manners, whereby He Deuteronomy. 4 Esa.
42.45.51.55.
required the true fruit of his Righteousness: and did still testify of the
like Image of his Being, and ceased not therein, till the time 2 Kin. 7. Psalm.
89. Acts 2.
was fulfilled, that his beloved one was appeared unto them: namely, Mat. 1
Romans 1. 2 Timothy 2.
his Son, the fruit of his loins, and the very like Being of his Godhead.

2. And even as the same Gods Son, [namely, the like Being of the said God
who lives for ever] was from the beginning, the First, whom Joh. 1.
God finished all his works by: so is he also the last [that is to say, the
perfection] of all those things which God has promised by Moses and his
Prophets, according as it is written thereof. Romans 10 1 Cor. 13. Gal. 3.
In whom the Law and the Prophets cease, or be fulfilled.

3. Insomuch then as the Law and the Prophets were in the same Son of GOD in
times past, fulfilled in Israel: and did cease in the same Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the Romans 10. Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
end of the whole sum of the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, to the
confirming of the Promises of GOD the Father; therefore did GOD then also at
the last, at the end or fulfilling of his Law and Prophets, Heb. 1.
speak unto the people of Israel, and to the Believers of his Word, by the
same Son; testifying how that all is Deuteronomy. 7. Ephesians. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
His: which Son he has appointed for an heir of all things, and Heb. 1.
the same bears all things with the word of his power; and he is unto us a
cleansing of our sins through himself.

4 This only borne Son of GOD the Father, is given to the Children of Men,
to the end they should be Romans 11.
grafted into his Spirit, [which is the holy Spirit of Love] and in their
minds be Joh. 15 Ephesians. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
of one Being therewith.

5. Through which holy Spirit, the same Son of God, Jesus Christ, has also
promised his Believers, that the Truth of the Life, should nakedly and clearly
be Joh. 14 Acts 1.
manifested unto them, whereby at the very last, to a conclusion of all godly
things, they in like manner might declare the Love, the most brightest
Daylight: and through the same true Light, Gods most holiest Being, draw all
people that have any desire toward God, to the unity of Peace under the
obedience of the Love, to the intent we all which love God, and his
Righteousness, should in these last days, know and understand in all things,
the mind of God in perfect clearness, and through the holy Spirit of his Love,
walk in all truth, as in a true light of the godly Clearness, according to the
Promises, even as God also has spoken the same, through the Son, whom he has
made heir even of all that is Gods. Mat. 11. Luke 10. Joh. 3.
For all what the Father has, is His.

6. But because of his Long-suffering, (that his goodness might be known in
the Love: and that none, through his default, might miss of the fullness of
the Life) he has spoken thus in times past, for to establish it in the last
time.

7. I have (says Joh. 16.
the Lord Jesus Christ) yet many things to say unto you: but ye cannot bear
them now. How beit when the Spirit of Truth shall come, the same shall lead you
into all Truth: For he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak: and he shall show you that which is to come. He
shall glorify me: For he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All what
the Father has, that is mine: Therefore have I said, He shall receive of mine,
and show it unto you.

8. Lo, all this Love does GOD now, through this new Day, or Light of his
Fatherly Love, show on us, for to draw our Spirit in him, out of the earthly,
lying, and deadly Being, unto his Love, in the Heavenly true Life, which is
everlasting.

9 Which his Love, Joh. 17 1 Cor. 13 1 John 4.
is the perfect Being of God and of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, which
heretofore was Esa. 2.
promised for to come in the last time: and it is the Apoc. 21.
Jerusalem, which is now in the last time come down unto us from Heaven, and
the perfect fruit of Righteousness, where the Sun of clearness does never go
down, according as GOD has spoken in times past by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, who have all likewise prophesied of this salvation, to the intent
that all people, to the unity of heart in the Love, should have a sure hope
toward God, and toward their salvation.

10 But alas, it seems that this Belief and Hope to this same, is by many
Jer. 5. 1 Timothy 1.4.
forsaken: or else the salvation and the truth is not well understood, for to
hope thereon.

11. For there are found with many sundry divided testimonies: and every one in
His, or the most part, will defend, that his testimony is brought forth by the
Spirit of Truth. But among these, there is found great fail by many, whereby
many are made doubtful in their belief, Matthew. 24.
and become cold in their zeal to the Good. And by means of their dissentions,
Luke 17.
which they have stirred up, and do yet daily stir up among themselves
against each other. Many know not what they shall hope for, or believe,

12. Wherefore for the Unities sake in the Love, O ye children of men, lay
down your contentions under the Love, and have regard unto God promises, and
to your Calling: and incline likewise your hearts to the obeying of the love,
and of the requiring of her service.

13. For in the obeying of the love, and of the requiring of her service, ye
shall become of one mind, and shall know, that there is no more but Ephesians. 4.2. 1
John 5.
one God or Father, who alone, is only good and almighty, no more but one
Christ, with him at his right hand; who only is the everlasting Mediator and
Savior between God and us, out of him no more but one spirit, who only is
true, and no more but one love, Col. 3.
which only is the band of perfection.

14. Nevertheles, the Gifts of God, through the spirit, under the obedience of
the love are manifold. Likewise also the Services are manifold. Which Romans 12.
1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
Gifts and Services, are all to the Commodity and Profit of the Communalty, and
are also all serviceable to the love, and to the unity in the peace. Howbeit,
it is all but 1 Cor. 12
one spirit, that works all through the service of the love. Which service of
the love, is not ministered, for to break that which God has spoken and
promised in times past: but Mat. 5 Romans 3.
to establish and accomplish it all, according to the Scripture.

15. Therefore let none of ours (whose souls stand subject under the Love)
take upon him 1 Cor. 5
to contend against any for any of the gifts of God, which are of God
graciously bestowed upon them, nor for the Services or Ceremonies cause, which
any man observes or publishes, albeit the same be manifold.

16 For it is not for us to contend or strive against any, for the gifts cause
which any man receives of his God, neither to contend against any man's
Services or Ceremonies, which he uses, to the training up and edifying of the
people, except (as it is convenient and edifiable to further the peace) that
they do all stand subject under the Love and her Service.

17. For one has this gift: and Romans 12 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Pet. 4.
with the same he is serviceable to the Communaltie, to a unity of heart in the
Love. Another has another Gift, and it is also serviceable to the Communalty:
and yet notwithstanding they are all used to the Love and to the Concord in
their Services.

18. Moreover, some use one kind of service, or such a manner of Ceremonies:
and some again, other Services or Ceremonies, wherewith they train up the
people, to the making known of that Righteousness unto them which God esteems,
and they are also serviceable to the same: And all likewise are done, to the
Love and her Concord.

19. Therefore seeing the Gifts of God, and the services are manifold, we let
them stand free to every one, and do not contend against them, so far forth as
they stand all under one God: and that they do not exalt their Services and
Gifts, above the love and her service; but do submit themselves all thereunder,
and do likewise confess, that God only is the Lord, and only gives in his
service of love the godly Gifts.

20. Wherefore let no man contend with his Gifts or Services, nor let no man
make any breach therewith, in the Communalty of the love; but Psa. 34
praise God in all his works. And that all, to a unity of peace in the love.

21. Lo, such a unity, do the services, Ceremonies, and gifts of the one-onely
holy spirit of love serve unto, all to the good life and Peace: and if we be
all minded to the good life, and to the peace, then shall no man's services or
Ceremonies be offensive unto us: neither shall we contend or wrangle for them.

22. For every 1 Pet. 4
Father of a Family under the love, has doubtless the liberty, in his Family,
to use Services and Ceremonies, according as he perceives out of the
Testimonies of the holy spirit of love, that they are most profitablest or
necessariest for his Household, to the life of Peace, for to keep his Household
thereby, in Discipline and Peace: training them up therewith, that they may
learn to practice and use 1 Cor. 14. Phil. 4.2.
that which is right and equal, for to manifest unto them thereby, the true
righteousness which God esteems.

23. If any man therefore has obtained in the obeying of the Doctrine of the
gracious Word and his Service of Love, any gifts of God: or if any man has any
heavenly Revelation, or if any man use any service of the Priestly Ordinance,
let him with us be serviceable to the love therewith, to the intent it may all
be agreeable with the love, and may all be done to Concord, in the service of
love, and not to strife, dissension, or schism, to the intent, that the good
life in all love and peace, might be lined under one head, the living God, and
only King, according as in times past it was prophesied thereof.

24. The same life in the love, is the life and very like Being of Almighty
God: namely, Christ, the gracious word of God the Father, (by whom John 1.
God made all that is any thing.) It is also the one only holy spirit of the
Prophets: unto the which, all spirits of the Prophets, and all services, that
come out from God, 1 Cor. 14.
are subject and serviceable to the love, and only minded to the peace and
life; for God is no God of discord, but he is a God of Peace.

25. Forasmuch then as the God of Heaven, does now show his mercy on us: and
does daily disclose unto us, the thing that so many days has been Ephesians. 3.
hidden, therefore let us likewise with thankfulness, and with submitted
obedience to the love; 2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12.
take heed in the spirit, to the godly grace, and not be slack or slow, to
further the good; but Ephesians. 4.
reach one another the hand, and be serviceable to the love, with helpfulnes to
the virtue, that the service of the love be not hindered 1 Cor. 6
nor evil spoken of.

26. And seeing such heavenly Revelations, are by Gods Grace to me unworthy
committed, and according to the mention of the writing, which through the grace
of God, are come forth or set out by me H.N. under the obedience of the love
are opened, and granted me to be known and Ephesians. 3.
understood, because I likewise should reveal the same in the world: therefore
do I also witness the same among the Children of men, indifferently out of the
inclination of love, to the intent, that virtue and unity may grow and multiply.

27. And these my testimonies of truth, shall also unto those (which now are,
and hereafter shall come) be to a right discerning of the upright and lovely
life, to as many as believe the same, and be comprehended in the love. For
among them shall this service of love to the same life, according to the true
being; everlastingly proceed on out of the love, according to the promises.

28. Behold ye beloved, concerning all this which is revealed to me by the
living God, 2 Timothy 1
and which I have testified and published out of his holy and gracious Word, I
have no other glorying, but Jer. 9. 2 Cor. 11.
in God the most highest, in the light of his true being, and in his heavenly
revelations, even as it is sufficiently testified.

29. Out of which Revelations of God, I show my service out of the inclination
of love, unto all those that affect the Love, to the end we might with one
consent be minded to the love; for to 2 Cor. 10.
draw the understanding under the obedience of the Love and her service.

30. In the same service stands also all my hope and confidence in the living
God, and my salvation in his Christ; Which Christ stands firm for us 1 Ioh. 2
to a Reconciler before God the Father, and in the service of his Love
everlastingly; that through the same service our inward mind, should stand
free, and firm in God and his Christ; and not be tied to any thing besides,
without the Communion and service of the Love, whether to the sin, or else to
men: neither to any created or elementish things nor yet to any earthly or
worldly things; whereby with one accord we might live boldly in God the most
highest, with the Communalty of the Love.

31. With these despise I none in his understanding, whether he be great or
small, that every one (as right and meet it is) may give his understanding 2
Cor. 10.
captive, or suffer it to be plucked under the obedience of the Love: and
likewise do that Phil. 4.
which is just and equal; For who can refuse the Love, or withhold himself
from her service, if so be he love the good.

32. Doubtless whosoever refuses the love, and withholdeth himself from her
service, or with his understanding, is against it, the same man shows
thereby, that he is without understanding, and not minded to concord in the
love; And moreover, that his heart thinks not upon the good, which God
esteems; but rather, upon his own good, which he has chosen to himself. But
who so are fully affected to the love and her service, and unto all that are
just and equal, and do unpartially submit themselves under the obedience of
the love, unto them am I inclined.

33. For with them, does my heart desire to live, in such a life as is just and
reasonable, Phil. 4.
lovely and peaceable, and with them, in like obedience under the love, to
stand obedient in the same life, Ephesians. 4.
to all unity of heart in the Love.

34. Behold, the true Christians of Israel, the people of the Lord, and even in
this sort minded with us; and there are no other Christians, nor Jews, nor
House of Israel, nor People of the Lord; but those that stand subject with us
to the Love with one accord, and over whom the Love is likewise the head: who
with us also, are not partial or divided with this or that, which is earthly
or visible.

35. Thereunto in like manner is the service of my writing: namely, to the
right stock of life in the Love, and not to contend or to strive against any.
And I do not know, that I have written against any man's dealing, (so far
forth as the same is according to Trut, and out of love.) Neither have I named
any faction by name for to contemn them, nor singled out any persons
particularly, whereby to reproach them: neither reviled any man's Religion for
heresy; but have called and invited all men, to the unity of heart in the
Love. The which is the blessing of all the Generations of the Earth, according
to the Promises made to the Fathers.

36. Therefore let every one glass himself, and look how near his cause is
right: and so give over his understanding to the obedience of the Love: (for
therein consists the upright being) to the intent that all may, through the
Love and her service Ephesians. 1.
be renewed, and the Corruption reign no more; but that the upright
Righteousness which God esteems, Esa. 60.
may come to light, according to the Promises.

CHAP. XXV.
1, The Author concludes this Introduction, with his Desire and Request to all
that read; or hear his Writings, that they apply themselves unto that, which
is set forth therein. 3. It is much happier to be among the lowly and sorrowers
for sin: than to be with the proud and dissolute. 6. A menacing of the
obstinate. 12. The reward of the righteous: and the horrible End of the
rebellious.

HErewith ye beloved we will cut off, and end this Introduction, to the holy
understanding of the Glass of Righteousness. And we desire of all those that
read, or hear our writings of the godly Testimonies, and likewise of all those
that have any desire to the Truth, and do humbly apply themselves to that which
is witnessed by us, and do join with us in all uprightnes, under the obedience
of the Love, to the intent that the Love may bear the dominion, and rule in us
to a one minded Communion, in one amiable and godly life, that they will not
take it grievously, to suffer contempt, heavines, or anguish for a little
while, with those that love the Righteousness; but rather stand always minded
(whether it be in prosperity or adversity) to be joined to the mind of God, in
all love even as the same under the obedience of the Love, is plainly and
clearly described, according to the life that abides for ever in the Glass of
righteousness.

2. The Almighty God grant us his Grace, and strengthen our minds to the same,
Ephesians. 4.
in the unity of Love and Peace: and in like manner all lowly hearts, that hope
upon the righteousness and suffer heavines, for the sins cause.

3. It is surely much happier to be among the lowly hearts, where 2 Cor. 7.
is heavines and sighing for the sins cause, Matt. 18. Romans 15. 1 These. 5. Heb.
3.
where exhortation to amendment, and instruction to the knowledge of God and
Christ is, and where men out of love Prove. 27.
reprehend the blindness of the heart for the righteousness sake, than to be
among the haughty, where the flattering lips of the ungodly and the dissolute
stout, or uncircumcised of heart are; where men embrace all gladness,
commendation, praise and honor of men, and not the honor of God.

4. Wherefore have regard hereunto, and awake to the good; For behold, It shall
in his time be found, that the endurers or sufferers (who now for the sins
cause, beat heaviness, sorrow, and the Cross; and who out of the love of
Righteousness, endure out such things) shall be turned to a Esa. 60 62.66. 4
Esd 2. Ioh. 16.
godly joyfulnesse; where contrariwise, all despisers of the Righteousness
which now rejoice themselves in ungodliness (how evilly soever they do it)
shall be turned to Matt. 25.
grievous sorrow and pain; yea, 4 Esd. 5. Apo. 21.
horrible it is to remember, the reward of the unrighteous or wretched men,
which is for to come upon them.

5. O how happy is that man, which joyneth himself to the Word of the Lord, in
his service of the Love, and Esa. 1. Mat 18
turns him away from the evil: which betimes 1 Cor. 11.
hears his Judgment and so sets himself down in the dust; k which
receives Wisdom, and Instruction to Virtue that loves the Righteousness, and
Prove. 3. Heb. 12.
refuses not the Chastening of the Lord, that he may be upright of heart,
before God; For it shall go well with him in this day of the righteous
Judgment which God, now brings over the whole Earth; yet passing through
great dangers of his salvation.

6. How will it go with you then, Prove. 11. 1 Pet. 5.
O ye sinners and sinneresses, which receive Sap. 2. 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
this transitory life for your delight, and keep God out of your hearts, and
have not once borne sorrow nor heavines for your sins.

7. Where will ye then hide your selves, ye haughty, ye covetous, and ye proud
men, and all ye arrogant self-wise, that now will not submit nor give over your
selves to obedience, under the service of the Love of the gracioue Word? Sap. 5
What profit I pray you will your pride, and your riches then yield or bring
you?

8. Who think ye, will then have compassion on your misery, ye which now
withhold your selves from the obedience of the Doctrine, and requiring of the
gracious Word, and make your selves common with the worldly minded and with
those that oppress the little ones, grieve the Consciences of the simple, and
betray, persecute, and spill Ezekiel. 22.
the innocent Blood?

9. Oh! I am astonished, whilst I think upon the horrible being of the ungodly,
the wicked perverse nature that will not convert.

10. Oh how horrible and fearful shall it be unto him, that shall behold it
with his eyes? Yea, what misery and VVoe comes over him, that shall taste
bear, and be tormented with the same eternally,

11. Therefore Pro. 15
much better in this dangerous Time is a little in the fear of God, with the
Righteous; than superfluities with the ungodly. It is also much better, to
suffer and endure, Poverty, Shame, Reproach, Affliction, Heaviness, Anguish
and Contempt, Heb. 11
with the Children of Peace, which have regard on Gods Righteousness,
according to his Promises, than to have all the Delights or Pleasures, with all
the honor, riches, and Triumphs of this world.

12. For the Reward of the Righteous redoundeth Pro. 11. Sap. 5.
to Gods Glory; but the recompense of the ungodly, of the wicked world, with
all unbeleevers or resisters of the good, Apo. 21
shall with confusion perish in horrible calamity, and with misery: It is true.

Take it to heart.

Love ye the Virtue fervently,
Give God his Honor due:
Delight therein continually,
That is his Doctrine true.
CHARITAS EXTORSIT, PER H. N.

FJNJS.

