TERRA PACIS.

A TRUE TESTIFICATION OF The Spiritual Land of Peace (which is the Spiritual
Land of Promise, and the holy City of Peace, or the heavenly Jerusalem) and of
the holy and spiritual People that dwell therein, as also of the walking in the
Spirit, which leads thereunto.

Set forth by H.N. and by him newly per used and more plainly declared.

Translated out of Base-Almaine.

Depart out of thy land, and from thy Kindred, and out of thy Fathers house,
and travel into a land that I will show thee, Genesis 12 Act 7. I will lead thee
on the ^^ght path that the course (when thou go) be not painful unto thee,
and that thou stumble not when thou runnest.

Take ^he information to heart, leave it not, keep it, for it is thy life.

Go not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked,
leave the same, and go not therein, depart therefrom, and pass by it,

Prove. 4. London, Printed for Samuel Satterthwaite at the sign of the Sun on
Garlic Hill 1649.

THE PREFACE of H. N. To the Spiritual Land of PEACE.
H.N. Wishes to the good-willing Reader, and unto all Lovers of the Truth
(which read or hear these present Testimonies of the Land of Peace) that they
might be prepared to be an upright people for the Lord, and taught to the
kingdom of heavens; and also to have obtained in their spirit and mind ^^n the
obedience of the Love) the simple eyes of the true Sight, the spiritual ears of
the godly Hearing, and he second birth in Jesus Christ, whereby they might
understand in spiritual manner the holy and spiritual understanding, that is
witnessed therein, to the end that the same which becomes seen and heard migh
be rightly judged according to the Spirit of the heavenly Truth, also the way,
that lead^^^ to the Life, entered into a ^^ght, and so the true Life of the
Living, and the pleasant Lands of Peace become inherited rightly, and according
to the Truth O yea, that it come to pass even so.

IN these true Testimonies of the worthy Land of Peace, (O ye good willing
Hearts, which love the Truth) there is (out of an inclination of Love)
witnessed and described unto you by Writing, the many manner of weldernessed
Lands, together with the sundry kinds of Travel and Vnrestfulness of the
disorderly people of the wicked world, and the Isa. 54. Apo. 18.
departure out of the same; as also (then immediately following) the entrance
into the spiritual Land of Promise ( Isa. 32. Heb. 4. Apo. 21.
the Rest of all the children of God) to the end that every one (which loves
the Rest of the Lord in Jesus Christ) might forsake the said wildernessed
lands, and so (according to this our direction) enter into the noble commodious
Land, and into the holy Isa. 60.
City of Peace.

2. Therein is likewise evidently declared unto you (with clear manifestation)
the holy people of the same Land, and how lovingly, peaceably, and uprightly
they live in that same good Land.

3. Into the Which good Land of Rest and Peace, Isa. 13. and 54.55 Ier. 3 and
17. and 23. and 31. and 33.50. Ezech. 20.
the Lord will now in the last time, under the obed^ence of the Love (according
to his Promises) assemble (...) people or his Elect, and be gracious unto them,
and so will (through the service of his Love) Isa. 65. and 66. Ezech. 34. and
37. 2 Match. 2.
bring them into the same out of all Wildernessed Lands, and separate them from
all disorderly and seditious people.

4. O ye children of the Kingdom consider of the mind: and the lovers of the
Truth, humble you now every one under the obedience of the Love, and Ioh. 13.
and 15. 1 John 3. and 4.
have or exercise love among each other, to the end that ye may remain
unoffended: also Ioh. 8. 2 Ioh. 1.
know the Truth in the Spirit, through the Love, and live in all Truth and
upright righteousness.

5. For I will open my mouth Psalm. 49.78. Matthew. 13.
in similitudes, reveal and witness the riches of the spiritual heavenly goods
as parables, and figure forth in writing the mystery of the Kingdom of God or
Christ, according to the true being.

6. He that has ears to hear, let him hear, and who so has eyes to mark, let
him mark what the Spirit of Love says, and brings to light by his Minister.

7. I looked and behold: to the children of the Kingdom (the Family of the Love
of Jesus Christ) it is given to understand Matt. 11. and 13. Luke 8. and 10.
the mystery of the heavenly Kingdom; but to those that are therewithout, it is
not given to understand the same; for that cause all spiritual Understandings
do chance unto them, by Similitudes, Figures, and Parables.

8. Verily the strange people, together with all those that have their
forth-going without the Family of Love, are Deuteronomy. 32. Sap. 2. and 5. Psalm. 14.
ignorant, and all the enemies to our godly Testimonies of the gracious Word of
the Lord, and of our most holy Service of Love, are Gal. 3.
resisters of the Truth of God. For that cause also they have heard very
painfully with their ears, and Isa. 6. Matthew. 13. Act. 7. and 28.
hardened their hearts against the Truth. They have likewise wholly shut to, the
sight of Ier. 5. and 7. and 16.
their eyes before the Truth, to the end they would not see the same nor her
Requiring, and altogether stopped the hearing of their ears before the
calling-voyce of the Truth, for that they would not hear the same, nor the
Requiring thereof, because they would in no wise understand in their hearts,
the Truth and her Requiring, as also for that they would not turn them to the
Truth and her Requiring, neither show forth any upright Fruits of Repentance:
Ioh. 5.
nor yet come to the godly life; and have even so (in the hardness of their
hearts) turned them about to the condemnation.

9. For that cause likewise, their portion or inheritance, is not with the
children of the Kingdom, in the Family of Love; Psalm. 1. Wis. 2. and 5.
but with the children of the wicked world, whose John 8.
father and head is the devil himself.

10. Seeing then that they, through their resisting against the Love, and the
requiring of her service, are become children of Romans 9. Ephe. 2.
wrath; and (through the seed of the old Serpent) are grown disobeyers of the
Requiring of the Word of Jesus Christ, and of the Doctrine of his Service of
Love as also a Deuteronomy. 27. and 28. Eccl. 41.
cursed people, even to be coheirs of the everlasting fire (which is prepared
for the devil and his angels) therefore verily they understand nothing at all
of the wisdom of God the Father, nor yet of the upright being of Jesus Christ
the Son of God and man

11. Therefore comes now likewise the Ezec. 7.
end, and Gods mighty hand upon the ungodly, which have had no will to Gods
Love, Romans 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
nor liked that the Love should r^ign over them. But Gods mercy comes over his
Elect, which sigh and pray night and day unto him, Luke 18.
and have an hunger and thirst Matthew. 5.
after the Righteousness.

12. For truly, the gracious time comes, and is now already come, wherein the
blessed people of the Lord shall Isa. 60.61. and 65. and 66. Eccl. 2.
delight, recreated, and rejoice them.

13. In which this gracious time, there shall nothing be figurely, or Image
like, nor yet also the Testimonies of the Truth of God, Matt. 13. Luke 8.
any Parables or Similitudes to the children of the Kingdom; for through Gods
heavenly Truth (the Light of Life-from Heaven) all whatsoever is of God and
Truth, becomes now published unto them Ioh. 16.
openly, nakedly or clearly, from the right hand of God the Father, and they
are made heirs therein under the obedience of the Love.

14. Yea, the holy Spirit of Love (which is a comforter of the heart) whom the
Father sends in the name of the Truth (the Being of Christ) he Ioh 14. and
15. and 16.
teaches and declares all things unto them; namely all what was spoken unto
them in times past (concerning the Truth) as Parables or Similitudes, for in
times past (the whilst the covering (which is the foreskin of the flesh of
sin) was yet before their hearts and the Vail (which is the flesh of Christ)
still before the clearness of the fare of God and Christ) they could not Ioh.
16.
endure that which is the clearness of the holy Ghost it self.

15. But when as now (in their new birth) the Vail^ departs from their
hearts, so is it all th^n Light and life unto them through the holy Spirit of
Love, 2 Cor. 3. and 4. Col. 2.
which comes unto them out of the Father, Ephe 5.
from the uncovered face of Christ, as also John 14. and 16.
remains with them everlastingly, and leads them into all Truth. It is very
true.

16. Come now all hither, O ye peaceable children! together with all ye which
love the Truth and Peace; and have your Forthgoing in the Spirit Rom 6.8. Phil.
3.
to the life of the new birth in Jesus Christ, according to the Requiring of
the Word of the Lord and his service of Love.

17. Fly now Zach. 2.
out of the North, and out of all wildernessed Lands. Rest not your selves
among the strange people, nor among any of the enemies to the house and service
of Love; but assemble you with us, into Isa. 60. Zach 8. Apo. 21.
the holy City of Peace, the new Jerusalem, which is descended from heaven, and
prepared by God, like a garnished Bride for her Husband.

18. O Jerusalem! (thou holy City of the great King) Isa. 60.
the Light of thy God of Israel does now rise up over thee, according to the
Promises.

19. Therefore Isa. 51. and 52. and 60. Baruc 5.
stand now up, and set thy self in the high place, and look round about thee,
toward the East, or Sun rising, and behold the Comfort which comes unto thee
from God.

20. Behold, Isa. 43.
thy children assembled them together, from the Sun rising and going down,
rejoicing them in the holy Word, and are mindful of God.

21. They were Bar. 5.
led away captive from thee on foot by the enemies. But now thee Lord brings
them unto thee: and exalts them with Honor, as it beseems the children of
the Kingdom.

22. For God will bring down Isa. 2.40. Bar. 5.
all high Hills, and make the high stony rocks, and the Vallyes plain, that
Israel may Genesis 23.33.
walk and dwell free (without fear) to the honor of his his God.

23. The Groves, and Bar. 5.
all pleasant sweetsmelling trees shall shadow Israel round about by the
commandment of the Lord.

24. For God will now in this day of his Love, Bar. 5.
be gracious unto his people, and (through his mercy) bring Israel again 2 Mac.
2.
with joy; as also lead them continually with his Righteousness, in the
clearness of his Majesty, etc.

25. Now this passed over, will (in the Testimonies of the spiritual Land of
Promise) rehearse more at large touching the holy ones of the God of Israel and
of their garnishing, as also distinct the wildernessed lands, and the
unpeaceable people from the good land, and the peaceable people to the end that
the death and destruction may be understood and known from the life and
preservation of salvation, z Deuteronomy. 30. Ier. 21. Eccl. 25.35.
and that no man may err ignorantly

26. But hereforth on following in this our Preface (before the beginning of
the spiritual Land of Promise) we will rehearse the mercy of God, where through
this lovely rest of the spiritual land of Promise is (out of Gods heavenly
truth) appeared unto us and the knowledge thereof given us, to understand;
therefore hear and understand ye dearly beloved.

27. Forasmuch now as we had a great desire to the place Psa 95. Heb. 4.
of Rest and Peace which God has promised, and that we sought after the same
with a fervent longing for, that we might find it, or come to the knowledge of
the same holy Land of Promise; so has the God of heaven been gracious unto us,
and not shut from us the knowledge of his holy Land, which he has promised unto
his People, as a land of Rest and Peace; Exodus 3. Heb. 4.
neither yet covered nor hid from us his Truth of the same.

28. But verily we are gone through, or passed beyond many and sundry manner of
wildernessed lands, and ignorant people, and so have considered of the nature
of every land and people

29. In all which we have found the strange ignorant people very unpeaceable
and divided in many kind of manners, dispositions, and natures, as also vexed
with many unprofitable things, to a great disquietness, and much misery Isa 42.
and 59.
unto them all.

30. The whilst we considered diligently hereon, so found we by experience,
that every people had their disposition and nature, according to the
disposition and nature of the land wherein they dwelt or were born.

31. But when we passed through, and perused used all this same, so have we,
through the mercy of God (at the end of all this) found a lovely land, Isa.
26.60. Zach. 8.
or a peaceably city, whose people (and none other) is a peaceable,
concordable, and lovely people; agreably minded, living peaceably, and are
faithful to each other. Into the which peaceable City, and unto the peaceable
people of the same, the Lord (the God of heavens) has miraculously Psalm. 4.
brought us.

32. It is true, the whole earth is unmeasurable great and large, and the lands
and people are many and diverse, but the most part of the lands are beset with
grievous labor, and with much trouble, Eccl. 1.2. and 3. and 6.
and the pe ple captived with many and sundry unprofitable v^x^tions.

33. But the Bar. 5.
children of the Kingdom have a land that is void of all molestation, and a
City that i. very Isa. 60.65.
peaceable which also is Isa. 35. and 54. Ier. 33.
inhabited with no manner of vexation or unprofitable labor, but with joy, in
all peace.

34. Wherefore the people that dwells therein, is likewise a wise and
understanding people, according to the nature of the same good land; and it is
a people of one manner of John 17. Act. 4.
nature and disposition, concordable, peaceable, and lovely.

35. Verily, without this one City of Peace or land of the living* there is no
convenient place of Rest on the whole earth; neither yet without the Commonalty
of this one manner of people of the same city, any meet people, Deuteronomy. 4.
among whom such an understanding is to be found, or that can live so peaceably
as this same.

36. But this land of peace (which with his lovely people is full of joy, and
lives in concord) is a secret land, and is severed from all other lands Deuteronomy
10 4 Esdr. 7.
and people.

37. It is also known of no man but of his Inhabitants, and of those which come
into the same, and that be assembled with them. But the entrance into the same,
is 4 Esd. 7. Matthew. 7.
very straight and narrow; for that cause it is found of few, but there are
many that run past it, or that have not any right regard thereon.

38. Seeing then that the entrance into this same good land, is very straight
and narrow, and becomes found Luke 13.
of few, neither is it rightly regarded, therefore remains this good land of
the Living unloved and unknown of the most part of strange people, and of all
unbelievers of our godly Testimonies.

39 Wherefore, to the end now to encourage all people to the love of the same,
so will we (out of inclined love) partly describe the state of the good land,
and the upright dealing of the lovely people, and testify of every ones
disposition and nature, that if happily there might be any one found that did
know his estranging from the same, and had a desire (with all his heart) to
assemble him with us thereunto.

40. For verily, in respect of the excellency thereof, it is the best-worthy
Psa. 48. Prove. 3. and 8.
to be loved, and for love thereof to Matt. 16.19.
forsake all whatsoever is without it; for it is much better, more precious,
and beautiful, yea and more excellent, rich, and joyful or living, Isa. 64. 1
Cor. 2.
then all what may be found, devised or invented upon the universal earth.

41. But whosoever loves not the same above all things neither yet does (for
the love thereof) forsake, deny, give over, or Matt. 10. and 16. Luk 9.14. Ioh.
12.
leave himself with all that he has, he shall not enter into it.

42. But if there be any one that is of the disposition or nature of the same:
or whose lusts and desires stand inclined or are affected toward it, such a
one verily, shall (for the worthiness cause thereof) love the same, as also not
think it tedious to assemble him unto us, Number. 12 1 Cor. 9. and 10.
and to pass through that way that leads thereto.

43. Wherefore, to the end now that all those (which desire, under the
obedience of the Love, to dwell in this good Land, with this People of Peace)
might be gathered together into the same, without harm and unhindered, and that
no man should remain without it, for want of any knowledge of the Way: So will
we show the nearest Ways, and the needfullest Means, and Guides, that lead
thereunto; because that every Traveller, may still keep the right High way, and
not turn from it, neither Deuteronomy. 5. and 17. Josh. 1.23. Prove. 4.
to the right side, nor to the left, but may keep so much the more diligent
Watch, until that he be come through the Gate, into the holy Apo. 22.
City of the good Land. We will also (for that men should in no wise err, nor
be deceived on the way) distinct, and mark out those Land, Places, and People,
which are most needful to be Deuteronomy. 2. and 3.
over passed, and 2 Cor. 6.
left; as likewise, all whatsoever is deceitful and harmful, and will in like
manner, evidently show, according to the Truth, how, wherewith, and
where-through, all harmful, and destroying things, together with all the
enemies or adversaries, and all tempters, and assaulters* are to be resisted
and overcome, which would let, and hinder the traveller from coming into the
good Land.

44. And if now also, there be any man in the journey, that is become deceived,
or erring upon the way, through any of the deceitful things (which we do show
hereafter following) or which has set down Number. 32.
himself to rest any where upon the way, to the intent to live quietly, and is
not yet come into the holy Apoc. 21
City, through Psa. 118. John 10.
the Gate: Let not him pitch his Tents there, neither yet make him there any
Tabernacle for to dwell there; but let him give ear Number. 32. Prove. 4.
and credit to our undeceiveable council of the Wisdom, and set his feet in the
right way that leads thereunto; and so travel forward to the good Land of the
Living, and of the true Isai. 32. and 60.
Rest and Peace.

45. For whosoever is not yet come into the holy City, through the Gate or
Door; John 10.
he is not yet also come to the upright Heb. 4.
Rest of the Children of God.

46. Wherefore (ye dearly beloved) seeing now that this way to the holy Land,
is perilous 4 Esd. 7.
to pass through, for him that is unexpert therein; so have we thought good
(out of hearty love) to testify and show forth distinelly (and that
altogether, to the preservation of the traveller) the most part of the
wildernessed places of the strange people, and the perils of deceit, each one
according to his pernitiou^ disposition and nature; to the end, that every one
may be of good cheer, and may (without fear) pass through the way rightly, and
without harm; and for that no man should remain lost, except he would himself.
As likewise for this cause, That if happily any man should be fallen into error,
upon the way, or should chance to be deceived, and seduced by any of the same,
he might yet understand and perceive, in which place of error, and among what
sort of unrighteous or ignorant people he is, or has united himself; and also
how far off, or neer-by, he is to the good Land of Peace, and to the peaceable
people of the Love.

47. Behold (ye dearly beloved) (like as hereafter follows) have we (out of
an inclination of love) showed and described in this manner, because that every
one of us (namely, ^^e to whom the Lord has given 4 Esd. 10 Ephesians. 3. Col. 1.
to know, or to understand the secretness of the good Land or of the heavenly
Kingdom) might (with all lovers of the truth) be turned to the same good Land
of the Kingdom of Peace, with one consent of mind, and with a good courage; as
also enter into, and pass through the way 4 Esd. 7. Luke 13.
that leads to the same Life, with a good faith and firm hope; whereby to
unite the same with us, and with those sal. 32. and 33.
peaceable people (in all John 17 ^ phes. 4.
love and concord) who do always live in peace, and in all upright
righteousness.

48. For this same good Land Psalm. 78. and 132. Matthew. 25.
is the upright place of rest, which God has prepared, reserved, and kept for
his People, from the beginning of the world; for to possess them with the same
in the last time.

49. Moreover, this same Land, is a Land full of Joy, Life, and Songs of
Praise, and likewise, full of all manner of Riches of God. For therein is the
secret Treasure Matthew. 13. Col. 2.
of all spiritual and heavenly Goods. It is also a Land, wherein Wine and Oil,
Honey and Milk, and all Sweetness (to a joy and life) flows abundantly; like
as we shall hereafter following, rehearse more at large of the same.

50. Rejoice you now with this, Psalm. 96. Isa. 44.49.
O ye Heavens, and recreate thy self now with us, thou Earth, and all ye that
hope upon the Good. Give ear now to the Truth, understand and consider well of
the strange States of the wildernessed Lands, and People, to the end, that ye
may forsake or Deuteronomy. 2.
pass by them, and have also a good regard unto the lovely State of the good
Isai. 35.60.
Land, and of the holy People, whereby to love the same, and to unite you, or
to become one being with them. For all this same each one particularly, is
hereafter following, described unto you in writing, even according to the Life
and Truth.

Take it to heart.

THE Spiritual Land OF PEACE.
Hear, and understand, taste, and perceive that which is spiritual, heavenly,
and everlasting, and not that which is earthly, natural, and corruptible.

Col. 3.
CHAP. I.
I Looked and behold: There is in the world a very unpeaceable Land, and it is
the wildernessed Land, wherein the most part of all uncircumcised, impenitent,
and ignorant people do dwell, and which is first of all needful for the man, to
the end he may come to the Land of Peace, and to the good City of Life and
Rest: to Genesis 12. Apo. 18.
forsake, and to depart out of the same. Which unpeaceable Land, is situate, or
lies against, or on the other, or contrary side of the East, or rising Zech. 2.
of the Sun; where neither Day not Sun arises, or shines at any time. For
when the Sun comes near unto the same, then goes she always under, or is Isa.
5 60. 4. Esd. 14.
covered with the Darknesses of the Land; and for that cause she Sap. ^.
shines not there, nor yet gives any cleerness in the same, because that the
Exo. 10. Psalm. 105. Sap. 17.
darknesses are too thick over the whole Land.

2. This same unpeaceable Land, has also a City or Strength, wherein the
people of the Land do put their confidence. The name of which City, they
themselves which dwell therein, do not know, but only those that are come out
of it; and it is named Ignorance, according to her own proper nature of the
darknesses.

3. For the Isa 8 9. 4 Esd. 14.
darknesses have wholly covered the same Land, and also the people that dwell
therein; which darknesses are so Exodus 10 Job 12.
thick, that they may be felt.

4. And whosoever do dwell, or are born therein, they are likewise so ignorant,
that they will not out of it; neither yet desire any better, because they have
never seen the Light of Heaven, in his upright righteousness, nor yet known,
nor loved the Isa. 59. Romans 3.
Life of Peace in his upright Being.

5. They run from one place, and come to another, yet is it altogether in the
same Land; but they will not depart out of it. Therefore is also the Proverb
verified in them, which says, It is evil, to be born in an evil Land.

CHAP. II.
THe people which dwell therein, know not their Original or first beginning;
also, they keep not any Genealogy or Pedigree; neither do they know, from
whence, or how, they are come into the same: And moreover then that, they are
Isai. 56.59. Matthew. 15.
altogether blind, and John 9.
blind born.

2. And yet over and above their blindness, although their eyes be shut, they
are all bound over their eyes with blind clothes: that which also they have
willingly over their eyes. For with the same they suffer themselves to be
directed, and led into all error of Ignorance: persuading themselves, that the
blind clothes, are the light of their eyes, which do give light unto them; on
whom likewise they have a confidence in their forthgoing, and desire not any
better: And therefore the blind ones are led there with blind clothes.

3. The blind clothes are called Isa. 56. Matthew. 15. and 22. Luke 6.
blind guides, because the blind ones (in the darkness, and in the Land of
Ignorance) are led by them into all ignorance; but that same do they themselves
neither know, nor understand.

4. And although one should take away the clothes from their eyes, in the same
Land of Ignorance, and so should open their eyes in the knowledge, yet might it
not help them any thing at all, to a beholding of the true Light; but it should
be unto them more evil then good, because of the darknesses Job 10.12. Isa. 5.
and 9
which are spread over the whole Land; therefore must they also in the same
(still groaping after the way) be led in the darknesses; and must likewise,
oftentimes Matt. 15. Luke 6.
with their blind guides, fall into the ditches.

5. For whosoever does not forsake the same Land and his darknesses, as also
the blind guides in the same, and suffers not himself to be led into the
true light, by the seeing guides of the Family of Love; John 11.
he must oftentimes stumble or become offended, and also many times Prove. 4.
stagger and fall, and that altogether; because he is not taught, nor led to
the cleerness of the Psalm. 38. John 9.
true Light, nor to the truth of the upright Life, whereby to behold the same
true Light, in his upright Righteousness, and to inherit the upright Life, in
his peaceable Being.

6. And although now one should speak much of the light, to any of the blind
people (in the Land, called Ignorance) and should in most evident manner,
expound or open the same unto them, in their knowledge; and that they then
should have no lust nor will, to depart out of the darknesses of Ignorance;
neither yet to be taught, nor led to the true light of the upright life: So
could it not doubtless profit them, to the entrance into the rest of life; but
it should be unto them, much more to a disquietness, to an offense, and to a
death, because they remain inhabiting in the Land and in the City of Ignorance.
For the whole City of the same Land, is full of Ignorance. For that cause also
she has her name, according to that she is her self.

7. Wherefore it is much better for the people of the same Land (the whiles
they dwell therein, and have no desire to depart out of it, through the fear of
God (that men give them) in their blindness and ignorant error) to understand
of the Ezekiel. 18. Mic. 6. Matthew. 18.
obedience which they ow to God and his Word, and to require the same of them,
then that men should open the eyes of the Genesis 3.
disobedient knowledge unto them in their disobedience; and so then (if they
endevor them not to obedience) to let them go on still with their blind
guides, till such time as they understand, that they are blind, and be led by
the blind ones; and that they then likewise grow desirous after some better
thing, and would very gladly or good willingly be taught to the Land of Peace,
and to his peaceable people, and be led into the same.

8. Verily, that the same council, is the best council to be used among the
blind people that know not their error, I have sufficiently proved by
experience, among those that are ignorant of their error, and among the
decliners from us, and our godly doctrine. Let every one therefore, take
diligent heed, that he tie or bind not himself too fast unto his error, with
his knowing wisdom, nor yet boast him of his knowledge; but let him study or
endevor himself to enter into the upright Christian life, and to the true
understanding of God, through the right John 10.
door of the Humility and Obedience of Jesus Christ, and to become assembled to
the family of Love; as also taught and exercised obediently, in the requiring
of his Doctrine: so shall it then assuredly not miss or fail, to bring him to
the true Light, and to the Life of the upright Righteousness.

CHAP. III.
THis forementioned City (named Ignorance) has two Gates; the one stands in
the North, or Midnight, through the which, men do go into the City of Darkness,
or of Ignorance.

2. This Gate now that stands in the North, is very large and great, and has
also a great door, because there is much Zech. 9 Matthew. 7.
passage of people through the same; and it has likewise his name, according to
the nature of the same City.

3. Forasmuch then as that men do come into Ignorance, through the same Gate,
therefore is it named, Mic. 7. Luke 21.
Men know not how to do. And the great door (where-through the multitudes of
people do run) is named, Unknown error; and there is else no coming in to the
same City, named Ignorance.

4. The other Gate stands on the one side of the City, toward the East, or
Spring of the Day; and the same is the Matthew 7. Luke 13.
narrow Gate, through the which, men travel out of the City of Ignorance, and
do enter into the straight way, which leads to the Life of the Righteous.

5. Now when one travelleth out through the same Gate, then does he immediately
after epsy some Light, and that same reaches to the rising of the Sun.

6. The name of this Gate (wherethrough men travel out of the Land of
Ignorance) we will rehearse Infra. 7.
hereafter: For we will now write forward of the manner of the ignorant Land and
People.

CHAP. IV.
THis Land of Ignorance is in it self so utterly wildernessed, and encompassed,
and be-set with so many Eccles. 1. and 2. and 4. and 5. Isa. 41.59.
vexations, troubles, and unprofitable labors; that by means thereof, there is
no convenient place to be found there, to sow any Corn in, Lam. 2.4 Amos 8.
for the food of men; therefore there grows neither Jere. 14.
Corn nor Grass, in the same Land.

2. The people of this Land, do all likewise live in confusion or disorder, and
are very diligent Eccles. 5. Isa. 44.
in their unprofitable work and labor. And although all their work be vain or
unprofitable, yet has every one notwithstanding a delightful liking to the
same. For according to the nature of the Land they are all ignorant, and
inclined to unprofitable works.

3. Forasmuch then, as that they all have such a delight to such unprofitable
work, Isa. 24.
so forget they to prepare the Ground for Corn and Seed to live thereby,
according to the good manly Ordinance; and so they live not by the manly food,
but by their own Ezekiel. 4. Hos. 4. and 9. Mic. 6.
dung; for they have there no other food to live by.

4. There is oftentimes hunger, but no man has any lust, or yet desire to any
other food Jere 36. and 44.
then to his own dung; for their stomach and nature is accustomed, and
naturally inclined thereunto.

5. Wherefore, seeing they are not fed with any bread, Job 33. Eccles. 14.
but with their own filthiness, or dung; so is there likewise, no satisfying
among them.

6. Seeing then that they understand not what kind of Food serves them, to
the good Life, but (through their Ignorance) do sustain themselves by their own
dung; therefore they do not understand also how to prepare themselves the good
things, Deuteronomy. 32. Luke 19.
that serve them unto peace, and to a peaceable life; but do vex and trouble
themselves out of measure, for to make those things diligently (and that Psalm 4.
with a delight) which are unprofitable, and which do afflict themselves, or
bring them to much encumbrance.

7. The vain or unprofitable works, and the preparations or endevors of the
foolish people (where-through the whole Land, every where* is exceedingly
burdened with great molestation and labor) are these.

CHAP. V.
THey make there diverse sorts of Puppet works or Babies, for to bring up the
children in vanity; there are made likewise many kind of Balls, Tut-staves, or
Kricket-staves, R^ckets, and Dice; for that the foolish people should waste or
spend their time therewith in foolishness.

2. There be made also, playing Tables, Draft-boards. Chess-boards, Cards and
Mummeries or Masks, for to delight the idle people with such foolish vanity.
There are made likewise, many Rings, Chains, and Gold and Silver Tablets, and
Brooches; also Garnishing of Plumes or Tufts of Feathers, and many manner of
stitched or imbroidered works, with Gold, Silver, Pearl, and Silk. Likewise,
many kinds of Tapistry, and Gards, or Borderwork upon Garments: And diverse
sorts of unprofitable colors upon Clothes; as also sundry manner of Cut and
Pinked Garments; and likewise, many kinds of Pictures, Tables of Imagery,
Painted Walls, and diverse kind of Carved, and Graven, or wrought Images for to
delight the foolish and proud minded people, 1 John 2.
and to satisfy and fulfill the lust of their eyes.

3. Men do occupy there likewise, sundry sorts of unprofitable and unneedful
merchandise, for to provoke the hearts of the foolish people, unto covetousness
or greedy desire 1 Timothy 6 Jam. 5.
of vain riches, and to rejoice them in the same.

4. There are made also diverse sorts of sounding instruments for melody; and
there are Printed many manner of foolish Books, for to delight the heating of
the foolish people therewithal: For after such things their ears do 2 Timothy 4
itch.

5. They build there likewise, diverse houses of common assembly, which they
call Gods houses; and they use there many manner of foolishnesses of taken on
Services, which they call Religions, or God-services, whereby to wave or hold
forth something in show, before the ignorant people, touching the opinion of
their Sap. 17. Tit. 1.
defiled consciences, because they should quiet their foolish consciences.

6. Seeing then that they are Sap. 2. Romans 1.
covered with darkness, and dwell in Ignorance; so do they invent among
themselves, many manner of good-thingking, or self-conceited knowledges, to
their appeasment in their Ignorance; also sundry sorts of garnishing of
services, Isai. 44. and 46. Jere. 10. Baruch 6.
and of gods, which they may handle or feel in their ignorance; for else they
should think that they had neither Gods, nor Gods services, neither could they
set their consciences at quiet.

7. In this manner are the vain people bewitched with these things; where
through they think or persuade themselves, that their gods services, and
knowledges, which they themselves do make, or take on in their hypocrisy, must
needs be some Wisd. 14.15.
holy or singular thing, and so then they honor the works of their own hands.

8. They bestow likewise much labor, for to exercise themselves well in the
knowledge, and to teach forth the same, but 2 Timothy 3.
they remain in the same land, utterly unskilful and ignorant touching the
knowledge of the truth.

9. They make there also many swords, halberds, spears, bows and arrows,
ordnance or guns, pellets, gunpouder, armor or harness, and gorgets, etc. for
that the tyrannical oppressors, and those that have a pleasure in destroying,
should use war and battle (therewithal) one against another.

10. To be short, all the unprofitable works of the same wildernessed land,
neither it all the abominations where-through the people of the same land do
live very cumbersomly and unpeaceable, are not very easily to be written; but
let him that has eyes to mark, look farther into the same.

11. It is surely an evil land, where it is neither good to dwell, nor yet to
remain: for the people of the same land, are too exceeding wonderful, and too
strange or Deuteronomy. 32. Iudic. 19.
absurd of life: also too exceeding disorderly, and too Isa. 57.
unquiet of mind, from whom likewise there proceeds a foul or Isa. 34. Joel
2.
filthy vapor, that stinketh over the whole land; but because they are gross
and soul of complexion, they themselves do not smell their own stink.

CHAP. VI.
THe people of this Land have also strange names, each one according to his
nature; every one is known there likewise by his nature; for according as their
nature is, such are their names written upon them: whosoever can read the
writing let him consider thereon; they are gross Letters; who so has but a
little sight and understanding, he may soon read them; whose names are these.

2. Highmindedness, Romans 1. Gal. 5. 2 Timothy 3.
lust of the eyes, stoutness, pride, covetousness, lust or desire to
contrariness, foolishness, wantonness Ephe. 5.
or light behavior, vanity or unprofitableness, Rom 1.
unnaturalness undecentness, masterfulness, gluttony, unchastity,
unforesightfulness, macking, scorning, dallying, Wis 14.
adultery, or fornication, contemning, lying, deceiving, variance, Gal. 5.
strife, and contention, vexing, Phil. 2.
self-seeking, oppressing, undiscreetness, etc.

3. Behold such strange or absurd names, disposition, and nature have the
people andinhabiters of this land called Ignorance.

4. Their dealing or manner of life, is also variable, for now they take on some
thing, then they leave somewhat else; now they be thus led, then be they so
driven; now they praise this, then they dispraise that; now they think to have
this Vision, then they think to have that Prophecy: to be short, they are
always unconstant.

5. Their Religion or Gods service, is called Ier. 44.
The pleasure of men. Their doctrine and ministration is called, Ier 7. and 8.
Ezec. 13. and 22.
Good-thinking. Their king is called, The scum of ignorance [which signifies
unto us, the climing up of the hasty or rash minds of ignorance;] whom they
themselves do set up to be their Superior or King, for to bear sway, or to
reign over them.

CHAP. VII.
WHosoever now finds himself in this dark land full of ignorance, and desires
to go out of, and to forsake the same, and so has a good liking toward the
good land of Rest and Peace, for to assemble him into the same, among the
peaceable people, he must go through the other gate that lies toward the East,
for that is the out-faring gate, wherethorow he must travel forth out of the
dark land of Ignorance, and it is named Prove. 1. and 8. and 15. and 16.
The fear of God.

2. The same gate has also a strong or mighty door for to go through, and it is
named Prove. 1. and 9.
The beginning of Wisdom. Now when the traveller begins to go through these
same; so can it not be otherwise with him then, but he must endevor himself to
give car and credit to the testimonies of the gracious Word of the Lord, and to
the service of the Family of Love Where-through he then also (in his hearing
and believing) is presented or met withal (by the Elders in the Family of
Love) with the light of the first entrance of the way that reaches into the
holy Land of the living. With which light and his requiring, the upright life
of the pure hearts in Jesus Christ, and the very true Isa. 60. Ioh. 1.
light of the same life (against the minds of the false light of the
good-thinking Knowledge) is held forth, and evidently declared unto him, whereby
he becomes then likewise humbled in all his minds and thoughts: and there is
also made known unto him, what manner of sinner, and how Matt. 15.
unclean of heart he is without the upright being of the true light and life
that proceeds out of God (and so in the Knowledge of his sins, and of the
upright Righteousness, as also of the first entrance of the way, to the land of
the living) he begins to perceive and to get a little Prove. 4.
wisdom of the holy Understanding, where-through likewise he is the more ready
to consent to pass over and to travel through the small way that leads to the
life.

3. This light now, that is held forth before the traveller, or wherewith he is
met (in the passing through the fear of God, and the beginning of wisdom, is
called Matthew. 3. Luke 3 Act. 2. and 3.
The grace of the lord in the confession of sins; through which light the
traveller is prepared to the true life of the upright Righteousness, and washed
with the water of Repentance, to the knowledge of Salvation in the forgiveness,
and in the cleansing of his sins.

4. With which, and through which light and his foregoing service the traveller
is Gal. 3.
led and proceeds on, even unto the good land of the upright living ones.

5. And although now, that this light in the foregoing of his service, be
lesser then the great daylight of the good land, yet reaches it
notwithstanding to the great Isa. 60. Mal. 4. Apo. 22.
daylight of the same land. And moreover, albeit that the least in the kingdom
of the good land be greater of light then the same foregoing light, Mat. 11.
Luke 7.
yet does it for all that bring the traveller to the greatest and chiefest
light in the kingdom of the good and peaceable land.

6. But in traveling forward upon the way, for to come to the good land of
Peace, so do the Psalm 34. Eccles 2. Act. 14. 2 Timothy 3.
perils then first make manifest themselves. Therefore must the traveller keep
a diligent watch in the said grace of the Lord, and in the obedience to the
Requiring of the same foregoing service; and so constantly follow after the
requiring of the grace of the Lord, Eccl. 2. Heb. 13.
and of the service of love, according to the counsel Prove. 1. and 2. and 3.
and 4. and 5.
of the wise or elders in the same, for otherwise he becomes hindered and
deceived upon the way, by the sundry manner of temptations and conceited lights
that do oftentimes meet with him, to the leading away, or seducing of him from
the right way.

7. Wherefore, to the end now there should no man remain Heb. 3.4
without the Rest of the Saints of God (which dwell in this good City) except
it were then, through his own unwillingness or good-thinking Knowledge, so will
we mark out both the perils of seducing, and also the means unto preservation,
for that no man should err upon the way, Deuteronomy. 13: Ier. 28.
nor be seduced or deceived by any false ends.

8. The Lord vouchsafe to strengthen the courage of all hearts that desire to
go into the life of peace, and to give them wisdom, that they in any wise
(through Number. 14. Heb. 4.
unbelief, nor through any good-thinking wisdom) become not hindered from
entering into the godly life, by the many manner of temptations that do chance
unto them by the sundry false ends, and so might happen to stay by the way.

9. Therefore hear, and understand: when one now enters into this gate,
(named Prove. 15.
The fear of God) and will travel forward toward the good land, through the
door (named Pro. 1.2.9. Eccle. 1.
The beginning of wisdom) in the light (named, The grace of the Lord in the
confession of sins) so shall he not then run on rashly without discretion,
according to his own good thinking or immagination, nor yet unadvisedly without
the counsel of the Pro. 4. and 5. Eccle. 8.
elders in the wisdom of the love, and of the upright being of Jesus Christ;
for whenas the wisdom does first begin in the traveller, so is she at that time
but small in him yet, as young or growing on: and he himself is yet also but
young of understanding, and small of comprehending in the godly wisdom.

10. For that cause the traveller (in the youngness of his understanding) must
(in the beginning when the wisdom grows first in him) have his proceeding
forward according to the counsel of his elder in the Family of Love, who has
obediently performed the requiring of the gracious Word and his service, and so
is grown up therein unto the Ephe. 4.
old age of the godly understanding of the gracious Word of the Lord, and well
exercised in the passing over the way to the good life and land of the Living,
to the end that he may likewise (to the overcoming of all foolishness and
seducing that meets him) attain to the Eccl. 6. and 8. 1 Cor. 13.
old age of the manly wisdom without harm, and so go into the good land of the
upright Wise, and Understanding ones.

11. Now when the traveller passes through this said gate and door, and so
begins to travel forward toward the good land, then does he find in the
way of his forth-going two kind of wise ones or counselors that do meet with
him.

12. The one of those wise ones presents himself before him out of the Family
of Love to his preservation, and he stands on the right side of the way, and
his form is not very amiable nor pleasant (according to the minds of the
flesh) to behold, nor yet his sayings and counsel to be obeyed, because that he
is contrary to all minds and knowledges of the flesh Romans 7.8.
or stands minded against them, (notwithstanding, if the traveller have no
regard unto him, neither does daily receive any counsel of him unto obedience,
nor yet follow his counsel, then shall he not come to the rest) and he is named
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
The Law or Ordinance of the Lord: whereunto also is joined the safemaking
doctrine and serviceable ministration of the holy and gracious Word under the
obedience of the Love.

13. And the same Law or Ordinance, with the adjoining doctrine and serviceable
ministration does Gal. 3. and 4.
sustain and keep (with the counsel and instruction of the elders in the holy
understanding of the gracious Word of the Lord and his service of Love) the
disciples of the Wisdom, the whilst they are yet young and unexpert in the
same, that they may remain preserved and ( Col. 1. 2 Pet. 3.
growing up in the godly Wisdom) may (in the Eccl. 8.
old age of the holy Understanding, and in the experience of the manly wisdom)
inherit the Prove. 7. Ephe. 1.
heritage of the peaceable land.

14. The other Wise one comes before him, out of the thoughts of man's
goodthinking, and out of the opinion of the strangers from the Family of Love:
which wise one comes often unto him, to the intent to draw him away Prove. 5.
from the way that directs to the land of the living, and he stands on the
left side of the way, and his form is sweet and friendly (according to the
minds of the flesh) to behold, and his sayings and counsels delightful to be
obeyed (but if the traveller do regard him and cleave unto him, and follow his
counsel, then becomes he altogether deceived, and at the last ^indeth himself
in many calamities and miseries) and he is named Romans 8.
The wisdom of the flesh; whereunto is taken on the corruptible doctrine and
ministration of man's good-thinking, with the which many people be seduced and
led away from the way of the passing over to the good land of the living.

15. These two wise ones (on both sides) do give unto the traveller several
counsel.

16. The Law or Ordinance of the Lord requires the traveller the obedience to
her Requiring, and so (with a simple heart) to accomplish Matt. 3.
all righteousness obediently: and testifies unto him, that that same is Pro.
3. and 4.
the right wisdom of the upright people of the good land, and councelleth him
likewise, that he (in the obeying of the Requiring of the ministration of the
gracious Word of the Lord) should draw away his senses and thoughts from all
unprofitable and corruptible things, and so to let it be delightful unto him,
to love the God of life h with all his heart, and to serve him only that he
might come to such an upright 2 Pet. 1.
nature and good being, Deuteronomy. 6. and 10. Matthew 22.
as the people of the good land have, and so then might live with the same
peaceable people in Ephe. 1.4.
the upright Righteousness and Holiness

17. But The wisdom of the flesh with the doctrine of her good thinking, does
(in all things) set forth her self there-against much subtiller and more
prudent, then to live so in the Wisd. 1.
singleness of heart, obediently, and requires of the traveller to do his
diligence, or endeavor to know all secrets; and so counsels him not to
hear, to believe, nor to obey Genesis 3. Romans 1.
the Law and Ordinance of the Lord, nor the Elders in the same ministration;
but to endeavor him of himself, to discern the best and the worst through his
imagination of the knowledge, and to excel all things with the knowledge, Ier.
9.11. and 13. and 18.
as also to live according to the best of the good-thinking or judgment of his
own heart.

18. Besides this, The wisdom of the flesh holds forth likewise before the
traveller diverse sorts of knowledge, according to the desire and pleasure of the
flesh, because he should choose such things to follow after: also sundry kinds
of Col 2. 2 Timothy 3.
false holiness, and false freedom, and many kinds of joy, in the vanity, and
in the foolish and earthly Wisd. 2. Romans 11. 2 Pet. 2.
corruptible things, to the end he should cleave unto them with a loose heart,
according to his own opinion and pleasure, and to frame his own Righteousness,
joy, and friendship there-out, even as though the same also were a good
holiness or Paradise of life, and a good freedom; but Pro. 5. Wisd. 3. Romans 6.
the end is the death and destruction.

19. If so be now that the traveller do believe and follow the counsel of the
wisdom of the flesh, then does he subject his heart unto two false and
deceitful props [the one is named, Phil. 2. and 3. 2 Pet. 2.
Self-seeking; the other Genesis 3.
Negligence toward the Law or Ordinance of the Lord] and so he comes into many
kind of errors through the wisdom of the flesh.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt if the traveller have an hearty desire to come into the rest of the good
land, and that his heart be inclined Ephe. 4.
unto Unity with the peaceable people, then must he utterly forsake all the,
counsel of The wisdom of the flesh, how pleasantly and prudently soever the
same attempteth him in the Knowledge, and all those likewise that are enemies to
the Family of Love, and that are captived with the fleshes wisdom or
good-thinking, and with the disobedience to the Requiring of the Word and
service of Love; for the end of the counsel of the wisdom of the flesh, and of
her servants or captives, is nothing but deceit, and extends to all Wisd. 5.
Eccl. 21.
grievous misery, bitterness, Romans 6.8.
and sins of death, and therefore must the traveller (with all his heart)
follow the Psa. 119.
counsel of the Law of the Lord, according to the counsel of the said Pro. 4.
and 7.
elders in the holy understanding.

2. (And although it seems at the first to be somewhat painful and bitter,
yet does the end of the same for all that extend to all joy, sweetness, and
Romans 6. and 8.
righteousness of life, and brings the traveller to the good land of rest and
peace.)

3. But the principal counsel of the Law or Ordinance of the Lord, is this,
that the traveller, or lover of the good land, shall in the beginning of his
journey Eccl. 7.
submit himself altogether under the Requiring of the holy and gracious Word of
the Lord, and his service of Love, and enter obediently into the Requiring of
the same, and prepare Eccl. 2.
his soul to temptation, and so shall call and pray unto his Psalm 18. and 19.
and 116.
God in all his temptation, and persevere steadfastly in the Law or Ordinance of
the Lord, even till into the good land of Peace.

4. And this good counsel of the Law of the Lord, gives the traveller also two
Instruments with him in the journey, or by the way; the one serves him for to
continue there through in the right way; and it is a compass, the which is the
right Christian way sure that always points him rightly unto the good land:
this compass is named, Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luke 9.14.
The forsakeing of himself for the good life's sake. As long as one goes on
according to the same in the Obedience of the Requiring of the Law of the Lord,
he cannot err.

5. With the other instrument all the enemies, and all the temptations that
would hinder the traveller from coming into this holy place be overcome.

6. This instrument, of victory is the Cross of Christ, and it is named, Lam.
3. Heb. 10.12 Iam. 5.
Patience, or sufferance, and it is the true Altar in thee Holy, upon the which
the true Meat Offering is, that is given to the faithful believing travelers
to eat, and also the true Drink Offering that is given them to drink. Which
Meate-offering is named, Ioh. 2.
The Flesh or Body of Jesus Christ; and the Drink Offering is named, The Blood
of Jesus Christ; and the same body and blood of Jesus Christ is unto the
constant and faithful traveller (in the proceeding on in his Pilgrimage) Ephe.
2. Col. 1.2.
a true Mediator, to lay away the sin in the flesh, and to establish the Romans
15.
Promises with him that are made to the Fathers; and so through the same, and
with the same Meate-offering and Drink Offering the traveller is able to bide
Heb. 12.
constant to the Compass, and on the Cross, till unto the accomplishing of his
Passover and debt offering; that is, unto the death and burying of all the
lusts and desires of the sinful flesh, and of all the fleshes wisdom or
good-thinking, and so can overcome all false ends and all the enemies of the
good Life of the upright Love, and enter into the good Land of Peace, without
harm, and be assembled to all the holy ones of God, in the everlasting life.

7. Whosoever then has even thus (as is said) these two forementioned
Instruments with him, and gives himself captive thereunder 2 Cor. 10.
obediently, according to the doctrine and requiring of the Law of the Lord, he
Sap. 3.
comes through the same captivity, to the upright freedom of all the children
of God.

8. Howbeit it Sap. 3. and 5. Matthew. 27.
seems, as that he dies on the Cross, through the compass, with the said
meat offering and drink offering; but he comes through Romans 6.8.
the same death of the Cross, to the upright life.

9. Now when the traveller gives himself to the journey, with this said Armor
of the upright warlike soldiers of Jesus Christ, and so prepares his Eccle. 2.
soul against all temptations; then can he likewise, in the days of his
temptations, keep the victory against all the enemies of the good life, and of
the upright love: For so in that Armor, none of the enemies of the life, nor
the ungodly ones, with their temptations, bide Heb. 12.
standing before the forsaking of himself, for the good life's sake, and before
the parience; nor the Matt. 16.
Gates of Hell the danger of death, the bands of the Dev^l, not yet the world,
nor flesh, have not any power against those same; but they be all overcome
therethrough, and all that whatsoever is not any life, neither yet of God, must
give back before them.

10. Therefore (all ye lovers of the good Land, and Ioh. 1. Iam. 1.
disciples of the holy Word) have a diligent regard unto the compass, and
continue on the Cross, Matt. 10. and 24.
even unto the end: For there-through do we obtain the victory against all the
enemies, and we may likewise, through those same, enter (without harm) into
this good Land, which lies right in the East, and where the Sun always
shines, Isa. 60 Apo. 22.
and never goes down; and so may inherit the same for evermore.

CHAP. IX.
^F so be now that the traveller do give ear to the council of the Law of the
Lord, and gives himself to the journey, with the said Instruments, then does
he in his traveling forward, come into a great unpathed Land, where many manner
of temptations and deceits do meet with him; and coming into the same, there
appears unto him immediately Matthew. 2.
a star out of the East, which guides him till into the good Land; to the end,
that he should always (in all the temptations of deceit) have a good confidence
to pass by all the temptations, and deceiveable things, that do meet with him,
and to come to the good Land.

2. This Star is named, Abac 2. Romans 1. Heb. 11.
Belief and hope, by the which he does behold (afar off) to what good rest the
Star will bring him.

3. This great unpathed Land (that he travelleth through) is named, Many manner
of walkings, because the Travelers do travel and pass (from all quarters)
through the same Land, Deuteronomy 1.
to that one good Land of rest; but in all the same Land, named, Many manner of
walkings, there is not one plain pathed way.

4. But although the Travelers do (in this Many manner of walkings) travel to
the good and peaceable Land; yet do they all at the last assemble into one way;
for they all have their guiding by that one Matt. ^. 2.
Star, which Star (according to the pointing of their compass) brings them
all to that one Land of Peace.

5. Moreover, this Land, into the which one comes, through the Fear of God,
and the Beginning of Wisdom, is of it self, a Eccles. 2.
sorrowful minded Land; and the people of that Land, neither yet the Travelers
in the same, Psa. 126. and 137.
are never merry; wherefore there do happen there unto the Travelers, many
temptations to choose Matthew. 4. Luke 4.
something, whereby to be released from the sorrow or grief: But with the
forsaking of himself, they overcome it all through the patience.

6. The names of the people are these, Stricken in heart, Exodus 16.17.
Cumbered in mind, Wofulness, Sorrowfulness, Anguish, Fear, Dismaidness,
Perplexity, Vncomfortableness, Vndelightfulness, Heavy-mindedness, Many manner
of Thoughts, Dead courage.

7. Behold, such names and natures of people, there are, and do dwell in this
Land, Many manner of walkings.

CHAP. X.
THis Land is an open, weak, or unwalled Land; and is like unto a Exo. 26. Number.
21.
barren wilderness, wherein there (...) joy to be found; but it is full or
perils of deceit, because of the sundry sorts of temptations that do come to
the Traveller through Perplexities.

2. For if they (according to the doctrine of the Law of the Lord) have not a
sharp watch unto the compass, nor hold them fast on the Cross, and also do not
still mark the Matthew. 2.
leading star, then may they soon be led away into a by-way; and that because
of the Heavy mindedness of the Inhabitants of the Land. For the wisdom of the
flesh does also come forth there oftentimes very subtly, Rom 1. 2 Pet. 2.
with her selfseeking, for to point the Traveller aside: But all what is
self-seeking, that is seducing, but whereunto the forsaking of himself points
or leads, that is the right path.

3. Verily, in this Land of mortifying and abstaining Mat. 16. Matthew. 8.
from all things, there is not much joy to be gotten; but the Traveller, that
(with the forsaking of himself) passes through the same, in the patience, and
seeks not his own selfness; but (under the obedience of the love) has a much
more desire to do Psalm. 40. Heb. 10.
the Lords will, he obtains a good salvation of the peaceable life.

4. And whosoever likewise, has not an hearty desire to the good life, he also
remains not constant in this way. But whosoever bideth constant til unto the
Matt. 10. and 14.
end, he shall be saved, and rejoice him in the everlasting life.

5. Moreover, in this land, the travelers have not much sweetness of the herb
of life, wherewith they be Exo. 16.
fed in their hunger, nor yet much satisfying of refreshing of the
Fountain-waters, Exo. 17. Number. 20.
wherewith they be refreshed in their thirst because that in the same land,
there is no perfect satisfying Isa. 41.
of hunger and thirst to be found, nor come by; for the herb wherewith they be
sustained to the Life, and the Fountain-waters wherewith they be refreshed, do
Eccl. 24.
make them still the longer the more hungry and thirsty: and as long as they
are traveling in this land toward the good land of Peace they have still
hunger and thirst Matthew. 5. Luke 6.
after the righteousness; but in the good land they become all satisfied.

6. The herb wherewith the travelers be 2 Cor. 3. Gal 3.4.
sustained to the life, is named, The serviceable Word of the Lord; and the
Fountain-waters wherewith they be refreshed, are named, Ier. 23. and 31. and
33. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11.
The promises of Salvation in the new Testament of the blood of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XI.
IN this land named (Many manner of walkings) there lie also fair hills, that
seem to be somewhat Number. 33. Deuteronomy. 2.
delightful, of which the traveller must beware; for it is nothing but Deceit,
Vanity, and seducing.

2. These hills are garnished with diverse trees, which do likewise bring forth
vain and deceitful^ fruits.

3. Now because of this garnishing of the trees, and for the delectation of
their vain fruits, many travelers do suffer themselves to be seduced
therewith, Number. 32.
and do make their dwelling among them, and so they remain without the good
land of Life and of Rest.

4. And seeing they are grown somewhat weary Heb. 12.
and grieved, or somewhat Number. 11.14.
unbelieving or doubtful in the ministration of the Word, therefore do they
suffer themselves the more easily to be drawn away with the same; for it has a
show as if it were to their preservation and welfare, or were some holiness.

5 For that cause do the travelers also, the more easily cleave unto it; and
so they leave the forsaking of themselves, taking on Exodus 16.17. Number. 11.
their self seeking (that is, They take on their own Rom 10.
righteousness, and made Col. 2.
holiness, or their Phil. 3.
ease in the flesh.) They likewise leave the patience, and become negligent
toward the Law or Ordinance of the Lord, following their Genesis 3.
self choosing, wherewith they (according to their own pleasures) be drawn
away, by the deceit of the wisdom of the flesh.

6. If they now bide not constant, till unto the end of the traveling through,
Number. 14. Psalm. 95.
then remain they also without the good pleasant Land. and do estrange
themselves from the holy City of Peace and Rest.

7. These hills are named Prove. 3. Isa. 5.
Taken on wit, or prudence, Riches of the spirit, Romans 1. 1 Timothy 1.
Learned knowledge, 2 Timothy 3.
Taken on freedom, Ezekiel. 13 22.
Goodthinking prophecy, Zeal after chosen holiness, Mat. 23. Col. 2
Counterfeit righteousness, New invented humility, Luke 18.
Pride in ones own spiritualness, Unmindful of any better, etc.

8. The Trees that grow upon these hills are named Judae 1.
Colored love, Litteral wisdom, greedy toward owns, flattering-alluring, Cor
1. or 2.
reproving of natural ones, Matthew. 4.
promises of vanity, 1 Timothy 4.
exalting of his own private invention, pleasure in chosen holiness Mat. 23.
Luke 18.
greatly esteeming his own working of private righteousness.

9. These trees do bring forth altogether one manner of fruits, which be all
likewise called by one manner of name; and the name of their fruits Psa. 57.
Wisd. 3. and 5. Eccle. 34.
is Vain Comfort: with which fruits the people that have left the forsaking of
themselves, and the Cross with the Meate-offering, and Drink Offering, and have
not brought their Debt-offering to the Lord, and that seek their Rest, or make
their dwelling among these deceitful hills, do let themselves Isa. 29.
be fed.

10. If therefore the travelers have left the forsaking of themselves, and the
patience with the Meate-offering, and Drink Offering, as also the accomplishing
of their Debt-offering, or are growing doubtful in the belief, Heb. 10.
so find they then some refreshing among these hills through the shadow of the
trees. They get likewise some satisfying through the vain comfort, and are also
at the first somewhat glad therethrough; also singing and crying out; We have
it, we have it, we are illuminated, born anew, and come to the rest, and to the
best of all.

II. But (alas) when the Sun arises somewhat high, then do the fruits Psalm.
34. Matthew. 13.
wither, namely the vain comfort, and when the Winter comes, then stand the
trees barren; and it is all Job 20. Wisd. 5.
deceit and seducing.

12. Therefore there is no true Rest but in the good land of Eternity which is
full of all pure hearts and souls of the living.

CHAP. XII.
THe whilst then that the traveller does travel toward this good land by the
leading Star (Belief and Hope) so comes he clean th^row all the deceit, by
means of the Matt. 16.
Forsaking of himself. For that ^t is a good compass unto him which points to
the good land

2. And with the Patience he likewise Heb. 10. and 11. and 12.
overcomes all assaults; for that is unto him a good blessing of the holy
Cross, and a good armor to the conquering Ephe. 6. 2 Pet 4.
of all his assaultings; where through all his enemies Iam. 4.
slye from him; and so he may pass by all what is destroying free without harm.

3. For there are many Molesters and destroyers to be found in this land, which
do grievously vex the travelers, and would also destroy, Luke 21. 1 Pet. 5.
let, or hinder them, that they should not come into the good land of Peace.
But they do all fear and tremble, before the holy Cross.

4. The molesters that do oftentimes meet the traveller for to hinder his
passing forward and to bring him to destuction, are named 2 Pet. 3.
trying of The Belief, Number. 14. Matthew. 24. 2 Pet. 3.
Doubt or distrustfulness to come to the good land, tempting with a chosen
appeasement according to the flesh, proving of the belief in a show of
comforting with the Worldly beauties, Matthew. 4. Luke 4.
profering of the possession of all the riches of the earthly corruptibleness,
to the end to forsake (in respect thereof) the true invisible being, Gods
Wisd. 7. Col. 1.
eternal Power and Might, the everlasting uncorruptibleness, and the heavenly
Riches of the perpetual Immortality, wherein no Apo. 21.
corruption can remain or endure.

5. But let no man suffer himself to be discouraged at the passage of the Heb.
10. Iam 1. 1 Pet. 21.
way, nor seduced by the molesters, but have all your longing (O ye lovers Psalm
42,
of the upright Virtue) after the most holy being of the good land of the
living, and keep still your eyes fixed upon the leading Star.

6. Have a diligent regard unto the Compass, that ye turn not out Ioh 23.
on a^^ side.

7. Forsake not the holy Cross, nor the serviceable gracious Word of the Lo^^
which is Matt. 24.
administered and given unto you to Eccl. 15.
feed upon (by the Elders and Minister of the same) for food of life, to the
e^^ that ye may there-through be preserve^ from all destruction in the way of
yo^^ Journey, til unto the entrance into the good land, and that all whatsoever
is destroying may fly Ier. 4.
from you; for even s^ in your constancy, the holy Cross shall (...) unto you
an Altar of the true burnt-offering and the serviceable gracious Word (...) the
Lord, a safemaking gift or offering Christ upon the same Altar Heb. 9.
in the holy (...) the true Tabernacle of God and Christ upon which Altar your
Gift or Offent which ye offer up unto the Lord upon the holy Altar in the holy,
becomes sanctify (through the same safemaking Gift or O^fering the
serviceable gracious Word (...) the Lord) and kindled, or set on fire for burnt
offering to the consuming of all the enemies of the good life, wherethrough
then likewise, your willing Debt offering Sin-offering and Death-offering shall
be acceptable Isa. 56. Romans 12.
unto the Lord, and ascend up before him (from the same Altar) 2 Cor. 2.
as a sweet savor.

8. Therefore be not afraid Deuteronomy. 20. Isa. 41. 1 Mac. 4.
of all your enemies, for God has made them all dismayed through the holy Cross
of Christ (the true Altar of his holy Offering in the Holy) and given them into
our hands for to be vanquished.

CHAP. XIII.
IN this same thorowfaring land, men find also a crafty murderer, that both
high and low, wide and far runs all over this same land, and he is named
Number. 13. and 14.
Unbelief.

2. Of this wicked Villain, it behooves us to be Heb. 3.4.
very wary; for by him there are many murdered, and so they remain without the
Rest, because they lose the Compass, and forsake the Cross through unbelief;
and also, because they cover their eyes from the Light of heaven, and will no
longer behold the Leading Star.

3. Therefore herein there is great danger to pass through, namely, for all
those that will follow their own counsel, and are Number. 13. and 14.
fainthearted, or wavering in faith, keeping no diligent watch unto the
Compass, and (for fear of sustaining damage) do hastily cast the Cross from
them.

4. But the travelers that give no regard unto their own counsel or opinion,
shall not fear the danger of sustaining damage, but shall continue of Ephe. 6.
good courage: for it is all nothing and vanity, whatsoever meets them upon
the way. It is all to be overcome through the patience; for there through it
consumes it self, Psalm. 37.68.
like unto smoke, and there is nothing at all found that is any-what, or that
remains over but the good land, with his holy Inhabitants and godly Riches.

5. Therefore let men travel through boldly Heb. 5. and 10. and 11.
with faith and a firm hope, and not doubt Matt 14.
nor grow wavering: then is there nothing that can endamage nor destroy them.

CHAP. XIIII.
IN this Land there lies also a dangerous river, wherein Psalm. 69.
many travelers be drowned and choked, that hold them not unto the counsel of
the Law of the Lord, and therefore have no regard unto the Compass, nor have
suffered themselves to be made fast on the Cross.

2. For that cause it is likewise very needful that the travelers do take
diligent heed hereof, also regard well the Compass, and hold them unto the
Cross, that they run not in the same.

3. This river is named, Romans 6, Ephesians. 4.
A desire in the pleasures of the flesh. And in the same there are also Fishes,
who have their nature according to the name and nature of the river: but let
not the traveller take upon him Rom 6.13. Gal. 5. 2 Timothy 2. Jude. 1.
to go into the same river, nor to catch her fishes, neither yet suffer himself
to delight to eat of them.

4. These fishes are named Ier. 5. Phil. 3. 2 Pet. 2.
Meat of the temporal delights, in stead of the everlasting good.

5. Some fishes are likewise named, Ease in the flesh, in stead of zeal to the
righteousness, John 2.
Honor of the world, in stead of the Rest in the Spirit, and of the honor of
God.

6. Take you every one diligent heed of this deceitful River, and of her
Fishes. It seems indeed to be a very pleasant water for one to refresh and
recreate himself in; and the taste of the fishes does also provoke a desire for
to eat still of them: but it is all mere deceit, Wisd. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Ioh. 2.
vain and nothing.

7. This river has (in her bottomless deepness) a very evil rewarding. For if
one sink into the same unto the bottomless depth thereof, then finds he
nothing there, but Job 18. Psalm. 11. Psalm. 34. Apo. 21.
burning pitch, brimstone, heat, and flames of the hellish fire.

8. That is the reward of this river, toward all those that run to the same,
and drown or choke themselves therein.

9. Therefore let no man intend nor endeavor him to take on any sweetness of
life, so long as he is not yet come to the Rest of the good land; for as long
as one is in the journey, he must account of himself as a 2 Cor. 5. 1 Pet. 2.
Heb. 11.
Pilgrim, or walker in strange lands, who suffers nothing to delight him in
the same (for to take it on him) inasmuch as he has no inheritance nor
continuing place therein. Heb. 13.


10. After this manner likewise, let every one stand minded, and not take on any
thing, 1 Cor. 9
according to his own pleasure, but proceed on right-forth toward the holy
Heb 11. Apo. 21.22.
City, which is named, The understanding of God; for in the same is Col. 2.
all fullness of riches, Ioh. 10.
and all fullness of life and of joy to be found.

CHAP. XV.
IN this unpathed thorow-faring land, there do also spring or grow certain
Thistles and thorns which do many times somewhat vex the traveller; but with
patience he may escape and pass through them all.

2. The Thistles and Thorns, are named, Number. 14 Wisd. 17.
Uncertain Consciences.

3. Therein are likewise to be found diverse natures of beasts, that are minded
to devouring; the which also do pursue the travelers very stoutly, in such
sort, that they sometimes retire a little because of them; but before the Cross
they do all retire back at the last.

4. These beasts are named, Romans 3. Gal. 5.
Envy, Wrath, Churlishness or Vnfriendliness, Cruelty, Offensiveness,
Resistance or Disobedience, Craftiness, greedy desire of Honor, Subtilty to
deceit and Violence; and also one of the most detestable beasts (that will
worst of all give way) is named Hypocrisy Luke 12.
or Dissimulation, where under all manner of naughtiness is covered with a
colored Virtue, Mat. 6.7.23.
or made holiness; and he is indeed the subtillest beast who provokes all the
other beasts for to devour the travelers.

5. Of which wild beasts the travelers must take heed with great
foresightfulness, Matt. 10. Ephe. 5.
that they run not into the mouth of them, and so be swallowed up.

CHAP. XVI.
NOw when the traveller is passed through all this said land, and has left all
these abominations, then comes he to three Castles, through the midst of the
which he must pass, and must leave them in like manner; for he shall not need 4
Esd. 2.
to fear any thing of all whatsoever meetteth him in the journey.

2. It is true when any thing meets him in any place, that has a show (or
that he himself regards) as if it were of some valu^; hen does it vant out it
self so highly sometimes, as if it were impossible to be overcome; Exodus 1^.
Number 13
but when one is gone through or past the same, and then looks about after it,
so is it nothing at all, and is alt gether deceit, ^ob 20 Psalm. 37
vanity, and bewitching.

3. Upon these Castles there lie subtle watchers, which are very crafty and
wily; but through the Mar. 8. Luke 9.
forsaking of himself, and with the patience one may pass by them: but
whosoever (through unbelief) has lost the Compass, and left the Cross, him do
they take captive to be their bondslave.

4. The one of these Castles is named, Job 1. and 2. Matt. 4.
The power of the Devils assaulting: the second, Heb. 12.
The forsaking of Hope: the third is named, Psalm. 55.
Fear of death.

5. The Watchers that lie upon these Castles (for to take the people captive
under the same) as named according to their nature; and these are their names.

6. 2 Cor. 11.
Appearing like angels of light, bzec. 13. and 22.
Indeavoring to the stealing of the heart, Pro. 14.16. 2 Timothy 3.
Appearance of Virtue, Subtle invention, Prove. 12. Col. 2.
Confidence in Knowledge, Mat. 23. 1 Timothy 4.
Made laws and imagined rights, Disguised or unknown holiness, Self framed
Righteousness (there goes also among them) 4. Esd. 16. Wisd. 17. Romans 2.
Accusation of sins, Fear of evil, Fear of adversity, Careful of destruction,
Fear of hell etc.

7. These and such like before named, are the Watchers of the Castles, who do
go out with many ^ Isal. 35.57.
su^till snares, for to let the travelers, and to catch them into their
Captivity.

8. But the Mat. 16.
forsaking of himself points quite beyond, as to forsake it all; and with the
patience, one passes through the same, as if it were nothing; for the Compass
does point only unto the Understanding of God, to the end to bring the
traveller to the same, and to arm him thereunto; forasmuch doubtless as all
other things are Wisd. 5.
seducing and foolishness.

CHAP. XVII.
NOw when one is passed beyond and has left all this (as is rehearsed) then
does he Number. 27. Deuteronomy. 34.
come hard by the good land, and he approaches near unto the understanding of
God. But many do run past the entrance thereof, because they persuade
themselves too soon, that they have left it all, and that they are grown so
wise, that they think it is not needful for them to near the serviceable Word
of the Lord any more, and think that therefore they cannot fail to know very
rightly the entrance of the good land; and also the manner how they shall go
into the good land, and so they lose the Compass, coming even so yet into very
great errors.

2. For the nearer one comes to the Land, the more subtly does the deceit
assault him; for besides the entrance of this good land (as the one ways
entrance joined to the other) there lies also a way Matthew. 7.
that leads to an abominable or horrible land; and the same way is a pleasant
way to behold; and Genesis 3. Pro. 14.16.
pleasant likewise to enter into, wherewith many be deceived; supposing
(forasmuch as his coming in is so delightful and pleasant in beholding) that
the same is the very way that leads into the good land.

3. Here it is very needful to have a diligent and sharp regard, to which of
both these ways the Matthew. 2.
Star leads and upon which the Compass points; whither it be to the same
pleasant way, or to the peaceable life of the good land, and also that the
Cross be not forsaken; for through Heb. 12. 1 Pet. 2.
the Cross one may perceive which of them is promised to be the Rest, namely,
the pleasant way, or the peaceable life of the good land.

4. This pleasant way is named Genesis 2.3.
Knowledge of Good and Evil, the which deceives many people, because they
persuade themselves, that to know the good and the evil does far excel the
serviceable Word of the Lord, and his Requiring; and that likewise the same is
the very best, the most holy, and the most prudent Understanding, whereby to go
into the good land, and to inherit his Riches; and so they judge that the
Knowledge is the greatest or the chiefest Riches of God. Howbeit it is nothing
at all Gen 3. Wis. 2.5.
but deceit, pain, labor, trouble, and no rest; also nothing but Death, and no
Life.

5. For if any man adjoyn him unto the knowledge of good and evil, and makes
more account of it then of the Nature of God, Gal. 3. Heb. 7.
whereunto the Law of the Lord is serviceable unto him, then does he forsake
the door or gate serving to the entrance of the life; and so chooses to enter
into the deceitful way of the knowledge of good and evil, thinking that he can
want nothing there; and so he enters boldly into it, Number. 26
persuading himself, that the same is the best, and that he shall there-through
go into the good land.

CHAP. XVIII.
NOw when any people are come into the same land, whereunto the pleasant way of
the Knowleg of Good and Evil leads; and which in it self is full of Number. 16
contention, full of great and grievous incumberances, and full of all
abominations of desolation; then does there appear immediately unto them an
inward or spiritual Pro. 11. Matthew. 22. Cor. 8. Col. 2.
pride, and an arrogant boldness against the discipline of the gracious Word,
and the obedience to the Requiring of his Service of Love; the which deceives
many; namely, for the most part, all those that ground them upon the knowledge,
and so do think to obtain or to enter into the Life and the Truth by means of
the knowledge of good and evil.

2. For the inward pride gets root in them and they suppose that they are
somewhat singular Job. 11.12. Isa. 5. Luke 18.
above other people, because they have so much knowledge to talk of the Truth;
and are so rich of Spirit therein, persuading themselves, that the riches of
the knowledge is the very light of salvation; and that same does then make them
presumptuous bold.

3. Even thus verily do they (in the knowledge) arrogantly take upon them, that
3 Reg. 22.
their Cause is sure and certain, but it is all nothing else but abomination of
desolation, Contention, Disagreement, and intangling among the children of men.

4. Therefore is also the same land (into the which one comes thus, through
the said knowledge) named Dan. 9. Matthew. 24.
The abomination of desolation, because that it sets it self in such a place
or dignity, and has such reputation among many men, as if it were the holy
understanding of God it self: Yea, it does also vaunt or give forth it self to
be the same; and so sets it self in 2 These. 2.
the hearts of men, and will likewise be reputed and held for the same at men's
hands: whosoever now beholds the same, Mat. 24. Mark 13.
let him consider thereon.

5 But (alas) whosoever is come into this horrible land, and has taken a
dwelling place therein, such a one cannot rightly behold or consider the
abominations of the same land; nor yet very well come out of the same again,
because that the spiritual pride, and the arrogant stoutness against the Love
and her service, is (by means of the knowledge) so deeply rooted in him, and
therefore he persuades himself, that the Col. 2.
knowledge, is a City full of the wise riches of God, and a good understanding of
the holy Ghost.

6. Howbeit, it is all false and mere deceit, because that the understanding of
God (the which is Gods true Being and Nature) does not bear sway, nor has the
superiority therein; but that the Genesis 3.
prudent knowledge, and the rash bitterness, together with all manner of falsehood
and self-seeking, has there the superiority, and bears the dominion.
Wherefore, there is nothing there also, but Job 5.
bottomlesness, and no upright ground of unity of heart John 17. Ephesians. 4.
in the love, nor yet the good life, nor the truth: And among the Inhabiters of
the same, there is likewise nothing but Jam. 3.
contention, division, or discord, against the obedience to the entrance of the
good life.

7. In the same Land, there is also a false light; through the which, the
people persuade themselves that their cause is so much the more certain in the
knowledge; Isa. 5. Sap. 2.
and they do likewise account the same false light, for the best and most firm
foundation, which they have found in the knowledge, for to build upon. But the
same light serves them not to the life, but nodoubt Isai. 58. 1 Cor. 3.
to an Arrogant stoutness, and to the intangling of men, and to presumption and
reproachfulness over others; and to much sedition in the Lands, or among the
people.

8. This false Light has its original out of the Knowledge and is named, 1 Cor.
8. Col. 2.
a lofty stout mind upon the Knowledge; where-through the people of the land do
suppose, that it is their firm ground of faith, where-from they must not start,
but stand firmly to it. And even thus does the false light engender in them all
a stout mind in their knowledge

9. Seeing then that the people do not know the Ioh. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.
true Light (the which is a godly life) therefore be they all (by means of the
knowledge, the which they account for a skilful wisdom and true Light) deceived
and corrupted in this wildernessed land by the same false light, besides the
which they know no other Romans 1.
perfect good, and so they be held by the same in the deceit, and do pluck over
themselves there-thorow, nothing else but all destruction, and disturbance or
dispersing of minds and thoughts.

10. But as long as they dwell in the horrible confused land, they understand
not that they are deceived and corrupted, nor yet that they have missed the
true entrance to the good land of the upright and concordable life, and are
gone into the Wisd. 5.
way of error, where-through they themselves do take on (out of the knowledge)
many opinions, false Col. 2. 2 Timothy 3.
holinesses, or worldly foolishnesses to their own destruction.

CHAP. XIX.
THis same horrible land of desolation is like unto the entangled Genesis 11.
Babylon (which was overthrown by the Word of the Lord, and also the builders
of the same were dispersed abroad every where) because that the knowledges do
there (in loftiness of mind) run one against another, and cannot understand
each other.

2. In the same do likewise all manner of people dwell, who are come into it out
of many quarters or lands, the which has indeed a coming in, but no passing
through.

3 Therefore they do never come through the same, unless they do Mat. 18.
turn them about, and come again to the same place where they were when they
went into the pleasant way of the knowledge that leads them thereunto.

4. But that can they not very well do, because of the false 2 Cor. 11.
light which holds them so captive (with deceit) that they will in no wise
depart out of it, and also because that the inward pride, and the stout lofty
mind in the knowledge, is too deep rooted in them.

5. The people of this land are a strange, wild, rebellious, and seditious
people, and Bar. 3.
are a people divided in mind, and grounded upon many kind of grounds
proceeding our of the Knowledge.

6. Of the which some are without 1 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 3.
belief and hope to the sure promises of God, having neither longing nor desire
to God nor to his everlasting life.

7. They delight in nothing else but to have their joy in the earthly Isa. 56.
Wisd. 2.
corruptible things; and when they want that, then are they without joy, and
without comfort, full of lamenting and murmuring, dying without hope.

8. Othersome are full of 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
reproachings, self-seeking, contentions, and Romans 1. 2 Cor. 12. Iam. 3.
resistant against one another.

9. Some covet diligently after the highest honor, wishing gladly that they, or
their taking on wisdom and holiness, were (above all other) exalted, harkned
unto, loved, and commended Matt. 6.
over the whole land; and that they might even so then have laud and praise
among men.

10. Many do choose a way unto themselves, according to the knowledge of their
own mind, to the intent to live to themselves therein: and thus does every one
walk there Isa. 53.56. Ier. 6. and 8.
according as his knowledge imagines in him.

11. To conclude, they are all (even every one with his consorts, or
fellowcompanions) resistant against each other, with the 1 Cor. 1.3.
knowledge, and the false light shines upon them all, quite over the whole
land. And the inward or spiritual pride, cease not there likewise, but she
grows or Job 5. Wisd. 3.
takes root, and does continually bring forth her false seed among those
people more and more.

12. Therefore every one there also is stout-minded upon the knowledge; Bar. 3.
and supposes that he must needs have the right (or cannot err) in his
knowledge, and that he is illuminated by the Lord, through his cunning knowledge,
and through his stout constant standing upon the same, and is one of the number
of the holy people; but it is all false and mere deceit, because that they
themselves have laid those same foundations Ier. 7. and 8. Eze. 13.22. 2 Timothy 3.
upon the which they set their confidence, or quiet themselves, and have made
them of the dust of the same land; which dust scartereth abroad all over the
whole Land, Matthew. 7. Luke 6.
like unto a drift-sand, and is named, Self wills choosing.

CHAP. XX.
BEhold, in this land (named, The abomination of desolation) it goes very
strange and wonderful absurdly, the which is not possible to be all written.

2. For every one there sees that another man's foundation is vain and mee^
foolishness; but there is no man there (or very few) that can Matthew. 7.
mark their own vanity or foolishness.

3. Every one does very gladly thrust off another from his foundation, to the
end to advance his own for the best; yet are all their foundations
notwithstanding Ier. 44. Ezec. 13. Bar. 6.
Self wills choosing; and are every one uncertain and unstable, and all their
work that they build thereon, is very Matthew 7.
feeble or weak: for it is all nothing but knowledge and self wills choosing, in
the which they proceed, and with the which they strive and contend, and with
high knowledge do they cast down one another work, and turn up the foundation
of it.

4. For whosoever there has the highest mounting knowledge, or is the richest
of spirit, or has the most eloquent utterance of speech, 1 Timothy 1.
he can there bear the sway, or get the chief praise, and can overthrow many
other infirm foundations and works which are also vain, but can show no 2 These.
2.
love to the unity of heart, in the good being of Jesus Christ.

5. And now when any man's foundation or work is overthrown through any manner of
knowledge, then is the same a great delight and glory unto the other that
gets the victory, and to an advancement of himself.

6. For that is the careful diligence that they use among each other, Number. 14
16.
as how the one may (with the knowledge) overthrow the others foundation,
building, and work, and to bring him into contempt among others, whereby to
enlarge their own knowledge, building, or work, and to make the same great or
commendable.

7. But whosoever has his foundation and work overthrown, the comfort of his
heart is taken away, and he falls into grief of mind; but if he do it for
all that continue self-chusing, and partially minded, and does not (under the
obedience of the Love) turn him to the upright Life, nor to the true entrance
to the same; then becomes he bound again unto Ezec. 13.
some other thing, which is also knowledge, and so he becomes a Gal. 1. 2 Pet.
2.
servant of men, or of his own manly opinion, or sense, and builds again
afresh upon Self-wils choosing.

8. Even thus verily do they make one-another bondslaves in the good
thinking-knowledg of men: and seeing that they (in their servitude) do 1 Cor.
1.3. 2 Cor. 12.
contend or take part against one another; so do they likewise divide
themselves into many several Religions or God-services.

9. But although they be all partially affected, as also have several
Religions, and many manner of god-services, yet do they notwithstanding give
their Religions and God-services altogether one manner of name.

10. Every ones Religion or God service is named, Assured knowledge that it is
right and good: thereupon do they set their confidence, and every one lives in
his own God-service, thinking and persuading himself 2 Timothy 4
assuredly, that his Religion or God-service, is the best or the holiest above
all other.

CHAP. XXI.
THis people that dwells in this Land (the Abomination of desolation) has
indeed a Romans 16.
fair spoken tongue; but commonly they are not loving, nor friendly of heart,
but full of 1 Cor. 3. Heb. 12. Jam. 3.
envy and bitterness; soon stumbling and taking offense, by reason they stand
captived under the knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.
and not submitted under the love, nor under the obedience of her service.

2. They are also (generally) Romans 1. Ephesians. 4. 2 Pet. 2.
covetous of the earthly riches; and in the Spirit of their heart, they are
proud Rom 1. 2 Timothy 3.
and stout minded.

3. Their inclination, lust, and desire, is to speak false witness against
others; also to blaspheme, ^sal. 10. and 35. and 140.
oppress, persecute, betray, Matthew. 23 and 26. Acts 6. and 7.
and to kill, and yet do know how to excuse all the same (with the knowledge)
that they do right and well therein.

4. They use not likewise any common brotherhood, among whom the John 13. and
15.
love is exercised, with a good, or kind nature, but are Jere. 5. Luk^ 22.
lorders over one another: And whosoever gets the greatest multitude of
people unto him or is the strongest company, he exercises Acts 5. and 7.
power and violence over the other, that do not accord with them in the
knowledge.

5. Every one there seeks nothing else but his own Joh. 5. and 7.
honor and dignity, commending his own wisdom or knowledge.

6. Every company accounts only his own Religion or God-service, to be
excellent and holy; and every one (in his own Religion) has also his own 2 Timothy 4.
teaching masters: therefore the teachers are many, and do stand divided in
sundry sorts of partakings.

7. But although these teaching masters be many, and in diverse sorts of
dissentions, do profess and teach several doctrines, and are contentiously
minded, one against another in their doctrine; yet are they altogether named by
one manner of name, and every ones name is, Boasting of the knowledge.

8. And every one of these masters teaches his Sect very 3 Reg. 22. Matthew. 22.
vehemently and stiffly in his Religion, which is named, Assured knowledge that
it is right and good, because they should continue steadfast, warning them of
the seducing of all the other.

9. These verily are always teaching, but (alas) in the same Land; they
themselves do 2 Timothy 3
never come to the knowledge of the truth.

10. And whosoever presents or informs them with the truth, and would teach
them otherwise then they themselves are minded; to him they are Jer 37.38. Acts
7. and 22 and 23 etc.
unmerciful, also hateful and dispising, and given to speak all manner of evil
of him. And this comes to pasts, because that they all teach Sect
particularly, have a mighty strong boasting, and a proud confidence, that their
knowledge is right, and their doctrine, the most holy Doctrine, Religion, and
God-service.

11. Seeing then that they (each several Sect in their imagined opinions) have
set themselves Matthew. 23. Mark 11.
in the highest place; so can they not therefore suffer any gain-speaking out
of the true service of the love of Jesus Christ, nor yet endure John 9. Acts 7.
and 22.
any admonition by the Elders in the same. For as long as they stand
contentious, and not submited under the love, to an unity; so desire they
likewise, none other teaching masters, but those that continue so courageous
bold in themselves, as boasting of the knowledge; who do teach assured knowledge,
that it is right and good, and do also very boldly call the same knowledge, the
Being of God; and so in their arrogant boldness, they Dan. 11. Heb. 10.
blaspheme the most highest, Psalm. 76.135.
who with his godly Being, dwells, and lives in Israel.

CHAP. XXII.
THe people of this Land (named, The abomination of desolation) has also a
King, who reigns very cruelly over them, and he is named, Wormwood, Apoc. 8.
or bitterness.

2, His Scepter, and the Seat of his Majesty, is named, Great esteeming of the
vain or unprofitable things.

3. His anointing (wherewith he is anointed) is named, Puffed up foolishness.

4. His Crown is named, Prove. 2.
Honor or glory in evil doing.

5. His Horses and Chariots, are named Psalm. 14. and 51. and 56. Ezekiel. 22.
Micah 3.
Treaders down or oppressors of the simple people.

6. His Council is named, Subtle invention.

7. His Kingdom is named, Unfaithfulness.

8. All his Nobility, Horsemen. Soldiers, and Guarders, are named, Sap. 14.
Romans 1.
Disorderly life.

9. His Decrees, Precepts, or Commandments, are named, Self-wil.

10. His Dominion or Lordship, is named, Ezekiel. 22. Micah 2.
Violence.

11. His Isai. 5. Matthew. 3.
Arms that he bears, is named, Desire to reign over all.

12. His Sword of Justice is sharp on the one side, and blunt on the other
side, and is named, Isai. 1. Jere. 5.
Self-wills justice; according to the name of the Kings Commandments.

13. The sharp side of his Sword, is called Jere. 6. Matthew 2. Acts 7. and 22.
Unmercifulness, and cutteth very sharply over those whom he likes not, or
over them that will not (according to his pleasure) stand pliable unto him,
under his violence.

14. The blunt side of the Sword, is named, Great grace. For over those that do
make great account of his Babylonish Kingdom, and which have (according to his
self-will) yielded them subject under the same (although they be evil of nature
and corrupt of life,) it cannot cut.

15. This King (bitterness) has great dominion in this Land, named Dan. 9. and
12.
The abomination of desolation; and the people that dwell in the same, are
altogether his bond-servants; for no man is free, or left free there, but they
Romans 6. 2 Pet. 2.
remain all bound under the Bitterness, their King or Governor.

16. For, inasmuch as they be not taught in the doctrine Matthew. 11 Ephesians. 4.
of the humility and meekness of Jesus Christ, under the obedience of his love;
therefore come they not also to the John 8.
knowledge of the truth, for to be made free by the truth: For that cause there
is likewise in the same Land, no other freedom, but in the bitterness, their
King; and the same Apoc. 8.
bitterness* grants or permits them to live Sap. 2. Matthew. 27. Acts 6. and
7 and 22. and 23.
free or loose of heart, in him (that is, in the bitterness of the King)
without accusation, or showing of any Reformation thereof; and in the same
freedom to set forth boldly, their false testimonies or counterfeit God
services.

17. And this same is a conceit of freedom, or 2 Pet. 2.
a false freedom, which also is not free in itself, but bound or subject unto
the bitterness.

18. The common people or the subjects of the King (which dwell in this
horrible Land) have likewise horrible names, according to the nature of the
same I and, and according to the nature of their King, and these are their
names,

19. Craftiness, Romans 1. Gal. 5.
Arrogant stoutness, Harmfulness, Stubbornness, Violence, Spite, Sudden anger,
Greedy of revenge, Gluttony, Cruelty, Blood-thirstiness, Resistance against the
love, and her service, Rom 1. 2 Timothy 3.
Dispising of naturalness, Disobedient to equity, Accusation over the
righteousness, Prove. 2. Matthew. 23.
Betrayers of innocence, Oppressors of humility, Killers of meekness, Jude 1.
Enviers of the loves unity, Matthew. 23.
Exalters of chosen holiness, Usage of falsehood, Gen 3.
Taken on shame* (namely, Coveredness of heart, as those that are ashamed to
confess the evil and bitterness of their hearts,) Own-selfness, 1 Timothy 2 Timothy 3.
Self-wills desire, or Self-seeking, etc.

20. These people have all one manner of disposition and nature, even according
to the disposition of their teaching masters.

21. For they also can suffer no gain-speaking nor blaming, neither will they
endure to receive any John 9.
wisdom or instruction of the Family of love, nor of the Elders in the same,
because they stand captived under their teaching masters, (Boasting of the
knowledge:) And when one presents or proffereth any better thing unto them,
then rises up their King Bitterness, Acts 7.
by and by in them, for to defend them in their causes, or to approve them to
be right, and to taunt, and judge him to be naught that loves them to the best
good, that is, to an upright heart before God.

CHAP. XXIII.
IN this Land there is likewise a false Prophet, who brings the people into
diverse considerations, and into diverse bindings or snarings of heart, and
bewitcheth them with many 2 Pet. 2.
longings, whereof there comes nothing; and so he leads their hearts,
minds, and thoughts, into the captivity of the knowledge, and not into the
truth.

2. This false Prophet is named, 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
Presumption, whereof there comes nothing, and he bears a great sway among
the people, who also do give high regard unto him, because he presumes or
boasts him so much; but it is altogether bewitching, whereof there follows
nothing.

3. But forasmuch as he has allured the people unto him, with such a
presumption or boasting; that they likewise in their unregenerate state, do
boast them of the Light and Word of Life; Hosea 4.
so perceive they not that they are bewitched by him.

4. For like as the Prophet is, Jere. 5. and 40. Ezekiel. 13. 1 Timothy 4.
so are also the people, namely, very highly boasting and braging of many
things; as likewise presuming and enterprising of many things, whereof nothing
ensues: But it is all false, and mere bewitching, and is nothing else, but a
vain persuasion or fantasy.

5. It seems sometimes indeed, as though it would be somewhat, but it is all
vain, and presumption, and nothing else but knowledge, whereof there comes
nothing, and where-through many people be seduced 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 2.
and brought into many false dealings, the end whereof extends unto much
grief.

CHAP. XXIIII.
THis false Prophet has also an horrible beast with him, which assisteth or
Apo. 11. and 13.
aideth him; which beast is likewise wonderfully extolled and served in the
desolate abominable Land.

2. Yea, all people that have not Gods nature, or his true Being of love,
neither yet do love the godly goods, do honor and serve the same Apo. 13.
beast, and do all receive her mark. And they deal with the same in all their
affairs; yea, the same mark do all those receive and use, that are not
assembled to the Family of Love, nor written in the living Book of the Lamb.

3. The beast is named, Isai. 1. Hosea 4.
Unfaithfulness. And the same beast, is the Kingdom, or the Government of the
false King, Bitterness. And such as is the beast, and her name, and Government,
such a Apo. 13.
mark gives she likewise to the people that serve her, and that cleave unto,
and honor her Kingdom or Government; therefore is also the mark of the beast,
named, Unfaithfulness.

4. This beast and her make (being both named, Unfaithfulness,) do make the
people utterly divided. Apo. 13.
And forasmuch as the people (that cleave unto, and serve the same beast, and
that have received her mark) are all likewise false of heart, unfaithful, and
self-seeking, and do willingly cover their own shame; Genesis 3.
and so walking in hyppocrisie or dissimulation, the one trusts not the
other, and they deal Jere. 9.
deceitfully, or with falsehood, among each other; and that is the venom of the
beast, the which she sows or spueth forth abundantly among the Apo. 16. and
17.
people.

5. Therefore there is also no open-heartedness among those people that do
carry Apo. 13.
the mark of the beast, but they are ashamed of their inward nakedness, Genesis 3.
both before God, and before one another; and therefore likewise, they walk not
with naked hearts before each other, neither will they also in any wise, make
manifest themselves with naked hearts, before the Elders in the Family of Love.

6. For the Apoc. 15.
mark of the beast has hunted shamefastness upon them; therefore they do cover
them also with their own Garments, or Genesis 3.
Aperns, which they themselves have made. Their Garments or Aperns, are named,
Joh. 12.
Fear of being despised.

7. Forasmuch now as this horrible beast, and false Prophet, have sown such
seed in the people; so does there come to pass through the same, wonderful
great Apo. 16.
dissension or division, to the breeding of manifold self willed services,
wherethrough all kind of fal^hood, craftiness, and railing against one another
arises; yea, so that the people also speak Dan. 11. Heb. 10. Jude 1. Apoc. 13.
blasphemy, or railing against God and his Saints, and against the house of his
love, wherein God will dwell, live, and walk, for ever.

8. And although there should be any unity erected in this said Land, yet
cannot the unity continue there; but it becomes rent and broken immediately,
through the presumption (whereof there comes nothing) and through the
unfaithfulness, whereout springs much malicious blameing.

9. Wherefore, because of this false Prophet and the horrible beast, Tim. 3.
Apoc. 16.
there can no unity of the people bide standing, in the unity of peace.

10. This horrible Apo 13. and 16. and 17.
beast (Unfaithfulness,) this false Prophet (Presumption,) and the cruel King
(Bitterness) have a mavelous great dominion in this same desolate abominable
Land.

CHAP. XXV.
THerefore Isai. 52. Zech. 2.
let not the Traveller that is come into the same desolate, abominable Land
(unawares, or through want of knowledge) continue any longer therein; for it is
a detestable Land and a wicked people of heart and mind.

2. Also, let him not endevor himself to travel through the same, whereby to
come to the good Land of rest; for he shall not be able to bring it to pass.

3. But as soon as he sees or perceives that these abominations of desolation,
do stand in the place where Gods holy Being Dan. 9. and 11. Matthew 24. 2 These.
2.
ought to stand, then let him immediately fly out of the same, and submit
himself under the obedience of the love, to his preservation; and let him turn
him about out of the same way, where-through he came in, and not have regard
any more to the Genesis 3.
Knowledge of good and evil, nor to the teaching masters, Boasting of the
knowledge, nor to the Religions or Doctrines, Assured knowledge that it is right
and good, nor to the false Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.
Presumption, whereof there comes nothing, nor yet to the wicked Beast, Apo.
13.
Unfaithfulness, that he become not subject, and remain in bon^age, unto
(Bitterness) the King of the same detestable Land; but let him ha^^ regard to
the service of love, and to the requiring thereof, and show obedien^^
there-under, 1 Pet. 1. 1 John 4.
for that he may come to the good Land; and so the love (with h^^ lovely
meekness) to become planted (...) him, Ephesians. 3.
and that he himself may be mad^ free John 8.
by the same.

4. For the same lovely Being of the love, is the life, Romans 14.
peace, and joy, and the Land of promise, Exodus 3. and 13. Deuteronomy. 8.
wherein Honey an^ Milk flows.

5. If therefore the traveller, or the love of the good Land, will enter into
the good Land, then must he at the end of h^^ journey, find himself to be
altogethe^ Mat. 18. and 19. Luke 19.
turned about, and good-willing to the will of the highest God, like unto an
obedient child, standing in 1 Cor. 14. 1 Pet. 2.
all singleness and simplicity, under the love, to the obeying of her
requiring, not knowing, or being wise, as touching this or that; b^^ that he
has only intended, or sought after Phil. 3.
the love, for that he might live unto the same, in her requiring.

9. Behold, to the same State does the compass, the Forsaking of himself, and
the Cross, the Patience, bring him; and so he comes before Psa. 118.
the City gate of the holy Land.

7. For whenas he now has overcome, or is passed through all these things,
with the forsaking of himself, and in the patience; then finds he himself to
be altogether Matthew. 5.
poor of Spirit, and to stand in the submission, like unto a Psalm. 40. Acts 9.
good-willing one to the Lords will.

8. Which submission, is called, Romans 6. Col. 2.
The burying of the affections and desires; for in the submission, the
traveller finds himself to be quite emptied of the affections and desires,
through the obedience of the Cross; therefore also he has not loved his Matthew.
10. and 16. Luke 9.14.
own life, the which, are his affections and desires; but has (in the
obedience of the Cross) forsaken the same, even unto the death, Col. 2. and 3.
and to the burying of the same own life, namely, of the affections and desires.

9. Seeing then that the affections and desires are mortified and dead, through
the compass and the Cross, and are buried by the Traveller (in the submission)
as dead things; so finds he in the same submission, the Key, for to enter
therewithal (through the gate) into the City, Apoc. 21.22.
where the everlasting life, peace, and rest, is

10. This Key is named, Equity, and with the same, the traveller goes through
the gate, named, 2 Pet. 1.
The nature of God, and so comes into the holy Isai. 60.
City of peace, named, Gods understanding; for to possess in heir-like manner,
the everlasting good (the heavenly Jerusalem) where there is nothing, but
everlasting life Isai. 25. and 35. and 60 and 65. Apo. 7.21.
and joy, and where all sorrow and tears are done away.

CHAP. XXVI.
NOw when as one is come into this City of peace, then is he received very
lovingly and friendly, by Isa. 9 and 32 and 33.
the King of the same Land; for he is not lordly Isai 42.
nor cruel or biting, but Joel 2. Matthew 11.
sweet-hearted and gentle.

2. Even thus one becomes as then, Ephesians. 5.
incorporated Romans 12. Col. 1.
to the body of the same true King, with the people of the same good Land, even
as a fellow-member of the King, and of those same holy people, and so they live
together in one judgment and mind, of the living God; and that is the unity in
the love, and the only judgment of the communalty of the holy people, or of
the heavenly company, who are altogether one body with the Family of Love, and
are no more with each other, but Ioh. 17. Romans 12. Col. 1.
as one man in whom all the members of one mind, Spirit or Life, have their
moving, and do hold them together unto one head, and so those same members are
altogether one body, with Infra. 38.
their head.

3. The head of their body is their King or Prince, and is named Col. 1. 2 Pet.
1.
Gods true Being.

4. This same is an upright Isa. 9.
peaceable Prince; and the members of his body are likewise very lovely and
peaceable. With whom the kingdom of Christ and of his Love is peaceably Isa. 60.
inhabited for evermore.

5. The names of the members of the body, or the Saints of the true Being of
God that are of one substance with the Family of Love, are these:

6. Meckness, Gal. 5. Ephe. 4. Col. 3.
Courtesy, Friendliness, Longsufferance, Mercifulness, Naturalness,
Decentness, Quietness, Faithfulness, Modesty, Constancy, Eyes of Simpleness,
Psa. 24. and 73. Marth. 5.
Pureness of heart, Measureableness in works, Helpfulness, 2 Pet. 1.
Discreetness, Ephe, 4.
Concord, Obedience to the true being of God, Sweetheartedness,
Serviceableness out of love, Cor. 10 3.
Laud, Praise, and thanks unto God, etc.

7. Such are the names of the lovely people that dwell in the holy City of
Peace, named Gods Understanding.

8. And according as every ones name is, so is likewise his disposition and
nature; for all their disposition, being, and nature, is according to the good
Disposition or Nature of the Land, and of their King.

9. And no man can come into this good City, nor become one body with these
peaceable people, except he do forsake Isa. 52. 2 Cor. 6.
all the other forementioned confused lands, and the detestable people, for God
has not chosen any one of all them to his Kingdom: neither can also the
traveller enter into the holy Land or City of Peace, with any of all them.

10. But whosoever now has forsaken all the confused Lands and people, and in
an humble heart (with upright thoughts to the obeying of the Requiring of the
Service of Love is come to the submission he goes with the equity through the
nature of God (as is before said) into Gods understanding. r Supra. 25
The which is the City of Rest, that God has reserved and left behind for the
children of God, for an everlasting Heb. 4.
Rest because they should inherit the same in the last time, according to the
Promises: Isa. 9. and 60. and 66. Luke 1.
which Kingdom of Peace shall endure or continue still for evermore under the
Obedience of the Love.

CHAP. XXVII.
THis City (named Gods Understanding) has very strong and invincible Isa. 26.
and 52. Zach. 2.
Walls, Fortresses, or Bulworks, wherewith she is walled and fortified against
all her enemies: Therefore can no man climb over into this city, nor get the
same by violence, with any gain-fighting neither yet deceive her with subtilty.

2. The Walls or Bulworks of this City are named 1 Timothy 3. 1 Pet. 3.
A free mind of the true Being.

3. And upon these walls, there is a prudent Psa. 121. Isa. 21. and 62.
Watchman or Espyall, which overseeth all what is present, or shall come,
namely, Life and Death, the Preservation and Destruction.

4. His Sight reaches from the rising of the Sun, Mal. 1.
even unto her going down.

5. He beholds the highest of the midday, day, and the deepest of the
darkness of the midnight.

6. This Watchman or Espiall is named, Isa. 41. and 44 Apo. 1 and 22
The beginning and the end.

7. He has also two eyes (a right, and a left eye) wherewith he overlooketh
all things, namely Good and Evil, Light, and Darkness.

8. The eyes are named, Wise Foresightfulness.

9. With the right Eye, Psalm. 34.
he looks into all things, wherein the Life, the Rest, and the Peace stands
firm for ever: but with the left Eye whereout the Death, the Unquietness, the
Confusion or Destruction proceeds.

10. This Watchman serves to a safe keeping of this City, and of those people
likewise that dwell therein. Therefore he keeps always a diligent Watch;
Psa. 121.
he never sleeps nor slumbereth, but is still sounding and playing his Song
upon his Trumpet: and all those that dwell in the same City do hear the sound of
his Song.

11. His Trumpet where-thorow he plays his Song, is named Apo. 10.
After this time no time more.

12. Seeing then that the same time is the last time, the everlasting Rest of
all the children of God, and the heavenly Kingdom it self, therefore sounds
the Watchman also out of the same last time, (as out of the last 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Trumpet) the sound or noise of the everlasting Life; after the which there is
no life more to be waited for; for 1 Ioh. 1.
the same life continues for evermore.

13. The Song which he plays and sounds out through his Trumpet (with the
sound of the everlasting Life) is named Ioh. 13. and 15. 17. 1 Pet. 1.
Unity in the Love.

14. With which noise of the Song, the people do hold themselves in unity in
the Love, whose Fortresses or Hold is not to be overcome. Therefore also
sounds the Song in this manner.

CHAP. XXVIII.
WE have a strong Isa. 26. Zach. 2.
City run thither apace,
Which does advance us in all virtue right,
Upright in Psa. 122. Mich. 4.
Peace, is always her race,
Therein now take your joy and delight.
2.
Gods Understanding is her noble name,
Builded with Zach. 78
Truth and Faithfulness sure;
There is true Ioh. 13. 1 Pet. 1.
love as beseems the same,
Thence never flies Ioh. 14.
Gods Spirit most pure.
3.
With the true Spirit of Gods 1 Timothy 3. 1 Pet. 3.
free mind,
She is Isa. 26.
walled to endure in eternity;
All Matt. 16.6.
violence with his tempestuous wind.
Does there procure his own adversity.
4.
The power of God (hear this now I say)
That's the 2 Cor. 10.
Defense (Understand the Effect)
From trouble and grief to Psa. 18.31.41. Isa. 25.
keep us always,
That is our refuge, and does us protect.
5.
Ye Princes elected Isa. 62. 1 Pet. 2.
of God, and new born,
Regard and love well our City of Peace;
Gods Isa. 27. and 54.
wrath is not there, nor cause why to morn;
The 1 Cor. 15. Apo. 21.
death lies there, swallowed up and does cease.
6. Behold such a Song sings or plays the Watchman upon the walls; and the
people of the City, do rejoice them them with Psa. 98. Isa. 35. and 52. and 61.
and 65. and 66.
unspeakable joy; and do likewise (all of them together) sing a danceing song,
dancing (with great joy) to a thankful lauding of God for their freedom. And
they sing in this manner:

CHAP. XXIX.
Rejoice you all now Psalm. 69. and 103. and 104.
pleasantly,
For joy our ears does fill:
Cheer up your hearts courageously,
Be glad Psa. 48. and 97. Isa. 51. and 52. and 61. and 62. Soph. 3.
O Sions hill.
For lo, the new time does appear,
That has been writ of long:
And is in sight to view full clear,
Wherefore rejoice with Song,
Ye Remnant (Gods Inheritance)
Be Zach. 2. Isa. 10. and 11. and 62.
joyful in our City;
Cast Fear out of Rememberance,
And sing this dancing Ditty.
2.
For Isa 41. and 43. Bar. 5. Matthew. 8.
North and South, ye Righteous,
Come, Psa 81. Isa 27.
blow the Horn apace;
From East and West extol even thus,
Your voice, and make solace.
For here is Isa. 7. and 8.
Emmanuel our King,
Against that fierce Ier. 51.
Babel:
Therefore now let your Trumpets ring,
For he will her expel.
Their hearts Iudi 7. Joel. 2.
are all dismayed now quite,
Sound up your Trumps apace:
Think now on God both day and night,
And 1 (...)
Discord from you chase.
3.
Now is the last I^r. 49. 5.
Cup filled also,
Over Babels Kingdom high,
To stagger and strive Psa. 107. Isa. 24.28.29.
like drunkars, lo,
That's now her Melody.
Her Wisdom with her Practices,
That 1 Cor. 1
comes now all to shame:
And is no more of worthiness,
Then for a laughing game.
In Gods Preceps most pure and right,
Rejoice you Psa. 100.
in every Land:
His Isa. 60.
Light does shine in us full bright,
And under him we stand.
4*
Now is the Kingdom Apo. 18. and 19.
of the Beast
Made dark, be glad therefore:
The Ioh. 1.
Light of Truth even here does rest,
Triumphing evermore.
His Apo. 12.
Kingdom eke do we possess,
The Truth Ioh. 8.
does make us free:
And sets our hearts Ephe. 2.
in quietness,
With God at one are we.
Whose Love is unto us we find
(That do obey her voice)
As is the head Ephe. 1. and 4. and 5.
to's members kind,
Gods Life 1 Ioh. 1.
does us rejoice.
5.
His shut Gen 3.
Paradise wherein we might
Not come, is op't 4 Esdr 8.
now fine:
The tree of Life is sprouted out,
Whose fruit is 4 Esd 7.
medecin.
Drink now the Ephe. 5.
wine of Love most pure,
With joy and merry cheer,
Gods Riches that always endure,
Are never wanting here.
Fore-sightfully Matt. 10. Ephe. 5.
with wariness,
See that you lead your life,
As do the wise, And seek no less
To fly 1 Cor. 1.
Dissentious strif.
6.
Now swallowed up Hos. 13. 1 Cor. 15.
lie death and sin,
With their Folly great and vain:
The Devil Ioh. 12. Apo. 20.
and Hell, whose bands we were in,
The mockery appears now plain.
The heavenly Deuteronomy. 8. Ioh. 6.
Bread, or ghostly Food,
That same our souls does nourish:
In Gods delightful Essence good,
By means whereof we flourish.
The Kingdom Luke 7. Apo. 12.
of the new man, pure,
That out of God does rise,
Is now with us, here present, sure,
In upright heavenly wise.
7.
A peaceable Isa. 2. Dan. 2.
Kingdom have we now here,
As Scriptures said before:
Here is no Isa. 30.65. Apo. 21.
wailing, nor mourning there,
Vex ye your hearts no more,
But now with us associate,
For in the heavenly Act. 1. Phil. 3.
being,
Is our King: he does Isa. 60.
illuminate
Us all, as is agreeing
To Scripture, where we read the same,
Rejoice therefore and sing
This new-land Song Psa. 96.98.
unto the Name
Of him our heavenly King.
8.
Ye Princes of our God most high
(Ye 1 Pet. 2. Apo. 5.
people of the Lord)
Which do agree in 1 Cor. 1.
unity,
Come all with one accord,
Your joy increase, and eke fulfill,
The truth receive also:
Gods Spirit Wis. 1 5.
is on the path, and will
Rebuke the Ioh. 16.
world, his fo,
Of her self framed righteousness:
Isa. 29. 2 Cor. 1.2.
And th'arrogant wise ones are
(With their contentious spitfulness)
Laid down in silence there.
CHAP. XXX.
BEhold, in such a mind of the living being, do the peaceable people live
(with joy) in this City of Rest and Peace; not fearing any enemies; Isa. 26.
Apo. 11.
for their City is very well walled to their preservation; as also fortified
about with a strong defense.

2. For upon the walls of this City, there is a strong piece of Ordnance,
whereof all the Enemies of the same, are sore afraid, as to be cast down by the
strong piece of Ordnance.

And this piece of Ordnance is named Isa. 11. Ephe. 6.
The Power of God. Against which piece of Ordnance none of all the Enemies of
this good City can bide standing.

4. But although now that the Enemies (with arrogant boldness and hardiness)
were so subtle and crafty, that they themselves knew how to invent cunning or
subtle bulworks for a defense unto them; also through audacious boldness, did
not fear the piece of Ordnance (The power of God,) and so (with all the
multitudes of their power) would venture to besiege this City of Life, to the
end to get her costly Riches, and the free and excellent Heritage of all the
children of God for a prey unto themselves: yet is notwithstanding, all their
labor, subtle endeavor, and purpose Psa. 37. Isa. 29.54.
in vain. And this plentiful Land remains for all that in his freedom; and
the heritage of the children of God continues likewise unharmed and
unvanquished.

5. For out of this City, there flows an unsearchable or infinite deep River,
with also a very tempestuous wind; is such sort Isa. 17.29.
that this River, with the same wind, gusheth vehemently forth, as with an
exceeding violent thorow-rushing stream; and breaks out with such violent
force, like burning heat Psa. 50. Isa. 30.34. Joel. 2. Mal. 4.
and flames of fire, to the devouring of all the Enemies of the same good City.

6. And thus after this manner (in the rushing forth of this same River) the
tempestuous wind Ier. 4.
grows so exceeding windy and forcible Nahum. 1.
even as it were a terrible tempest; and so rusheth forth very swiftly with the
River among all the Enemies of the good City.

7. And this same boisterous storm gives such a hugh terrible sound, like a
wonderful great roaring noise of many multitudes of Trumpets and Shalms, and
like a terrible thunderclap, wherewith Psa. 48.78.
it overthrows all the subtle bulworks, where-through this strong
unmeasurable deep River with the tempestuous wind, does then likewise Isa.
17.29.
put to flight and destroy all the enemies of the good Land; and they do all
disperse abroad and consume away, as if they were Job. 21. Psalm. 1. and 18. and
35.
Chafe and Dust.

8. This infinite deep river (wherewith the stormy wind does violently arise
to a terrible tempest; is named Isa. 13. Iudae 1.
The righteous Judgment of God. The stormy wind is named Isa. 11. Joel. 2. 2
These. 2.
The Spirit of the Almighty God.

CHAP. XXXI.
THis unmeasurable, deep, and mighty strong River, and this tempestuous wind,
proceeds forth out of a Psa. 46.
water-fountain within this good City; and they have always their course of
stream and rushing of wind round about the City, to the Isa. 29.
destroying of all her Enemies, because that the holy people of this City, Ier.
23.33. Ezee. 34.
may dwell the more peaceable without fear, and may remain for evermore.

2. Out of this water-fountain (whereout the strong River flows, and whereout
the tempestuous wind blows) the children of Peace in this City, do learn all
their wisdom; and fetch thereout all their Eccl. 24.
Understanding and Knowledge. Which wisdom (that they learn there-out) is also
an holy wisdom, and that same Understanding (which they fetch thereout) is a
godly Knowledge.

3. This water fountain, is named, Heb. 1.
The Mystery of God and of his infinite being.

4. Wheresoever now this River flows, and this wind, with his rushing and
tempestuousness, blows or stormeth, even there may none of all the Enemies of
the good Land, nor yet any thing whatsoever is not of God, continue: and Job
21. Psalm. 1. and 35. Isa. 5. and 17.
the ungodly must all perish there like like Chafe and Dust that is dispersed
abroad with the water and the wind.

5. Forasmuch then as this delectable plentiful City, is thus mighty and
excellent, and stands comprehended in a Light Isa. 60.
wherein no Darknesses can come therefore is she also invincible of all her
Enemies; and none likewise can subdue her, nor bring her into bondage, but she
remains a free City for evermore.

6. And all the people of this City Mat. 17.
are free also; and do all live in freedom. There is likewise no free people in
the whole world, but only this people of this good City, named Gods
Understanding.

7. There are also to be found many strong Ba^. 3.
Champions in the Knowledge, that would enter into this good City, through the
power and Riches of their Knowledge; but it is unpossible for them; for who so
turns not himself about, and becomes Matt. 18.19. Mark. 10.
as a child, neither yet comes to the submission (wherein one Rom 6.
burieth the Lusts and Desires as dead, wherein the Equity is found) and
enters not into it, through the Ioh. 10.
Nature of God, he shall not come into the same.

8. And if so be also that any man do choose, and enter into another way that
likes him better then this, and that he would in that sort go into the good
City, and not through the Ioh. 10.
right door which we do show; then should the piece of Ordnance ( Ephe. 6.
The power of God) be too mighty for him; and the walls ( 1 Pet. 3.
The free mind of the true being) should be much too high to clime over; and
the River ( Mal. 4.
The Righteous Judgment of God) and the strong wind (The Spirit of the
Almighty God) should overthrow, Isa. 29.
break, and scatter him abroad, and utterly drive him away from the knowledge of
the right way that leads to the good City of Peace and Life.

9. But all the lovers of this good City that love the Peace and the Simplicity
of life (in the Love) with all their hearts, and that seek and desire nothing
else but the Matt. 11.
meekness, faithfulness, and truth in the Love, and desire to be no 1 Pet. 5.
Lorders over the Riches of this City, nor over any of all her garnishing of
sumptuous beauty, but servants in the same, those do go into the City of Peace
and Rest (with the Equity) through the right Ioh. 10.
door, and do live Apo. 20.
eternally in the everlasting life in the Communialty of the Love of the lovely
people.

CHAP. XXXII.
THis holy City, named Gods understanding (which is very beautiful, goodly, and
delectable) has for her beauty and riches sake, many assaults. But whosoever
has not a Ioh. 7.
desire with all his heart to perform the Lords Will and all Mat. 3.8.
Righteousness, he shall not come therein.

2. But although now that this good City be unknown Isa. 64. 1 Cor. 2.
unto all strange or outlandish people, yet is the same notwithstanding sought
after Isa. 9. Luke. 13.
with great labor by many that are without her, to the end to know and to
receive her beauty and riches; also much consulted of, as likewise great
counsel held thereon in diverse manners; and much learned 2 Timothy 3.
and studied after the same. But if they do not enter into, nor pass through
this way that we do show, and that directs thereunto, 4 Esd 7. Matt. 19.
then shall they also never know the same nor her Riches of pure beauty,
much-less possess them.

3. For the Consulting, Studying, and Learning (let it come to pass with what
incessant Diligence and careful travel that it will) 2 Cor. 1. and 2. 1 Timothy 3.
is doubtless all in vain. For there shall no man know, nor receive, or inherit,
either her riches or beauty, but those that stand submitted under the Obedience
of the Love; as also that do learn of the Love and her Service, the Matt. 11.
humility and meekness of heart, and so do in that manner enter into the same
through the right door, even as children that are born Ioh 3. 1 Pet. 1.2.
anew out of the Love through her Service.

4. Seeing then that the beauty of the form of this good City is not known to
the people that are without her, so is there likewise nothing at all of her
wisdom understood by any of all those that are without her: therefore her form
of beauty, and her unsearchable wisdom is known and understood, Wisd. 9.
only by those that do walk and pass through the way that leads unto her, and
so do enter into the same Apo 21.
City of Peace through the right door or gate: who do at that time first
understand how unsearchable and unpossible her wisdom is ( Isa 6. Matt 11. and
13.
for the outlandish people) to comprehend or to understand; for without this
City there is no understanding, wisdom, nor knowledge of God, or of the godly
things, no, none at all.

5. And all whatsoever any man (without this City) supposes to know, and to
have of the godly things; and all what is taught and taken on without this
City, or without the way that extends thereunto (to the intent for to know
and to inhent the godly things there through; and after what Wisdom of God
soever any one 2 Timothy 3.
studieth (whereby to understand the same) is altogether a Isa 58. and 59.
vain foolishness; where-through also one may easily know the foolishness of
the people.

6. For, if any people (being yet without this good City of Peace, or without
her right way) do esteem their learned knowledge, for a wisdom, so is then the
same, as likewise all their foreign learned wisdon, or that which they learn
without the Obedience of the Love of Jesus Christ no better worth then to be
Isa. 5. Romans 1. Iam. 3.
laughed at; and it is all a very great foolishness and hypocrisy.

7. For verily the greatest folly that I have found among the people upon
earth, is, that some are foolish, and withal, so arrogant, that they Romans 1.
account of themselves to know something, and so they consult, use subtilty and
Art, to know what, or of what manner the 1 Timothy 1.
godly things may be; and in this sort, they will (being without this good City
of Peace, and her Family of Love) learn and take on Gods Wisdom, through their
own knowledge, and through their manly understanding, also judge his spiritual
goods, his heavenly riches, and his holy truth (which is hid from all Isa. 29.
Col. 1.
man's understanding) and will set up the holiness of Jesus Christ according to
their judgment.

8. But seeing now that there are no Lands, nor Cities to be found that are
like unto this City, nor yet any strength that can overcome her; and that it is
altogether ignorance 1 Cor. 1.
and foolishness whatsoever is without her: also, that all foreign or
outlandish holiness, arts and wisdom, is nothing else but a taken on choosing, a
great mockery, and a vain hypocrisy or an unprofitable foolishness, therefore
do these people that dwell in this City; and likewise all those that become
assembled among them, and adjoined unto them, live cheerfully, and well quieted
in heart, having all their comfort, in that Mat. 25. John 10. and 17.
life that continues for ever, and in the endless Isa. 35. and 51. and 61.
joy that shall endure perpetually.

9. Which people Bar. 5.
of the peaceable kingdom also, do not seek any good without this City, nor
without her Communialty; neither can they think, that there should be Ioh. 6.
Apo. 22.
any good to be found without the same, and therefore they do never turn out
from it.

10. And although it were so that they might seek any good without it, or that
it were permitted them (by license) so to do, yet do they know for all that,
that they should not find it without the same; and also that Gods good being
and nature of the Love, can be with none that have not their fellowship with
them, 1 Ioh. 1.
inasmuch as that they all doubtless have their fellowship with God the Father
and his Christ, and with the holy Ghost, and all the Saints of God in the
everlasting life. And therefore seeing that they do know that that same
wherewith they have fellowship, is the fullness of all virtues and wisdom, so do
they hold them concordably unto each other 1 Cor. 12 and 13.
under the Love, and stand affected only to this good City; for there is no
where any better thing to be found, no not any where the like.

11. For there wants nothing within this City: but she is full of all manner of
Apo. 1. and 22.
riches and pure beauties, which also are unspeakable with tongue, and not
possible to be written.

CHAP. XXXIII.
SEeing then that these precious riches are so utterly unknown to the people
that are without them, and that be not assembled unto them, therefore also one
Isa. 64. 2 Cor. 2.
cannot well expound or declare unto them the unspeakable garnishing and joy of
the same City, nor the beauty and value of her riches, nor yet make it known
unto them in their knowledge, namely, how glorious and great, how lovely,
peaceable, and delightful they are.

2. But unto those that are in this good City of Peace, and to those that go
into it (through the gate of the City) it is well known, and not else to any
others; for to them it is given to understand Matt. 11. and 13. Ephe. 3.
the Mystery of the same kingdom; but to those that are without it, it is not
given; and therefore likewise all things happen unto them by Similitudes and
Parables.

3. Therefore all other lands and people are unperfect, broken, or divided; but
this good land is a perfect good; and this peaceable people is also an
undivided people* and are altogether Ioh. 17.
one in the love of their God and Christ: therefore they are likewise no more
but one body, or one Isa. 2.4.
man with each other in the same Love.

4. For through the new birth in the Love of God and Christ, they are all one
Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12.
it one being, as many members of one body in one life.

5. Whosoever also comes into this good City of Peace, he becomes 1 Pet. 1.
altogether born anew in the Spirit, under the obedience of the Love, through
the said Love and her Service; for he is changed in every part, as Romans 12.
Ephe. 4.
in senses, thoughts and mind.

6. And whosoever is not born again through the Love and her service, nor
assembled unto it through the new birth, Ioh. 3. 1 Cor. 2.2.
(...) likewise may not see or behold, nor yet obtain these riches of God,
neither in th^^ time, nor ever hereafter.

7. But he that goes into it, through the Love and her service, and as new
born in the Spirit, to him also it is all Isa 43. 2 Cor. 5. Apo. 21.
new what he sees, hears, and knows in the same; for he has neither
understood, known, comprehended, nor inherited any of those things before that
time.

8. How were it then possible that one should be able to describe or express at
full all the amiableness of this City, and all the good decentness, and orders
of this land and people, with all her Isa. 64. 1 Cor. 2.
Riches and Garnishing together with all her Rest and Joy, and with her
unfeigned Love, pure Life, and peaceable Unity, all which is to be found therein.

9. But it is and becomes rightly known unto all those that come into this
City of Rest, and that are become united and agreeably minded with this lovely
people; for as then there is no more Soph. 3. 1 Ioh. 3.
evil, nor evil suspicion, nor yet sight of evil in them; for within the same
one does neither see nor think any thing else, but all Isa. 51. and 54.
Good, Joy, Rest, and Peace in the everlasting life.

10. And the comer in, who through the counsel of the chief elder in the godly
Understanding of God is passed through the Passover of the way that leads
into the same, and so is come into this good City through the Nature of God, and
united with this lovely people, in unity of the Peace and of the Love; he
rejoices him likewise with unspeakable Isa. 60. and 61. and 65.
joy in the same land; as also recreateth Psa. 96. and 112.
himself exceedingly in her Garnishing, and thanketh and laudeth God for the
great grace and mercy that is chanced unto him through the love of God the
Father and her Service.

11. Even thus becomes his heart joyful in the lovely Being of the friendly
people; where through he feels himself to be changed in all points in his
Spirit, like one that is risen Romans 6.8 Col. 3.
from the Death into the everlasting Life; wherein all rest, faithfulness,
Zach. 7.8
and Truth, all Love, Peace and Righteousness is found.

12. Yea, all the whole peaceable people of the Love, do likewise rejoice them
every one, when as any one repents Luke 15.
for his sins and so comes into this City, under the Obedience of the Love,
and uniteth him with that same peaceable people, which lives and dwells
therein.

CHAP. XXXIV.
IN this holy City there is also a Light, which is an everlasting and very true
Light, Isa 60. 4 Esd 2. Apo. 21.22.
that always shines and continues for evermore in that land. Wherefore there
is neither night nor darkness there, but always day and clearness.

2. This same Light is not risen up through any riches of the knowledge of Good
and Evil, nor come forth through any wisdom of man; but it is the very true
light of Life Joh. 1. 1 John 1.
that has been from eternity, and that shall remain for ever.

3. And the same is named Joh. 1.
The everlasting Life, that was with God the Father in the beginning; and all
whatsoever is made, is made through the same; but without the same there is
nothing made, of all whatsoever is made.

4. This everlasting life serves Joh. 1.
for a light unto men to a peaceable walking of their course is this holy City
of Peace.

5. And the same Light is an upright and undeceiveable Light, Joh. 1.
to the illuminating of all people, namely, of those Ioh 10. Apo. 22.
that do go into the City of Peace through the gate, and that are adjoined to
the peaceable people.

6. Therefore also the true life, and the promised rest of the heart, is only
in this good City of Peace; for without the same, and without the way or
passing-over that leads into it; and among all those that separate themselves
therefrom, there is nothing but death, Genesis 3.
misery, and calamity; for without the same are the Apo. 22.
Inchanters, the Dogs and Wolves, and all wild beasts, together with all
abominations, and des^lations, and all undiscreetness and unrighteousness.

7. But within in the City among this lovely people of Peace, there is nothing
but all life and prosperity, Isa. 60. and 61. and 62.
as likewise all loveliness, peace, and heavenly delightfulness.

8. Also no man gets shame nor reproach there; no man there coveteth after
Honor, or Praise, nor yet after Dignity or greatness of estimation; for there
is no mastership nor violence, but all brotherly love and concord.

9. There likewise no man reigns over another; but they are all alike with
each other, loving and peaceable fellow-brethren, or members of Jesus Christ,
even as one only man, or as one Ephe. 2. and 5.
body of the godly Disposition and Nature.

10. Even thus also they do all there eat of one manner of bread, and 1 Cor. 10
and 11.
drink all there of one manner of drink; and inasmuch as they are every one
spiritual children of God and Christ, and are not covered with any foreskin of
the sinful flesh, nor yet with fleshly or earthly 1 Cor. 3.4.
minds, therefore do they likewise (with their spiritual members) walk naked
and uncovered, both before God, and before one another.

11. Also there, the one does see no unclean thing in the other, for it is
there all of God, Ephe. 1. Apo. 21.
spiritual, holy, and good, and pure are all their works and thoughts.

12. Seeing then that these holy people are every one Spirit, and spiritual,
and pure, and undefiled in all their works and thoughts: and that likewise it
is all [namely, Land, City, Riches, with all whatsoever is, and comes into the
same] spiritual, godly, and Gods own workmanship; therefore also they are not
ashamed of the godly works; neither yet do they hide any spiritual Genesis 2.
members from each other; for they altogether are no more then one spiritual
body, Romans 12. Ephesians. 2.5.
or one man of God. Wherefore the one member cannot be ashamed of the other.

13. Forasmuch then as there is no shame nor reproach there, Genesis 2.
among each other, and that it is all good there, and is all looked into, and
known for good, whatsoever is there among them, and what becomes assembled
unto them; so is there likewise, no coveredness before God, nor before one
another; and (lauding and honoring their God perpetually) they live in the true
freedom of their God, wherein God has made them free, through his truth, and
put off the Isa. 23.
covering of reproach, from their eyes and members.

14. And in this manner, does God (in this holy City of Peace, and of
Perfection) behold the man in his manly nakedness; Genesis 1.
and again, the man, the glorious God, in his godly nakedness, even thus do
they there also, behold one another in their manly and godly nakedness, and
that altogether in the Spirit and life of the pure hearts; and that same
pleases God, namely, that all partitions, coverings, and middle walls, are put
away from his Genesis 2. 2 Cor. 3. Ephesians. 2.
hand work, that God may behold his hand work for good, even as he has created
it; and so likewise again, the hand-work his Creator, that they may all praise
and laud God in the works of his hands, Genesis 1. Eccles. 39.
because he has made it all so upright and well.

15. Behold, this same is the upright mind of life, in the holy City of the
living, and is Gods Being and Nature, and the very true 2 Cor. 3.
cleerness of the uncovered face of Jesus Christ, and the inheritance of the
holy Ghost, and of all spiritual and heavenly Goods. It is very true.

CHAP. XXXV.
SEeing then that this City is a spiritual City of Life, and of perfect
Righteousness, and also full of wisdom, and of the knowledge of God; therefore
does not the one brother there, teach the other, neither is it needful for any
man there, to say to his neighbor, Jere. 31. Heb. 8. 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 1.
Know the Lord; for there they are all Kings, Priests, or Elders, and do all
know the great glorious God, both small and great, and have all their dealing
among each other, in the upright love.

2. Inasmuch now therefore, as that they do all stand well-minded, with one
accord, to the love, and her upright being; 1 Timothy 1.
so do they not there likewise compel any one to any righteousness, as to
learn, or to observe the same, by compulsion; but they have all (of themselves)
a Isal. 2. Jere. 50. Zech. 8.
delight and pleasure in the life of righteousness.

3. And so (out of their inclination in the love) they deal in all what is
Phil. 4.
right and equal. For the life in the love (which is Gods true being it self)
is their chiefest, and most perfect righteousness, who is the Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
head of them all.

4. Moreover, there is no man that claims any thing to be his own, as to
possess the same to his own private use; for no man (and that out of every ones
good disposition) can desire any thing to be his own, or yet to make any thing
Acts 4.
proper to himself, from another; but all whatsoever is there, is free, and is
there left free in his upright form.

5. There is also no man denied to use any thing 1 Timothy 4.
in freedom, of all what is profitable and needful for him; for they stand all
in the equity, Ephesians. 4.
as one in the love.

6. Seeing now that they walk Phil. 4.
according to all manner of equity: so is there no desire to any man's
increasing, nor diminishing, nor yet to any man's extolling, nor dispraising;
and therefore likewise, there is no man extolled above his state and ordinance,
nor yet contemned or debased, to be reputed less or lower then the same: For
the Almighty God is Psalm. 7. and 9. Isai. 33.
their Judge, who directs, leads, and upholdeth every one in his right
Ordinance, through his holy Spirit of Love.

7. Every one there also, uses 2 Pet. 1.
temperance and equity. There is nothing done privily, neither do they deal in
any thing secretly, but all naked and openly; there is likewise no Acts 4.
self seeking, nor unfaithfulness.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THere also no man desires to serve Exodus 20 Isal. 2.
any strange gods, nor to make to himself any Images or similitudes, for to
worship them; for they are come to the Joh. 1.3.
Being of God, in the light of life. And so they are John 17. Ephesians. 2.5.
one with God, and God is one with them.

2. Whose name likewise they use Exodus 20 Eccles. 23.
not in vain; for all what they speak of the Godhead, to the Laud of his holy
Name, that same has a living form in them.

3. In this manner do they Deuteronomy. 5.
sanctify the Lords Sabbath day; for they live peaceably in the light or day
of his sanctification.

4. They do honor their Father Ephesians. 6.
and their mother as in the Loves Obedience. Even so does the Lord likewise
give unto them a long Eccl. 3.
life (a life for ever) in this same holy Land.

5. Also they Exo. 20. Matt. 5.
kill not, for they have no nature to destroying; but all their desire is that
it might all live, whatsoever is of the life and can live, and whatsoever
serves and laudeth God.

6. They also commit not any Deuteronomy. 5.
adultery, for they are all honest Tob. 3.
and chaste of lift, and Matthew. 5.
clean or pure of heart. Thus they live in the blessing of their God, wherein
God blesses them and whereunto he has appointed or ordained them.

7. They do not steal Exo. 20. Matthew. 19.
nor rob likewise, but they till or dress the lands of God; and are laboring
toward all things, and in all things, whatsoever is Ephe. 4.
profitable and expedient: and are much more inclined to impart or distribute
their spiritual gifts, and heavenly goods (if any thing thereof were needful
unto any one) then that they would be inclined to crave any earthly things of
any one 2 Cor. 9.12.
or to diminish or scant him in his possession; for no man desires to possess,
nor to have any thing more under his hand or power, then is needful for him,
or expedient to a good Government.

8. They also bear no Exo. 20.
false witness; For no man Ephesians. 20. Col. 3.
lies against his neighbor, there.

9. They likewise desire not, anotherbodies Mat. 5.
house, nor their neighbors wife; but every one there, lives in faithfulness
with his own 1 Cor. 7.
Conjunction, even as God has joined them together, Genesis 1. Matthew. 19.
from the beginning.

10. Thus do they live in all faithfulness among each other, and permit not
their thoughts to think Tob. 4.
any thing to the satisfying of their own Appetites, without the same.

11. Inasmuch now therefore as that they have such an upright disposition and
nature, as that they do not desire, nor lust for any thing that is against the
Law or Ordinance of the Lord, so are they likewise faithful therein.

12. Seeing then also that their Love is Ephesians. 1.
pure and undefiled (as that they live uncoveredly, according to the truth) so
are there likewise among them, no deceitful Mat. 18. Mar. 9.
eyes, nor false thoughts, nor yet bitterness, Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
contempt, nor offensivenesse.

13. Also they know not there, of any 1 Cor. 1.15.
contention or discord, nor yet of sin nor death; for there is nothing else but
Gal. 5.
love and unity of peace, with joy of the everlasting life.

14. There is likewise no deriding or mocking, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet. 2.
nor any unfit thing used. They talk not there also, of any foolishness nor
lightness.

15. They use not also any unlawful or disorderly Liberty; but all what they
use, speak, and do, that same is agreeable to the Pet. 4.
holy Word of Life, and is the true Liberty of all the Children of God: And
therefore is there likewise among them, no superfluous vice that exceeds
measure or equity.

16. Seeing then that they stand every one concordably inclined to the good, so
is no man there also, compelled to the good life: but every one lives in the
upright Ephesians. 4.
righteousness and holiness, that God esteems. And thus all their nature is
no other, but to be Gal. 5.
serviceable one to another out of mere love.

CHAP. XXXVII.
BEhold, in such an upright being is this lovely people (which has his
dwelling in this good City, named Gods-understanding) grounded or established:
and the Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
love is their band wherewith they are united with each other, in the light of
the true life.

2. By which means, all their nature and mind is nothing else but love, Gal. 5.
Peace, and righteousness, as upright Children, 1 Pet. 1.2.
borne of the love, like those that are risen again from the death, with the
Resurrection Dan. 12. Joh. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
of the righteous ones in in the everlasting life, and do live eternally.

3. For ever them there is no death, nor Romans 8.
damnation, neither does any Esa. 25. 1 Cor. 15.
death reign in the same Land, of the righteous; and so the man dies not
there, neither yet whatsoever is manly.

4. The women likewise do not bring forth their children in pain or grief,
Esa. 65. and 66.
but with joy; for the whole Land is Deuteronomy. 28
blessed, for the righteous life's sake, yielding forth his fruits, as a
blessing.

5. Thus the man eats not his bread in the sweat of his face, or in the
careful travel of his life, Esa. 65.
but with joy, and receives his food in blessing.

6. Forasmuch now as God has made and ordained all things Genesis 1.
well, from the beginning, therefore do they also live uprightly in Gods
Ordinance, and do neither take from, nor add to any thing.

7. And therefore, inasmuch as they do neither take from, nor add to, touching
all that which is the Lords, so live they likewise only in the Works and
Ordinances of the Lord, and do not vow orbind themselves in the Matrimony of
men, nor yet suffer themselves to be bound therein; but are Mat. 22. Luke 20.
like the Angels in heaven, or like Messengers, that are publishers of the
spiritual heavenly goods*, and are the chosen generation, the Kingly Exo. 19.
1 Pet. 2. Apo. 1.5.
Priesthood, the holy people, the peculiar people of God, who are all Kings,
and Anointed ones.

8. For all there, whatsoever is manly, those same are every one Lords, Kings,
and Priests, and do bear their Dominion, over Sin, Death, Devil, and Hell.

9. Also no man reigns over another, and that pleases God well; namely, that
the one man of God reigns not over the other, nor that the one, is the others
1 Cor. 7
bond-servant, neither yet to the Romans 6.
sin, nor to his own sensuality or affection; but that they do always submit
them concordably, Ephesians. 4. 1 Pet. 1.
under the love and her service, and do still stand ready to do the Lords
Will, to serve their God Luke 1.
in righteousness, and to bear the Dominion with him, Romans 6. 1 Cor. 6.7
over the evil, and over all what has a liking to the evil, whereby to live
eternally in the 4 Esd. 2.
immortality with God and his Saints.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
EVen thus now, these spiritual Saints of God, that dwell in this spiritual
holy City of Peace, 1 Reg. 8.10.
have no heads nor Kings, that are borne of the Flesh and and Blood of Sin:
For their King, or the Head of their Body, is the eternal and most mighty
King, 3 Reg. 8 2 Par. 2.6.
who is so great and glorious, that no creature, Esa. 66. Act. 7.
nor any house, made by the work of man's hand, no nor yet all the heavens of
heaven can comprehend or contain Psa. 104. Jer. 25.
him.

2. This great glorious King, is a Esa. 9.
peaceable Prince, in this good City, and this King is named, Col 1.
Goas-true being (as his name is also mentioned Supra. 26.
before) bearing all things Heb. 1.
with the Word of his Power, and cleanses his people from the sin, through
himself, and is foreseen and chosen to be an heir of all things, for that it
may all live unto him.

3. To this noble King of the heavenly glory, do they live, and are obedient
unto him, not by compulsion, but out of inclined love, and out of a good 1 Pet.
1.
nature of their God, like-fellow-members 1 Cor. 12.
of one body of the godly truth, who do show forth nothing else, but love and
peace, according Joh. 13.15. 1 John 4.
to the disposition and nature of their King, named Gods-true-being, which
Prince Esa. 9.
shall reign for evermore, according to the promises.

4. This King of peace, and his peaceable Commonalty of Kingly people, and this
Land of Peace is named, A Kingdom of Kings, because they are every one, Kings,
1 Pet. 2.
Briests, and Anointed ones, that dwell in this Land.

5. And besides this one Kingdom of Kings, there are no Kingdoms in the whole
world, that are rich of Kings, but they are altogether poor of Kings, and are
all likewise bond-servants, Romans 6. 2 Pet. 2.
and captive slaves.

6. And therefore also is this City of Peace only, a Kingdom of Kings: and
they are all likewise, free Apo. 22.
Kings, and Lords, that dwell therein. The same City also, with all what
joyneth thereunto, is an abundant rich land, as likewise full of all
Commodities, that do serve the people, to the life and joy.

7. This people of this same Land, Deuteronomy. 4.
is also an understanding wise people; For, they have their inhabiting in Gods
understanding, and stand comprehended in the light of life, Joh. 17.
being united in Gods true being.

8. There is likewise no right understanding nor wisdom to be found in the
whole world, but only in this Land of Peace, among this lovely people;
therefore is also this Land the best of all Lands, and the people that dwell
therein, the most understanding and righteous people.

CHAP. XXXIX.
THis Land brings forth a fit herb, for the food of the people, and it is
named, Deuteronomy. 8. Sap. 16. Mat. 4. John 6.
Gods living Word; by which food they do live, and rejoice them in the good
taste thereof, and there is no other food taken by them: for seeing they are
heavenly and spiritual men, so eat they likewise no other but the heavenly and
spiritual food.

2. In this Land there is also very good Pro. 9.
wine, whereof the people of the Land do drink, and become exceeding merry
therein, and it is named, The mind of God.

3. There is likewise a Apo. 22.
living fountain, wherein the people of this City do delight them, and take
their recreation and refreshing in the same; the fou^tain is named, A firm
confidence in God.

4. This people goes also very gorgiously apparelled, and the Garments are so
very clear, that one may behold the inward Members of their body naked and
bare, quite thorough them.

5. Which apparel of the people, and their garnishing, or the Jewels of their
beauty are named, Apo. 19.
The justification of the Saints.

6. To be short, all manner of riches, and all the Ornaments of God, be found
in this Land, among Esa. 64. 1 Cor. 2.
this lovely people the Members of the truth of God: which peaceable people
does possess the wealthy land of the godly understanding.

7. In which plentiful Land, there are no sundry chosen-out God-services, nor
several Religions or Ceremonies used; but the God-service that they do use,
and with the which they are serviceable unto all men, Ephesians. 4. Col. --
to an unity of heart with them, in all love, is one only and true God-service,
which extends to the holy Spirit of love, and to the everlasting life, as
also unto the holy City of Peace, and of her peaceable people: which
God-service is well pleasing before God, and to a salvation of men, and it is
named, Joh. 13. 1 John 3.4.
The Service of Love, with the administration of the spiritual and heavenly
goods.

8. Which service of love, they do likewise Romans 12 15. Ephesians. 4.
show forth on each other, in peaceableness of heart, and the same is their
religion or God-service: they know not also of any other Religion, or
God-service, then of the service of love, Joh. 13.15. Col. 3. 1 Pet. 1. c. 3. 1 John 3.4.
and to love one another, and so to keep themselves pure, Jam. 1.
or unspotted of the world.

9. Which pure God-service and most holy Religion, and the ministration of the
gracious word and service of love that tends thereunto, is availeable before
God, and acceptable l unto him, and not any other that be used without the same
God-service of love.

CHAP. XL.
THe people of this Land do (in their God-service) serve the most high God,
Deuteronomy. 5.32. Psalm. 18. Esa. 45.
who is God only; and they are subject to no other Gods, nor Laws, nor
Ceremonies, but only to the Lord their God, and to his most holy service of
love.

2. Also they are not subject to the creatures, nor to any created thing, as
properly to belong thereunto, but only to the Creator, Genesis 1. Romans 1.
that has made all creatures, and created things.

3. This God (whom only they serve) is a secret Esa. 45.
God, a God that dwells Psalm. 2. and 22. and 115.
in the heavens, and moves above all heavens, who likewise has comprehended
all in his hand whatsoever is.

4. The same God is exceeding great, glorious, and miraculous, and besides him
there is no Deuteronomy. 32.
God more, neither in heaven, nor upon earth, whose Name is known only in
himself, and in his.

5. He is the 1 John 4.
Love, the Joh. 14.
Truth, and the Spirit, and the Spirit is the everlasting life, in the truth,
and in the love.

6. He is the true substance, of all substances, Joh. 1.
the true life, of all lives, the true light, of all lights, the true mind, of
all minds.

7. He is the true power or strength, Job 9.
of all powers or strengths: the true understanding, of all understandings: the
true righteousness, of all righteousness.

8. He is the true Mal. 1. Ephesians. 3.
Father of all Fathers: the Lord, of all Lords: 1 Timothy 6
the King, of all Kings.

9. He is the true begetter of all Generations: For he it is which Esa. 45. and
66. John 1.
begets all that, whatsoever is born of the truth, out of the truth, and
through the truth; out of whom also, all what is any thing, is be gotten: for
he himself begets his children, out of himself.

10. He is 1 Cor. 8.15. Heb. 1.
all in all, who likewise has comprehended all in himself.

11. He is the true 1 John 4.
love of all loveliness: the upright Joh. 14.
truth of all truth.

12. He is the true Mat. 11.
meekness of all meek ones: the true Joel 2 Jona 4.
mercy of all merciful ones.

13. He is also the true nature of all naturalnesse.

14. To conclude, He is all what his people is, unto whom he is a Paradise full
of joy, and a 4. Esd. 2. Apo. 2.22.
tree of life, or a living Tree, full of all sweetness and fruits of
everlasting life,

15. He it is, that was Mich. 5. Heb 13.
everlasting, from the beginning: He it is, that is now presently; he it is,
that shall remain for ever.

16. He is the everlasting, unbroken, the everlasting undevidable, the
everlasting perfect good.

17. This living God, is their only God, for he only is God, and none else,
Deuteronomy. 32 Esa. 45.
and besides him, there is no God more, as is already said: this God do they
love Deuteronomy. 6. and 10. Mat. 22.
with all their hearts, minds, and thoughts.

18. Seeing then that they are borne and brought forth out of him, so is
likewise all their life, sense, and mind, only in him; Joh. 17.
and God himself in like manner, is in them, with his mind, life, or Spirit,
and so they are one being with each other, namely, God and Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 37.
his people of peace.

19. And the same (the living Godhead with the Manhood) is the only true being,
or substance, in this peaceable Land of rest and peace.

20. The same is also the 1 Cor. 13
perfect of all perfection, which shall continue for ever, to the which state,
God has created the manly generation, Genesis 1. 4 Esd. 6.7.
for to make them heirs therein, and called or bidden them thereunto, by Jesus
Christ.

21. The same perfection, are likewise Gods promises, Genesis 12. and 17.22.
to the blessing of all generations of the earth, and out of the same
perfection, is the true service of love ministered, to a godly life, in the last
time.

22. And wheresoever now the same comes in the Spirit, and makes it self
known essentially, there do all 1 Cor. 13
peeceworks, divisions and dissentious cease, and the love gets there the
victory, and remains there for ever, never breaking nor decaying any more.

CHAP. XLI.
WHosoever now forsakes all the desolate lands and people, as is before said,
also has his respect diligently bent upon the Mat. 2.
leading star in the East, and walks on rightly, according to the compass;
as likewise forsakes not the Cross, and so comes to the submission, by him
shall be found the equity, with the which, he entteth into Gods 2. Pet. 1. Apo.
22.
nature; and so he comes into this good City, full of all riches of life and
joy.

2. By which means he has a free entrance into this holy City of Peace (named
Gods-understanding) for to become one only Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.5.
body with all the Saints of the heavenly company, the which are the peaceable
children of love, in the Land of the living.

3. He now therefore, that is in this manner come thereunto essentially, may as
then (in the love, and in the unity of peace) go out John 10.
and in, without harm, and may walk thorough all Lands, Places, and Cities;
bring unto all lovers of the good Land (that are seeking the same) good Esa.
33.52. Romans 10.
tidings, give them good encouragement, as to respect all the enemies, like Job
21. Esa. 5.7.
chafe, and as nothing, show them the next way for to go into Esa. 30.
the life, and so lead them with him, into the good Land, and assemble Jer. 3.
them to the holy and peaceable people of the Lord, to an unity of heart with
them, in all love; for that same is the concordable service of love to the
life, ministered by the Eccl. 6.8. Heb. 13.
Elders in the Family of the Love of Jesus Christ, and whosoever turns
himself therefrom, and is not obedient to his requiring, he does severely
err, and turns him away from his Salvation.

4. The next way therefore, to go into the foresaid life, is this: That one do
forsake Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luke 9.14.
all what he has taken on, and not any more to take on, nor desire any thing,
and so through the service of love, to enter into the simple life, wherein all
faithfulness and truth is found, and no slandering, nor stumbling, 1 Cor. 13
or offensivenesse, nor any blameing of others that do labor after
righteousness and concord, and are minded to the peace of Jesus Christ.

5. For the simple life, is the equity of the nature of God, and by the same,
one goes into the holy City of rest and peace.

6. Whosoever now is, even thus as is said, under the obedience of the love,
become uniform with the children Bar. 5.
of the Kingdom, and that his Spirit, Word, or Speech, does flow out of, and
into the same secret Kingdom, even like unto a 4 Esd. 3.
living breath of God, that flows out from God, and into him again. He
verily is become a fellow-elder in Gods holy and godly understanding, with the
Elders in the Family of Love, and can very well walk in freedom, among all
people, and also remain still very free, united with the peaceable ones in the
City of peace, and can live in the upright Ephesians. 1.4.
righteousness.

7. For the k knowledge separateth nor hurts not him. Genesis 2.


8. The Devil Mat. 4. Joh. 12.
overcomes not him.

9. The sin Romans 6.
or the evil delights not him.

10. He fears not the death. Oze. 13.
not him.

11. The Serpents deceit nor her poison Mar. 16.
cannot kill him; for he has eaten of the Wood of Life, ( Apo. 2.
which stands in the midst of the godly Paradise) and lives eternally, not
fearing any burden of condemnation; for that cause also the hell cannot
condemn him.

12. Nor the accuser Apo. 12.
accuses not him.

13. The foolishness Ephesians. 2.
allureth not him.

14. The chosen righteousness Col. 2.
snareth not him.

15. The holiness prideth not him.

16. The Dan. 12.
adhominations of desolation, hinder not him.

17. The deceitful hills, seduce not him.

18. The vain comfort, relisheth or likes not him.

19. The unbelief, 4. Esd. 6.7.
destroys not him.

20. The delight to live in Gal. 5.
pleasures, choketh not him.

21. The Ephesians. 4.
ignorance, blinds not him.

22. Nor the leaders of the blind, do not lead him. For God is his Esa. 60.
Apo. 21.22.
light and life, and to the same godly being, he lives, and not to any strange
things, which be (in his passing thorough them) has forsaken: wherefore he is
not captivated under the oneness, nor under any ungodly being, but only 1 Pet.
1. 1 John 4.
under the love, and the requiring of her service.

23. And even thus is God with him, and he is with God; For the true Spirit, or
the true godly being of the love, Joh. 16.
leads him into all truth and love; and in this manner (under the obedience
of the love) is all his conversation, Esa. 32.51. and 65. Apo. 21.
in rest and peace: who likewise lives without fear everlastingly, in all
godly and spiritual heavenly goods, with all the children of the Peaceable
Kingdom, and of the Love.

24. Behold, that same is the lovely rest, Esa. 60.61.62.65. and 66. Jer. 23.33.
and the godly life, in the glorious freedom of the Children of God in the
last time, according to the promises.

CHAP. XLII.
WE praise thee, O Father, thou Lord of heaven and earth, for that thou have
hidden Mat. 11. Luke 10.
these things from the proud-boasting wise, and the prudent understanding ones,
and revealed them to the little and humble ones.

2. The rich of spirit, nor the great, wise or, industrious Scripture-learned
ones, have not understood the same: but to the Esa. 57.66.
poor of spirit, and to the simple of understanding, have thou given it.

3. Yea, O Father, Mat. 11.
even so has it pleased thee, for that the rich of spirit should have no cause
to boast Esa. 29. Abdi. 1. 1 Cor. 1.
them of their wisdom, nor the understandingones of their prudence; but that
they may every one bow them under the obedience of thy love, and so may
acknowledge, that thou only (O my God and Father) art a true God.

4. Therefore, because that the Lord would (through his hearty love) make his
holy Name great and commendable, Luke 1.
he has exercised power with his arm, and dispersed those that are proud in
the device of their own hearts.

5. He has thrust down the mighty Eccl. 10.
from the seat, but exalted the humble.

6. The Luke 1.
hungry has he filled with goods, and left those empty, that were rich or
satisfied.

7. Therefore the Lord forsakes none, that seek him with Jer. 29. Eccle. 2.
all their hearts: for he is a strength unto the poor, to the simple, and to
the little ones of understanding; a Psa. 9.18 46.71.91.94. Esa. 25.
strength in the time of sorrow, a refuge from the tempest, and a shadow from
the heat, when the Tyrants fret or rage, like a storm against a wall.

8. For that cause Esa. 41.45.51.54.
dismay not your selves, O ye faint-hearted ones, nor be not wavering-minded,
although the destruction do make up it self very high, and that the decliners,
together with the good thinking wise, and the Scripturelearned of the wicked
world, do slander or speak evil against this same, and do persecute us; for it
shall all perish, wating out like Psalm. 10. Esa. 50. Psalm. 37.68. Sap. 5.
an old garment, and like the smoke or vapor.

9. For the Lord brings down the fury of the ungodly, and makes their heat
strengthlesse, like unto the heat in the wilderness and woods.

10. The Vine-branches of the Tyrants does he wither with the shadow of his
clouds, Esa. 58 Eccl. 24.
and brings forth his righteousness, like a morning star, and his truth
like a glorious cleernesse, Esa. 60.
or light of the Sun.

11. And in peace Esa. 52.60.
does he set up again his holy City Jerusalem, Psalm. 79. ^ Mac. 2.4
which the Heathen have trodden down.

12. He does now make manifest his holy Temple again with joy, Esa. 33.44.
Apo. 21.
and so permits his Tabernacle, the Sanctuary of his dwelling, to be
beholden.

13. And sets up the same upon the top of the hill of Sion at Jerusalem,
that the hill of Sion may stand aloft, Esa. 2. Mat. 4.
and be exalted above all Hills, even as the Lord has forespoken the same by
his Prophets.

14. For the Lord of Hosts will now prepare upon his Hill of Sion, at
Jerusalem, a sumptuous Esa. 25.
Feast for all people, of fat, well marrowed Cattle, and of pure wine, wherein
there is no dregs.

15. And upon this hill, he will take away Esa. 25.
the covering, or the veil wherewith all people are stopped, and wherewith all
Hathen are covered; for the 1 Cor. 15
death shall be swallowed up.

16. And the Lord God will wipe off Esa. 25 Apo. 7.
the tears from the faces of all the people, and take away their reproach in
the universal earth.

CHAP. XLIII.
BEhold, that is the time of the Lords blessing, in the which they shall sing
this song in Judah.

2. We have a Esa. 26. Supra. 28.
strong City, the walls and the defense are our preservation.

3. Open the gate, Psalm. 118.
that the righteous people (which keep the faith) may enter therein.

4. Thou always keep peace, according to sure promise, for men stay them
upon thee.

5. Therefore put your confidence in the Lord everlastingly, for God the Lord
is a stony rock for ever.

6. He brings low those that dwell in pride, and he casts down the lofty
City; yea, he throws it down to the earth, so that it lies in the dust.

7. That it is trodden upon with feet, yea, with the feet of the poor, and with
the feet of the simple.

8. But the way of the righteous is plain, and the goings of the humble do
thou, O God direct aright.

9. Therefore Lord, Esa. 26.
we wait upon thee, in the way of thy righteousness, for the lust of our heart
stands bent toward thy Name, and to a remembrance of thee.

10. We are desirous of thee in the night-season, even with all our hearts, and
with our spirit, do we walk up early unto thee.

11. For where thy Law bears rule in the Land, there do the inhabiters of the
earth learn righteousness.

12. But although grace be proffered to the ungodly, yet do they learn no
righteousness.

13. But do nothing else but iniquity in the upright Land, for they do not see
the Majesty of the Lord.

14. Lord, they see not that thy hand is exalted: but when they shall see it,
then shall they be ashamed.

CHAP. XLIV.
THerefore Psa. 113.133.135.
exalt our God, and laud his holy Name.

2. Because he has gotten the Kingdom, and the Scepter of his Kingdom is
made manifest.

3. For the Lord is become Psalm. 97.
King, wherefore his people do rejoice.

4. His Word has showed power, his righteousness Esa. 45.51.
is become manifest.

5. His Spirit has appeared like a light, and confirms his salvation for
ever.

6. The same God has renewed us in him, and given Esa. 29.32. Act. 2.
us a new understanding.

7. A new creature 2 Cor. 5.
has he brought forth, the Image of God Ephesians. 1.
the upright righteousness.

8. Therefore do the people speak Mar. 16. Act. 2.
with new tongues, the new song is in our mouth.

9. Lord, Apo. 15.
wonderful are thy works, for thou have done mavelous acts Psa. 71.77.
among us.

10. The evil that was in us, Psa. 10. Jer. 31.50
is now no where to be found amongst us, that which we know not in the death,
is now apparent unto us in the everlasting life.

11. With us the sin Romans 8.
is now condemned in the sin, the righteousness is declared unto us in
righteousness.

12. Among us the death is now swallowed up Oze. 13
in the death, the everlasting life is come unto us, in the renewing of our
life.

13. The hell is judged or condemned into the Apo. 20.
pit of hell, the heaven is showed unto us in the heavenly being. Apo. 12.21.22.


14. The lie is come to shame in the lie, the Psalm. 85.117.
truth is risen up unto us in the truth.

15. The darknesses are descended into (...) bottomless pit to the
darknesses, the light has illuminated us Psa. 36.118.
in the light.

16. The Idol is fallen in his Esa. 2.
Idolatry; the living God is become known unto us in the Godhead.

17. Therefore do we confess the Majesty of our God, and the sanctification
of his people perpetually.

CHAP. XLV.
O Lord, thou Almighty God, great Psa. 139.
and wonderful are thy works.

2. Righteous and true Apo. 15.
are thy ways, thou Prince and King of Saints.

4. Who Jer. 10.
should not fear and love thee, O Lord of life, and praise thy name?

3. Forasmuch doubtless as there is no holiness, but thou; for thou only, O
Lord 1 Reg. 2.
art holy.

5. All people shall worship thee, Psa. 72.87.
in thy presence, where thou becomest manifest in thy holy Temple.

6. For thy righteousnesses are known, and thy holiness is inherited by thy
people.

7. But not an holiness made by men's hands, but an holiness that is from
eternity, and shall continue for ever.

8. Therefore do thou, O God, remain a God in eternity, a King Esa. 9. Dan.
1.7.
which shall reign perpetually.

9. Wherefore we are now joyful in this portion, and sing Heia, Heia.

10. Play to the Psalm. 96.98.
Lord a new Song, and sing, Alleluia, Tob. 13. Apo. 15.
Alleluia.

CHAP. XLVI.
Rejoice now with joy, ye Psalm. 48. Esa. 62. Soph. 3.
daughters of Sion, and recreate you ye Citizens and Inhabiters of the City
Jerusalem.

2. Shout now with triumph, all ye generations of Israel and Juda, and rejoice
you in all love ye children of peace.

3. Behold, your King appears Zach 9.
unto you in meekness, and he comes Mat. 24.25.
with Majesty.

4. For that he would establish you heire-like in his Jer. 31. Eze. 37.
Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.
for to possess his Kingdom for evermore.

5. But unto his enemies, the resisters of the Love, he appears in Psa. 5.7.
Eccl: 5.
wrath and in rigor.

6. For to thrust them from him, Mat. 7.23.25.
and to shut them without this Kingdom for ever.

7. For he will make an end of the iniquity, and cast all falsehood and
offensivenesse Mat. 13.
out of his Kingdom.

8. He will diperse the deceitful Psa. 33. Pro. 15.
thoughts, his life, disposition, and nature Es. 65.66.
will he bring to light.

9. He will establish his Kingdom in peace, Esa. 9.
and the peace of his Kingdom shall have no end.

10. Lo, that is the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, the heavenly King in
eternity. Alleluia, Alleluia.

CHAP. XLVII.
WHerefore, O ye souls, shout now in your God for joy, and rejoice Psa. 62.
Luke 1.
your mind in his Salvation.

2. From whom you were turned away, and are turned to him again.

3. Behold, that is the Psa 118. Esa. 28. 1. Per. 2.
stone which saves you, the everlasting God of Israel, who has made heaven
and earth.

4. His Anointing is at his right hand, out of his spirit of salvation, comes
the faithfulness and truth unto us.

5. That which he has stricken and wounded, Deuteronomy. 32 Tob. 13.
he has anointed and healed again.

6. He can kill, 1 Reg. 2. Sap. 16.
and make alive again, he leads into hell, and brings out again.

7. He thrusts away and condemns, as it were in cursing; Esa. 54.57.60.
he calls to him again in blessing, as his best beloved.

8. He brings down to dust, earth, and ashes, he Psa. 113. Esa. 52.
exalts again above all Cedar-trees.

9. He suffers to fall into sorrow, as if it were nothing, and that he
esteemed it not.

10. He rejoices it again, and esteems it much more precious then gold,
silver, and precious stones.

11. Where is there a Deuteronomy. 32 Psalm. 18.113.
God, like unto the God of Israel, which sits above, or over-spreadeth all
heavens.

12. He has founded Genesis 1. Psa. 102.
the earth upon his Word, the Firmament is comprehended in him.

13. Sun and Moon stand obedient Psa. 104. Esa. 38.
to his Commandment, all the hearts of the living has he in his hand.

14. He does all what he Psalm. 114
will, he respects Sap. 6. Act. 10.
no man, neither wise nor simple.

15. When he makes up himself, Psa. 76 Jer. 10.
it must all bow to him, and fear his mighty hand.

16. He chasteneth or rebukes for a certain time, Job 5* Psa. 36. Mich. 7.
but his goodness indureth for ever.

17. Laud him all ye Psa. 138.148.
Kings, and ye Counselors, in the Land, fear his Majesty, all ye people.

18. He that works wonders among the heathen, and has a lust toward his
Elect.

19. He has a pleasure Deuteronomy. 10.
in the house of Israel, for that he would plant Esa. 49.11.
the generation of Jacob in righteousness.

20. He will not ever be Esa. 54
angry with his people, their chastisement shall not always endure.

21. He punishes them for their sins, Jer. 30*
he saves and justifies them* for his holy Names sake.

22. He will not forget his Covenant, that he has made with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob.

23. He will not leave his Psalm. 32. Jer. 31. Mich. 7.
mercy, which he has promised, by his Servants and Prophets.

24. Yet once again will he move Agg. 2. Heb. 12.
the earth, and gather his people together out of all quarters of the earth, 2
Mac. 2
and be gracious unto them.

25. Also he will erect a new Jer. 31. Heb. 8.
Covenant with them, and give them a new Name, the everlasting free-ones; Esa.
62.
the released by the Lord.

26. To whom the Law of the Lord, his Statutes, and Rites, shall no more Exo.
34.
stand written in tables of stone.

27. But God will write them in their hearts, in the Jer. 31. Heb. 8.
innermost part of their minds, in the ground of Faith, according to the manner
of the Father Abraham.

28. Rejoice you then, that have been Esa. 54.60.
rejected among all Heathen.

29. Clap then with your Psalm 47.
hands, and stamp then with your feet.

30. Make then your songs of joy at Sion, sing then Alleluia Tob 1.
in all the streets and lanes of Jerusalem.

31. Then cast from you the mourning-garment; for that is the end Esa. 61.
of your shame and contempt.

32. Then put on Esa. 49.54.
the apparel or ornaments of joy, sing, play, and laud the Lord in triumphing.

33. Play Psa. 33.8 1.98.146.148.150.
upon Harps, upon Lutes, upon Cymballs, Flutes, Tabors, Gitterns, and upon all
manner of Instruments with strings.

34. For then will God Esa. 33. Eze. 34.
be your King, your Head, and only Pastor or Shepherd.

35. No sin Jer. 50.
shall ruinate or spoil you any more, no Prophets shall seduce you any more.

36. You shall every one Jer. 31. Heb 8.10.
know the Lord your God, as also his Law, Statutes, and Rites.

37. Thereon hope now, O Israel, the same shall come unto Esa. 35.5.60.51.
you all, ye Children of Jacob; Alleluia, Alleluia.

38. Give perpetual thanks unto the great God of Israel; for, besides him,
Esa. 34.
there is no God more.

CHAP. XLVII. In these Chapters following, there are recited certain benefits
showed on the man, through the Service of the Love of Jesus Christ; with also a
lamentable complaint over the blindness of the people, and over certain good
thinking wise, and Scripture-learned ones, and likewise how grossly they have
overreached themselves, or failed in their giving of judgment over the
spiritual and heavenly things, with more other notable Declarations, and good
Instructions.
ALL this, O ye good willing hearts, and lovers of the truth, which we have
here set forth in Letters, have we (through love) written for the service and
furtherance of you all, because that every one of you likewise should
understand the upright life of Peace, whereof we do witness, also wherein our
health and preservation consists, and likewise whereunto the promises of God
the Father, Genesis 22.
made to the blessing of all generations of the earth, do extend, and naught
become agreeably minded with us, and we with you, for to enter into the same
good life under the obedience of the Love, through the love and her service, to
a Ephesians. 1. 2 Pet. 3.
renewing of the world, and of all whatsoever is waxen old: as also, to become
one only Communaltie of Peace, whereby to prepare in that manner (through the
service of Love) the Esa. 54. and 60. and 66. Agg. 2.
Peace upon earth, according to the Promises.

2. To that end also tends our whole service of writing, whereunto likewise
we are moved, out of an inclination of love, for that the Romans 10
righteousness (which God esteems) might come to light, and be manifested
thorough the love and her service, to an everlasting Esa. 9.26 and 1.54
Peace for Israel, according to the Promises.

3. Moreover (because there should be nothing withheld from any one, of all
what serves, or is profitable for the man, to the knowledge of the life) we
have also (to a more abundance of the godly understanding) witnessed of this
same life in the Spirit, which we do here point unto in these present
testifications of the Land of Peace, with many distinct sayings in the four
Books of the Glass of Righteousness, and likewise in all our Writings, that
are published or set forth by us.

4. In which writings we have also (as much as we were able, and saw into it to
serve to edication) evidently and apparently distincted the Deuteronomy. 30 Jer. 21.
Eccles. 15.
ways of life, from the ways of death.

5. Seeing then that the glorious 2 Cor. 4
light (as a day or cleernesse of Christ) is by Gods grace, given us to behold;
therefore have we (out of the same sight, or heavenly Revelation) rehearsed
likewise in those same foresaid books and writings, many of the secret heavenly
Romans 16 Ephesians. 3. Col. 1.
treasures or riches of God, which in times past, even hitherto, have not been
made known unto the world, like as God does now presently (through his love)
reveal and make them known unto his Saints.

6. Which testimonies of the heavenly treasures or riches of God, we have (out
of inclined love) witnessed as a Glass of upright righteousness, and to a
beholding in the Spirit of all Righteousness, Light, and Life, to the serving
and furtherance of all Lovers of the true being, whereby to draw all those to
the love of the true being, that are good Luke 2.
of will to the same true being, and that they might even so adjoyn them to our
Communalty, and Service of the love of God and Christ, and likewise submit them
with us under the obedience of the Love.

7. Which God-service of ours under the obedience of the love of God and
Christ, is the most holy God-service, Mat. 22. Mar. 12. Jam. 1.
before God the Father. For the same Service in his Declaration, is nearest
unto the godly heavenly truth, above all God-services and understandings of
this world.

CHAP. XLIX.
FOr what God-services soever do not submit them with us, under the obedience
of the Service of the 1 Cor. 13
love of God and Christ, shall all be found false, Jer. 10.
and as no God-services; and what understanding soever does not yield it self
captive thereunder, shall all be known to be lying, and as ignorance; and
likewise what Preachers or Teachers soever do not submit them, nor stand
subject there-under, shall all become manifest, that they preach or minister
not the holy Word of the Lord, and that they are not Jer. 14. and 23. and 27.
Romans 10.
sent by God, nor yet by Christ, for to preach; as also, that they desire not
to minister their Office of Preaching, according to the requiring of the
Service of the love of Jesus Christ.

2. Yea, all Majesty's, Rulers, Governors and Magistrates, Romans 13.
that are of God, shall every one submit Esa. 2.
them with us thereunder, for the peaces Cause, which God has even so
foreseen through his love; and likewise for to prepare the same peace upon the
earth, under the obedience of the Love of JESUS CHRIST.

3. And what Majesty, Rulers, Governors, and Magistrates soever, will not bow
themselves in that manner under the love of Jesus Christ, nor stand submitted
thereunder, those same shall declare thereby, that they have no desire nor will
to Minister their Office Sap. 6.
of Government, according to Gods Ordinance, and according to the love of Jesus
Christ.

4. Seeing then that the Government is Gods Ordinance, and that also those Sap.
6. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.
Governors, which undertake the protection of the good and simple people, and
of all those that sin unadvisedly or ignorantly, are Gods Ministers, therefore
shall likewise every Governor, that ministers his Office out of Gods
Ordinance, or is well inclined thereto with all his heart, submit himself good
willingly to to the love of God and Christ, and to her Service, for a testimony
that they are Gods Ministers, and have a desire to the peace upon earth, and to
be serviceable unto the children of men to that effect.

5. And all common people that have minded the good life and the peace, shall
in like manner, bow Mich. 4.
them under the Service of Love, for to live such a life of peace under the
obedience of the Love, according to the godly testimonies of the Glass of
Righteousness.

6. But whosoever shall refuse thus to do, and so will not live peaceable under
the love with us, as likewise all those that turn them away from us, and from
our godly Doctrine of the same Service of Love, those same shall be accounted
for no people, but for a Job 21. Jer. 9.
destroyed and lost heap, who are neither profitable in the World, nor yet
before God. For, there is nothing upright nor true, that excels 1 Cor. 13
the love and her service.

7. Therefore it is also every ones duty (both before God and men) to bow him
under the love of his God, and Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22.
to the love of his neighbor, whereby to learn through the Love and her
service, to observe what is right and Tob. 4. Phil. 4.
equal; to the end, that the love might by that means, be seen and known,
that she is the band of Col. 3.
perfection, and the upright Ephesians. 4.
being it self, whereon the Law Mat. 22.
and the Prophets do witness, and whereunto the Services and Ceremonies have
their Ministration.

8. Which love is likewise published by the Apostles of Christ, to be a 1 Timothy 1
principal sum of the Commandment and of Faith, and to be a steadfast
God-service, 1 Cor. 13
which continues for ever, according to the Promises.

9. Out of which our most holy Service of Love, that is come unto us 1 Cor. 3.
by Gods grace, we have (according to the sight of the true life) showed forth
the upright Deuteronomy. 30. Eccl. 15.
difference of the life and death, in the glass of righteousness, in most
large and ample manner.

10. In the which one may sind and reap all fullness of Declarations or
Instructions, tending to the furtherance of the profitable knowledge both of
all godly heavenly things, and also of all manly and natural things.

CHAP. L.
FOrasmuch then as God has (out of his bountiful grace) shined, or given 2
Cor. 4.
into our hearts, such a clear light of the lovely being, under the obedience
of his love, therefore do we likewise restifie of God and of the true light of
his love, and not of any creatures; for that we might make manifest now in the
last time unto all those that are good of will to the obedience of the love,
the heavenly 1 Cor. 2. Ephesians. 3. Col. 1.
mystery of the Christ of God, to the end that the love in her service might be
spread abroad, and have her going forward, to a serviceablenesse unto the life,
and that they might all inherit the life and the rest in the love, namely,
those which love the good life and the rest Esa. 32. Heb. 4.
that God has promised unto his people, and that labor diligently thereafter.

2. And inasmuch now as our Service under the obedience of the Love (whereby we
do testify of the spiritual heavenly goods in Jesus Christ, to an unity Joh.
17. Ephesians. 4.
in the love) tends thereunto, therefore does not the Love also permit us to
cease in that matter, but the inclination of her lovely being, 2 Cor. 5.
drives us continually forward to the same.

3. Yea, the heart and mind of our conscience cannot endure to keep 1 Cor. 9.
Col. 4.
silence thereof, l^st that we our selves (inasmuch as such a grace is happened
unto us) might by our silence-keeping in this perilous time, be any let or
hinderance therein.

4. Wherefore, because now that the Love to the life might be furthered, so do
we show forth our Service (with courtesy) 2 Cor. 4.
toward all consciences of men, to the end, to witness unto all people, and
with reasons and sentences to declare unto them according to the truth, in what
manner of life, that they all ought to deal and to walk with each other, and
are likewise bound in duty to live faithfully in the same.

5. Let them then believe it, or let them not believe it, let them do it, or
let them not do it, we quiet our consciences before God, and are Act. 20.
blameless of the destruction of all those that believe not, nor yet will
enter into the Heb 3. and 4.
rest of life, but do refuse Pro. 1.
the proffered grace of the Love.

CHAP. LI.
WHerefore, because that the same now which is to come, might appear, so do we
not speak coveredly, as in secret manner, in privy places or corners, Mat. 10.
but naked and apparent in the day.

2. But if now our testimonies be covered unto any one, or be witnessed or
spoken in hidden or secret manner, before any one, then are they covered,
secret, or 2 Cor. 4.
hidden before those that perish; namely, the decliners from those same, and
the unbelieving minds of the wicked world, Jam. 4.
who are Gods enemies, as also enemies of the love and of Christ, which will
not that Luke 19.
God, nor Christ, not yet the Love should reign over them; but are 2 Timothy 3. 2
Pet. 2.3. Jud. 1.
stout, and puffed up in mind, as those that will reign themselves, according
to their own advice or opinion, seeking their selfnesse and not the Lords; the
which they do apparently show by the deed, because they will not stand
submitted under the love nor her service, neither yet do love the unity in the
love; and therefore likewise they understand not the 2 Timothy 5.
truth.

3. Whose hearts are blinded with the 2 Cor. 4
blindness of the wicked world, and with the blindness 1 Cor. 1.3.
of her dissentions, and chosen Col. 1.
holiness, for that they should not behold the light of the heavenly
cleernesse in the love.

4. For that cause also they cannot understand nor comprehend the service of
Love, which tends to the everlasting life. nor the upright Romans 8.
freedom, to the blessing of the manly generation, whereof we do witness.

5. For that same is our service, toward all those which love the good life
and the peace; namely, for to declare and show unto them, under the obedience
of the love, and assured way to the life, to the end, that they might all now
in this day of love, have a free 2 Pet. 1.
passage to the good life through Faith, for to live lovingly and peaceably in
the same life, ( Joh. 1. 1 John 1.
which was likewise from the beginning, and shall remain for ever, and unto the
which the manly generation is created) and that ^t might go well and prosper
with them perpetually.

6. That same is the everlasting life, that was Mat. 28. Act. 2.
published in times past unto the people, as an Evangelie or good message, for
that they should be saved therein.

CHAP. LII.
BUt oh, alas! we have now in this perilous time, very special cause to sigh
and mourn grievously, over the Esa. 6. and 59.
blindness of many people, and to bewail the same with great dolor of our
hearts and that chiefly, because there is now in this same day of love, 2 Mac.
2.
and of the mercy of God, so little knowledge of the good life of Peace and of
love to be found among them; and also, for that the same knowledge is desired
of so few, and yet much less loved. But they do almost every one delight to
walk in strange 4. Esd. 5. Mat. 7.
ways that stretch to contention and destruction, by which occasion, they live
in many molestations and deadly afflictions every where.

2. Therefore may we (with woefulness and ^ighing hearts) very jostly say, that
it is now a perilous Amos 5. Mat. 24. 2 Timothy 3.
time to be saved, or to escape or remain over to preservation. (Oh, what
venomous winds do there blow, to the desolation and destruction of men!) Yea,
it seems to be almost Mat. 19. and 24.
unpossible for the man to come to his salvation or preservation in Christ, or
to the lovely life of peace.

3. But yet is it easy, and Mat. 19.
possible with the Lord; namely, for all those that seek him with all their
Deuteronomy. 4. Jer. 29.
hearts, and under the obedience of the Love, do believe his Word of Truth,
whereof all false hearts have a lothsomnesse, and it is unto them a secret Mat.
13. 2 Cor. 4.
or unknown Treasure of wisdom.

4. Oh! when we behold all the perils and snares which are now presently in
the way, as lets or hindrances against the good life of peace, namely, by the
worldly foolishness, pride and corruptiblenesse, also by the many manner of
seditions of the Scripture-learned Mat. 6. and 15. and 23. Act. 7.
and chosen holiness, and again by the sundry sorts of conceited opinions of
men, so does our soul oftentimes suffer great sorrow, and that even herefore,
because that all understanding of the flesh, which is borne of the blood of the
flesh Genesis 6. 4 Esd. 3.
and earthly being, runs on so ignorantly after the knowledge of the godly
truth, and over-reacheth it self so grossly, in giving judgment in the
testimonies of the spiritual things.

5. For verily, many of the opinionated, or good-thinking wise ones, and of the
Scripture-learned sort, have with their good-thinking, understanding, or
arrogant wit of the flesh, made up themselves for to judge there-through the
truth of God, which is brought to light by us, and so have by the fleshly
conceiving, or mind of their Act. 7.
uncircumcised hearts, and unilluminated understandings, considered of, or
weighed our spiritual and heavenly testimonies of God, and of the holy Spirit
of the Love of Jesus Christ, Joh. 7. and 8.
according to the outward appearance, and judged them after the same manner.

6. Not only these our spiritual and heavenly testimonies of the spiritual
land of Promise, and of the spiritual Saints of God; but they have also
judged, according Joh. 7.8.
to their earthly and fleshly minds, other more spiritual and heavenly
testimonies of God, which are gone out from the holy Spirit of the love of God
and Christ, and that are set forth or published by us, and which have their
ministration unto spirit, and unto inward spiritual things, or do extend
thereunto, and have not rightly understood our Ministration, which guides to
the spiritual and heavenly; even like as the same is happened unto us by some,
and become manifest before our eyes, but chiefly by the principal ones in the
Scripture-learnednesse, and likewise by those which did advance and give forth
themselves to be 1 Timothy 1.
Treachers, and that seemed to be the most prudent and expert ones, in the
services, and also how resistingly many false hearts have made up themselves,
with their earthly and fleshly minds, against the truth of the spiritual and
heavenly testimonies of God, and his Promises, and against the holy Spirit of
Jesus Christ, and of the merciful love of God the Father, Heb. 10. 2 Pet. 2.
Jud. 1.
as blasphemers of their most holy goods, and likewise against us, who do
witness and publish forth Gods Word, his everlasting truth, out of those same
spiritual and heavenly goods, for to defame and persecute us, with much Mat. 5.
lying and falsehood.

CHAP. LIII.
BUt although many of them have grossly overreached themselves therein, yet
have some notwithstanding according to the imagination of their knowledge, run
on, or labored for the spiritual things, for that they would understand them;
also many have, according to their understanding of the flesh, testified of
them.

2. But seeing they have not sought their knowledge of the spiritual things in
the obedience of the Christian doctrine of the Service of Love, but in their
knowledge of the flesh, and so have taken on their understanding of the
knowledges of the spiritual things, out of the imagination of their own
knowledge; therefore have they likewise understood those same spiritual
things, according to the mind of their flesh, and witnessed of them in the same
manner also: For that cause likewise the right 1 Cor. 2
knowledge of the spiritual and heavenly understanding, has not in the
cleernesse of the true Sap. 5.
light, shined unto them.

3. Forasmuch then as they were Ephesians. 4.
yet estranged from the true light of life, and of love, and stood not
subjected under the love, nor to the requiring of her service; therefore have
they also made up themselves so much the stouter against us and against our
most holy Service of Love.

4. But all that which is happened unto us by them, and by all those that turn
them away from us, or which does yet daily happen unto us (as to slander or
speak evil of us, and reproachfully with many lies to defame and to persecute
us with falsehood) have we, for the love of Christ his sake, endured at their
hands, Mat. 5. Heb. 12.
in all patience, giving laud and thanks unto God with joy, for that he has
accounted us worthy for to suffer Act. 5.
reproach, slander, and persecution, for his love and truths sake, to the end,
that our most holy Service of Love, and the godly Doctrine of the same, might
in the proceeding on or continuance of our patience, so much the more break
through 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 6.
or come to light unhindered, and become generally known to be the true
God-service that God requires, and that it might also be known, that we are
unguilty of the false bruits that be laid to our charge behind our backs, and
that we do Minister the 2 Cor. 6
Word of the Truth of God and Christ, under the obedience of the Love, to the
peace and salvation of men.

5. For verily, this assured confidence have we in the Lord, that although our
Cause be oppressed or contemned by many for a certain time, yet shall
notwithstanding Eccles. 1.
in his time, the just or the right understanding ones commend our wisdom,
which God has graciously given to us, and laud God for the same.

6. But truly, those that do now charge, contemn, and with their venomous
Psalm. 14. Jer. 9. Romans 3.
Serpents tongues, sharply reprehend, or maliciously speak evil of us, and
persecute us, have not spoken evil of and contemned us only, but also Mat. 10.
Luke 10. Acts 9. 2 These. 4.
God himself, who is our true Master Builder of his house of Love, and have
judged his holy service of Love, through the which we do testify, and publish
abroad the upright righteousness before God and Men, for a most detestable
error, and so with their false judgment have drawn away Mat. 18.
many wavering hearts, from the same.

7. But alas! (the which out of the good nature of the Love, makes us sorry
for them) the judgment and the condemnation wherewith they have judged and
condemned us, is come upon themselves; Mat. 7. Romans 2.
for with all their judgment over us they have not condemned us, but
themselves, inasmuch as they are found guilty in that, which they have judged
over us.

CHAP. LIVE.
O My beloved hearts, in the Love of Jesus Christ, forasmuch now as we do
consider all this to stand thus over our enemies, and that it is become
manifest unto us, therefore let not their misunderstanding, and their
resistance against us, be any offense unto us; neither yet let us make up our
selves against them, Romans 12 1 Pet. 3.
to requite evil, but pray unto Mat. 5.
God for them, that the Lord will give unto them, and unto all erring or
strayed hearts, and unto all those which (out of their ignorance and
unskilfulnesse in the truth) do slander and persecute us, as likewise unto all
those that have turned them away from us and our godly Doctrine, Ephesians. 1.
eyes of true sight, and hearts of upright understanding, that they may see and
know their error, and turn them Eze. 18. and 33.
penitently to the Love and her Service, and so under the obedience of the
love, become amended touching all their errors and evil deeds, and may through
the Love and her Service, be raised up Esa. 35. Heb. 12.
again from their fall, or be set upright in the truth and godliness. O yea,
that same with prayer unto our God, is all our desire toward all our enemies,
to the end, that they might every one turn them to the love of Jesus Christ,
receive the Doctrine, and requiring of the Service of Love obediently, and so
under the obedience of the Love, might live in the upright godliness of Jesus
Christ.

2. Wherefore ye deerly beloved, for to avoid all perils of destruction, so
let not every man take upon him to be a Mat. 22. Jam. 3.
Teacher, or a Minister of the Word, much less a Judge of the Truth; for
therethrough brings he the more grievous Romans 2.
judgment and condemnation over himself.

3. For it is not every man's office, to be a Teacher or Minister of the holy
Word, but only his, that ( Exodus 28 Number. 17. Heb. 5.
like unto Aaron) is raised up, promoted, or chosen thereunto by God and his
Word, whose rod or stock verily, does also even like unto Aarons rod, wax
green, and blossom, and bears fruit; and his likewise, who in the first
Schoole-rule of the Christian Doctrine of the Service of Love, has like a
faithful Joh. 15. Acts 1.
Disciple of the Word, and lover of the true being of Jesus Christ, received
the Doctrine and Administration of the holy Word, from the Elders in the Family
of Love obediently with a simple heart, and so is grown up under the obedience
of the Love, in the holy and godly understanding, till unto the Ephesians. 4. Col. 2.
old age of the Man Christ, and taught to the Mat. 13.
Kingdom of the God of heavens.

4. Who does then also as a meet Elder and Household Father in the Family of
Love, Mat. 13.
bring forth out of his Treasure both the new and the old, in whom likewise
Christ with his Spirit of Love, has his Joh. 14. and 17.
dwelling and shape* and also his being, like unto a flowing, or John 7.
springing fountain of living waters.

5. Which living waters do then likewise flow John. 7.
from his body, with the which, the thirsty souls after the righteousness be
refreshed, and the Lords fields or tilled lands moistened or made wet, to a
fruitfulness, for to bring forth good fruits, which do serve the life of man,
to Apo. 22.
all healthfulnesse.

6. Behold such a one, which with his understanding and thoughts, is thus in
all 1 Pet. 1.
obedience to the gracious Word, and the requiring of his service of Love, Joh.
17. Ephesians. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
incorporated to the Sprit of God and Life of Christ, and knows Joh. 8*
the truth in that manner, he verily has rightly continued steadfast in the
Doctrine of Christ, and is meet likewise to minister Joh. 15. Acts 1.
the holy Word of Truth, and to be a Teacher of the people, and not those which
do yet carry the 2 Cor. 3
foreskin before their hearts, nor yet those which are still earthly Gal 1.
and fleshly minded, and so turning themselves away from us, and running forth
of themselves, do sow nothing else but pernicious seed among the people.

CHAP. LV.
WHerefore it is in like manner found true, that the fleshly-minded ones (which
sow upon the flesh, or which build upon the foreskin of their uncircumcised
hearts) do mow Gal. 6.
the corruption, and inherit the destruction.

2. But those that are Ier. 4. Col. 2.
circumcised on their hearts, in the laying away of the foreskin of the
sinful flesh, and in the obeying of the requiring of our most holy Service of
Love, are become spiritually minded, and so then (out of the upright being of
the love of Jesus Christ) do sow upon the Spirit, Gal 6.
or build upon the spiritual, which is the true being it self; those same do
receive or reap the fruits of blessing 2 Esd. 2.
in the everlasting immmortality, which do not perish, Joh. 15.
but continue for ever in the eternal life.

3. For all flesh, although it do also speak of spiritual and heavenly
things, through his knowledge, yet is it doubtless nothing else but like Esa.
40. 1 Pet. 1. Jam. 1.
the grass of the field, and all his garnishing of beauty and holiness, is
also like unto the flowers of the field; behold, the grass dries away, and
the beauty of the flowers of the field withers or decays.

4. But the spiritual good, the power of God, and his Sap. 1. and 7. Heb. 1.
living being (wherein all what is of God stands firm, and flows thereout)
remains steadfast, 1 Pet. 1.
unchangeable for ever; and in the same, or through the manifestation of the
same being, the Kingdom of the God of heavens, comes Luke 17.
inwardly in us, and that is the Joh. 1.17.
true light of the everlasting life.

5. Whose naked cleernesse, although the same be nothing else but light and
life, is Esa. 29. Mat. 11. and 13. 2 Cor. 4.
hidden, shut, and covered from all understandings and wisdoms of the flesh,
and from all those that are minded on the flesh, or that build thereon.

6. But it is manifest, and shines bright to the circumcised of heart, and to
the upright spirituall-minded ones, 1 Cor. 2
in a spiritual heavenly understanding, and the same cleernesse is the 1 John
1.
being of God from heaven, the upright Ephesians. 4.
righteousness and holiness, and the life Joh. 17.
of God in eternity.

7. Wherefore, ye deerly beloved, seeing that the Apo. 3.
door of life is now by Gods grace opened unto us, the Mat. 3.
Kingdom of the God of heavens, and the heavenly Jerusalem, Esa. 60. Apo. 21.
or City of Peace, descended down to us, and come neerby; therefore let us
take good heed unto such a time of the godly 2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
grace, and not neglect, despise or contemn the same, but as goodwilling
children of Faith take special heed unto it, and so in the Mat. 3. Acts 2. and
3.
doing of upright fruits of repentance, enter H^b. 4. and 10.
into the same, according to the Spirit, and live therein.

8. But not according to the thinking-good or imagination of our own hearts,
nor according to the mind of the earthly wisdom, wherethorow many have
estranged Ephesians. 4.
them from the truth of life; but according to the mind and requiring of the
Service of Love, and of the Spirit of the heavenly Sap. 1.7. Jam. 3.
wisdom, which extends to the land of the living, and City of Peace.

9. For if we will contiue safely kept from all s^ducing and destruction, and
enter rightly Heb. 4.
into the rest, according to the promises of God the Father, then must we
submit our selves 1 Reg. 15 1 P^t 1.
obediently under the gracious Word of the Lord, and the godly Doctrine of his
Service of Love, and so in the Spirit enter into the foresaid rich City of
peace, Gods secret understanding, through the nature of God, and taste therein
the spiritual heavenly things, and all life and sweetness; for even there in
the same, one is come to the Romans 8. Col. 1.
rest of all the Saints and Children of God, and there one eats of the wood
of life, that stands in the Genesis 2. Apo. 2.22.
midst of Paradise, and lives for evermore.

10. Which Paradise and place of rest is shut Genesis 3.
and hidden before the old man of error, and it shall likewise continue hidden
for ever before all those which (according the nature of Adam) are falling away
Esa. 59.
from the holy Commandment of God and Christ, and so are erring from the truth
of Jesus Christ and his Church; for those same are they that carry the right
Aprons Genesis 3. 2 Cor. 3.
or coverings before their hearts, which Adam has made him, which aprons or
coverings of Adam is the hiding of the transgressions or of the sins.

11. Therefore can no man see John 3.
the Kingdom of God, except the aprons (the taking on of Adam) be put off from
his heart, that is, that he do make manifest himself Pro. 28. Eccl. 4.17.
uncoveredly in his sins of disobedience toward God, and do forsake Romans 13. 1
Pet. 2. Heb. 12.
or lay away the same in the obedience to the gracious Word of God, and to the
Service of his Love, and that he even so becomes borne anew Joh. 3.
in the Spirit, and is become plain Job 1. Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 14.
and just, and simple, like unto a newborn Babe, and does grow up therein
obediently, taking nothing upon him any more, nor yet hiding himself any thing
at al before the face of God, nor before the Ministers of his gracious Word.

12. For whosoever does not thus simply receive the Kingdom of God, Mat. 10.
Luk 8.
as a child, he also shall not enter into it, but must remain Tess. 1.
separated from such a clearness of the godly light for ever, and not taste
Mat. 22.
or know any of the godly heavenly goods, much l^sse inherit them.

CHAP. LVI.
BEhold, because now that the craftiness of the old man is counted by the man,
therefore does likewise the noble Genesis 3.
rest, the Paradise of the Lord, and the Kingdom of the God of heavens, as also
his spiritual and heavenly Mat. 13.
riches remain shut, and covered or hidden from the man, and he cannot find the
way to the tree of life.

2. But the same stands 4 Esd. 8. Apo. 2. and 22.
open, and also uncovered before all those which in like manner, are open, or
Eccles. 4. and 17.
uncovered of heart before the Elders in the Family of Love; for those same
(even like unto Christ, and all his believers) are minded to nothing else, but
to life, peace and righteousness, and so then likewise, Jesus Christ the
gracious Word of the Lord, is unto them a Pro. 3.
tree of life in the Paradise of the Lord, and the true being of God the
heavenly Father, which Christ after the Spirit has his manifestation out of
the love, through her service, and so through his Spirit and service of Love, he
begets or teaches among us, the Mat. 11.
humility and meekness of heart, Ephesians. 4.
to unity of peace in all love.

3. Whosoever now is not of the mind of Adam, neither yet that the work of Adam
has through the Serpents counsel, captivated him in Genesis 3.
the knowledge, but that he unlearneth all in the same again through the
Service of Love, and is taught, Ephesians. 4. 1 Timothy 4.
or becomes taught in all love, according to the mind of Christ, he also
belongs Joh. 13.
unto Christ, and is in the holy City of rest and Peace, or he goes into the
same the right way.

4. Lo, such are the right believers, the children of life, and the warlike
Champions, which through the Apo. 7. and 12.
blood of the Lamb, have overcome, or are overcoming the evil, who do
possess, or shall possess all things with joy, and are a lovely people, Eze.
19. 1 Pet. 2.
a holy Kingly generation, and do eat the breat and drink the wine with Christ
and his holy ones, at the table of the Lord, Luke 22 Apo. 3.
in the Kingdom of the God of heavens.

5. Forasmuch then as they have in the Service of Love, turned Mat. 18.
themselves about to be obedient children, and have laid off the Deuteronomy. 10 2
Cor. 3.
foreskin of the old man from their hearts, therefore is likewise the Kingdom
of God 4. Esd. 8 Act. 7.
opened unto them, and the mystery of the same given them to Mat. 11. and 13.
understand; the which remains shut, unknown, L^k. 10. 1 Cor. 1.2.
and secret, before all the wise of the world, before all unregenerated rich of
spirit, and Scripture learned ones, as also before all unbelievers of the Love,
and before all those that blaspheme and resist the Service of Love, and that
are uncircumcised on the foreskin of the old man.

6. And as long as they are unbelieving and disobedient or resistant toward
the Love and her Service, so does not doubtless any of all their wisdom Esa.
29. 1 Cor. 1.
and learning, nor yet any searching in the depth of their understanding, nor
any subtilty in the knowledge, help or further them any thing for to come to
the same; but are much more in the way against them, or they do all stand as
lets unto them, to come to the 2 Cor. 11
simplicity of Christ.

7. Therefore is there nothing more needful for the man at the first, whereby
he may enter into the life, then that he do Mat. 11.18. Luke 14.
submit himself under the obedience of the Love, and so become taught in the
Service of Love for to unlearne again Mat. 16. Phil. 3.
all what he of himself has taken on and learned.

8. Now when he has in this sort, humbly yielded himself under the Service of
love Mat. 19.
and in the same has unlearned all his taking on, then does he in like manner
rightly receive the true Doctrine of the wisdom of God, and becomes taught in
all love.

9. But not according to a mind of the flesh, in the earthly 1 Cor. 1.2.
corruptible thing, but according to the mind of the Spirit of Christ, in the
heavenly everlasting goods.

10. Now when the new 2 Cor. 5
Creature in Christ is there appeared in the obedience of the Love, then is
also the old quite perished there; for behold, it is there become Esa. 43.66.
Apo. 21.
all new through Jesus Christ.

11. And that same is the gracious hand of God toward the man through his
love, and it is his promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth.

CHAP. LVII.
TO this Joh. 3. Romans 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
renewing in the Spirit of Christ, we are all called, ye dearly beloved,
because that we should be spiritually minded in the spirit of our minds,
whereby to inherit in that sort, with Christ, Mat. 13. Col. 2.
the spiritual heavenly riches, and to walk and deal before each other with
naked hearts in Ephesians. 4.
all love.

2. To the end now for to have, or to enter into this open-heartednesse and
love with each other (whereunto we do love all lovers of the truth, that have
diligently Phil. 3. Col. 3.
minded the love and the peace of Christ) we have with these present
testimonies, witnessed of the true Kingdom of God and Christ, as a Land or Apo.
11.
City of Peace, and described and figured forth the passage unto it, as a way
that men travel through, and the entrance into the Kingdom (wherein the Romans
12 Ephesians. 4.
renewing of the sense and mind is manifested) as a gate or door.

3. We have moreover signified or showed in writing (before the lover of the
Kingdom) all what he must Mat. 19.
forsake, if he will come to the good land of Peace, or enter into the Heb. 4.
rest of all the holy ones of God.

4. But not that the lover of the good land shall therefore think, that he must
first come to every one of the forementioned horrible places; or that he must
pass through them all, before he can come to the good City of Peace.

5. O no, ye dearly beloved: but the cause why we have marked out all the
abominations and desolations is, for to make known every place of deceit, 2
Cor. 2. and 11. Ephesians. 6. 1 Pet. 5.
and all seducing or leading away from the good land of life, to the end, that
no man should be let by any of those same, for entering into the noble Land full
of Life and Peace.

6. Also for this cause, for to warn every one that are lovers of the true
being, of all vain and false persuasions, because that if any thing thereof
should chance to meet them, they should not then be afraid, nor yet join to the
same, for it is all deceit and bewitching, and all Luke 9.14.
such things must be forsaken, if we will go into the good life of rest.

CHAP. LVIII.
IN what place soever now a lover of the good Land finds himself, being yet
for the present time without the same, he may then go out of Mat. 16. 2 Cor. 6.
and forsake it, and so (according to the counsel Tob. 4.
of the Elders in the holy understanding, in the Family of Love, endeavor
himself to proceed forward to the Psa. 37. Esa. 30.
submission, [that is, to a submitted being, without any desiring of self-wills
choosing, Mat. 10. and 16.
and to stand unbound or free from his selfnesse] and let him take unto him the
equity; and so enter through Gods holy nature, into Gods understanding, Joh. 10.
and 17.
the everlasting being of the heavenly truth, through which entrance into the
same, all minds and thoughts be released, and John 8.
made free from all what is vain and corruptible in the world, and from all
captivity to the earthly things and creatednesse, for to inherit even so the
eternal life, the Kingdom of the heavenly beauty, and the upright being of
Gods everlasting uncreatednesse, in all love perpetually.

2. That same is the everlasting Genesis 2.
perfection, wherein neither the thoughts of corruption, nor yet any mortality
can Apo. 21.
endure, but that which is pure, clean and clear, according to the spiritual
form of the heavenly things.

3. Behold, such is the Kingdom of Peace, Apo. 12. and 21.
the heavenly beauty, and the holy Land of Promise, to the Genesis 22.
blessing of all generations of the earth.

4. And that is the holy rest, Esa. 32. Heb. 4.
and the noble freedom, which God has reserved for the children of God, and
given them now 4 Esd. 7. Col. 1.
in the last time, for an everlasting inheritance, according to the Promises.

5. Now the only God of Life grant the same rest unto us all. Amen.

Take it to heart.

Charitas extorsit per H. N.


