Sr. John Nisbet of Dirleton, Lord Advocat, One of the Senators of the College
of Justice, And one of his Maties. most Honble. Privy Council etc.
DISC^^E IUSTITIAM blazon or coat of arms

D. Paton delin. R.White sculp.


SOME Doubts and Questions, IN THE LAW; Especially of SCOTLAND.

AS ALSO, SOME DECISIONS OF THE LORDS OF COUNCIL and SESSION:

COLLECTED and OBSERVED By Sir JOHN NISBET of Dirleton, Advocate to King
CHARLES II.

To which is Added, An INDEX, For finding the Principal Matters in the said
Decisions.

printer's or publisher's device

EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Closs, Anno Dom. M.DC.XCVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT, TO THE READER.
THE Deceast Sir JOHN NISBET of Dirleton, His Abilities in the LAWS, and
generally in all Learning, procured him the Employment of Kings Advocate, And
one of the Lords of Session, and other Honorable Places deservedly conferred
upon him, in the time of His late Majesty King CHARLES the Second.

His long Practice and profound Knowledge, in Our Laws, gave the Rise to the
following Doubts and Questions; Which, if he had Lived, he would have Answered
and Cleared; as he has done many of them, to the great satisfaction of our
Ablest Lawyers, and great improvement of our Law.

The Decisions are, What his Leisure, from public Office, could allow him to
Observe, and were ever thought so Succinct and Judicious, that most Lawyers
were at Pains, to cause Copy them from the common Manuscripts, though neither
full nor Correct; which now in the Printing is carefully helped.

At Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of July 1697. Years.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Do hereby Grant to George Mosman,
Stationer Burges of Edinburgh, his Heirs or Assigneys, The sole Privilege of
Printing and Selling a Book, Entitled, Some Doubts and Questions of the Law,
Especially of Scotland; As also, The Decisions of the Lords of Session,
Observed by Sir John Nisbet of Dirleton, Advocate to His Majesty King CHARLES
the Second: Together with, An Index to the said Decisions: And discharges all
other Persons whatsomever, to Re-print, Vend, Sell, or Import, any of the said
Books, for the space of nineteen Years, after the day and date hereof, under
the Pain and Penalty of the Confiscation of the said, Books, to the said George
Mosman, for his own use and behoof, and of the Sum of an hundred Pounds Scots,
to be paid by the Re-printers, Sellers, or Importers of the said Book to the
said George Mosman.

Extracted by Me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Cons.

LIST OF THE Several Heads of the following Doubts and Questions.
A.
ADjudications. page 1 Advocation by the Justices. 2. Alimenta. 3. Altarage.
Ib. Annexation to a Barony in another Shire. Ib. Annualrent. Ib. Annualrent for
Damnage. 4 Right of Annualrent. Ib. Relicts Annuity. 5. Annus Vtilis. Ib.
Appellatio. Ib. Appellatio a Camera Imperiali. Ib. De Appellatione a Praefecto
Praetorio, and aliorum Judicum sententiis. 6. Appellatio a Vicario. Ib.
Approbatio. Ib. Arrestment. 7. Arrestment of Conditional Debts. 8. Arrestment
Loused. Ib. Per Aversionem. Ib.
B.
Back-bonds to the Exchequer. Ib. Bairns Part. 9. Bond Heritable. Ib. Bond
Moveable. 10. Bonds of Provision to Children. Ib. Bond of Relief. Ib. Baron
Courts. 11. Bastard. Ib. Bishops. 12. Bishops Debts. Ib. Bodomaria page. Burghs
Liferent Escheat, Ib.
C.
Camera Imperialis. Ib. Captions. Ib. Casualities of Superiority. 13. Causa cum
qua Res transit. Ib. Cautioner and Relief. Ib. Chaplainrie. Ib. Charge to enter
Heir. 14. Chattels Real. Ib. Children and Creditors. Ib. Childrens provisions.
Ib. Civitas Ib. Clauses in Contracts of Marriage. 15. Coals. 16. Collation. Ib.
Commission not to Expire morte Mandatoris. 17. Commissioners to the Parliament.
Ib. Commontes. Ib. Common Appendant. 18. Communio. Ib. Compensation. Ib.
Composition for Entry. 19. Compriser. Ib. Comprising. Ib. Infeftments upon
Comprysing. 23. Conditio. Ib. Confession by Criminals. 24. Confirmation. Ib.
Confiscation. 26. Confusione tollitur obligatio. Ib. Conjunct-Fiar. 27.
Conquest. 27. Consensus. 28. Consensus Domini. Ib. Consent. Ib. Anent
Consistories; Whereby the Usefulness and Necessity of these Courts is evinced,
and Doubts and Prejudices, against them, are cleared. 29. Consolidation. 35.
Decreets contra Consortes. 36. Corporations. 37. Creditors of the Defunct. Ib.
Persons convict of Capital Crimes. Ib. Curator. Ib. Curatores ad Lites. Ib.
D.
Damnum. cum quis utitur Jure suo. 38. Deathbed. Ib. Debtor and Creditor. 39.
Nomina Debitorum. Ib. Strangers Debts. Ib. Debitum Annuum. 40. Debitum in Diem.
Ib. Decimae. Ib. Decreets of the Lords of Session. Ib. Deeds both inter Vivos,
and Mortis Causa. Ib. Dependence. 41. Destination of Succession. Ib. Desuetudo.
Ib. Dies coeptus. Ib. Dilapidation. Ib. Dishablitation. 42. Power to Dispone,
notwithstanding the giving away the Right of Fee. Ib. Dispositio collata in
arbitrium alterius. Ib. Disposition. 43. Actio ad Distractum. 43. Division of
the Duties of Lands, betwixt Buyer and Seller. Ib. Donatio inter Virum and
Vxorem. Ib. Donatio mortis Causa. 44. Donatio non acceptata. Ib. Donators upon
Recognition and Forefaulture. 45. Duels and Hame-sucken. Ib.
E.
Emancipatio. Ib. Contractus Emptionis, a Pretio incipiens, aut Mensura. Ib.
What way the Buyer may be urged to Enter. Ib. Entry of Assigneys upon
Resignation. 46. Entry upon Resignation by a singular successor. Ib. Liferent
Escheat. Ib. Escheat single. 48. Escheat without Backbond. Ib. Delivered
Evidents. 49. Exception against the Cedent, if always competent against the
Assigney? Ib. Executor. Ib. Executor Creditor. 52. Executor Nominate. Ib.
Executory. Ib. Extent. 54 Extinguishment of Rights. Ib.
F.
Faculty to alter. Ib. Faculty to Dispone. Ib. Jus Facultatis. Ib. Personal
Faculty. 55. Quae Facultatis sint? Ib. Quomodo intelligendum, Facultati non
praescribi? Ib. Faculty reserved to dispone. Ib. Fee. 56. De Feodo Pecuniae and
Nominum. 57. Feus. 67. F uda Nobilia. Ib. Fiar. Ib. Fiars of Bonds. 68. Fiars
in Tailies. 69. Fictio Juris. 70. Fiscus. Ib. Commissa Fisco. Ib. Flumina. Ib.
Flumina Publica. Ib. Forfaulture. 71 Forisfamiliation. 77 Funeral Charges. Ib,
G.
Gestio Haeredis. 78. Gift. Ib. Gift of Escheat with Backbond. 79. Gifts of
Forefaulture. Ib. Gifts of Recognition. Ib. Gift of Ward. 80. If Gifts of Ward
and Non-entry prejudge singular Successors? Ib. Goods belonging to the Rebels
at the Horn. Ib. Grana crescentia. Ib. Great Seal. 81.
H.
Heirs. Ib. Behaving as Heirs. 82. Heir of Conquest. Ib. Discussion of Heirs.
83. Heir and Executor. Ib. Heirs Male. 84. Obligements, in Contracts, in
favors of the Heirs of the Marriage. 85. Heirs Portioners. 87. Heirs of
Provision and substitute. Ib. Heirs of Tailie. Ib. Quo casu, Heirs of Tailie
may be considered as Creditors? 88. Haereditas. 89. Aditio haereditatis. Ib.
Haeres Contrahens. Ib. Repudiatio Haereditatis. Ib. Servus Haeres. Ib. Vltimus
Haeres. Ib. Heirship Moveable. 90. Money consigned for Redemption, whether
Heritable or Moveable? Ib. Sums Heritable or Moveable. Ib. Homologation. Ib.
Horning. 91. How far a Husband is liable for his Wifes Debt? Ib. De Hypothecis,
Vulgo Wadsetts. 92. Tacit Hypotheck. 94.
I.
Immobilia. Ib. Immobilia per applicationem and aliis modis. 95. Imposition
upon the Pint of Ale. Ib. Impositions of Burdens upon Shires. 96. Impositions
voluntary upon Shires Ib. Improbations. Ib. Impugning the Authority of
Parliament. Ib. Incendiarium. 97. Incorporations. Ib. Infeftment of Annualrent.
Ib. Base Infeftment. 98. Infeftment in a Right, both of Property and
Annualrent. Ib. Infeftment for the use and beho of of another. 99. Conditional
Infeftments. Ib. Public Infeftments. Ib. Inhibition. 100. Inhibition upon
Teinds 101. Insinuatio. Ib. Instance. 102. Instantia. Ib. Instrumentum
Guarentigiatum. Ib. Interdiction. Ib. Inter december Dies. Ib. Intrometter. Ib.
Invecta and illata. 103. Duobus Investitis per modum Confirmationis, sed
posterius acquirentis Jure prius confirmato, uter sit potior? Ib. Investitura.
104. Jura complexa. Ib. Juramentum. Ib. Jurisdictio. Ib. Jurisdictio Camerae
Imperialis. Ib. Jus accrescendi. Ib. Jus Mariti Ib. Jus Mariti and Relictae.
106. Jus Relictae. Ib. Jus Superveniens. Ib. Justice-General. 107.
K.
Nearest of Kin. Ib. KING. 108. King and Prince. Ib.
L.
Laudimium. Ib. Lawburrows for Burghs. Ib. In Lecto: Ib. Legacies. 110.
Conditional Legacies. Ib. Legal Reversion. 111 Legatars and Intrometters. Ib.
De Legatis. Ib. Legatum rei alienae. Ib. Legatum a Legatario acquisitum ante
mortem Defuncti. 112 Res eadem duobus Legata. Ib. Legitima Liberorum. Ib.
Legitimation per subsequens Matrimonium. 115. Marriage and Legitimation. 116.
Leuteratio. Ib. Libellarius Contractus. Ib. Liberi. Ib. Liferenter. Ib.
Executors of a Liferenter. 117. Liferents. Ib. Quando Dies cedit as to
Liferenters? 118. Vasallus Ligius. Ib. Limitation of Fees Ib.
Litiscontestation. 119. Quo casu Possessor in mala fide constituitur per
Litiscontestationem, and quando non? Ib. Locus Poenitentiae. Ib.
M.
Mare. 120. Marriage. Ib. Marriage Clandestine. 123. Materna Maternis. Ib.
Matrimonium. 124. Mensis. 125. Mensura Taxative and Demonstrative. Ib. Militia.
Ib. Miln. Ib. Ministers Stipends in a Reddendo. Ib. Minor. Ib. Minor non
tenetur Placitare. 126. Reduction upon minority. Ib. Decree against Minors.
Ib. Mobilia. Ib. Mobilium vilior possessio. Ib. Modus habilis. 127. Molendinum.
Ib. Molendina aquatica: Ib. Molendina Bannaria. Ib. Molendina navalia
Immobilibus accensentur: Ib. Molendina. (...) Ib. Districtus Molendini. 128.
Quomodo qui sunt in districtu Molendini cogi queant? Ib. An qui sunt in
Districtu alibi molere possint? Ib. An Extrui possit Molendinum quod noceat
vicino? Ib. An Molendinum possit Extrui sine licentia Principis? Ib.
Restagnatio Molendini. Ib. Vsus Molendinorum Juri Civili ignotus. 129. Vbi
convenit, ut pro Familia molatur, quid Juris si aucta sit? Ib. If a Mother and
her friends may succeed? Ib. Mutuum. Ib.
N.
Non-entry. 130. Novo damus. Ib. Nullitas ex verbis non licebit. 131. Clausula
ex unnc prout ex tunc. Ib. Nundinae. Ib.
O.
Oath of Coronation. 132. Qualified Oaths. Ib. Correspective Obligements. 133.
Mutual Obligements in Contracts. Ib. If Offices do Escheat by Horning? Ib.
Omissa and male appretiata. Ib. Operae. 134. Order of Discussing. Ib.
P.
Pactis Privatorum non Derogatur Juri Communi. Ib. Parliament. Ib. Passing from
a Right. 135. Patents of Honor. Ib. Pecunia Pupillaris. Ib. Pensions granted
by the King. 136. Personalis Actus. Ib. Pignora. Ib. Plenishing; If a Wife be
provided to a part of it? Ib. Possessor. 137. Poinding of the ground. Ib.
Prerogative. Ib. Prescription. 139. Prescription against the King. 140.
Presentation upon Forefaulture. 141. Process against Strangers. 142.
Procuratories of Resignation. Ib. Promise to Dispone, not in writ. Ib.
Protections. Ib. Provisions in favors of Bairns. 143. Provision in Bonds. Ib.
Provisions in Charters. Ib. Provisions in Contracts. 144. Provisions in favors
of Daughters. Ib. Publica. Ib. Pupils. 145.
Q.
Quartering. Ib. Quorum. Ib.
R.
Ratihabitio. Ib. Jus Ratium. 146. Jura Realia in Re and in Rem. Ib. Rebellion.
Ib. Whether the Rebels Goods ought to be Liable to Creditors? Ib. Recognition.
147. Redemption Heretable or Moveable. 148. Order of Redemption. Ib. Reduction.
Ib. Reduction Ex capite Fraudis. 149. Infeftment after Reduction. Ib. Reduction
Ex capite Metus. Ib. Reduction upon Minority. Ib. Reduction Ex capite Lecti.
150. Re-entry after Redemption. Ib. Regalia. Ib. Regality. 151. Writs
registrate, that cannot be found in the Register. Ib. Registratio. 152. Regum
Contractus. 154. Relief of Cautioners. 155. Relocation. Ib. Reluitio seu
Retractus. Ib. Remissions. Ib. Renounciation. Ib. Renounciation by Daughters at
their Marriage. 156. Renunciatio Juri Publico. Ib. Res Fiscales and res
privatae Regis. Ib. Re-seafin upon Reduction. Ib. Reservation in favors of
Relicts 157. Resignation. Ib. De Resignationibus. 158. An Resignatio in Manibus
Domini Superioris, alienantem penitus devestiat? Ib. An ex Persona
Resignatarii, and ejus vel obitu vel delicto, Custodia Haeredis and alia
emolumenta Domino directo obveniant? Ib. An in Feudis, quae de Domino Rege
tenentur, idem Jus sit, adeo ut per Resignationem Vasallus devestiatur? 159. Si
Alienatione facta, and ex ea Resignatione; alia postea fiat, and ex ea etiam
Resignatio in favorem alterius, isque primus Investitus fuerit: and post eum
prius acquirens: Quaeritur uter Potior? 161. An is qui in Dominium directum
successit Titulo singulari, teneatur Acquirentem in vasallum recipere ex
Resignatione in manibus Authoris? 164. An Superior nedum Resignatarium ejusque
haeredes, sed Cessionarios investire teneatur? 165. De Resignationibus a Domino
directo acceptatis, An devestiant Resignantes? 166. Retention. 171. Retours.
Ib. Retoured Duty. Ib. Return of Lands to the Superior, upon a Provision. 172.
Return of Lands to the King, failieing of Heirs Male. Ib. Reversion. Ib.
Reversions of Comprysings against appearand Heirs. 173. Reversion Personal.
174. Legal Reversion competent to Idiots, etc. 175. Rights made by Dyvours Ib.
Fraudulent Rights in prejudice of Creditors. 176. Right a non habente
potestatem. Ib. Rights ad Tractum futuri Temporis. Ib. Right in Trust. 177.
Ripae and Ripatica. Ib. Quando Dies cedit in Grass Roums, when there is
Question betwixt Fiars and Liferenters? Ib.
S.
Act Salvo. 179. Seasin. Ib. Registration of Seasins. Ib. Special Services and
Precepts of Clare constat. Ib. Servitude and Extinguishment. thereof. Ib. Lords
of Session. 180. Sheriffs. Ib. Ships. Ib. Solarium. 181. Sponsalia. Ib.
Statuta. Ib. Steelbow and Heirship. Ib. Strangers. Goods or Debts belonging to
Strangers. Ib. Subjects living Abroad. Ib. Substitutes. 183. Substitutio. Ib.
Substitution in Bonds. Ib. Substitution in Legacies. 185. Successio in
Maternis. Ib. Successio in Stirpes. 186. De Successione in Feudo amisso, and
quo Jure censenda, utrum Haereditatis an Conquestus? Ib. Successor Titulo
lucrativo. 191. Singular Successors. 193. Sums heretable and movable. Ib. Sums
moveable. 194. Eldest Superior. Ib. Superior mediate. Ib.
T.
Tack. Ib. Back-Tack and Prorogations. 196. Tack of Teinds. Ib. Tailies. 197.
Tailie altered. 201. Teinds. 202. Teind of Fish. Ib. Proving the Tenor. Ib.
Decreets for proving the Tenor. 203. Terce. Ib. Territorium. 205. Testament.
Ib. Testament Execute. 206. Testament and the Wifes part. Ib. Testes. 208.
Third and Teind. Ib. Titles of Honor. Ib. Titular. 209. Tocher. Ib.
Quaestiones de Tractatu Suedico, and Bonis prohibitis Vulgo Counterband. 210.
Posterity of Traitors. 214. Transumpts. 215. Trebellianica. Ib. Trust. Ib.
Trustees in Infeftments. Ib. A Trustee committing Treason. Ib. Tutors. 216.
Tutor and administrator of Law. 217. Tutor Ratione Rei. Ib. Tutory. Ib.
V.
Re-entering of Vassals. 218. Vectigalia and Pedagia. Ib. Vinco Vincentem. Ib.
U.
Union. Ib. Vniversalia Augmentum recipient. 219. Quando Vniversitas delinquit?
Ib.
W,
Wadsets. Ib. Wadset Heretable or Moveable. 220. Wadset proper. Ib. Ward. 221.
Ward Lands. 222. Taxt Ward. 223. Warrandice. Ib. Infeftment of Warrandice. 224.
Waste. Ib. Witnesses Remitted. Ib. Witnesses in case of Treason. Ib. Women
Witnesses. Ib. Obligements to employ Sums of Money, for Provision of Wives.
225. A Woman's Jointure. Ib. Woods. 226. Wrack. Ib.
Z.
The case of the Admirality of Orknay, and Zetland, Represented in behalf of
the King, in Answer to the Duke of Lennox's Claim thereto. Ib.
ERRATA in the Doubts etc.
PAge 2. lin. 16, after posterior add first. p. 10. l. 21. given read got. p.
16. l. penult. dele or. p. 19. l. ult. place the comma after only. p. 23. l. 8.
right r. burden. p. 25. l. 3. was r. is. Ibid. dele and. p. 26. l. 13. after
Disponner add a me and de me. p. 61. l. 22. r. in comperto. p. 82. l. 11. of
Kin r. Heir of Tailie. p. 83. l. 12. after unles add, Tailied. p. 84, l.
penult. Males ls. 1. Males are. p. 99. l. 19. after use add of. p. 102. l. 29.
1. Confirmatione. p. 114. l. 7. aditur r. auditur. ibid. l. 41. r. pertinebat.
p. 122. l. 20. nor. r. but. p. 130. l. 7 Immediate r. mediate. p. 133. l. 10.
against the Price r. against the Buyer. p. 170. l. 45. r. oblectari. p. 184. l.
11. null, r. Moveable. p. 195. l. ^9. second r. first. p, 198. l. 8. dele male.
p. 218. l. 14. after but add If,

SOME Doubts and Questions, IN THE LAW, Especially of SCOTLAND.
A.
Adjudications.
BY the Act of Parliament, upon Comprisings or Adjudications for a Sum of
Money, The Superior may be forced to enter, or to pay the Debt, Quaeritur, If
he may be urged to enter, upon Adjudications proceeding upon Dispositions, in
prejudice of the Superior, by obtruding a Vassal; seeing in that case he has not
Retractum Feudalem?

A Vassal having made a Disposition, or granted a Bond for Disponing his Lands,
will the Superior be obliged to Infeft upon Adjudication? Ratio dubitandi.
That the Superior, by the Act of Parliament, is obliged only to Infeft
Comprysers, or Adjudgers being Lawful Creditors, and he has Retractum Feudalem
paying the Creditor: And the Debtor has Retractum Legalem, which is not in the
case of Dispositions.

If Lands should be Adjudged from the Appearand Heir of Ward-lands, Whether
will the Appearand Heirs Marriage be due, and affect the said Lands in
prejudice of the Adjudgers? Answer. Albeit that it appears, that Marriage
should be of the nature of Ward, which is not Real as to singular Successors;
the Superior having only Right to the Duties, which he may uplift; And ex stilo
of a novo damus, Marriage is not reckoned amongst real Encumbrances; Yet in the
case of Thornidikes, the Lords has found Marriage Real.

Whether, as Reversions that are comprysed need no Intimation, In Respect of
the Series of Solemnities that is in Comprysings, By which they become so
public, that they are presumed to be known to the Person Liable, If there be
not Eadem Ratio in Adjudications, being now of the nature of ordinary Decreets?

If at least there be a difference betwixt Bonds and Reversions; So that, as to
Bonds, when there is a Competition of Two Comprysers, The Posterior intimating
should be preferred?

If Superiors, who are Subjects only, will be obliged to receive Adjudgers to
be their Vassals, having Adjudged not for Debt, but upon Dispositions? And if
the King be in another Condition?

If, upon a Disposition, The Receiver should obtain Sentence for Damnage and
Interest against the Disponer his Heir for Implement, If in that case, the
Adjudger ought to be received? Ratio Dubitandi, That Primordium inspiciendum
est; and upon the matter there was not a Debt ab initio?

If a Reduction Ex capite Minoritatis, not being intented at the instance of
the Minor, Jus Actionis may be Adjudged?

An Heretable Bond being Adjudged, Though there be no necessity of Intimation,
because Adjudications and Comprysings are public Rights upon Record.
Quaeritur, If the Debtor, paying bona fide to the person, to whom he granted
the Bond, will be in Tuto, the said Adjudication not being intimate? Answer. It
is thought, that he should be in Tuto, seeing Intimations are required for Two
Effects. Viz. Either to complete the Right be Assignation, or to certiorate the
Debtor that he make payment to no other person: And though an Adjudication be
sufficient, as to the said first Effect, an Intimation is necessary as to the
other, unless the Debtor be called in the Adjudication.

Advocation by the Justices.
IF the Justices may Advocate to themselves Criminal Processes, depending
before Lords of Regality, or other Judges? It is thought, The Lords of
Justiciary cannot Advocat: The taking or Advocating Processes, from a Competent
Judicatory, upon Reasons of Advocation, being a Power and Prerogative belonging
to his Majesty's Supreme Judicatories of Session and Council. And Reasons of
Advocation, either upon Suspicion, or some other Reason merely Civil or of
State, belong not to the Cognizance of the Justices, but to the Lords of
Session and Council. If they were to Advocate, the Reasons of Advocation
behooved to be first discust; and what could be the method, since all Processes
before the Justices are so peremptory, That Caution must be found both by the
Pursuer and Defender.

Alimenta.
COnstituto semel Alimento, quo nihil in jure magis favorabile, aut magis
personale, de eo nec Alienatio nec Transactio rite celebratur; datur enim ut
persona exhibeatur and utcunque vitam toleret; Mirum igitur Advocatos primi
ordinis tanto conatu and boatu summa open annisos, ut Judicibus persuaderent aut
imponerent, asserentes Alimentum, uxori constitutum juri Mariti obnoxium esse,
vel saltem creditoribus Mariti esse integrum illud afficere; Quod enim ossibus
haeret nec a persona cui competit avelli aut alienari potest, illud nec juris
Ministerio, aut fictione transfertur; Quum igitur Alimentum adeo personale sit
(ut superius diximus) ut alienari nequit, ita ut ab uxore nubendo in Maritum
non possit transferri tacita and quasi alienatione: Sublato autem jure Mariti,
jus Creditorum quod subit in consequentiam and ut accessorium corruit, nec
subsistit magis quam accidens sine subjecto. Broomhall contra Darsie, Julii 7.
1678.

Altarage.
SOme Lands being Founded, by a Burges of Dumfermling, to an Altar in the
Church of Dumfermling, for Maintenance of a Chaplain at Saint Marys Altar
there; And it being provided by the Foundation, that the Founder and his Heirs
Male should Present the Chaplain; The said Lands being after Fewed, and since
Disponed Quaritur, How shall the purchaser be Infeft? This case is not under
the Act of Parliament anent Laick Patronages; The case there being of
Patronages, whereof there is Infeftment holden of the King, whereas the
Patronage in Question, is not by Infeftment, but provision as said is: It is
thought, that the Chaplain is Superior: And if there be none, a Chaplain
should be presented. Caribber.

Quaeritur, The Patronage being to the Heirs Male of the Founder, and if they
do not present within (...) Days, The Dean of Gild of that Town should present,
Whether the Heir-Male may Dispone the Patronage? Ratio dubitandi. The Provision
in the Foundation, is not in favors of Assigneys, and the Founder had
confidence only in his Heirs; And such an Interest being Religious, and
provided to a Family, with the said substitution, is not in commercio.
Randifurd.

Annexation to a Barony in another Shire.
WHat is the effect and import of Annexation of Lands, lying within one Shire,
to a Barony lying within another? Whether it be Annexation only, that one
Seasin may be sufficient, for all the Lands, though in several Shires: Or that
Inhibitions, and other Diligence should be used at the Mercat Cross, where the
Barony lies?

Annualrent.
AN whole Barony of Land, being affected with an Annualrent, and being
thereafter Disponed in several parcels to diverse persons; If one of the said
Purchasers should be distressed, for the whole Annualrent, May he have recourse
against the others, for their proportional parts, they being in rem correi
debendi?

A Person being Infeft in an Annualrent irredeemably, so that neither the
Heretor may Redeem, nor the Annualtenter may require his Money, and the
Annualrenter not being Creditor, but upon the matter Emptor annui reditus,
Quaeritur, Whether such Annualrents will be liable to subsequent Laws,
restricting and lessening Annualrents? Ratio dubitandi, These Laws do militate
only in the case of Mutuum, which is not here; There being neither Sors, nor
Vsura, nor Debitum, as to the principal Sum; And though such Annualrents be
constitute with a respect to the Sum that was paid, and the Annualrents
thereof current for the time, That does not alter the case; seeing the property
of Lands is only bought with the like consideration, And the Annualrents of
Money might have been heightened, and the Annualrenter wants the benefit
competent to him in the case of mutuum, viz. In the case of Money lent out for
Annualrent, he might uplift the Sum, and employ it more profitably than for a
small Annualrent.

An Annualrent being Disponed to be uplifted out of Lands and Teinds, and
Infeftment following thereupon. Quaeritur, What will be the Effect of the said
Right as to the Teind, seeing the Ground cannot be Poinded for the same; these
not being Fundus? Answer, The Right of the Teinds may be apprysed, and a
personal Action will be competent against the Heritor of the Teinds, during his
occupation.

An Annualrent being disponed, to be by Infeftment out of several Lands lying
discontigue; Quaeritur, If the Disponer may unite the same, so that one
Infeftment, taken at one of the Lands, may be sufficient for the others?

Annualrent for Damnage.
Quaer. IF the Defender should be liable for Annualrent of the price, in so far
as it is more, nor the Worth of the Lands? It is thought Not, because the Rate
is not certain, and the Defender may get a Buyer at the same price; And that
the Defender was in bona fide to contract with a Pupil so authorized, and if he
have prejudice, he should have recourse against his Tutors Representatives; And
Annualrent is not due for Damnage and Interest until it be declared. Tweeddale
contra Drumelziar, vide Reduction upon Minority litera M.

Right of Annualrent.
A Person having disponed Lands, with a Procuratory of Resignation and
Infeftment to the Buyer of the Lands, and for security to himself of a part of
the Price for an Infeftment of Annualrent redeemable upon payment of the Sum,
and with a Clause likeways that the Infeftment shall expire. Quaeritur, 1. If
there be prejudice to the Buyer, that his Right should be so affected, being
his Ground-right? Answer, It is thought there is none; Seeing upon payment, if
the Party desire, There may be a Renunciation, upon the back of both Charter
and Seasin, relating to another of the same Date, to the effect it may be
registrate. 2. Quaeritur, If the said Right, being to be holden of the
Superior, may be extinguished without Resignation? Answer. It, being only a
redeemable Right, after Redemption, in strictness of Form, cannot be resigned,
because it is loused. And formerly, in Wadsets of Property, the Superior, upon
the Redemption, did grant Precepts; and a Right of Annualrent cannot be
resigned for a new Infeftment given to the Heretors Superior, that being
inconsistent with the Property in one Person; And therefore, a Decree of
Redemption, with the Clause foresaid Resolutive in case of Redemption, relating
to both, does sufficiently extinguish it. And if there should be a Resignation
in the Superiors hands, it should not be in favorem, for the Reason foresaid,
or ad Remanentiam; But to the effect the Annualrent might be renounced, and
consolidate with the Property, with the Superiors consent.

Relicts Annuity.
WHen a Husband is obliged, and his Heirs, to pay an Annuity to his Wife in
Liferent; If other Creditors be about to do Diligence and Comprise after his
Death, Quaeritur If the Relict may not pursue the Heir to secure her, and for
that effect to grant Infeftment of Annualrent, and upon a Decree Adjudge an
Annualrent upon that Ground? Quando aliquid conceditur aut disponitur,
conceduntur omnia sine quibus non potest explicari: And the Obligement for the
Annuity will be otherways Void.

Annus Vtilis.
ANnus utilis Duplex est, 1. Ratione initii, ut initium sit utile, and
postmodum Dies continui. 2. Ratione omnium dierum, ut actor habeat potestatem
agendi, reus respondendi, and Dies sint judiciales. These. Besold. in Lit. I.
51. vid. Injuria.

Appellatio.
APpellatio non permittitur in foro Saxoniae, sed in ejus locum successit
Leuteratio, ad eum finem introducta, coram eodem Judice, ut gravamina errore
forte litigantium, vel negligentia Judicis illata, brevi manu reparentur, sed
hujus rei abusus perspicuus est. Vide Leuteratio, Besold. These. Litera. l. 53.

Appellatio a Camera Imperiali.
APud Germanos, cum sit ultimum Judicium Camera, ab ea non appellatur ne tamen
sua potestate abutatur, constitutum est judicium Revisorium, ad quod ij qui per
iniquitatem aut negligentiam Assessorum laesos se existimarent, provocare and
Revisionem petere possent; per Commissarios Imperatoris, and Statuum Imperii,
ad id deputatos, adversus sententiam sine dolo, non tamen sine errore, aut
culpa latam. Fritschii Exercitat. juris publici, pars. 2. exercit. 1. n. 88.
and sequen.

Revisio habet effectum Executionis suspensivum, 91. Ibid.

Judicium Camerale cum non a solo Imperatore, sed a Statibus suam acceperit
authoritatem, tum Imperatoem, tum Status repraesentat, Ibid. n. 83.

Camerae Praesidem and Assessores initio constituebat Imperator, sed Ordinibus,
consentientibus, id deinceps mutatum, ut Assessores ab Ordinibus
praesentarentur Ibidem.

Imperator causas in Camera caeptas, avocare non potest; quia per modum
Contractus in ordinationem Camerae consensit, and ideo ad ejus observantiam de
jure tenetur, Ibid. n. 84.

De Appellatione a Praefecto Praetorio, and aliorum Judicum Sententiis.
LIcet ab iis ob eorum Excellentiam non liceat provocare, iis tamen qui Laesos
se affirmant supplicandi Licentia permittitur, and remedium datur per
Supplicationem ex gratia, non per viam Restitutionis ex Justitia, praesertim
cum sententia lata est contra Jus Litigatoris. These. Besoldi. p. 557. litera L.

Appellatio a Vicario.
AVicario ad eum cujus est Vicarius, non appellatur, cum utriusque idem sit
Tribunal. L. Romana 3. de appellationibus sexto Decret. L. 1. and 2. Cod. De
Officio ejus, cujus vice alter judicat. Sigismund: Scaccia de Appellationibus.
q. 8. n. 61.

Approbatio.
1mo. Nulla Exceptio aut allegatio in foro magis trita aut frequentior est illa
de Approbatione; aut (ut loquimur) de Homologatione, quae illa regula niti
videtur, quod approbo non reprobo: Sed cum omnis definitio in jure sit
periculosa, and ista ut omnis materia Brocardica variis substringatur
limitationibus; aut enim Approbatio juris alicujus, celebratur expressa
ratificatione and id agitur ut approbetur, and eo casu reprobare quod
approbavit nulli licet, nec honestum est: aut aliud agitur, sed ex actu
colligitur and infertur approbatio, and eo casu dispiciendum quid actum, and
actus agentium ultra eorum mentem and intentionem haud operantur. v. g. Emi
praedium, ratus illud ad venditorem pertinere ut optimum maximum, nec Servituti
aut Reversioni (ut loquimur) seu Retractui obnoxium; emersit adversarius
Sempronius asserens servitutem aut jus praedii Reluendi sibi competere; ejus
vel potentiam veritus, vel alia ratione impulsus, cum eo transegi, isto jure
vel mihi cesso vel acceptilato, sed Titius idem jus servitutis aut Retractus ab
eodem authore adeptus, sed potius quia anterius: Si ex eo contra me ageret,
mihi contra jus Retractus aut servitutis excipienti haud obtrudi posset me jus
homologasse and approbasse; eo quod cessionem, aut acceptilationem ejus
stipulatus fui, ea enim transactione id tantum agebatur, ut litis ansa
praecisa, conditio mea melior non deterior foret; and ut mihi consulam
acquirendo jus, si quod erat penes Sempronium, non vero ut jus aliquod a me
alienem.

2do. Eadem ratione, si juris mei ignarus praedium meum conduxi, aut post
locationem Dominium ejus nactus, and domini forte haeres sum; in possessorio,
locatore de mercede agente, de jure meo exceptio haud admittenda est, nemo enim
sibi causam possessionis mutare potest: nec minus possessione reddita jus meum
integrum and illibatum superest, nec in petitorio, aut declaratorio obest
conductio, aut exceptio, Quod approbo non reprobo; conducendo siquidem praedium
quod ignarus meum esse, alienum rebar and locantis, id mihi erat propositi, ut
jus in eo consequar, non ut jus in alium transferam: and consensui, sine quo
nec est, nec esse potest alienatio, nil magis contrarium quam error.

Arrestment.
IF Arrestment be Pignus Praetorium, and does so affect, that in whatsoever
hands the thing arrested comes, it will be liable thereto? Or if it be only a
Diligence, and upon the matter of the nature of Inhibition in mobilibus, so
that the Debtor dying, or the subject that is arrested being Poinded or
Comprysed, the Arrestment will be ineffectual?

If the Goods in the Hands of the Debtor, upon Arrestment, may habili modo be
craved to be forthcoming? Or if habilis modus of all Goods (but Money) be to
Poind or Apprise: the Propriety of Corpora being only transmitted per
Traditionem?

If Arrestment upon a registrate Bond may be loused being before the Term of
Payment?

Whether, where there is nothing due by a Person in whose hands Arrestment is
made the time of the Arrestment, the same will affect a supervenient Debt?

If Arrestment die with the Debtor, or does affect after his Decease?

If a Bond for lousing Arrestment be void through the Debitors Decease?

If at least an Arrestment upon a Decree, be of an other nature than that upon
a Dependence, being in effect Pignus Praetorium, and Execution pro tanto; or if
it should be at the most, like a Denounciation, whereupon Comprising has not
followed in the Defuncts time, which therefore is void?

Albeit an Arrestment does not import a Right of Hypotheck, and that
notwithstanding, an other Creditor may poind. Quaeritur, If at least, it should
have that Effect, That the Person in whose hands the Arrestment is made, cannot
pay the Debtor in prejudice of the Arrester: and that as he cannot pay the
Debtor, so after his decease he cannot pay his Heir nor Executor, being eadem
Persona?

Executors being in Competition upon Arrestment to make forthcoming, Whether
they should come in all pari passu, notwithstanding some be before, and some
after; as in the Case of Comprisings being both at one time, though the
Denounciation be at several times?

Quaeritur, If an Arrestment does affect Debts due by the Person in whose hands
the Arrestment is made contracted after the Arrestment? Ratio Dubitandi,
Inhibition does affect Lands acquired thereafter; and Arrestment, as to such
things as are the Subject of Arrestment, is of the nature of Inhibitions, and
there is eadem ratio as to the Interest of the Creditor.

Arrestment being made of a Sum, due by a moveable Bond, bearing Annualrent,
and of all profits due to the Debtor by the said Bond. Quaeritur, Whether the
said Arrestment should be effectual, not only for the Annualrents already run,
but these that should accrue thereafter? The same Question may be as to duties
of Lands. Ratio Dubitandi, Quod non est, aut nullum est, nullum sortitur
effectum. And Arrestment of what is not yet extant, is accidens sine subjecto.
It is thought, That there is a difference betwixt a Debt, that is not neither
in sp^, nor obligatione; and conditional Debts, which though the Condition be
not existing, may be arrested; and the Condition existing, the Arrestment will
be effectual: and a fortiori, Annualrents, and Mails, and Duties, may be
affected by Arrestment, seeing, from the date of the Obligation, dies cedit,
though non venit.

If a Debtor be in Possession of a Coal, or of a Miln in his own hand, what
course can be taken by a Creditor, at whose Instance there is a Dependence, to
secure the Profits, in case he prevail?

What is the Reason of Difference betwixt Arrestment and Inhibition, as to that
Point, seeing Arrestment affects only what belongs to the Debtor for the time?
Answer, The Arrestment relates to Goods and Debts, the time of the Arrestment;
and Inhibition is simply, that the Debtor should not dispone his Lands and
Estate; and Arrestments are a Diligence against the Party who is Debtor, or
has any Goods in his Hands belonging to the Arresters Debtor himself.

Arrestment of Conditional Debts.
IF a Creditor should arrest a Sum due to his Debtor upon a Wadset, in case of
Redemption; What will the Import be of such an Arrestment? Answer. If
redemption follow, and after the Order another Creditor arrest; It is thought,
That the Arrestment before will be preferable; as in the case of the Arrestment
of a conditional Debt, which will be drawn back, Existente condition, vide
Wadset Quaest: 1 ma. Litera W.

Arrestment Loused.
QVaeritur, If upon a Dependence, or Bond unregistrate, there be Arrestment
laid on, and the same be loused; and thereafter, the Goods arrested be poinded,
The Cautioner for lousing the Arrestment will be liable? Ratio Dubitandi is,
That the Goods were not fraudfully put away by the Debtor. Quaeritur, If after
the Arrestment, the Debtor contract Debts, and the Goods be poinded for the
said Debt, contracted after the lousing the Arrestment, Quid Juris, Will the
Cautioner be liable?

Per Aversionem.
AVersione emere, aut locare dicimur, cum universaliter and uno pretio vendimus
aut locamus: Duobus enim modis locatio fit, vel per Aversionem vel ut in pedes,
vel mensuras, merces praestetur. These. Bes. verbo Buschstauff. 127.

B.
Back-bonds to the Exchequer.
THE Exchequer having granted Gifts: v. g. of Recognition, or others, but upon
Back-bonds in favors of Creditors, and of the Wife and Children; So that they
have reserved no Interest to the King, but to themselves only to regulate and
arbitrate the dispenceing the Benefit of the Back-bond, in favors of
Creditors and the Wife and Children; May they proceed, and apply that Benefit,
in favors of such as apply to them, without calling the other Parties? It is
thought, That the Lords of Exchequer are to be considered as Arbitri, and that
their Arbitrium is regulatum, and should not be used, without citeing of all
these, who have any Interest; that upon full hearing of all Parties, they may
proceed.

Bairns Part.
IF a Son get a Portion in order to live upon it seorsum, and out of his
Fathers Family. Quaeritur. If he can be thought a Bairn, and claim a
Bairns-part, seeing he has not granted a Discharge, nor accepted the same in
Satisfaction. James Cheisly.

There being Three Heirs of diverse Marriages, and certain Provisions in
favors of the Heirs of the Marriage, being made in the respective Contracts of
Marriage. Quaeritur. If (there being no other Bairns in familia) they will have
their Bairns-part, notwithstanding they are Heirs? And if they have, Quaeritur.
If they must confer their Provisions, if they be unequal? Answer. They will
come in as Bairns. And as to the second Quaerie, It is thought, they should not
confer; seeing they have their Provisions, not simply as Heirs, but as Children,
by the said Prosions.

Bond Heretable.
IF a Bond bearing an Entail of a Sum. Viz. To the Creditor and the Heirs of
his Body, which Failieing to a Brother, or Heir of a Brother, who would not
succeed either him or his Children; be Herotable, in Respect of the Entail,
though Executors be not excluded, neither does it bear a Clause of Infeftment?

A Band being granted to a Husband, and his Wife the longest Liver of them Two,
and the Heirs of the Marriage, which Failieing, to the Husbands Heirs and
Assigneys whatsomever. Quaeritur. Whether the said Bond belongs to the Heirs or
Executors of the Husband. Ratio Dubitandi, It is granted since the Act of
Parliament 1641. And the Act of Parliament 1661. and the Act of Parliament
1641, are positive, that all Bands for Sums of Money bearing Annualrent are
Moveable, Except in the two cases therein expressed, viz. Of an obligement to
Infeft, Or of a Clause Excluding Executors. And on the other part, the said
Acts seem only to intend Bonds containing payment of Annualrent for profit,
which upon that account before the said Act were Heretable after the Term:
Whereas the Bond in Question is not only Heretable upon the account foresaid of
payment of Annualrent; But because the same is expressly Tailied, and provided
in favors of Heirs, and in the first place of Heirs of Provision of the
Marriage: And the Sum is of purpose Heretably fixed for a Liferent to the Wife
and a right of succession to the Bairns of the Marriage, so that the Husband
cannot Test of it; And it cannot fall under Executory ab intestato, in
prejudice of the said Tailie: And is of the same Nature, as if a Bond were
taken to a Man and his Heirs Male, which would not be Moveable, seeing it
implies the Clause excluding Executors.

When a Bond is taken to the Creditor, and Failieing of him by Decease to
another person, bearing only Annualrent and no Hererable Clause, Quaeritur; If
the Creditor to whom it is granted may Dispose of it by Testament? Ratio
Dubitandi, it seems not to be Heretable by the Act of Parliament: On the other
part the said Substitution imports the Executors to be excluded, and a Testator
cannot dispose by Testament of what ab intestato could not fall to Executors:
And though the Creditor be Fiar and may dispose of the said Sum, yet he cannot
do it on Deathbed; the same being an Heretable Sum.

If at least after the Death of the Creditor the said Sum be Heretable in the
Person of the Substitute? Ratio Dubitandi, The same is Moveable by Act of
Parliament; And the Substitute having now right to it, he is in the same case
as if the Bond were granted to him: Ex adverso, the same being semel Heretable
is semper Heretable, until it be made Moveable by a Charge.

If a Bond containing such a Substitution should be made Moveable by a Charge,
would it notwithstanding belong to the Substitute?

If an Heretable Bond may be comprysed; And if the Legal expire will the
Creditor have right to the sumes contained therein, though far exceeding his
Debt?

Bond Moveable.
A Party having given a Bond to the end that thereupon a Comprysing may be
deduced against the Granter, For settleing the Estate of his Father in his
Person; And having granted a Back-bond to pay the person granter of the Bond a
Sum of Money, with Provision That if he denude of the Comprysing he shall be
free of payment of the Money. Quaeritur, If the Sum be Moveable; So that the
Relict of the Creditor may crave a part thereof Jure Relictae, in respect the
Sum is in Obligatione: And to denude of the Right of the Comprysing is in
Facultate Solvendi. Mr. Archibald Nisbet contra Dalgarno.

Bonds of Provision to Children.
A Father having granted Bonds of Provision to Children with a Clause That they
should be valid though not delivered, Quaeritur, The same being granted in
Liege poustie, If they should prejudge the Relict or Fisk? Ratio Dubitandi, The
Granter is Master of them, and may Cancel and destroy them. Answer. Si absit
Dolus and the Defunct did intend nothing but to provide his Children, they
should be considered as a Debt.

Bond of Relief.
IF a Person obliged Conjunctly with another upon a Bond to be relieved may not
after Registration of the Principal Bond charge for Relief: And for that effect
to pay the Sum and poind for the same? Forbes contra Vdnic,

Baron Courts.
QVaeritur If the Superior may pursue before his Baron Court for Non-entry, or
Ward, or Marriage? Ratio Dubitandi, That the said Casualities are fructus of
the Superiority; And seeing the Baron may pursue his Tennents for the Fruits of
Property, There is the same Reason, that he should pursue for the Fruits of his
Superiority: And the Vassals have no prejudice, but rather Advantage, that they
are not taken from their own Houses to answer before another Court, and to be
at the Charges both of Attendance and Process, which are greater there: And if
the Baillie do wrong, it may be repaired by a Reduction.

Bastard.
IF a Bastard has disponed his Estate in Liege Poustie, and Infeftment has not
followed dureing his Life, Will the King or his Donator be liable to fulfill the
Disposition?

If a Bastard's Relict and Bairns, will have their Legitime, though he cannot
make a Testament? Answer. Affirmative.

If having Children, he may make a Testament, and name a stranger an Executor;
seeing the King has not prejudice: And his Children cannot complain, having
their Legitime? Cogitandum.

If at least he may leave Legacies: And his Children Executors nominate, at the
least nearest of Kin, and Executors ab intestato will be liable to the same?

If a Bastard has Testamenti factionem passivam, and may be named Executor, or
Heir of Provision? Answer. Affirmative.

If a Bastard may have an Heir of Tailie and Provision? Cogitandum.

If a Bastard, by a Deed inter vivos has disponed his Estate in Lands by a
delivered Write: and dies before the Right be perfected, Quaeritur, What way
the same shall be perfected? or what Action is competent to the Person in whose
Favors it is made, and against whom? Answer, It is thought, that the King
being to succeed to the Bastard, his Officers may be pursued, and the Director
of the Chancery, if the Lands hold of the King (and if they hold of another
Superior, the said Superior) To hear and see the samen adjudged, and Precepts
directed.

Quid Juris, If the Deed be not a simple Disposition, but a Right to the
Disponer in Liferent, and another Person in Fee; with the ordinary Clauses and
Power to alter? Answer, There may be more Question in this case, being upon the
matter Donatio mortis causa.

Quae Ratio, That a Bastard cannot make a Testament, whether or not ob maculam
natalium: Or that by reason thereof they were as Dedititij in Law, swa that
during Life they were liberi, but dyed servi and nulli, without power to
dispose of any thing? Answer, That the said Incapacity was ratione natalium:
Seeing these who have no other Heirs (so that the King is to succeed as ultimus
Haeres) have not Testamenti factionem.

If a Father who is a Bastard will succeed to his Children? Answer, It is
thought, he will.

Bishops.
IF Precepts granted by Bishops may be execute after their Death? If a Bishop
being upon the point to be Translated, may accept a Renunciation of a Tack not
expired, and grant a new Tack for more years, in prejudice of his Successor? Or
if he may set a Tack?

Bishops Debts.
Seeing Bishops are an Incorporation and do not represent their Predecessor's
Person, but only the Incorporation: and therefore are not liable to his Debts;
Quaeritur, If at least he be liable to the Debts of the Bishopric, As v. g. If
there be an Annualrent payable out of the same to a pious Use, and the
preceding Bishop has not paid the same: Will his Successors be liable
personally, at least will their Rents be affected by a real Action of Poinding
the Ground, or like to the same?

Quid Juris As to the Taxation; if a Bishop would be liable for these bygones
that were due by his Predecessor: reserving Relief against his Heirs and
Executors?

Bodomaria.
BOdomaria est Foenus Nauticum, quo sub spe majoris lucri pecunia datur Navis
Patrono, hoc pacto ut salva nave tantum cum faenore reddatur, relicto interea
Hypothecae loco navigii fundo, quo perdito and capitale interit. Besold.
Thesaurus, Bodom.

Burgh's Liferent Escheat.
WHat Execution can be against Burghs for their Debt? If they may be charged
with Horning, and if thereupon any Liferent Escheat may follow?

C.
Camera Imperialis.
CAmerae sententiae, an ab iis appelletur; an Imperator eas avocare possit? de
earum revisione, vide A. and ibi Appellat.

Captions.
IF Captions may be Execute after Sunset, seeing Poinding cannot be then
executed? It appears there is difference betwixt Poinding and Caption, by
reason other Persons that may have interest in the Goods may be concerned in
the Poinding, which is not in Captions: And the Kings Rebels may be taken at
anytime, and there is no time so fit to take and surprise them as the night.
Rothemay against Forbes. Before, the Council found that Captions should not be
execute in the night.

Casualities of Superiority.
IN General It is thought that all Casualities, which are Fructus Dominit
directi, are to be considered as fructus pendentes of Lands, which pertain to
the singular Successor; unless they be Collecti: and they are never thought to
be Collecti, unless they be at least claimed and pursued for.

Causa cum qua Res transit.
REs transit cum sua causa, hoc est cum omni cominedo, and onere. Jus. Fluv. p.
775. n. 55.

In conditionali dominio interest, an sub condition ad nos pertineat, an vero.
a nobis abscedat; priori casu quamvis Dominium in Aere stare non putest, tamen
quoad nos est in pendenti and in spe tantum: altero, est actu nostrum sed
existente condition resolvitur: Nam meum est quod certa lege meum est, Jus
Fluviat. p. 790. n. 145. and deinceps.

Cautioner and Relief.
IF a Cautioner be Denounced for his Cautionry, will the Principal be liable to
relieve him of the loss of his Escheat? Ratio Dubitandi, The Principal is
obliged to relieve him of what he should pay for him, but not of the prejudice
he should sustain for his Contumacy and Rebellion, through his not payment.

Chaplainrie.
LAnds being holden of a Chaplain, a Bishop being Patron, if there be not a
Chaplain and the Bishop delay or refuse to present, what course shall be taken
by the Vassals Heir, or singular Successor to get Infeftment? If the Bishop may
not be pursued, and the Director of the Chancery, to hear and see him decerned
to present a Chaplain, and to exhibit to one of the Clerks of Session the
Presentation to be registrat, to the effect it may be known and patent to the
Leidges, and that within (...) days after he be charged: And in case of
disobedience, verified by a Horning against him upon the Decree; The Director
of the Chancery to direct Precepts for infefting of the Vassal.

Seeing by Act of Parliament anent the Superiority of Chaplainries, and such
like, The Patron to the Chaplain is appointed to be Superior to the Chaplains
Vassals. Quaeritur, If Chaplains hold of the Bishops, the Bishop will be
Superior? Answer, It is thought, not; seeing the said Act of Parliament is only
in favors of Laick Patrons, and was made when the Bishops were suppressed.

Charge to enter Heir.
AN appearand Heir being charged to enter Heir in General, and renouncing,
Quaeritur, If there may be a Comprising or Adjudication against him, unless he
be charged to enter Heir in Special? Ratio Dubitandi, That frustra should he be
charged to enter Heir having already renounced: Yet it is thought he ought to
be charged, seeing a special Charge to enter Heir, is Instar and in place of a
Special Service, and Infeftment thereupon: and the Heir may repent that he
renounced, and may be better advised, when he is charged to enter Heir in
Special.

Chattels Real.
LIferents, Non-entries, Ward, and such like Casualities, that are successive
when they are gifted, they become real Chattels, and will fall to the Executors
of the Donator, as is thought; Quaeritur, If when they are not gifted they
should be considered also as Chattels, so as to belong to the Executors of the
Superior, and not to his Heirs and Successors of the Land? Cogitandum.

Children and Creditors.
IF a Father grant Bonds to his Children, and thereafter contract Debt, so that
he is not in a condition to satisfy both his Creditors and Children, Whether
the granting of Bonds for Onerous Causes will import a Revocation of the
Childrens Provision: At least will the posterior Creditors be privileged and
preferable to the Children?

Childrens Provisions.
A Father having disponed to his Son of the first Marriage, the Fee of his
Estate; with power to burden it with 40000 merks for provision of his remanent
Children allanerly. Quaeritur, If he being then married upon a Woman of that
age, that he could not have Children by her, should thereafter marry; May he
provide any part of that Sum to the Children he had thereafter of the last
Marriage? Or if the remanent Children, in whose favors the Faculty is
reserved, can only be understood of the remanent Children of the first
Marriage, he having then five besides the Heir, Mr. Alexander Gibson contra his
Brother.

Civitas.
CIvitates and Municipia intelliguntur nomine Reipublicae: and eis competit
beneficium Legis. leg. 3. cod. de Jure Reipub. Sc. Rempublicam ut pupillam
extra ordinem juvari. Frischius Tom. 2. exercit. juris publici, exercit. 2. n.
17. and sequen.

Praescriptio non currit minori sed Civitati, Ibid. 35.

Propter tenuitatem civitas novum vectigal imponit, Ibid. 37.

Gaudet Praescriptione centum annorum.

Ex solo pacto sine traditione, quibusdam casibus habet in rem actionem Ibid.

Vsus-fructus ei relictus durat centum annis Ibid.

Clauses in Contracts of Marriage.
THe Contract of Marriage betwixt Alexander Sandilands, and Agnes Sandilands
his Wife Daughter to Robert Sandilands Dean of Gild, bears that provision,
Viz. That the said Robert and his foresaids are obliged to the said Agnes and
her Spouse that at Robert his Decease the said Agnes his Daughter shall be
esteemed a Bairn of the House and Family; And shall succeed to her Part and
Portion Natural equally with the remanent of Robert's Bairns to all Sums,
Plenishing Goods and Gear; and others that should pertain to the said Robert
the time of his Decease.

The said Alexander is obliged and his foresaids, that whatever Benefit shall
fall to the said Agnes, or her to succeed to by her Fathers Decease, or by
virtue of the said Obligement, to provide the same after he should get it, to
himself and her in Conjunct-fee and Liferent, and to the Bairns betwixt them,
which Failieing his Heirs and Assigneys, 9 January 1657. Registrate 1 March
1671.

The said Alexander is obliged to provide the Conquest to himself in Liferent;
and their Bairns in Fee.

The Contract of Marriage betwixt John Hamilton Writer and Rachel Sandilands
the other Daughter of the said Robert, Bears, That they accept the Tocher in
satisfaction of all other Sums, Executory, Debts, Goods, and Gear, and others
whatsomever which was provided to the said Rachel, or which may fall or pertain
to her, or may be claimed by her by Decease of the said Robert, or her Mother
Mause Weir: All which she and her Husband Assigns to the said Robert, his
Heirs, Executors, or Assigneys to be Disponed at their pleasure.

By the Clause of Conquest the said John is obliged to provide the same to
himself in Liferent, and the Bairns in Fee: And to that effect to insert the
Bairns Names in the Writes.

The said Rachel, if her Husband Decease before her, is to have (if there be no
Children) the half; and (if there be) the third of the plenishing of the House
the time of his Decease, which is to be made free of Debts by his Heirs and
Executors.

Quaeritur, If the Obligement to succeed to all that should pertain to the
Father should be understood, only as to a Bairns Part, and should not be
extended to the Deads-part?

If what should fall to Agnes after her Fathers Decease, should belong to the
Bairns of the Marriage, though the Marriage be disolved through the Husbands
Decease before the Father Robert his Decease?

If Rachel the other Daughter notwithstanding her Renounciation, will come in
as one of the nearest of Kin, at least as to Deads Part, Viz. Deads third and
the half of a Bairns Part.

By Contract of Marriage, the Husband is obliged in the first place to provide
30000 Merks, to his Wife in Liferent, and the Heirs of the Marriage presently:
And to the other Bairns 18000 Merks after his Decease. Quaeritur, The Heir
being served, will there be a Confusion as to his Debt and Provision? 2do. If
he may have Action against the Executors for it, as Heir and Creditor? 3tio. If
he succeed to his Father in Land-Estate, though the Money was not employed,
will not the Obligement be satisfied, pro tanto? 4to. Will the Bairns come in
pari passu or must the Heir be satisfied in the first place out of the Moveable
Estate?

Coals.
A Woman being Infeft in Lands in Liferent; cum Carbonibus and Carbonariis.
Quaeritur, If she may win Coal where there was none before in order to Selling?
Ratio Dubitandi. That usus fructus est jus utendi salva rei substantia, and the
Coal usu consumitur; And being dug non renascitur: It is thought therefore,
that where there was no Coal before, The Liferenter cannot break Ground in
order to Selling.

Quaeritur, If the Liferenters at least may Win Coal, where there was no going
Coal before in order to their own use and for their Fire, Refounding any
Damnage that may be by breaking of the Ground. Cogitandum.

Where there is a Coal going, Quaeritur, If the Liferenter may continue to Work
and Sell? Answer. It is thought for the Reason foresaid the Liferenter cannot
Sell, but may claim by the said Clause to have as much Coal as may serve for
the Liferenters use only, unless it be expressly provided that the Liferenter
may Win and Sell as the Fiar might have done.

If the Liferent be not constitute so clearly in the Terms foresaid, and it be
only provided that the Liferenter shall Liferent the going Coal, Quaeritur, If
the Liferenter may have the same benefit of the Coal as the Fiar might have
had, both for the Liferenters use and for Selling, providing that the
Liferenter use the same as bonus Vir, and in the same manner as was in use
formerly, and do not any thing of purpose to the prejudice of the Fiar: putting
in too many Colliers or otherwise?

As there is quasi Vsus-fructus of Money, if it ought to be so of Coal, and
what is Win should be valued, and the price should be valued to the Liferenter
in Liferent and in Fee to the Heretor? To consider if this case has occurred
elsewhere in the case of Sylvae caeduae.

Collation
BY Contract of Marrriage, the Husband is obliged to provide the Heirs of the
Marriage therein specified; But there is a Clause subjoined, That if there be
only Daughters, and they be more than one; The Eldest only should succeed, and
the other Daughters should resign their parts in her favors, reserving to the
Father to provide them which he did not: There being beside some Heretable
Estate, Quaeritur, If the Eldest will not only have the Land, but her share of
the other Estate as Heir Portioner? Ratio Dubitandi. That Law and Nature
favors and intends Equality, betwixt Children; Especially where the interest
and preservation of Families is not to be considered, and upon that account
there is no Prerogative of Primogeniture and (...) which is only competent
Liberis Masculis, Daughters being finis and caput familiae: And by the Contract
the Eldest Daughter is not obliged to Marry one of the Name or who should take
the Name. 2do. The Heir cannot be Executor unless he confer, or upon the
foresaid consideration, and there appears to be Eadem Ratio in this case,
Whitelaw.

If an Heir, to the Effect he may share in the Executry offering to confer the
Moveable Heirship, ought not also to confer Lands, and other Heretable Estate?
For the Executory may be very considerable, and it were hard that upon
Collation of the Moveable Heirship possibly of small value, he should both
retain the Heretable Estate how great soever, and share in the Executory though
very great.

If there be Three Daughters, and the Eldest at her Marriage get a part of the
Lands. Quaeritur, If she will share as Heir Portioner with the other Sisters,
unless she confer; as in England.

Commission not to Expire morte Mandatoris.
IF a Commission may be granted by a Person to Friends for Selling Lands and to
endure irrevocable, not only during his own Lifetime; but after his Decease to
bind his Heirs until it be Execute? Ratio Dubitandi, Mandatum expirat morte:
And on the other part, there may be a necessity to Sell, and his Heirs may be
Minors: Or upon some other considerations it may be fit that there should be
such a Power given; And as he may bind himself by granting such a Commission,
he may bind his Heirs being eaedem Personae.

Commissioners to the Parliament.
QVaeritur, If there be any case wherein Commissioners to the Parliament ought
to consult the Shires whom they Represent? Answer. It is thought, that albeit
by their Election they have Commission cum Libera potestate, It is to be
understood that they may superstruere; But cannot evert or alter Fundamentals
and the constitution of the Government either of Church or State: And if any
thing of that nature be intended, it ought not to be done by Representatives,
unless they have special Authority to that purpose.

Commonties.
THe Servitude of Pasture being either in common Muires, as Gladsmuire or such
like; Or in Commonties belonging to Heretors and Superiors, and their Vassals
by Rights from them; Or in Lands belonging to others and not to their
Superiors. Quaeritur. If an Infeftment cum communi Pastura will be a Ground of
Prescription, in all the foresaid cases, unless it be special as to the
Subject, and the Lands to be Pastured upon? Answer. As to common Muires, if the
Lands adjoining be Disponed, cum communi Pastura, by the King, it is to be
presumed that before they be Disponed, the Kings Tennents of the Lands Disponed
were in use to Pasture in the said Muire: And therefore the Clause cum communi
Pastura is to be understood with the Pasture formerly belonging to the King;
And in that case, possession though not for the space of Forty Years by virtue
of that Right is sufficient. 2do. There is the same reason as to Lands Disponed
by Superiors having a Commonty within their own Property. v. g. in Dirletoun,
unless there be some speciality. v. g. as in David Forest his Precept of Clare
constat, there is Nine Acres given without mention of Pasture in the Commonty
of Dirletoun, and there is a Tenement and three Acres and an half cum communi
Pastura in Communia de Dirletoun; So that the Right being granted unico
contextu, the Right of the said Acre cum communi Pastura Excludes the same as
to the other Nine Acres. 3tio. As to a Commonty within the Property of other
Superiors, the Clause cum communi Pastura in the Tenendas will not be a ground
of Prescription, unless there be a Right or Constitution by the Heretor, within
whose Property the said Commonty is.

Common Appendant.
QVaritur, There being a Servitude of Pasturage or Commonty due to me out of
Neighboring Lands (which the English call Common Appendant) will the Servitude
extinguish if I purchase the said Lands, seeing res sua nemini servit? Answer.
It is thought that it is Suspended but not extinct: So that if the Purchaser
sell the Lands affected with the Servitude it will revive, unless it be
provided otherwise: And Servitudes of that nature are Real, and pertinents
Praediorum non Personarum.

Communio.
COmmunis Possessio, qua vel ad pasculandum, vel ad alios fructus participandos
vicini utuntur, non caret Litigiis; Divitibus proportionem Geometricam,
pauperibus Arithmeticam affectantibus: Sed possessio Geometrica servari debet
and Praedialis, ita ut qui majores habet possessiones magis utatur pascuis, qui
minores minus. Jus Fluviat. p. 561. n. 25.

Compensation.
IF there may be Compensation on a Bond prescribed, For that reason, Viz. That
quae sunt temporalia ad agendum they are perpetua ad excipiendum; And the
ground of Prescription as to Personal Actions being Negligentia petentis,
cannot be pretended in this case, the Defender being satisfied in his own hands.

When in Processes for Sums of Money, Compensation is proponed, and the Pursuer
Replies upon Recompensation, and the Defender again Duplyes upon
Recompensation. Quaeritur, what course shall be taken by the Judge upon their
several Recompensations? Answer, If it appear that the Pursuer or Charger is
addebted in as much to the Defender, as the Defender to him, all the
Compensations being considered, the Defender ought to be assoiled; and the
Parties hinc inde should be decerned to give up and discharge the Grounds of
the Compensation: And if all the Compensations being sustained, the Defender be
found debtor to the Pursuer, a Decree should be given for what is due: And if
the Pursuer be found debtor to the Defender, the Defender ought to be
assoiled, and the Pursuer decerned to pay what he is owing.

An Assigney to a Debt for an Onerous Cause, having pursued for the same,
Quaeritur, If it be alleged that, the time of the Assignation, the Cedent was
the Defenders debtor, and that he has present Action for liquidating his
Debt; Whether ought Compensation to be sustained upon the said Ground, and a
time granted to liquidate? It is thought, That the Cedent not being Inhibite,
nor any Diligence done against him, the Sum assigned was in Commercio, and
might be disposed of by him; there being then no ground of Compensation, which
is de liquido in liquidum; and otherwise non tollit obligationem. vide
Retention, in Litera R.

Composition for Entry.
IF the Superiority be disponed or comprised after Resignation, Quaeritur,
Whether what is payable for receiving of the Vassal should belong to the former
Superior: Or to his Successor by whom he is to be received, being pretium of
his Entry.

Compriser.
IF after expiring of a Comprising, the Compriser may pursue for the Evidents,
being incidents to the Right.

Comprising.
IF a Bond for an Onerous Cause, being granted by a Person not Inhibited, and
public Infeftment thereupon, be preferable to a Compriser who had comprised
before, but was Infeft after the Bond?

If a Compriser of Ward-Lands die before the expiring of the Legal, Will the
Marriage of his Heir fall?

If it fall, Will the Debtor, if he redeem, be liable to refound the Avail?

Comprisings of Heretable Bonds, though they be upon the matter Legal
Assignations, so that the first Compriser will be preferred to the second
intimating, in respect of the previous public Solemnity in deduceing
Comprisings: Yet Intimation is necessar to put the Debitors in the Bonds
comprised in mala fide.

If there be a necessity of a Declarator of expiring a Legal, as there is of a
Conventional? Seeing in many Cases there may be much Equity for purging the
expiring; as if the Sum be all paid but a very little part, and the Lands
exceed much the Debt.

If the Compriser come to be Debtor in a Sum equivalent, Will the Compriseing
expire?

The first Compriseing being reduced at the instance of a posterior Compriser
ex capite Inhibitionis, Will the first Compriser have Right to the Legal of the
second?

Though the Debtor be Inhibited, May he not assign the Legal?

If Compriseing whereupon Infeftment is not to follow, and which formerly
needed not to be allowed ought to be Recorded, conform to the Act of Parliament
1661. Act.?

There being a Compriseing against a Principal and two Cautioners of their
respective Lands; and the Right of the said Compriseing being acquired by a
Person who had bought one of the Cautioners Lands, If that Person should
dispone the Right of the other Lands with the Compriseing, Sums, and Grounds
thereof, as to the said other Lands, only before the expireing of the Legal.
Quaeritur, 1. If he has not reserved expressly the Compriseing and Sums thereof
as to his own Lands, but has only disponed in the Terms foresaid: Will the
Compriseing extinguish as to his own Lands, seeing it could not subsist without
the Grounds, and these are disponed? Answer, It is thought, It will not
extinguish, in respect the Compriseing is not simply disponed, but only as to
the other Lands, and the same not being disponed as to his own Lands, eo ipso
it is retained together with the Grounds; and it was Actum that the Disponer,
by acquiring the Compriseing, should be thereby secured as to his own Lands:
And having disponed the same as to the said other Lands, Law presumes that he
has retained it as to his own Lands in the first place, and that it should be
effectual as to the other Lands in the second place: And Acta agentium are to
be understood to operate according to their Intention.

Quaeritur 2do. If the Compriser of that Legal should Redeem, who should have
right to the Sums; whether the Disponer, or these to whom he has disponed, as
to the other Lands, at least to a part of the same? Answer, If the Disponers
Interest as to the Security of his Lands amounts to, or exceeds the Sums, he
will have Right thereto entirely, seeing he is to be secured in the first place.

If a Com^riser Infeft in Lands does consent only to a Right made by the
Debtor of a part of the Lands comprised, will that Consent secure the Buyer
against the singular Successors of the Compriser, having Right from him by
Compriseing or Disposition and Infeftment thereupon: Seeing they may pretend
that a Consent does not denude habili modo.

A Creditor comprised the Principal Debitors Lands, and some time thereafter
the Cautioners Estate; and after the Compriseing against the Principal was
expired (But yet the Compriseing against the Cautioners was running) he
disposed of some of the Principals Lands. Quaeritur, If the Cautioner may plead
that the Compriseing against him is extinct, In swa far as the Creditor has an
irredeemable Right to the Principal's Estate, Exceeding his Debt: and is
satisfied at least may be satisfied with his Intromission and disposing of the
same?

A Compryser, after expiring of his Comprysing of his Debitors Estate exceeding
the value of his Debt, Intrometting with or disposing of a part of the same.
Quaeritur, If he may Compryse any other Estate belonging to the Debtor: Upon
pretense that he is not satisfied: Or if the Expiring of the Comprysing and the
making use thereof thereafter, puts him in the same condition as if the
Lands had been Disponed to him irredeemably, and datae and accepted in
solutionem: So that both Principal and Cautioner, against whom a Comprysing is
yet running, may pretend that the Debt is satisfied; At the least that the
Creditor should denude himself of that Comprysing cum omni causa? Lamertoun
contra Mr. John Fairholme.

A Compryser of Lands holden Ward being Infeft. Quaeritur. If these Lands will
ward by the Decease of the Compryser; And if the Marriage of the Appearand Heir
will fall? Ratio Dubitandi, A Compryser is but an interim Vassal for security
of his Debt: And upon that Consideration such a Right in England is considered
as a Chattel.

If the Comprysing be redeemed will the Debtor be Liable to refound the
Damnage sustained by the Ward and Marriage?

Quaeritur, If the Ward of the Comprysers Heir, will determine and expire upon
the Redemption?

Quid Juris in that case of proper Wadsets, if the Debtor after Redemption
will be Liable to Refound the foresaid Damnage? The difference being that a
Comprysing is an involuntar Right, and the Wadset Voluntar, so that the
Creditor seems to take his hazard.

If Lands be Comprysed from a Person who has no Right thereto for the time but
acquires thereafter a Right, whether the said jus superveniens will accresce?

If there be a difference betwixt a Compryser and a Buyer from an interposed
Person, who has acquired a fraudulent Right, Viz. That a Buyer acquires a Right
for an Onerous Cause, and it is just and the Interest of Commerce that he
should not be prejudged, whereas a Compryser does only Diligence upon his own
hazard, and the Right Transit cum sua causa and labe?

A Right being acquired bona fide, from a Person not Inhibited, after
Comprysing, and being Infeft before the Compryser. Quaeritur, Whether he or the
Compryser will be preferable? Answer. The Lords found in the case of Sir
Patrick Nisbet and Hamilton, That the Compryser should be preferred: Which
appears to be hard, seeing, a Comprysing is only jus ad rem and a Legal
Disposition; And the first complete Right by Infeftment seems to be preferable,
and a Comprysing does not import vitium Litigiosi seeing the Debitors Right is
without Question: And the Question is whether the Compryser or the Receiver of
the Disposition should have Right to that which is unquestionable in it self?

The Debtor or these who have Right to the Legal, Redeeming from the Appearand
Heir of the Compryser, whether does the Redemption sist the course of the Ward
and Marriage if the Heir be not Fourteen Years of Age? Answer. Affirmative.
quia resoluto jure principali resolvuntur consequentia.

Will not the Debtor be liable not only to pay the Debt but to refound the
prejudice the Creditors Heir sustains upon occasion of the falling of the
Casuality of Ward and Marriage by the Decease of the Debtor? Answer.
Affirmative, and the Creditor and his Heirs should be Indemnes: It being the
Debitors fault that they are forced to Compryse, and that the Comprysing is not
Redeemed.

Whether a Discharge does extinguish a Comprysing, the Creditor granting to be
satisfied; In the same manner that Intromission within the Years of the Legal
does extinguish the same? Answer. If there be no Infeftment a Discharge is
sufficient: But if there be Infeftment, there must be at least a Renounciation
Registrate in the Register of Reversions.

A Comprysing being Redeemed, whether does the Debitors Right and Infeftment
revive, or must there be a new Seasin, and what way shall the Debtor be
Reseased? Answer. There must be a new Seasin; and the same way is to be taken
as in the case of a Regress: Seeing the Compryser as he has a Legal Reversion,
so there is a Legal Regress.

Quaeritur. If a Comprysing as to all effects be equivalent to a Resignation?
Ratio Dubitandi, That a Comprysing is not only a Legal Disposition but the
Compryser may be immediately Infeft upon the same, as upon a Resignation, though
the Debtor decease.

If a Compryser get a Right to the Legal of his own Comprysing before it expire
by another Apprysing; And so Deinceps if there be more Comprysings whereof the
first Appryser obtains Right within the Respective Legals. Quaeritur. when the
same do expire? Cogitandum.

If a Royal Burgh, or others having Power to receive Vassals upon Resignation,
has Power likewise to receive upon Comprysings: And if in that case any
Composition be due to them?

If the Lands be Comprysed how shall the Duties be divided? Answer. If any part
of the Lands be sown before the Comprysing, the Increase will belong to the
Compryser: And if the Lands be set, the time of the Comprysing is to be
considered; For if the Comprysing be before Whitesunday the Compryser will have
Right to the whole Duties; And if it be before Martinmass, he will have Right
to the half: And if after Martinmass to no part thereof.

The Superior being charged with Horning to receive a Compryser, and being
Denounced, will he be Liable for Damnage and Interest: if either he Infeft a
second Compryser, or a Precept be direct out of the Chancery for Infefting him?

If upon the Redemption of a Comprysing, the Superiors will be obliged to
Infeft the Redeemer Gratis?

Quid Juris, If the Redeemer be another Creditor?

Quaeritur, If Comprysings be equivalent to Dispositions and Resignation
following upon the same, so that the first Compryser is preferable to others
even before Infeftment? Answer. That Comprysings are only Legal Dispositions,
and do not denude the Debtor without Infeftment, whereas Resignation being
made in the Superiors hands and accepted does denude.

What is the reason then that after Comprysing, it is found that the Debtor
not inhibited cannot Dispone in prejudice of the Compryser? Answer. That the
Law, and the Judge who is Lex animata, having in subsidium Disponed to the
Creditor the Debitors Lands; the same is so affected by the Legal Diligence,
that the Debtor is denuded as to that effect that he can do no voluntar deed
to prejudge the Creditor; Without prejudice nevertheless of more exact and
complete Diligence of other Creditors, who obtaining Infeftment will be
preferred to the first Compryser: as in the case of Movables after Arrestment,
the Debtor cannot dispone the same, and yet may be Evicted by another Creditor
by way of Poinding.

If a Superior be content to take a Right to a Comprysing of Lands holden of
him, not being willing to enter the Compryser. Quaeritur, If he may claim a
Years Duty when the Lands are Redeemed? Answer. Negative: And he is in the same
case as if he had Comprysed himself, so that as he cannot in that case neither
in the other can he claim any Composition; in respect the samen is granted only
that the Superior should not be prejudged by obtruding a Vassal, upon him
against his will.

If by the First Act of Parliament anent Comprysings, a Composition was due to
the King? Answer. It is thought, not: There being a difference betwixt the King
and other Superiors; in respect the King is Pater Patriae and all the Leidges
being his Subjects, it cannot be said that he has any prejudice by the change
of his Vassal, and long after the said Act of Parliament Signatures were not
past upon Comprysings, but Comprysings lay at the Signet and were the warrant
of Charters under the Great Seal.

To try when that Custom was changed, and what warrant was for changeing the
same.

A Person having Comprysed Lands and having granted Bond that he being satified
of the Sums due to himself, and of the Sums due to another person, and that
other person being relieved of his Cautionry for the Debtor, The Compryser
should denude himself in favors of the Debtor: And the said Compryser having
thereafter Disponed the Right of the Comprysing, but with the Right of the said
Backbond expressly provided in the Disposition and the Procuratory of
Resignation therein. Quaeritur, If there be no mention in the Seasin that the
Right is with the said Burden, whether the Compryser will be still Liable by
the said Backbond to the Persons in whose favors it is conceived? And 2do. If
the said Backbond will militate against a singular Successor acquiring a Right
from the Assigney to the Comprysing. Answer. It is thought both the Compryser
and the person having Right from him with the Burden of the Backbond will be
Liable. 2do. A singular Successor will not be Liable unless the said Provision,
that the Right should be with the burden of the Backbond, be in Traditione and
in the Seasin.

Quaeritur, What way shall the Appearand Heir have the Right of the Lands
Comprysed where the Comprysing is extinguished by Intromission, If it be not by
a Service as Heir to his Father? Answer. He may give in a Bill to the Lords or
intent Action against the Superior on that ground, That the Lands are in
effect redeemed and satisfied by Intromission; And that the Superior and the
Creditor being conveened, it ought to be declared that the Lands are Redeemed,
and the Creditor ought to renounce, and the Superior be decerned to Infeft.

When a Person is denuded by Infeftment, and yet the Infeftment and Disposition
whereupon it proceeds is Reduceible upon the Act of Parliament as being in
Fraudem Creditoris. Quaeritur, What course the Creditor shall take, and whether
he should first reduce before he Compryse? Ratio Dubitandi. That if he compryse
the Debtor being divested as said is, there is nothing in his person to be
comprised. Answer. It is thought it is fitter to Reduce and then to Compryse;
Because after the Creditor has been at the Charges of Comprysing, it may be
there may be difficulty in the Reduction: And yet upon other Considerations, it
may be fitter first to Comprise; in Respect the Lands may be Comprysed both for
the Debt of the Disponer and the Debt of the Person to whom the Right is given.

Infeftments upon Comprysing.
WHen there is a Clause in a Charter upon Comprysing, That if the Comprysing
expire another Infeftment should be taken within Year and Day, otherways the
Infeftment to be void. Quaeritur, What is the effect of that Provision, if it
may be purged? 2do. If another Compryser may object the said Nullity?

Conditio.
COnditio est adjectio, qua id quod dari, aut fieri volumus, confertur in
aliquem casum and suspendit obligationem.

Condition impossibili adjecta, Contractus est nullius momenti, and
contrahentes Ludere videntur, secus in sponsalibus and ultimis voluntatibus in
quibus favore Matrimonii and ultimae voluntatis, tales conditiones habentur pro
non scriptis. Christen. de Sponsalibus quaest. 14.

Confession by Criminals,
IF a Confession be emitted and signed before the Judge in the Criminal-Court
may the Pannal Retract and not adhere to it before the Assyse, so that the
Inquest cannot proceed on it as an evidence and clear Probation?

Minors having confessed heinous Crimes, may they desire to be reponed upon
pretense of their Age, though they do not pretend and clear that their
Confession was upon Error or Mistake?

Confirmation.
A Feu of Church Lands being neither confirmed by the Pope nor King, If the
Confirmation by the King of Rights granted thereafter by the Fever to be holden
of the King; will supply the want of Confirmation of the Original Charter?

When a Person is Infeft to be holden of the Superior and deceaseth, and both
the Disponer and Superior that was for the time are deceased, yet the
Superiority is conveyed to a singular Successor, Quaeritur, If after long time
the singular Successor in the Right of the Superiority may confirm the said
Infeftment: So that the Heir of the Person Infeft, though not confirmed in his
own time, may be Infeft as Heir to him by a public Infeftment? Ratio
Dubitandi, It cannot be said that his Father was Infeft by a public
Infeftment: To consider therefore whether the Party infeft being infeft to be
holden of the Superior, may be said to be truly infeft holden of the Superior;
But that the Infeftment was not a complete Right, until the Superiors Consent
and Confirmation was had, whereby it did convalesce, as if it had been from the
beginning: Or if there be no mid impediment? And there is a Difference betwixt
Vitiosum ab initio, and Incompletum; illud nunquam confirmatur, istud accedente
complemento convalescit.

Whether or not Confirmation may be granted after the Death of the Disponer?
Vide Craig.

If a Disposition be granted to be holden of the Superior containing a Precept
of Seasin, and if it be confirmed by the Superior, but before Seasin follow
thereupon the Superior is denuded of his Right in favors of his singular
Successor, Quaeritur, If thereafter Seasin may be taken on the said Precept?
Ratio Dubitandi, That Res devenit in alium casum, and the former Vassal not
being denuded, he remains still Vassal to the succeeding Superior; So that by
no deed without his consent, a new Vassal can be obtruded to him.

Quaeritur, If Infeftments being to be holden of a Superior, may be confirmed
after the death of the Person infeft? Ratio Dubitandi, Craig seems not to be
clear, upon that Ground that the Superior and Vassal should both consent; So
that the consent of the Vassal in taking the Infeftment and the Superiors in
confirming the same be conjoined, which cannot be, the death of either
interveening: It is thought nevertheless, that such Rights may be confirmed
after the Death of the Receiver, though their Consents cannot be conjoined,
which was only done, and when the consent of Persons is required ad integrandam
Personam; as in the case of Pupils and Minors, it ought to be given before
their decease, and in ipso acta; But where the consent and confirmation of
Persons is ad integrandum and constituendum Jus, which is constitute and
perfected per gradus and parts, The consent and confirmation may be at any
time re integra, and where there is no medium impedimentum: as Exempli Causa,
If there be a Compriseing against the Disponer, the Disposition cannot be
confirmed.

Item sometimes there must be Confirmation neither ad integrandam Personam, nor
Constitutionem Juris, but for confirming the Right constitute; as the Popes
Confirmation in the Right of Church Lands, or the Patron's Confirmation; which
are necessary in regard of their Interests, Et ne quid Detrimenti Ecclesia
capiat: which may be at any time.

If a Right be confirmed after the Death of the Receiver of the Right, and
after the Disponers Heir is Infeft upon the Retour, Quaeritur, If the Heir of
the Person who receives the Right, may be served Heir to his Predecessor as
having dyed last vest and seized, notwithstanding that the Right was null the
time of his decease; and that there is medium impedimentum in the Retour, by
the Infeftment of the Disponers Heir? Answer, It is thought he may be served
Heir, and the said Infeftment is not an impediment; the Heirs of the Disponer
being eadem persona and in effect his Author: And the said Infeftment is in
effect to the use and behoof of the Receiver of the Right and his Heirs: And
the Heir of the Disponer is in no other case than the Disponer himself, whose
Infeftment is to the use of the Buyer until his Right be confirmed, and then
ceases.

If the King should confirm the Charter a me granted by Castlemaines to
Cesnock. Quaeritur, If in that case the Vassals will be in any hazard? Answer,
It is thought, not; seeing it cannot be said that they were at any time Vassals
to Cesnock: And though fictione Juris the Confirmation be drawn back as if
Cesnock had been infeft immediately after his Right: yet it cannot be drawn back
where there is medium impedimentum; the Vassals having acquired a Right before,
and having never been Cesnock's Vassals but only to Castlemains before the
Forefeiture.

If an Heretor of Land dispone his Land to be holden of the Superior, and the
Superior confirm the Disposition with all that shall follow upon it; But before
Seasin be taken upon the Precept, the Disponer dies. Quaeritur, What way the
Purchaser shall be Infeft? Answer, The Disponers Heir is to be Infeft, and to
grant a Precept relating to the former Disposition and Confirmation: Or if he
will not, or think not fit to be Heir; the Lands may be adjudged from him as
charged to enter Heir.

Quaeritur, In the case foresaid, if the Superior, after he has confirmed the
Disposition, die before Seasin thereupon; Whether a singular Successor in the
Right of Superiority may question the said Infeftment? Ratio Dubitandi, That
there is medium impedimentum, viz. The Superior is changed; and the former
Vassal being his Vassal the time of his Right, thereafter another Person cannot
be his Vassal without his consent: Et e contra, the former Superior having done
all that he could do to perfect the said Right; and nothing resting to complete
it but the deed of the Disponer or his Heir by giving Infeftment, the former
Superior was denuded as to his Interest: So that his Successor cannot question
the said Right, being perfected by the Infeftment.

If at least the Successor of the Superiority may be urged to renew the
Confirmation? Ratio Dubitandi, The singular Successor in the Superiority, may
be urged to grant Infeftment upon Resignation in the hands of his Predecessor,
Cogitandum. But it appears there is a difference, seeing by Resignation the
Property is in the Superiors hands, whereas by the Confirmation, it is not: and
the Vassal is not denuded before Infeftment upon the Charter confirmed, whereas
he is denuded by Resignation, and by Comprising which in Law is equivalent to a
Resignation accepted, seeing the Superior cannot refuse to give Infeftment upon
Compriseings.

If the Disponer be denuded of the Superiority, what course is to be taken
against his singular Successor for renewing the Procuratory? Answer, Seeing in
the case in question, the Buyer was infeft according to the Tenor of the said
Disposition, It is to be considered if the King may notwithstanding confirm the
said base Right.

Confiscation.
IF a Person being at the Horn dwell within a Regality, and have Goods or Debts
within another Regality, Will these also belong to the Lord of Regality where
he dwells, upon that pretense that sequuntur personam?

Confusione tollitur obligatio.
BY Contract of Marriage, the Husband is obliged to employ 30000 merks to
himself and his Wife in Conjunctfie, and the Heirs of the Marriage; and has
obliged also his Heirs and Executors to employ at his decease 15000 merks to
his Bairns besides the Heir, Quaeritur, If the Heretable Estate be short of
30000 merks, May the Heir pursue the Executor ad Supplementum? Ratio Dubitandi,
he is served Heir and eadem Persona with the Defunct, and confusione tollitur
obligatio: It is thought he may, and that Maxim militateth, when the Heir
succeeds in universum Jus and Patrimonium: But in this case the Heir having
right only to the immovable Estate, there is no confusion of that Obligement
which is prestable out of the Executory, to which the Heir has no right: as in
the case of moveable Debts due by the Defunct to his Heir either of Line or
Tailie, there is is no confusion for the reason foresaid.

Item Quaeritur, If there be not so much in the Executory as may satisfy the
Provision foresaid in favors of the Bairns, if they may have recourse against
the Heir for their Provisions? Ratio Dubitandi, The Heir by the Contract was to
be provided presently, and the Bairns at or after the Father's decease, and by
and attour the Sum provided to the Heir: so that the Heir should have his
Provision as Praecipuum and before the Bairns: Answer, It is thought, That the
Heir being provided under the name of Heir, which is Nomen Repraesentationis,
as he is liable to other Creditors, so he is liable to the Bairns, being
provided under the notion of Bairns, who do not represent.

If the said Provisions had been in a second Contract of Marriage, the Son of
the first Marriage being Heir of Line, would be liable to the Son of the second
Marriage though served Heir, and there would be no confusion for the Reason
foresaid.

Conjunct-Fiar.
QVaeritur, If a Lady Conjunct-Fiar or Liferenter of a Barony may receive
Vassals singular Successors upon Resignation or Confirmation or give Novo damus.

Conquest.
A Father being obliged to provide to the Heirs of the first Marriage the
Conquest, and having acquired a Room during the first Marriage, and disponed
the same to the Son of the third Marriage, Quaeritur, If the Heir of the first
Marriage may reduce that Right, as given without an onerous Cause in his
prejudice, being a Creditor by that Clause of his Mothers Contract of Marriage?
Ratio Dubitandu, It is pretended not to be free Conquest, the Father having
contracted Debt thereafter above the Sum of that Room: Whereunto it was
Answered, That the said Room was Conquest, the price being then paid; and the
Debt contracted thereafter.

A Merchant being obliged to provide the Conquest during the Marriage to
himself and Wife, and the Bairns of the Marriage, Quaeritur 1. Whether Conquest
being Vniversitas, will fall under the Executory of the Bairns, though the
subject, and what will fall under the Conquest be moveable?

2do. The Conquest being provided so, that the Right should be taken to the
Husband and Wife and Bairns of the Marriage, whilk Failieing the half to the
Husbands Heirs and the half to the Wifes Heirs: Whether the Husband be Fiar and
the Bairns only Heirs of provision, though the subject be Moveable?

Though the Husband be Fiar, if he can Dispone the Conquest without an Onerous
Cause: or provide the same to other Heirs, in prejudice of Bairns being
Creditors by such Provisions?

The Husband being obliged in these terms to provide the Conquest, viz. Lands
Heretages and Annualrents and other things; And to take the Rights in manner
foresaid. Quaeritur, If the General other things be comprehensive of Movables,
there being no mention of Sums of Money or Movables? And it seems that
Conquest is to be understood properly of Heretable Interests, of which only,
and not of Movables, Rights are taken: And other things may be understood of
things Homogeneous, and of the same nature that the things expressed in
particular are of; ( Viz. Heretable) as Reversions, Tacks, etc.

If at least Bonds bearing Annualrent though Moveable, will fall under the
conquest; Seeing Rights are in use to be taken thereof: And by the Law they
belonged to Heirs before the statute? This and the Four preceding Questions
are in the case of Andrew Bruce, and his Conquest during the first Marriage.

The ordinary Clause of conquest in favors of Wives being of Lands, Heretages,
Annualrents. Quaeritur, If Bonds being Heretable because Executors are Excluded
will fall under the same? Answer. It is thought, not; Because the Subject is
only Lands, Heretages and Annualrents, whereupon there is or may be Infeftment:
And Heretages comprehends only Lands, Teinds, and such Rights as are real by
Infeftment or otherwise, or whereupon Infeftment may follow.

Consensus.
USV receptum est, ut in terrarum aut nominum and jurium alienationibus and
Cessionibus, praeter contrahentes alii interveniant pro interesse and consensum
accomodent and subscribant contractibus and instrumentis: Sed quisnam Consensus
effectus esse debeat ambigitur; quibusdam videtur, consentientes, contractus
quibus consenserant haud reprobare nedum ut rescindantur agere posse, juxta
tritam juris regulam quod approbo non reprobo. Alii opinantur cum nihil juris
disponant ant tribuant, consensum haud extendi ultra id quod actum aut
cogitatum, viz. Vt si quod jus eo tempore quo consensum adhibuerant suberat,
aut juris umbra, ejus ratione aut praetextu Litem aut quaestionem intentare
nequeant; Salva tamen liberate commercii, and jura si quae sunt penes alios
quam contrahentes, potiora acquirendi; aut in ea succedendi: Iis ex intervallo
and post facto adeptis consensum haud obesse.

Cogitandum an ea sit commoda distinctio, consentientes si in alia jura postea
succedant iis uti posse; quae enim consentientibus tunc temporis haud
competebant sed postea nec opinantibus forte jus detulit, ea antequam penes eos
forent consensu ase abdicasse nec verisimile nec credere par est: Qui autem
juri in alium transferendo consensit, si ejusdem rei jus and melius penes alium
esse compererit and sponte and opera sua acquirat, ex eo adversus eos qui ipso
consentiente jus alterum quaesierant agere haud audiendus: Nec enim juri nec
bonis moribus consentaneum est, quod approbavit, aliquid moliri aut quaerere
quo illud posset reprobare aut rescindere Broomhall contra Lady Darsie.

Consensus Domini.
COnsensus assumit naturam actus super quo interponitur: Sicut stipulatio, quae
est stricti juris interposita contractui bonae fidaei. Bes. These. liter. L. p.
552.

Dominus consentiendo, non praesumitur juri suo velle praejudicare; sed solum
obstaculum, quod scilicet jus vasalli sine Domini Consensu alienari non
poterat, removisse: Et remissio juris sui non praesumitur, nisi verbis apertis
de ea constet. Ibidem P. sequen.

Regula, quod Domini consensus juri ipsius nihil officiat, procedit tantum in
illis juribus; quae Domino consentienti competentia, separatam habent rationem
a negotio cui consensus accedit, non autem in his quae ad robur and firmitatem
actus pertinent. Idem. p. 554.

Consent.
QVaeritur, If an Appearand Heir consent to a Disposition, made in Lecto, after
the Decease of the Granter, may another Heir quarrel the Deed upon pretense
that the Consenter was not served Heir at any time? Ratio Dubitandi: The
Consent of the Appearand Heir the time of the granting the Right, does so
validate the Right, that all Heirs are precluded from questioning it: And there
appears to be the same reason when the Consent is supervenient.

If the Consent will import Behaving?

A Person being Infeft in an Annualrent to be holden of the Disponer; and in
possession by payment of the Annualrent, Consents to a Disposition of the
Lands. Quaeritur, If that Consent will prejudge a singular Successor; The
Disposition being neither Registrate in the Register of Reversions, nor the
Seasin upon the Disposition relating to the Consent?

If the Consent of a Person having Right by Disposition whereupon Resignation
has followed, will prejudge a singular Successor?

In what cases Consent to a Right will prejudge singular Successors? Answer. It
is thought that where there is no Infeftment and the Consenters Right may be
transmitted by Assignation or Discharged, such a Consent may prejudge singular
Successors: And will amount to an Assignation or Discharge.

If a Consent of a Party having only Right to a Reversion, will prejudge a
singular Successor unless it were Registrate?

Anent Consistories; Whereby the Usefulness and Necessity of these Courts is
evinced, and Doubts and Prejudices against them, are Cleared.
THE Question, whether a Judicatory be useful and necessary, and therefore to
be Instituted, If it be not; and continued if it be already erected; or
unuseful and therefore to be suppressed; Cannot be defined well a priori, but
from the nature of the Subject, and Causes which are agitate in the Judicatory:
And if the Subject be necessary and favorable, Notwithstanding any extrinsical
Abuses (which may creep in to the best Judicatories) it may plead for a
Reformation, but not a total Suppression.

All Causes are of necessity to be decided, and Justice is always favorable,
But in some Causes (as the Law speaks) praedominatur favor and publicum
interesse, and such, and only such are the Subject of the Jurisdiction of the
Commissarys, as Causae Matrimoniales and Testamentariae, which are in
themselves favorable; and the Causes of Orphans and Widows, of miserable
Persons, of Persons slandered and defamed, of Ministers and their Readers for
their Stipends, in which the Condition of Parties pleads for favor, not in
the point of Decision (which should be impartial, and abstract from all
respects) but in the way of Procedure, that it be both exact and summar; that
those Parties be neither dwanged by a long and expensive attendance, nor
wronged by a precipitant handling of their Business: which Qualities seeming
incompatible in a Judicial Procedure, concur only when a particular Judicatory,
is allotted for such Causes: and neither the throng of their Business can
justle them out, neither the Judge can have a pretext for shifting them.

The Gravity and Difficulty of Matrimonial and Testamentary Causes is so
notour, and the favorable Elogies of Law anent these Persons, recommending
thereby a Circumspect, and as it were a Religious Handling of them, are so
obvious and frequent, that they need not be repeated; and it is certain that
there is no Subject debated either in the Law it self, or in the large Volumns
of the Doctors, with greater Prolixity and Subtility, than the Causes of
Marriages and Testaments. Authent. de nupt Novel. 22. in praesat. verba sunt
eximia, alia omnia quae sancita sunt, non omnibus competunt hominibus, nec
rebus nec temporibus, studium vero nuptiarum totius est humanae so bolis: ex
quo etiam renovatur solo: and ampliori quam alia dignum est solicitudine: and
humano generi Immortalitatem artificiose videtur introducere. It is remarkable,
that the whole ff. being divided in (...) parts, one whole part, viz. the 5th.
containing 8 books, teaches de materia testamenti. Videri possunt tit. cap. de
testam, and the subsequent tit. to the end, decret. l. 3. tit. 11. de testam.
l. 3, decretal tit. 26 de test. succest. lib. 42 per totum. Clarus de testam..
testam. Covar de testam. genere tom. 1. per totum ff. de sponsalibus lib. 27.
sequen. tit. ad fin. lib. C. de nuptils lib. 5. and seq. tit ad 27. 4.
decretal. desponsalibus and matrimonlis per totum decret. causa 27. lib. 32.
Inclusive. Covar. in 4. lib. decretal.


It is to be observed from Law and History, that from these Reasons,
Matrimonial Causes, and publicatio and insinuatio Testamentorum (which is with
us the Confirmation of Testaments) were neither entrusted to the lowest sort of
Judges, neither to Judges of great Employment about the decision of other Civil
Actions, to be decided in a tumultuary Way, and promiscuously with other
Causes, but by a considerate Choice of Judges, singled out, for these Causes:
It was provided that neither the meanness of the Judge, nor the greatness, nor
multitude of his other Employments, should prejudge Causes of so great Gravity
and Importance. Censores, albeit magistratuum omnium maximae reverentiae and
potestatis, penes quos erat regimen disciplinae communis; And yet it was
incumbent to them, Remp. tucri, and non judicare de controversiis privatis
competent to be judged by the Centumviri, arbitri cognoscebant tamen de
sponsalitiis, de Repudiis and divortiis, and matrimonio spreto and male
tractato. Greg. Tholos. lib 47. C. 16. de Censoris potestate. Cujac, lib. 11 ad
lib. 39. Soluto matrimonio. And with what Solemnities Testaments were
confirmed, appears by the Title of the ff. and the Cod. de aperiendis
testamentis, and L. repetita C. de Episcopis. It is clear, that Insinuatio
Testamentorum competebat tantum magistro Census: And by the Law defensores
Ecclesiarum are prohibited to meddle with the Confirmation of Testaments, as
absurd to be assumed by Churchmen, quibus est se ostendere peritos
disceptationum forensium, which words of the Law, insinuate the disputable
Nature of Questions incident at Confirmation of Testaments; by reason whereof,
Churchmen were inhibited to meddle with them, although many other Civil Causes
were remitted ad Episcopalem Audientiam, in that superstitious time. The Law 18
Cod. de Testamentis, and Lex consulta divertia Ibid. are consonant to the Law
Repetita, and bears the like inhibition of Churchmen, and intimation of
absurdity if they should meddle. Thereafter the Confirmation of Testaments was
entrusted defensoribus Civitatum, qui eligendi erant non vilissimi sed
nobiliores, and have a limited Jurisdiction in Causis Pecuniariis, not unlike
the Commissaries ad 50 solidos, and thereafter 300 aureos, as appears by L.
Jubemus C. de Epist. and authent. ibi inserta toto tit. C. de defens. Civitatum.


Though the favorable Nature of Consistorial Causes, and the necessity of a
several and peculiar Judicatory for them, be evident for the Reasons and
difficulty foresaid, and from the Pattern of Antiquity; It will appear more
clearly from representing the Inconvenients that will follow, if Consistories
be suppressed, and by answering the Objections against these Courts.

The Inconvenients are these 1. Omnis mutatio etiam in melius est periculosa;
Especially of a Fundamental Law and Policy, which has ever been alse ancient
as any monument of Law and Policy in this Country The Antiquity of the
Practique of Consistories, is evident from the Titles de Testam. In quot parts
dividuntur bona testatoris, de testibus and executoribus testamentariis; and
diverse others of the Majesty, which were published in the time of K. David 1.
about 500 Years since.
2. Unless there be a Judicatory appointed for these Causes, it cannot be
conceaved how Defuncts Wills shall be observed, how Minors, Orphans, Widows,
Legators and Creditors shall be secured. 3. Whereas it may be conceived (and as
we hear is urged by some men, who know not the nature of Testaments, nor use of
Consistories) that a General Register may be kept of Testaments, as of
Sasines, and Hornings, without necessity of Confirmation: The keeping of such a
Register cannot supply the want of Consistories, if they should be suppressed;
Because albeit a Register could be kept of Testament Testamentars given up by
the Defunct and presented to be registrate by Executors; The Registration of
them cannot be urged, if the Executors be unwilling, or the nearest of Kin, who
is possibly Interessed by the nomination of Executors, and leaving of Legacies,
to keep up the Testament, except there be a Judicatory for Confirmation of
Testaments; and Edicts served, and Intromittors charged to give up Inventar;
Neither can any time be limited for registration of Testaments: And the
Certification of Nullity, in case of not Registrations within the time
appointed, should be Injustice; because Testaments are not the Deeds of Parties
concerned, viz. Executors and Legators, but the Wills of Defuncts, which may be
unknown to those who have most Interest: and therefore the not Registration of
them cannot be imputed to them, as of Sasines and Hornings which are the Deeds
of the Parties themselves, and cannot be unknown to them. 4. When Defuncts have
not made Testaments, it cannot be conceaved (if there be not a Judicatory for
Confirmation of Testaments) how the nearest of Kin should be decerned and
confirmed Executors Dative, how Licenses should be given, quando dubia est
haereditas, and apparently damnosa, and when haereditas est caduca; and neither
an Executor is nominate, nor the nearest of Kin craveth to be confirmed; how
the Defuncts Goods should be preserved to Minors and Creditors, if the
Procurator-Fiscal be not decerned, and either become comptable, or a
surrogation of Parties interessed: And when Testaments have been already
confirmed, how shall Testaments, ad omissa and male appretiata and non executa
be expede? How shall Executors Creditors be decerned? How shall the intricate
Questions be decerned, and Disputs incident in the Confirmation of Testaments
be decided, anent the Nullity and Falsehood of Testaments, the competition of
the nearest of Kin, with the Executor Nominate, of the Executor ad omissa, with
the Executor confirmed? Of the Executor ad non executa, with the Executor of
the Defunct? Executors anent the Praelation of Creditors, and others of that
nature?

The Confirmation of Testaments, and the decision of Causes Matrimonial and
Testamentary, cannot be devolved upon the Lords of Session, without great
prejudice, 1. Because the Lords are already overburdened with great Business,
and weighty Causes of Heretages, and great Importance; and therefore have been
forced to discharge themselves of Actions possessory of Molestation, Jam. 6.
Parl. 11. Cap. 42. 1587. Ratifying a former Act of of the said Lords, whereby
these Actions are remitted to other Judges; because the multitude of Affairs
before the Lords empeaches greatly the ordinary Course of Justice: And it is
not possible to the Lords to try the Verity so well, (which are the Words of
the Act, and Motive of making of it.) 2. The Lords have not time to hear
Parties, and urge earnestly calling and dispatch of the Businesses of greatest
Consequence; far less can they have time to urge Parties to confirm Testaments,
and to enquire, and take course anent Defuncts Goods, ne dissipentur to the
prejudice of Creditors and Minors; which should be done, and is incumbent to
the Commissaries ex officio, albeit Parties urge not. 3. The Lords Procedure by
reason of multitude of Business before them, is not peremptor; and Parties
after long and expensive attendance, having prepared their Business for
hearing, cannot be assured to have them called and expede, whereas Process
before the Commissars are peremptor; and Summons bear not continuations which
is necessarly required in favorable Causes, concerning Minors and poor People
who cannot attend; But especially in Edicts and Testaments, which cannot bide
delay, least Minors Goods should perish: And are so privileged that in Vacant
and feriat times, they may be, and are ordinarily expede, without necessity of a
license. All Questions and Causes, and probation of Adultery on Impotency, the
Disputs whether frigiditas sit natura vel Art, utrum ante matrimonium aut
superveniens; Vtrum maleficium sit solubile an insolubile, and others of that
Nature, cannot be agitate verecunde, in so public and eminent a Judicatory,
prima instantia.

These Causes much less can be remitted to Sheriffs, and other inferior
Judges. 1. By reason of the Gravity and Intricacy of them Praetor, etsi
Patricius and inter Maximos Magistratus. Cognoscebat de Legatis; and peculiaris
Praetor constitutus est qui de fideicommissis jus dicat; hoc autem
testamentariarum causarum membrum perexiguum est, L. Si cui Legatum ff. de
condit. and demonst. L. 2. ff. de origin Juris 32, and ibi Cujac.
2. The Sheriffs have either their Offices Heretable and Patrimonial, or chosen
yearly by his Majesty; The first cannot have their Right of Jurisdictions
enlarged to Causes of such gravity, without a new Grant and Right from his
Majesty; and here how little favorable Heretable Offices are, It is constant
from Law and Reason, by the Act 44. Ja. 2. Parl. 11. It is Ordained that no
Office should be given in Fee, and Heretage; (Skeen de verb. Sign. in Verbo
Sheriffs) Because in Jurisdiction persona eligitur, and both Heretable and
other Sheriffs are known to be Gentlemen who understand not the Law, nor the
way of Process, and are forced to delegate pedaneos Judices; and to depute
their Friends and Servants, who have no knowledge of the Law, and being changed
yearly, have no time to learn the least formality of Process; Sheriffs should
answer for their Deputs, Jam. 1. Parl. 1. C. 6. 1404. Ja. 3. Pa 5. C. 26. 1469.
3. Sheriffs, who in Conscience, and according to our Acts of Parliament, are
liable to answer for their Deputs, may think it hard that Causes of such weight
and Difficulty, which cannot be decided but by such as understand the Civil and
Canon Law, should be remitted upon their perrils to be Judged by Deputs. 4. The
Sheriffs Jurisdiction both Civil and Criminal, is so large, (as is represented
by the learned Skeen, de Verb. Sign. in Verbo Sheriffs.) that it cannot be
extended, without great Prejudices, to Causes and Actions of a different
nature; Because Removings, Molestations, Ejections, Services, and other Actions
competent to be judged by the Sheriffs, are for the most part real and
possessory, and may be easily decided by the customary Law of the Country, and
Acts of Parliament; Whereas Testamentary and other Consistorial Causes, are in
apicibus Juris; and cannot be decided, but by the Civil and Canon Law, not
authoritative, but according to the equity of the said Law, which must be known
to those who are Judges in these Causes.

The prejudices and common Objections against Commissariots are these. 1mo.
That they are Episcopal Courts. 2do. That Official Courts are suppressed in
England. 3tio. Exorbitancy of Quots, and other abuses are great in these Courts.

That the first may be cleared, It is to be considered that Jura Episcopalia
are of two sorts. 1mo. Such as are usurped by Bishops as intrinsically inherent
in the pretended Office of Bishops. 2do. Such as extrinsically belong to them
by the Grant of Princes or otherways; These of the former sort (as their
usurped Jurisdiction over their Brethren) are extinct with the Office. The
last sort is not to be suppressed, if they be useful and necessary: Thus the
temporal Jurisdiction of Bishops was Reserved to Baillies of Regalities,
conform to the Infeftment to be holden of His Majesty: Thus Episcopal
Patronages are not extinct, but are to be disposed upon as the Estates shall
think expedient, and sic de caeteris. That the Jurisdiction of Commissaries as
it is now established is of this kind. There is an express Canon in decret.
did. 88. Episcopus tuitionem Testamentorum non suscipiat, and the gloss
explains tuitionem. And it is clear from the (...) of the (...) of the decretal
de Testamentis cap. 13. and cap. 17 executio Testamentorum devolvitur ad
Episcopum tantum, cum aliquid Ecclesiae vel ad pios usus relinquitur, tunc enim
secundum piissimas Leges voluntates dilatas Episcopali studio decens est
adimpleri; Where the word Secundum piissimas Leges is considerable, and argues
that they had that privilege only, by Imperial Laws which is received in the
Gloss, and is cleared from the Cod de Episcop: audient: and de Episcop: and
Cleritis; and from the Authent. That Matrimonial causes were competent only to
be judged in Civil Judicatories.
It appears 1mo. Because it is clear from the Civil and Canon Law; That
consistorial Causes non pertinebant ad Episcopalem Audientiam in the times of
the greatest Grandeur, and in the most Superstitious Times; And that Churchmen
were prohibit to meddle with them, as Absurd, and most incompetent to be Judged
by them, as is evinced by Citations supra at the Letter (B.) But these Causes
were assumed by these Judicatories in the Latter Times, upon pretext that they
were pious and favorable, and by the Connivance of Princes Theologi
Germanicarum Ecclesiarum in articulis Smalcaldicis hanc jurisdictionem ex
postliminio tantum jure exercuerunt. and quidem non adeo veteri, ut ex Cod. and
Novel. jure apparet, causas se: Matrimoniales a Magistratu politico
diiudicandas, vide Altar damasc: p. 462. It is acknowledged by these who are
most for enlarging Episcopal Government, That jure municipali tantum,
confirmato Ecclesiastico, ad Episcopalem Jurisdictionem pertinet Testamenta
probare and insinuari facere, Beza de Repudiis and Divortiis concludes, Jure
certe suo non tantum Prophetae sed Christiani and Religiosi principes, leges de
conjugiis posecrunt Vide Altar Damas. cap. 6. per totum.
2do. The Jurisdiction of Commissaries as it is now established, was erected by
Q. Mary in time of greatest purity and Reformation, and a Commission granted by
her to the Commissaries of Edinburgh. An. 1563. And is warranted by diverse
Acts of Par. Viz. Ja. 6. P. 1. C. 28. 1567. (The which Year, the Lords of
Session made certain Instructions for the Commissaries of Edinburgh, and other
inferior Commissaries) By another Act of his 7 Par. 1581. which is the 26 in
the Catalogue of the Unprinted Acts, and contains a Commission for
confirmation of Testaments and placeing of Commissaries. By an Act of his 12.
Parl. 1592 the 25. of his Unprinted Acts, Entitled a Ratification of the
Commisariot of Edinburgh. By the Act. 179. of his 13. Par. 1593. Ordaining
Letters of Horning to be direct upon Decreets of Provosts and Baillies of
Burrows as is granted upon Commissaries Precepts. 3tio. It is most evident from
the 6 Act of his 20 Par. 1609. That the Jurisdiction of Commissaries is a
Temporal Jurisdiction, acknowledged by the Act to flow from His Majesty, as
well as any other ordinar Jurisdiction, which His Majesty might have granted to
any Subject as well as Bishops; And which is granted by the said Act to the
Lords of Session, as His Majesty's great Consistory for Reduction of
Commissaries Decreets; And which before he granted to the Earl of Argyle, whose
Heretable Right of the Commissariot of Argyle, is reserved by the said Act.

There is a great difference betwixt the Official Courts of England, and the
Commissariots as they are Established in this Country, Because Commissariots
being considered either Objective, In regard of the Object and Causes
Consistorial; Or formaliter ratione modi quo versantur circa Objectum, in
regard of the way of procedure in these Courts, Commissariots are Civil and
Temporal Judicatories in both respects, in respect of Confirmation of
Testaments and Testamentary Causes, and Matrimonial, de impotentia Maleficio
and de Natalibus. Bastards and others of that nature are incompetent to be
Judged in Sessions, Presbytries and Assemblies (which are the true
Ecclesiastical Courts) and therefore is acknowledged to be merely Civil,
because Summonds are direct by the Commissaries under the Signet of Office,
bearing His Majesty's Name and Arms, the Certification is Civil, Witnesses are
Summoned under Civil and pecunial pains, and Letters are directed for
compelling them to compear under the pain of Horning: The Execution of
Sentences is Civil, by poinding or comprising for Liquidate Sums; Or by a
Charge to fulfill what is in facto, upon the Commissars Precept; Or by a Charge
of Horning upon the Letters; And by intenting Action of deforcement before the
Commissaries or the Lords of Session. But the Officials Jurisdiction was
Episcopale, Ecclesiastical in both the former Respects, and was continued as it
had been in the Popish Church; The Bishops usurping the Jurisdiction that
belonged to Sessions Presbytries and Assemblies; and delegating to their
Officials their Jurisdiction, both Objective, in Causes competent to be judged
in Church Judicatories; And Formaliter in the way of procedure competent only
to the Church. By the Canon of the English Church they were Judges in causa non
modo instantiarum sed Correctionis and disciplinae, they had a Superintendance
over Ministers, to advert that they should do their Duty in their Charges;
Ministers and Churchmen were accusable before them, and being contumacious and
not appearing might be Suspended and Excommunicate; They were Judges whether
Crimen be notorium and publicum or not; And upon pretext that it was not
public and Scandalous, poterant mutare poenitentiam in mulctam pecuniariam;
They usurped Sacrilegiously the power of the Church and Ecclesiastic Censures,
and by the fulminating at random Excommunications for small matters, as small
Debts, Viccarrage Teinds, the Official and his Officers Fees, and for
Non-compearance in their Courts: And by their easy Absolution upon small
satisfaction and for Money, made Excommunication contemptible Vide Altar
Damasc. Cap. de officialibus. Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Sect. 6.
For these and other Abuses intrinsical to the Judicatory it self, These Courts
have been long ago cried down on these grounds by diverse Learned and well
affected Men, and lately suppressed: But the instance of their ruin cannot with
reason be adduced to subvert Consistories, they being altogether different and
absolutely Civil in their Institution, object and way of Process, and no more
Ecclesiastical than the Church Regalities, which had an Extrinsical dependence
on Bishops in the way of holding.

It is already cleared, That if any Abuses be in these Courts they are not
essential resulting upon the nature and Constitution of the Judicatory, but
accidental, which may be Reformed, without the subversion of so old and so
useful a Judicatory. 2do. If Commissaries either be not qualified or corrupt,
It is wished they may be tried, and removed, and a solid course taken for
obviating the like Abuses thereafter, that places be not venal, but proposed
and disposed as rewards of Virtue to able and deserving Men 3tio. The
Exorbitancy of Fees and Quotts may be Regulated, by taking course anent the
presentation to settled places, that honest and ingenious Men be presented,
that a Competency of settled and constant Fees be allotted to encourage honest
and able Men to pretend to these places, and to enable themselves for them, and
that they may live creditably and honestly in them, and Quotts may be abridged,
and it may be provided that small Testaments may be free of Quot; And the Quots
of great Testaments may be limited, not to exceed a certain Sum, which the
Estates shall think reasonable to be the highest Quot: The Quot Silver which
shall be thought fit to be taken may be employed (the Commissaries being
satisfied of their Fees) to pious uses.

Consolidation.
A Person having Right by Assignation to a comprysing of Lands holden of
himself, whether eo ipso that he has the foresaid Right, will the Property
consolidate with the Superiority? Seeing a Comprysing is equivalent to a
Disposition and Resignation thereupon: And the Superior having Right by an
Assignation to a Disposition whereupon there is Resignation, and to the said
Resignation; It seems that in that case there is Consolidation: In respect the
Superior upon such an Assignation in favors of a Stranger will be obliged to
Infeft him: And because he cannot Infeft himself, the Law does introduce
Consolidation. Ratio Dubitandi is, That Consolidation is upon the matter a
Seasin of the Property; And a Seasin being facti, cannot be without some deed
of the Person, in whose favors the Consolidation is to be made, Declaring that
he accepts a Right to the effect foresaid. If it be not fit in such cases, that
the Superior should before a Notar and Witnesses Declare, that seeing he has
both a Right to the Property and Superiority in his Person, It is his will and
intention that the Property should be consolidate with the Superiority; And
that an Instrument upon his Declaration foresaid should be equivalent as if the
Compryser had been Infeft and had resigned ad Remanentiam: And if such an
Instrument should not be Registrate as an Instrument of Resignation ad
Remanentiam?

When a Person Infeft in the Property of Lands, acquires and is Infeft in the
Superiority. Quaeritur, If eo ipso there be a Consolidation of both Rights?
Item if the Superior succeed as Heir to the Right of the Property Quaeritur, If
in that case there be a Consolidation, so that Dominium directum trahit ad se
utile? Seeing the Superior could not Infeft himself, and by his purchasing of
the Property he enters to the Right thereof, and so the Property is consolidate
fictione juris, in the same manner as if he had been Infeft.

If vice versa, The Proprietar acquire the Superiority, If eo casu there be a
Consolidation of both Rights? Answer. It is thought, not: And that Dominium
utile cannot draw to it directum, without Infeftment by the Superior of the
Dominium directum.

If a Person being Infeft by his Father upon a Right granted to him and his
Heirs whatsomever to be holden of the Disponer; be thereafter Infeft as Heir to
his Father in the Superiority of the said Lands, which belonged to his Father
and his Heirs Male. Quaeritur. Whether there will be a Confusion and
Consolidation of the Property and Superiority? It is Answered. During his
Lifetime there will be a kind of Consolidation, seeing he cannot be Superior
to himself: But it will cease by his Death, so that the Superiority will belong
to his Heirs Male, and the Property to his Heirs whatsomever.

If he intends that there should be a Consolidation, what course is to be taken
to that purpose? Answer. If, as in the case foresaid, he was Infeft first in
the Property and then in the Superiority, he must dispone the Property to a
Confident; And the Confident being Infeft must resign ad Remanentiam, to the
effect the Property may be consolidate with the Superiority to him and his
Heirs Male and their Successors.

If a Superior should succeed in the right of the Property. Quaeritur. If there
be a confusion of both Rights in his Person? Answer. It is thought, though they
may appear to be a Consolidation dureing his Lifetime, they are nevertheless
distinct; Seeing the right of the Superiority may be to Heirs Male, and the
Property to Heirs whatsomever: And the said Heirs may succeed Respective.

If the said Superior, being Infeft in the Right of the Superiority, succeed
thereafter in the Right of the Property, what way shall he be Infeft therein,
seeing he cannot Infeft himself? Answer. It is thought that it is not
inconsistent, that the Superior may give Precept to give Seasin to an Actorney
in his name and for his use.

If the said Superior intend that the Property should be consolidate with the
Superiority, what way shall it be done? Answer. He may direct the said Precept
in these Terms for Infefting him: And seeing he has both Rights in his Person
and intends that the Property should be consolidate with the Superiority; The
Precept may be in these Terms, to give Seasin to the effect the Property may be
consolidate with the Superiority; To be holden both of his Superior in all time
coming, in the same manner as if they had never been severed.

If a Precept may not be obtained in subsidium out of the Chancery, for
Infefting the said Person in the property to be holden of himself, seeing he
cannot Infeft himself? Answer. It is thought that a course may be taken upon a
Bill to the Lords, ordaining the Director to the Chancery to direct a Precept
upon the reason foresaid.

Decreets contra Consortes.
A Decree of Reduction Ex capite interdictionis being obtained in foro; and
the Wife being Liferentrix craving to be reponed, because Competent and omitted
could not be alleged against her being sub potestate Mariti. Quaeritur. If she
prevail, may the Husband crave the benefit of her Decree? Ratio Dubitandi.
Upon pretense that it is found that the Decree against him was unjust upon the
matter: And it cannot be just as to her and unjust as to him.

This Question may occur in many cases; As that of two Heirs portioners, one
being Major and another Minor: And after the Decree against both, The Minor
being Reponed and prevailing. And of a Decree against a principal, having
proponed a Defense of payment and having succumbed in probation: And thereafter
the Cautioner being pursued, and upon probation of the same Defense, being
Assoilied.

Corporations.
QVid juris as to Crafts and other Incorporations, and as to Bishops and other
single Incorporations, if in any case they may oblige themselves and their
successors?

Creditors of the Defunct.
IF the Creditors of the Defunct being Minors will be preferred to the
Creditors of the Heir, though they do not Diligence within three Years?

Persons convict of Capital Crimes.
A Person being convict of a Capital Crime, and the Escheat of his Movables
therethrough falling to the King, and he being kept in prison many Years
without a Remission, and dying in that condition. Quaeritur, Whether the Rents
of his Lands in the interim not uplifted, will belong to the King and his
Donator, or to the Heir? Ratio Dubitandi, His Escheat is only of what he had
the time of the Sentence; after which he became civiliter mortuus; and being
nullus in Law, he had nothing to loss; And the King by his Indulgence could not
prejudge his Heir, unless he had granted him a Remission restoring him against
the Sentence.

Quaeritur, quid Juris, If after he is convict, he should commit Treason,
whether he might be Forefaulted in prejudice of his Heir?

Curator.
A Female Minor being Married, Quaeritur, If the Office of her Curatory does
expire?

Curatores ad Lites.
JVre Saxonico, Faeminae sunt in perpetua Tutela, sed isti Curatores non habent
Administrationem, and ideo Rations non tenentur reddere; adhibentur enim
tantum pro consilio and assistentia, and ad integrandam personam, maxim in
Judicialibus.

Ex consilio suo, quod fideliter impertiuntur, etiamsi non responderit eventus,
conveniri nequeunt, quia nemo ex consilio obligatur: An idem dicendum in
Curatoribus ad Lites? These. Bes. in litera K. 47. verbo Kriegerischer. per.
totam page 474. and sequent.

D.
Damnum, cum quis utitur Jure suo.
DAmnum est conjunctum cum injuria: Et non dicitur Damnum quod Evenit cum quis
jure suo utitur.

Si vero quis ita utatur Jure suo, ut vicino potius noceat quam sibi prosit,
illicitum est, and prohiberi potest: Quia magis Jure suo abuti quam uti videtur.

Si in meo aliquid faciam ad aemulationem and injuriam alterius, hoc est, non
in meam utilitatem sed animo nocendi; alteri de Dolo Teneor.

Secus si injuria faciam, non animo nocendi vicino sed ut mihi prosit.

Si enim in meo praedio puteum aperiam, quo aperto, venae putei vel fontis
vicini mei praecidantur, non teneor ex hujusmodi facto etiamsi promisissem de
Damno infecto, quia jure meo and licite feci. Textus sunt expressi, Leg. 1..
12. and Leg. 21. ff. de aqua pluvia arcenda, Jus Fluviat. p. 67. n. 13.

Deathbed.
IF a Creditor may on Deathbed make an Heretable Sum Moveable by a Charge of
Horning?

A Person holding Lands Ward, when he was on Deathbed did resign his Estate in
favors of his eldest Son, with the Burden of Provisions in favors of his
other Children; which course was taken of purpose, to prevent the falling of
the Ward and Marriage, his Son being then Minor. Quaeritur. If his Son may
question these Provisions as being in Lecto, upon pretense that though on
Deathbed he might Dispone in favors of his Heir, yet he could not prejudge
him? Answer. It is thought that the said Right being made suo modo, and he
having accepted the same and bruiked by virtue thereof, after Majority he
cannot question the said Modus and Qualification.

A Person having provided his Estate both Heretable and Moveable to his Relict
in Liferent, and to his Daughter in Fee, and Failieing of her by Decease to be
divided betwixt his Relict and his Brother, being his next Heir after his
Daughter and her Heirs. And the Brother having accepted of a share of the
Moveable Estate after the Decease of the Daughter. Quaeritur. If he might
question the said Right as to the Heretable Estate as being made on Deathbed?
Ratio Dubitandi. Vtile per inutile non vitiatur, and the Defunct might on
Deathbed dispose on his Movables; And the accepting of the Right as to these
does not hinder the Heir to question the same as to the Heretage; Whereof he
had no power then to dispose.

A Husband having Disponed Lands by way of Gift to his Wife, and having
thereafter revocked the said Gift tacit by a Disposition made on Deathbed in
favors of another person. Quaeritur. If the Heir may question the said
Disposition upon Deathbed? Ratio Dubitandi, The Heir is not prejudged, in
respect the Lands would not have belonged to him but to the Wife: And the
Revocation is qualified and only in favors of the Person to whom it is made on
Deathbed, and to no other effect.

Debtor and Creditor.
IF for a Sum of Money, Land be Wodsett, so that the granter of the Wadset is
not Debtor, There being no Clause of Requisition or Obligement for repayment,
Quaeritur, If there be only a Reversion, Whether will the granter of the Wadset
have the benefit of the Act Debtor and Creditor; so that the haver of the
Wadset may be restricted to the Annualrent of the Sum contained in the
Reversion? Grubet contra Moir.

After a Comprising was deduced, an Infeftment of Annualrent was granted by the
Debtor: And thereafter another Compriser having comprised, who pretended that
his Compriseing should be drawn back to the first, being within Year and Day,
and therefore should be preferred to the Right of Annualrent: And that the
Debtor being denuded by the first Compriseing, had only a Reversion; and that
an Infeftment of Annualrent is not habilis modus, to give a right of Reversion;
and that it was not, nor could be cled with Possession; The second Compriseing
being before the term of payment: The Lords brought in the Annualrenter with
all the Comprisers, as if he had comprised the same day he was infeft. Colstoun
contra Nicolas a Creditor of Dunglass. Gibson Clerk. Colstoun's Bond was 16
February 1669; Seasin 24 May 1669, Nicolas Compriseing 1669.

If the first Compriseing and Infeftment should be considered as being to the
behoof, not only of the Adjudger Infeft, but of the others, by the Act of
Parliament, in the same manner as if the Infeftment had been so granted
expressly by the Superior? Quaeritur, Quid Juris? Ratio Dubitandi, That even in
that case the Adjudger Infeft is only Vassal, so that by him only the Superior
has his Casualities. Bancrief.

Nomina Debitorum.
IF Nomina, which are not Res, But Entia Rationis, have Situm, when the Debtor
is in Scotland animo remanendi, and the Debt is contracted with him, as
resideing there? Ratio Dubitandi, They are thought and called a Personal
Interest, and therefore should sequi Personam. Contra, They are, Res in
Obligatione and potentia. 2. If the Creditor be forefaulted in France, being a
Frenchman, they do not forefault to that King, Quia subditus amittit only quae
sunt civitatis. 3. They are liable in Scotland to extraordinary Taxations. 4.
The Debtor is quasi servus, and servi habent situm. To consider Quid Juris
elsewhere, as to Banks and montes Pietatis.

Strangers Debts.
IF a Stranger contract with a Scots-man abroad, that he should pay him
presently upon the Place, and the Debtor nevertheless come away without
satisfaction. Quid Juris as to that Debt, whether it be construed Nomen
Anglicum?

Quid Juris as to English-debts, contracted betwixt Englishmen in England, if
the Debtor withdraws to Scotland? Answer, It is thought, that though actor
sequitur forum rei, and the Law of Scotland has place in such Cases, quoad
Ordinatoria, yet the English overruled such Cases quoad Decisoria: And a
Testament proven in England is sufficient.

Debitum Annuum.
A Brother having given a Liferent-tack to his Brother of a yearly Duty of
Victual out of his Lands, to be paid yearly during all the days of his
lifetime at Martimass; and the Tacks-man having deceased before that Term, will
he have any part of that years Duty in which he deceaseth? And if there be a
difference betwixt Debitum annuum and Legatum annuum, cujus dies cedit anni
initio? Mr. William Turnbul Minister of Mokerston, contra Turnbul of Minto.

Debitum in Diem.
WHat course should be taken when the Debt is in Diem, and the Term of Payment
not come; and the Debitors Estate comprised, and the Comprising for other Debts
like to expire before the Creditor in Diem, can have a Decree and Execution
thereupon? Sir Robert Sinclair's Daughter.

Decimae.
AV Commencement Les dismes n'estoyent le domaine des gens d'eglise: et les
dons des dismes que les Princes et Seigneurs ont fait aux Moines (qui lors
n'estoient du nombre des Clercs) ont este faites de leur biens propres?

Plusieurs payoient les dismes par devotion sans contrainte, de ces payments
fut faite coustume qui causa obligation qui Engendra action pour contraindre a
payer les dismes. Grimand. de dismes lib. 1. cap. 4.

La contrainte de payer dismes primierement, N'eut fondement certain sur
l'authorite du Magistrate Civil, car il ne se trouve aucune constitution pour
payement des dismes dans les Loix Imperiales, Ibidem.

Charlemagne fut le premier qui les commanda payer Ibid.

Decreets of the Lords of Session.
WHether the Sentences of the Lords of Session should be considered as Laws,
and if notwithstanding thereof, these who are of another Opinion may in cases
occurring thereafter, vote according to their own Opinion?

Deeds both inter Vivos and Mortis Causa.
IF it appear by a Paper in legitima potestate, That the Defunct intended to
settle his Estate, both Heretable and Moveable, Whether will the same be valide
as to both, so that both a Testament and Deed inter vivos may be consistent in
one Paper? Ratio Dubitandi, If at the same time there had been a Paper apart,
in the same Terms, it had been a valid Right as to the Heretable Estate, being
Delivered: And it appears that it were against Reason that it should be invalid
because it is in a Paper containing a Testament, seeing utile per inutile non
vitiatur. Captain Ross.

Dependence.
INhibitions and Arrestments may be upon Dependence of an Action: Quaeritur, If
when two Citations are necessar, the Summons with the first Citation thereupon,
will import a Dependence before the second Citation?

Destination of Succession.
A Bond being granted to a Sister by her Brother for Provision, and to the
Heirs of her Body, whilk failieing to return to him and his Heirs: Whether may
she assign it without an Onerous Cause? Jean Drummond contra Riccarton her
Brother.

Whether the said Bond be moveable, and will fall under Executory?

Humbie, By Contract of Marriage betwixt him and Wariestoun's Daughter, being
bound to resign for an Infeftment to himself, and the Heirs Male of the
Marriage; Which failieing his Heirs Male whatsomever, Quaeritur, If there be no
Heirs Male of the Marriage, will his other Heirs Male have action of Implement;
The said Obligement being only in Favors of the Marriage?

If as to other Heirs (That being only a Destination) he may alter it at any
time, etiam in Lecto, in favors of the Heir whatsomever of the Marriage? Quod
in Favorem introductum est, in odium non retorquetur.

If a Bond were granted by a Person in the same Terms, and were lying by him,
might he alter or destroy it in lecto?

Desuetudo.
LEx non dicitur sublata per non usum, sed per contrarium usum. Baldus ad Tit.
ff. de Legibus and Cod. quae sit longa consuetudo, Heiring: de Molendinis,
Quaest. 37. N. 38.

Dies coeptus.
IN Favorabilibus Dies coeptus habetur pro completo: v. g. Pubes dicitur annum
decimumquartum complevisse, cum diem ejus ultimum attigit.

Dilapidation.
THE Act of Parliament 1585 against Dilapidations, provides, That Bishops to be
provided thereafter, should find Caution to leave their Benefice as it was at
their Entry: and if the Person so provided should do otherways, the Tacks and
other Deeds should be void. Quaritur, If they should find Tacks set at their
entry, Whether they may set new Tacks after the expireing thereof; the Benefit
being in the same case by the new Tacks as at their Entry? Cogitandum.

Dishabilitation.
QVaeritur, If by our Law the Posterity of Traitors may be disabled, and what
may be the import of the Dishabilitation? and whether etiam Ante-nati may be
disabled?

Power to Dispone, notwithstanding the giving away the Right of Fee.
WHen Lands are disponed, reserving a Power to the Disponer to dispone the same
in hail or in part, as if he were Fiar, Quaeritur, If he be thereafter
forefaulted, will the King have the same faculty by the Forfeiture? Answer, The
said Faculty being Personal to the Disponer, upon personal Considerations, such
Reservations being in Rights granted by Parents to their Children, to be Ties
upon them that they be dutyful; and because Parents may come to be in that
condition that they may need, and it is just that they have recourse to their
own Estate: Seeing the said Considerations do not militate as to the Fisk, the
said Faculty cannot be pretended to be transmitted.

Quid Juris, In the Case of a Compriser, whether the said Faculty can be
comprised? Answer, That the Debtor having the Faculty foresaid ought to
dispone for satisfaction of a just Debt; And if he be so unjust as not to
satisfy the Debt, the Law may, and does dispone: and in Law the Compriseing
being a Legal Disposition, is equivalent as if the Disposition had been made by
himself.

Dispositio collata in arbitrium alterius.
A Person not being satisfied that his nearest Kinsmen should succed him,
having a great Estate, and they but mean, and who, he conceived could not
represent him creditfully; and not being fully resolved who should represent
him, lest he should be prevented with death, did therefore dispone his Estate
in Lands, to such two Persons most worthy of his Name; or upon Mortifications,
or such Pious Uses, as Ten of his Friends named in the Disposition, being a
Deed inter vivos, should think fit. Quaeritur, If the Friends should
accordingly name two Persons, would the Right be valid? Ratio Dubitandi, 1.
Mandatum expirat morte mandantis: And if he could not dispone himself on
Deathbed, much less could he empower another Person to dispone after his
Decease. 2. Paria sunt indebito tempore fieri and in tempus indebitum conferri.
3. A Deed cannot be said to be a perfect Deed inter vivos, unless it were
consummate in substantialibus, and the Person Cui, is de substantia. 4. No
Power can be given by a Person, who has no Right himself but as Procurator or
Commissioner, and such Powers do expire with the Granter. 5. There can no Right
validly be given incertae personae, or ex alieno arbitrio in futuro. 6. The
Defunct could not give Power to the said Friends, to dispose of his Personal
Estate after his Decease, and a pari or majori, he could not give such a Power
as to his Heretable Estate. Mr. John Bayne of Pitcairly.

Disposition.
IF a Person get a Right and Disposition omnium Bonorum; Whether will he be
liable to the Debt of the Disponer?

Actio ad Distractum.
EX Contractu non agitur ad Distractum, sed ad implementum: and Contractus and
Transactio non aliter annullantur ex defectu Implementi, quam si praecesserit
monitio ad implendum, and deinceps culpa implere Debentis. Hering. de Molend.
Quaest. 11. N. 132. and 133.

Division of the Duties of Lands, betwixt Buyer and Seller.
BY the ordinary Custom when Lands are sold, If it be a Whitsundays Bargain,
the whole years Duty is assigned: If it be a Martimass-Bargain, only the half
year. Quaeritur, If they be not assigned, Quid Juris as to the said Duties?
Answer, It is thought, the Buyer will be in the Case, as we have said of a
Compryser: But the Question will be if the Bargain be made after Martimass, and
before Candlemass the ordinar Term of Payment of Victual? And then it is
thought, that the Buyer should be in the same case, as if the Bargain had been
made precisely at Martimass, if the price be then paid, or in condition to be
paid, with the Annualrent from Martimass: Seeing the Disponer is in no worse
case than if the Bargain had been made precisely at Martimass.

Donatio inter Virum and Vxorem.
A Woman being induced to consent to a Right granted by her Husband of her
Conjunct Fee Lands, and making Faith not to question it. Quaeritur. If she may
so far revock a Donation as to her Husband, that she may crave the equivalent?

Donatio inter Virum and Vxorem being ipso jure Null, But so that morte
confirmatur. Quaeritur. If a posterior Creditor of the Husbands should Comprise
Lands given to the Wife, during the Marriage before the Husbands Death, will
his Death confirm the deed in prejudice of the Creditor; The Comprysing being
medium impedimentum?

If at least the Legal will belong to the Wife, The Husband not Revocking?

If the Husband decease without Revocking. Quaeritur. If the Wife will have
Action against the Heir upon that ground, that the Debt is paid out of her
Estate by the Comprysing on the Husbands posterior Bond?

Lands being Disponed by a Husband to his Wife, and thereafter he having
Disponed the same to another person in Lecto aegritudinis. Quaeritur. If his
Heir may question the Right in Lecto? Ratio Dubitandi, It is not made in his
prejudice but of his Wife: And the Revocation is only in favors of the
Receiver of the Disposition.

A Debtor having contracted Debt after he had made a Right of Land or any
other Donation in favors of his Wife. Quaeritur. If eo ipso he has Revocked
Tacit the said Donation? Ratio Dubitandi. The Donatio inter virum and uxorem
is Null, and morte tantum confirmatur; And before it became valid the said
impediment interveened: And since the Debtor might have Revocked the said Gift
and might have satisfied the Creditor that way; his Silence and not Revocking
is upon the matter fraudulent, and in prejudice of the Creditor. It is thought,
That it is to be considered, if the Debtor or his Heir have no other Estate,
out of which the Creditor may be satisfied; In that case the Creditor may have
recourse against the Lands Disponed to the Wife.

If in the case foresaid the Wife may have recourse against the Heir for the
Lands given to her so evicted? Ratio Dubitandi. That if the contracting the
Debt after such Donations import Revocation, it ought to be only in favors of
the Creditor and not of the Heir, who ought to be in no better case, and the
Wife's Action against the Heir may be upon that ground, That out of the Estate
belonging to her (unquestionably as to the Heir) the Debt whereto the Heir is
Liable is satisfied.

A Woman having made a Disposition to a third person to the behoof of her
Husband, and having ratified and made Faith before a Judge. Quaeritur. If she
may question the said Deed as being Donatio inter Virum and Vxorem
notwithstanding her Oath? Answer. It is thought she may: And that Deeds that in
Law are invalid cannot be sustained upon pretense of an Oath which ought not to
be Vinculum iniquitatis; otherwise eadem facilitate that a Wife is induced to
give, she may be induced to Swear, and the Law should be Elusory: And such
Oaths ought to be understood only, that they are not compelled, and that they
shall not question such Deeds upon that head; But not in relation to any other
Ground whereby they may be questioned; As v. g. Minority, and that the Wife has
Curators not consenting: And that the Husband (if she has no other) is Curator
and cannot Authorize her to any Deed in rem suam: And the Act of Parliament
anent the Oaths of Wives is in favors of Strangers and not of Husbands.

Donatio mortis Causa.
THere being a Donation inter virum and uxorem. Quaeritur, The Donator
Deceasing and the Donant Surviving and not Revocking, whether will the Gift be
Valid? Ratio Dubitandi. Such Donations aequiparantur Legatis being always
Revocable: And Legatars Deceasing before the Testator their Legacies are void.

Donatio non acceptata.
IF a Donation be made but not accepted. Quaeritur, If a Creditor may Compryse
the same and accept? Vide Legacy quest. 4.

Donators upon Recognition and Forefaulture.
AFter Lands holden of the King had fallen under Recognition, they fell also
under Forefaulture, and after the Decease of the Forefaulted person a Gift of
the said Lands was given upon the Recognition, and thereafter another Gift was
given upon the Forefaulture; It not being known by the King or his Officers,
the time of the first Gift, that the person Forefaulted had committed Treason;
Quaeritur, Which of the Donators should be preferred? Ratio Dubitandi, That
Recognition is but a Casuality; And after the Vassal was Forefaulted the
property was thereby devolved to the King ipso jure; And all Casualities seem
to be Extinct, and consolidate with the Right of property: And the Right upon
Recognition does not belong to the Superior ipso jure before Declarator. Mcghie
of Larg.

Duels and Hame-sucken.
IF Hame-sucken or Fighting Duels be Capital though no person be killed?

Qui in Duello occubuerunt, in Locis religiosis sepeliri non possunt, Perez.
Lib. 2. Tit. 1.

E.
Emancipatio.
IF by our Law, Children after twenty five years may Emancipate themselves, and
live by themselves, and leave their Father and his Family? Cogitandum. And the
custom of other Nations is to be considered.

Whether if they go out of the Family without the Fathers consent they may
claim a Bairns part?

Contractus Emptionis a Pretio incipiens aut Mensura.
CVm emitur fundus tot jugerum, an si plura reperiantur jugera Emptori cedant,
an venditori? Respondetur. Cum pretium formatur a Mensura, and ab ea Contractus
incipit, and in singula jugera certum pretium promittitur, quod superest ad
venditorem redit, quod deest ab eo suppletur.

Sin Contractus incipit a specie, licet demonstrative aliqua mentio de modo
agri fiat; ut si vendo fundum centum jugera continentem, si plura reperiantur,
cedunt Emptori, nec ad augendum pretium tenetur: falsa enim fuit Demonstratio,
quae non nocet. These. Bes. in litera K. 9. verbo Kauffen. p. 453.

What way the Buyer may be urged to Enter.
IF the Buyer lie out what will be the remedy for the Superior? Answer. He may
pursue to hear and see him decerned to Enter, and to pay Composition: And
without prejudice of that Decerniture, if he continue to ly out, To hear and
see it found that the Lands are in Non-entry; And that the Superior as to
Casualities, shall be in the same case as if he were Entered.

Entry of Assigneys upon Resignation.
IF the Alienation and Resignation be Assigned, Quaeritur, If the Superior may
be compelled to enter the Assigney, seeing both are in favors of Heirs and
Assigneys? Answer. Negative, Unless a Composition be paid both for the Buyer
and for the Assigney: Seeing the Superior is not obliged to Enter any but the
Buyer and his Heirs: And though the Right be to Assigneys it is to be
understood such as the Superior should be satisfied with: And the Superior is
not to be in a worse case than if the Buyer had been Infeft and had Disponed:
And there is in this case Fictio brevis manus.

Entry upon Resignation by a singular successor.
WHat way a singular Successor in the Right of Superiority, may be urged to
Infeft upon Resignation in his Authors time; Seeing he does not represent him as
Heir; And is not bound to the Buyer by Contract or quasi? Answer. There is
obligatio in rem, as in the case of Servitudes and Annualrents; And he may be
pursued summarly to hear and see him decerned to Enter the Buyer: And to that
purpose to give him a Charter of the Tenor Exhibited: And upon a Bill the
Director to the Chancery may be ordered to give out a Precept in subsidium.

Liferent Escheat.
A Vassal having granted a subaltern Right being Year and Day at the Horn,
Forfaulteth only his own Right of Liferent without prejudice to the Sub-vassal:
Whereupon it may be Quaeried, If a Vassal has Disponed his Right but so that
the Party Acquirer is not Infeft, will notwithstanding the Disponers Liferent
fall? Answer. Affirmative. And the Ratio Dubitandi is of no weight. Viz. 1. A
Tacksman though the duty be not proportionable will not be prejudged. 2. If the
Receiver of the Disposition be Rebel per annum, and the Lands hold of the King,
The King will get eodem tempore Two Liferents of the same Lands. Viz. One by
the Rebellion of the Disponer, and the other by the Rebellion of the Receiver.
For as to the first, a Tacksman has a Real Right and Interest which militates
against a singular Successor. And as to the second, there is no Inconvenient
that the Superior should have the Liferent of his Vassal; And if the King be
Superior that he should also as King have the Liferent of his Subject; And any
benefit may accrue to him by the Disposition and Warrandice thereof during his
Lifetime.

If a Person Infeft in Liferent be denuded by an Assignation of the Liferent,
which is only habilis modus (in respect Liferents constitute by Infeftment are
personal, and cannot be transmitted by Resignation) Quaeritur If the Liferenter
be Year and Day Rebel after the Assignation, will the Superior have Right to
the Duties?

A Lady Tercer, or Tennent by Courtesy, their Lands holding of another Superior
than the King, and they not being Vassals to him; Whether will their Liferent
fall to the King, being year and day at the Horn?

A Person being denounced in April, and continuing year and day at the Horn,
Quaeritur, quando dies cedit, of the Liferent falling to the Superior of the
Lands set to Tennents? And whether or not the Superior will be in the case of a
Liferenter surviving the Fiar; So that he will have right in the case foresaid,
to the full Duty of that year that the Liferent falls, per lapsum anni and diei?

Quid Juris, Where the Rebel labors himself, will he not be liable to the
Superior for the Duty of that Year, as if he were a Tennent?

If these Obligements that are ordinary in Dispositions to be holden of the
Granter and Superior, That while the Buyer holds of the Granter, his Heirs and
Successors shall be entered gratis, and shall not be liable to Non-entry nor
Liferent Escheat, which are gifted to them now as then, Will bind singular
Successors? And what way they may be made real, if there be any Question?
Answer, It is thought, that they may be inserted both in the Charter and Sasine.

It may be contended, that these being upon the matter Servitudes upon the
Superiority, may be constitute as other Servitudes without Write; specially
seeing it is intended they should hold either of the ways; and that the Right in
the Person of the Disponer to be holden of the Superior, is in effect to the
Buyers behoof, until they be confirmed: And Reversions were Real, even before
the Act of Parliament anent the Registration of the same, Cogitandum. If at
least Comprisers will be liable to such Obligements? Seeing they comprise only
such a Right as their Debtor had: and they are in use to comprise all
Contracts and Dispositions, and therefore ought to be liable in rem to all
Obligements upon the Debtor and his Successors, relating to the Lands
comprised.

To consider, If there be not a Difference betwixt Obligements as to Liferent
Escheat and others; these as to Liferent Escheat being contrary to Law, and
such as give occasionem peccandi; and if such an Obligement be not sustained,
to whom will the Liferent belong? Whether to the mediate Superior, seeing the
immediate has renounced? or to the King as ablatus ab indigno?

If a Liferent Escheat be gifted to the Rebel himself, being yet at the Horn,
Whether will it fall under his single Escheat, or Liferent to the King?

If the Liferent be gifted by the Superior to the Vassal himself being relaxed;
and if thereafter he be Year and Day at the Horn. whether or not his Liferent
will of new fall to the Superior? Ratio Dubitandi, he cannot have two Liferents
of one Person.

If there be a Difference betwixt the Casualities of Ward and Non-entry, and a
Liferent Escheat, which has also tractum temporis; in respect the Liferent
Escheat falls ex delicto, and but once, and is Jus collectivum of all Years
falling under Liferent: Whereas Ward and Non-entry are of the Nature of Annua
Legata, and are in effect annuae cessiones, which are only Effectual during the
Cedents Right? Vid. Title, If Gifts of Ward and Non-entry prejudge singular
Successors, in Lit. G.

If a Person being at the Horn should suspend and relax, and thereafter the
Letters being found orderly proceeded, should be Denounced, Quaeritur, If the
time of the former Rebellion would be continued with the last as to the
Question of the Liferent, as if the Rebel had not been relaxed?

When Reversions, or Minutes bearing Obligements to dispone in favors of the
Rebel, do fall under Liferent Escheat, Quaeritur, What benefit or Right will
the Donator have? Answer, It is to be considered, what benefit the Rebel
would have: and the Liferent thereof will belong to the Donator.

If an Heretor be year and day at the Horn, and there being a Subaltern right
holden of him for a small Feu-duty, the Superior would get his Liferent only as
to that Feu-duty, there being no more his.

Quaeritur, If there be a Liferenter holding of the Superior, and she having
assigned her Liferent during her lifetime, Whether or not the Superior will
have right to her full Liferent, without respect to the Assignation? Et quae
Ratio differentiae? Answer, The subaltern Right was a real and valid Right,
constitute habili modo, which could not be prejudged by any Deed of the
Heretor: Whereas the Assignation made by the Liferenter is only personal, as a
Disposition made by the Heretor, which depends upon the real Right; and eo
resoluto, falls.

Escheat single.
IF an appearand Heir have right to a moveable Heirship, and the same or
nearest of Kin have right to be Executor, but neither the one is served, nor
the other confirmed, and both be at the Horn: Whether will their Interest
foresaid fall under Escheat, as in the case of Forefeiture; Seeing Escheats are
Forefeiture as to Movables?

If a Tack being for many nineteen Years, should be assigned; Will the same
fall under the single Escheat of the Assigney, seeing there is no Liferent as to
him, and the Liferenters may all die in his lifetime?

Will not the Assigney have right for the lifetimes of the Heirs, though they
be not served Heirs?

The Tack being for three lifetimes, and certain nineteen years after, Quid
Juris, Where the Tacksman has no Heirs, so that there is place to a Gift of
Bastardy or ultimus Haeres?

A Tack of Teinds being granted to the Tacksman and his Heirs and Assigneys,
for three Liferents, and three nineteen Years; and being thereafter assigned,
Quaeritur, If the Assigney be at the Horn, Whether it will fall under his
single Escheat? Answer, It is thought it will: seeing it is not a Liferent Right
as to the Assigney, and the whole Liferents may be determined during the
Assigneys lifetime: and a Tack for three nineteen Years does fall under single
Escheat.

Quaritur, If a Tack exceeding the Life of Men, v. g. for eight nineteen Years,
falls under single Escheat?

Escheat without Backbond.
IF the King may regrant Escheats, without a Back-bond, and declare that it is
his pleasure so to do? Answer, It is thought that the King in no worse case
than other Superiors, who do always give Escheats of their Vassals Liferent,
(and if they be Lords of Regality their single Escheat) without Back-bond.

Delivered Evidents.
A Person having a Bond of fifty thousand Merks, did assign the same to the
Debtor; But so that the Debtor by the Assignation and accepting thereof, was
obliged to pay the said whole Sum (reserving the Cedents Liferent) to the
persons therein mentioned amongst them, Quaeritur, The Assignation being never
delivered to the Assigney, and recovered after the Cedents decease, viis and
modis, Whether it will be a binding Writ? Answer, The Case will not be without
question. Ratio Dubitandi, That Deeds and Writs that are single and monopleura
do not bind, unless they become the Parties Evident by Delivery: and on the
other part, Contracts subscribed by two Parties retained in the hands of one,
are valid though not delivered to the other: and the said Assignation is not a
simple Deed, but bears reciprocal Obligements which are as binding as if they
were subscribed by both. 2. The said Assignation, though it appears to be actus
inter vivos, yet upon the matter is donatio mortis causa, and the Defuncts will
as to her whole Estate, and to whom it should belong after her decease: and
such Writes, being of the nature of Wills and Legacies, may be retained and are
valid though not delivered. Lady Margaret Kennedy.

Exception against the Cedent, if always competent against the Assigney?
QVaeritur in general, If all personal Obligements, and Exceptions competent
against the Cedent, be competent against the Assigney? And what reason there
is, that Discharging Compensation, and the Suspending of Payment for a time,
and such like; should be competent against the Assigney: and not such as are
founded upon correspective Writs, which import Retention, or Suspending of
Implement against the Cedent?

Executor.
IF the Executor ad omissa be countable to the nearest of Kin, who are not
accessory to the Fraud of Omission?

If the Creditors and nearest of Kin have such an interest in the Goods
confirmed, that they are preferable to the Executors own Creditors? or if after
Confirmation there be a Confusion, as in the case of an Heir?

When there is only one Child, who is both Heir and Executor; Whether there
will be only a Bipartite Division, betwixt the Defunct and Relict? Lady
Craigleith.

If an Executor Creditor be liable to Execute the Testament fully, or only so
far as may satisfy himself?

If the Defuncts Estate be so settled in the Person of the Executor by
Confirmation, that there is a confusion of it with his own; so that his
Creditors may affect, and evict it being in Money or in Goods; and doing prior
diligence, will be preferred to the Defuncts Creditors? Ratio Dubitandi, The
Executor is haeres in mobilibus: On the other part, he has only an Office, and
the Administration is committed to him by the Commissars, and he finds
Caution to make forthcoming; and if he die before the Testament be Execute,
another will be confirmed ad non executa, and upon the matter he is Curator
Bonis.

A Child being confirmed Executor to the Grandfather upon the Mothers side, and
dying without Issue and either Brothers or Sisters: Will the Father have right
to the Executory as Executor to the Child? 2. What if the Child decease before
the Testament be execute? 3. Can the Father be Executor ad non executa to the
Grandfather? Mr. Andrew Marjori-banks Daughter.

Executors nominate (though Strangers, and not Universal Legators) before King
James his Act of Parliament, had right to the whole Executory; and since to the
Third; Quaeritur, If they decease before Confirmation, Will they
notwithstanding have right as Legators?

If they be Confirmed, and die immediately before the Testament be execute,
Whether the Executor-Stranger will have right to the Third?

The Office of Tutrix cease by her Marriage, but not that of Executrix,
Quaeritur, Quae Ratio Discriminis? Answer, She being in Tutela herself, cannot
be Tutrix to another. 2. An Executor has not nudum Officium, but is Heir in
mobilibus: and for that Reason, a Woman may be Executrix, though incapable
munerum virilium.

Testaments appear to be Executed by Sentences: Seeing after Sentence the
Executor may Assign.

Albeit quod est Cessibile may be Comprysed, or affected with the Cedents Debt:
Yet if after Sentence, the Debts and Goods be extant, The Creditors Legators
and nearest of Kin will be preferable to the Creditors of the Executor: Because
though they may seem to be secured by Caution, yet the same is that the
Inventar shall be made forthcoming, and tutius est incumbere etc. And the
Executor is Haeres fideicommissarius or Curator bonis, and if he Sell or Assign
praesumitur That he does so that he might satisfy Creditors, Legators and
nearest of Kin; but where the same is evicted for his own Debt, it is upon the
matter Unjustice and Malversation.

Seeing the Interest and Right of an Executor is jus anomalum and Participium,
being partly considered in Law and constructed to be haereditas in mobilibus;
and partly Officium to execute the Defuncts Will if he Dye Tested, and the Will
of the Law if he Dye Intested; And therefore if a Woman be Executrix, albeit
she be only Dative, if she marry she is not in the case of a Tutrix and
Curatrix: Albeit it may be thought that an Executor Dative is Curator datus
bonis, and she ceases to be Tutrix and Curatrix if she Marry, because these are
only nuda officia; But she continues still to be Executrix: And yet if an
Executor Dye before Execution his nearest of Kin will not succeed to him in
that Interest as Executor to him; So that he may be confirmed Executor to him
in the Goods confirmed, but there must be a Testament and Executor ad non
Executa, not to him but to the former Defunct: Whereupon diverse Questions
arise, And first, if an Executor nominate die after the Confirmation but before
Execution, will he have by the Act of Parliament the third of all the Goods of
the Deads part, or only in so far as the Testament is Execute? Ratio Dubitandi,
Before the Act of Parliament the Executor had the third entirely, viz. The
Defuncts part without respect to the Execution, But only the confirmation being
in place of addition: And by the Act of Parliament he is restricted to a third
of that. And on the other part, since that Act of Parliament, It is presumed,
according to that Law, The Defunct intended only the third of his part to be
given to the Executor, in respect of the Trouble and pains he is at to Execute,
and recover bona Defuncti, and therefore he should only have a proportion of
what is Execute.

If the Executor nominate Decease before he confirm, will he have any part of
the Deads part? Which will be cleared by an Answer to the former.

When the Procurator Fiscal is confirmed after an Edict served, Whether will
the nearest of Kin being Majors the time of the Confirmation, and not owning
their Interest, be excluded; So that they can have no Action against the
Procurator Fiscal or Bishop for the Goods contained in the Inventar?

Quid Juris as to the nearest of Kin for the time; And if he be Reponed whether
will he have action of Count and Reckoning, or must he reduce the Confirmation
so far as that he may be confirmed; The Procurator Fiscal being satisfied of
all Charges? Ratio Dubitandi, That the nearest of Kin is not nomen juris to
succeed, or to have any thing belonging to the Defunct unless he represent him,
which he cannot unless he be confirmed Executor.

Quid juris, In the case of an Executor Creditor after he is satisfied, will
the nearest of Kin be excluded? And if not, what is the habilis modus to get a
right settled in his Person? Ratio Dubitandi, In suffering the Creditor to be
confirmed, it seems that he has disclaimed his Interest, and not without injury
to the Memory of the Defunct: And the Creditor being once confirmed, the
nearest of Kin cannot be confirmed: And having Forefaulted his Interest, it may
seem, quod indigno aufertur, est Fisci; and quod nullius est, est in bonis
Regis.

Quaeritur. When Testaments are Execute, so that there is no place to a non
Executa? And if as to Goods whereof the Executor is presently in possession it
be not fully Execute? And as to nomina and Debts it be not Execute by Sentence,
though they be not uplifted; Seeing after Sentence the Executor may Assign? And
in that case, may not the Executors Executor confirm the same as belonging to
the Defunct?

Though after Sentence the Debt be in bonis of the Executor, and confounded
with his own Estate: If there should be a Competition betwixt the Executors own
Creditors, and the Creditors of the Defunct or his Relict and Bairns; Would not
the Creditors and the Relict and Bairns of the Defunct be preferred to the
Creditors of the Executor, upon that Ground that they are not simply the
Executors Goods but in Trust; and is a fidei-commissum for the use of the
Defuncts Creditors and his Relict and Bairns: So that both the Executors
Creditors and Fisk ought to be excluded upon any such Competition?

If the nearest of Kin will not be Executor: Quaeritur, What remedy will be
competent to the Creditors, not of the Defunct but of the Executor; Seeing there
is an Act of Parliament, in case of an Heirs not entering: But not in the case
of an Executor in behalf of Creditors?

If the Commissars should confirm the Creditor of an Executor nominate and the
Executor decease, will the next nearest of Kin have Action against the Executor
Dative to be Comptable? And whether that Executor will have the privilege of
an Executor Creditor? And if he may be pursued at the instance of other
Creditors who are not Creditors to the Defunct?

An Executor being nearest of Kin and confirmed, but immediately dying, Quid
juris, will his nearest of Kin be confirmed Executors ad non Executa, if there
be another nearer to the first Defunct?

To consider the Civil Law as to Haeres cum beneficio Inventarij: If an
Executor be not Haeres in mobilibus cum beneficio Inventarij?

Executor Creditor.
A Creditor being confirmed Executor and dying before the Testament be
Executed; Will not his nearest of Kin be confirmed ad non Executa and exclude
all other Creditors, in respect of the Diligence of his Predecessor, and that
Confirmation did affect the Goods for their satisfaction?

Three Creditors being confirmed for their Respective Debts, and one of them
deceasing before Sentence. Quaeritur. Will the Office and benefit belong to
the Survivers entirely? Ratio Dubitandi. A Testament Creditor is a Diligence,
and there is no other way of Diligence to affect the Moveable Estate of a
person deceased, and it is equivalent to diligence against Debitors on Life,
affecting their Movables. And on the other part, Executory being an Office the
Law prefers the Creditor, If the nearest of Kin do not own it; But cum sua
causa, and so that the nature of the thing is not altered: And therefore the
Executor dying, the Office and Diligence does evanish.

Quid juris in the case of an Executor Creditor: If after he is satisfied the
nearest of Kin will have an Action for the superplus?

If a Testament be Execute by a Sentence against the Debitors, though payment
be not made? Vide Hope.

Executor Nominate.
IF an Executor Nominate be Liable as a Tutor; not only for what is confirmed
but what he might have confirmed and intrometted with? Tweeddale contra D. of
Monmouth.

Executory.
WHether Vniversitas bonorum, That is an illiquid Right; Though the Subject may
consist of Movables as a single Escheat, Conquest, Society as to a Trade or
Shipping; Will fall under Executry?

If Casualities of Ward, Liferent Escheat, Non-entry, Marriage, will fall under
the same? Or to the Superiors Heir?

There being a Bargain of Lands, in nudis finibus contractus vel Dispositionis,
will the Price belong to the Heir who must perfect the Bargain? Answer. It is
thought not; Seeing the Price is a Moveable Sum: And it appears that the Defunct
having sold the Lands had use for it, and did intend to uplift it.

Whether a Gift of single Escheat will fall under Executry or belong to the
Heir? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Escheat is jus Vniversitatis, And nothing is in
use to be confirmed but either particular Movables or Debts, and plenishing
estimate in cumulo,

Item, Whether a Gift of Liferent Escheat (which as to the Donator is a
Moveable Interest) will fall under Executry? Ratio Dubitandi As in the former:
And likewise that during the Liferenters Lifetime it cannot be construed, what
it will amount to: And it has Tractum futuri temporis.

The same Question may be as to a Tack Assigned.

Whether the Heir who has Right to a going Coal, will have Right to Buckets,
Chains, and other Instruments as being accessoria and destination addicted to
the Coal, as the Colliers: Or if they will fall under Executry?

A Person being about the building of an House; And the samen being begun and
certain Materials (as Stone, Lime, Slats and others) being prepared o that use:
Whether will they belong to the Heir (for the reason foresaid) or fall under
Executry?

A Daughter having accepted her Tocher and Provision by Contract of Marriage;
in satisfaction of what might fall to her either by her Father or Mothers
Decease, The Contract of Marriage being after her Mothers Decease. Quaeritur,
If another Sister will have the Mothers part entire without respect to her
Sisters Interest; being renounced as said is? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Father
who is Liable for his Wifes Third, is in Effect Discharged as to his other
Daughters part of the samen: And on the other part, the Mothers part belonging
to her Children, non jure Legitima as Bairns, but as Executors and representing
her: If any of them Decease before Confirmation, or be unwilling to confirm,
their Renounciation will be ineffectual as by a person not having Right.

Quaeritur. If the the Sister who is not Excluded should confirm: If the Sister
who is Excluded (as said is) may at least have Action against her for her part
of the Mothers part: To the effect that the Discharge in favors of her Father
may be effectual? It is Answered, That unless she be confirmed her self, she
can have no part of that which belonged to her Mother: And albeit by the Act of
Parliament anent Executors Nominate, the nearest of Kin has Action for the
superplus of the Deads part exceeding the third; That is only in the case
therein mentioned, the said Act giving Condictionem ex lege in that case only:
Whereas that Act does not militate in other cases where there is no legitime,
but only an Interest to represent; which cannot be effectual sine Aditione:
Confirmation being in effect Aditio in mobilibus.

Quaeritur, If a moveable Escheat will belong to the Executor, seeing Movables
belong to the Executor; and moveable Sums, and other movables fall under the
same? Answer, It is thought that Escheat being Jus Vniversitatis, should belong
to the Heir: Seeing not only mobilia do fall under the same, but also such
Rights and Interests as cannot belong to an Executor, as Tacks if they be not
Liferent Tacks: And it is the style of Gifts, that the Escheat should be holden
of his Majesty; which does not quadrate, and is not proper to be said of such
things as belong to the Executor.

Extent.
IF the Inquest be warranded to Extend, unless there were former Retours upon a
Commission to Extend?

Extinguishment of Rights.
IF the Heretor of Praedium Dominans acquire the Right of Praedium serviens,
Whether does the Right of Servitude extinguish; quia res sua nemini servit; So
that if he sell the Dominans, the Servitude does not revive?

If the Heretor of Land acquire a Right of Annualrent out of the same; Whether
or not is the said Right of Annualrent extinguished or suspended only; So that
it may revive if the Right of Property be taken away by Reduction?

F.
Faculty to alter,
LAnds being disponed with power to alter, without these Words, Etiam in Lecto;
If that Faculty may be used in Lecto?

A Person having reserved a Power to alter in Lecto; May he then use that
Power, in favors of any other Person than his Heir; seeing he is not in
legitima Potestate as to the disponing an Heretable Interest: and on the other
Part, the Heir has no prejudice?

Faculty to Dispone.
BY a Write granted by the Earl of Callender, to his Lady, he gives her power
to dispose of the half of his Estate, Quaeritur, The said Power being Personal,
without mention of her Heirs, and she not having used the said Faculty; If the
said Power be Transmissible? Found by the Lords That the Earl of Dumfermling as
Heir to his Mother, had right thereto: and he having assigned the same to his
Son, he recovered thereupon the half of the Estate, To see the Decree.

Jus Facultatis.
ATtendendum, an quis aliquid faciat jure facultatis an jure servitutis;
Facultas enim non minus aliis quam nobis patet: quia usus qui alii magis ex
occasion quam jure conting it, Servitus non est, nec in eo temporis
Diuturnitas quidquam prodest, nisi accesserit prohibitio praescribentis, and
patientia ejus contra quem praescribitur Jus Fluviat. p. 756. N. 71. and
sequent.

Personal Faculty.
A Person giving a qualified Right, reserving Liferent and a Power to dispone:
Quaeritur, If that Faculty may be comprised as a Personal Reversion?

Quae Facultatis sint?
ALiqua Dicuntur esse facultatis, quorum Libertas a Jure publico permissa est,
quae non pariunt jus deducibile in Judicium: hoc casu nec nos contra alios
praescribimus, nec alii contra nos; Exemplum est in Leg. viam. 2da. de via
publica. Aliud Exemplum est in facultate privata, quae nullam antecedentem
habet causam obligandi; ut si Rusticus sua sponte, nulla praecedente causa, per
multos annos, Domino, certis temporibus, capones attulit; ex hoc actu merae
facultatis nulla oritur Domino actio.

Quomodo intelligendum, Facultati non praescribi.
ALiqua dicuntur esse Facultatis ad acquirendum novum Jus, vel novam actionem;
vel etiam ad eam Conservandam: atque ita pariunt Jus deducibile in judicium. Et
hoc jus licet sit in libera potestate acquirere volentis, non tamen est in
potestate illius contra quem acquiritur, vel conservatur, ut recusare posset.
Sic adire haereditatem est merae facultatis, and tamen tollitur and
praescribitur spatio 30 annorum; ergo and juri offerendi, and reluendi
praescribitur. Hering. de Molend. quaest. 21. N. 17. and sequen.

Jus publicum tribuit cuivis de Populo, ut uni ex multis, nec privative ad
alium, etsi ad singulos inde aliquid commodi perveniat: Inde illud quod dicere
solent, Facultati non Praescribi, Dicitur de his quae a natura, aut publico
Jure tribuuntur; itaque quocunque tempore, nemo praescribit ut qua ierit in
publico nullus alius commeet, etsi nunquam ea commearit.

Ea quae de tali facultate dicta sunt, non recte Traducuntur ad ea quae proprii
and privati cujusque Juris sunt; id enim Jus est quod ad privatum quemque
pertinet privative, ita ut non ad alium: Omni siquidem Juri aut facultati quae
competit privato cuiquam privative, potest praescribi. Idem Ibid. N. 20.

Faculty reserved to dispone.
IT being ordinary that a power is reserved by these who Dispone Lands,
especially to their Friends, to Redeem or Dispone or Burden at any time dureing
their Lifetimes. Quaeritur, Whether Lifetimes should be understood civily,
during their Liege Poustie?

Item, Quaeritur. If the Receiver of the Disposition be Dead and the Lands in
Non-entry, whether the Disponer may notwithstanding Dispone and resign by
virtue of the said Power? Ratio Dubitandi, The said Faculty is upon the matter
a Heretable Commission and Procuratory, which cannot be Execute post mortem
mandantis: and there is no person that has the Right Established in his person
so that it may be resigned.

Item. If the Lands be in Non-entry and Ward, will the Resignation by virtue of
the said Faculty determine and put an end to the foresaid Casualities in
prejudice of the Superior? Ratio Dubitandi. The Defunct by whose Decease they
accrue was the Superiors Vassal: And though the Disponer has the same power,
yet he should have used it debito tempore, while the Vassal was on Life, and
before the pursuer had jus quaesitum: On the other part, the said power is of
the nature of a Regress, so that quocunque tempore (as in the case of regress)
Re-entry may be desired by virtue of the said Faculty.

A Charter being to be granted to a person conform to the said power; That
Clause, Quaequidem pertinuerunt, what way it is to be conceaved; and if mention
should not be made of the person who is Infeft for the present, though he be
not the person to whom the Right was Disponed with the said Power; But either
an Heir or singular Successor?

If the Faculty to Dispone be not upon the matter a Reversion, materially and
as to the effect of the same; so that the person having the same, may Dispone
albeit he has not jus in re; And albeit the Heretor be either Dead or
Forfaulted; As an order may be used against an Appearand Heir, or against the
King or his Donator, in the case of Forfaulture or ultimus Haeres?

A Person who had the Faculty foresaid, having by virtue thereof Disponed, but
deceasing before Resignation, Quaeritur, What way the Disposition shall be made
effectual, seeing the Faculty was personal to himself?

Fee.
WHen by a Contract of Marriage a Sum is to be provided to a Husband and Wife
in Liferent, and to the Bairns in Fee; Which Failieing to the Father and his
Heirs. Quaeritur. Before there be Children where is the Fee? And if it be not
fit to take it to the Father to the use and behoof of the Children, which
Failieing to himself and his Heirs?

When it is intended that by Contract of Marriage the Parents should be only
Liferenters, and that certain Sums should be provided to the Children, so that
they do not represent them, Quaeritur, What way the Fee can be provided to the
Children that are not in being? Answer, The Father may be infeft in Liferent
for himself, and in Fee for the use and behoof of his Eldest Son and his Heirs:
Which Fee is to be to the Father and his Heirs, to the use foresaid: And they
are to be obliged upon the Existence of a Son, to denude in Favors of him and
his Heirs.

By Contract of Marriage betwixt Knockdaw, Sir John Kennedy, and Gilbert
Kennedy of Girvanmayns, The said Sir John having married the said Gilbert's
Daughter; The said Gilbert's Lands and Estate are disponed to the said Sir John
and his said Spouse, and the Heirs betwixt them; which failieing, to such of
the said Gilbert's other Daughters, as he should at any time appoint; which
failieing, to the said Sir John's Heirs and Assigneys whatsomever: and now the
said Sir John being deceased, and having a Son of the Marriage, Quaeritur,
Whether the Fee did belong to him, so that his Son may be served Heir to him in
the Estate? It is Answered, That in the case of the Duke and Duchess of
Monmouth, The Conception of the Tailie not being unlike, it was thought the
Duchess was Fiar; albeit the Limitation of the Heirs did ultimatly resolve in
the Dukes Heirs; upon that ground that there is a difference betwixt the case
where the Lands are provided and Disponed to the Husband and the Wife, and the
Heirs of Marriage; which Failieing either to the Husbands Heirs, or Wifes
Heirs: And in the case foresaid where after the Heirs of the Marriage there are
diverse substitutions, in favors of the Wife's other Heirs; and after all in
favors of the Husbands Heirs. In the first, if the Wife's Heirs be only
substitute Failieing Heirs of the Marriage, the Husband is understood to be
Fiar; Because as it is the essence of a Fee to have power to Dispone, and if
the Fiar do not Dispone to transmit to the Fiars Heirs, and to be represented
by them: And in dubio cujus haeredibus maxim prospicitur, That person is
thought to be Fiar. But in the second case, there being diverse degrees of
Substitutions and all in favors of the Wife and her Heirs, before her Husbands
Heirs, The Wife is thought to be Fiar: And upon the Faileure of all her
Relations, the Husbands Heirs in the last place are Heirs of provision to her;
And yet in the said case of Girvanmains, It is thought that the Husband is
Fiar, there being these specialities in that case. 1mo. The said Estate is
Disponed to the Husband, and his Spouse the longest Liver as said is and their
Heirs of the Marriage; and there is no Liferent settled on the Husband, whereas
there is a Liferent of a part of the Lands given to his Wife in satisfaction of
what might fall to her either of her Fathers Estate, or of her Husbands. 2do.
There is a provision that if there should be no Children of the Marriage to
succeed to that Estate, the Husband should be obliged in that case, he and his
Heirs to denude themselves upon payment of a certain Sum of Money; and he could
not denude himself unless he were Fiar: So that it was intended that the
Husband should be Fiar, but with the foresaid Provision to denude in the case
foresaid, and to be restricted to a Tocher: For which and other Reasons arising
upon the Contract, The Antecedentia and Consequentia being considered, It is
thought that the Son should be Heir to his Father as Fiar.

A Bond being granted to a Man and his Wife, and their Heirs. Quaeritur, What
Right the Wife will have to the Sum? Ratio Dubitandi, that there being no
mention that the Sum should be due to the longest Liver, and the Heirs of the
longest Liver, but to them both and their Heirs, It appears that the Heirs
should be understood the Husbands Heirs as Personae digniores. Answer. It is
thought that seeing there is an joint Right to the Husband and the Wife, and it
is the custom of Persons of their Quality being mean Country Persons, that the
longest liver should enjoy all: The Wife indubie should enjoy the haill in
Liferent and should have the Fee of the half.

De Feodo Pecuniae and Nominum.
PEcuniae and Nominum nec proprie Ususfructus nec Feodum est; ususfructus enim
definitur jus utendi fruendi salva, rerum substantia: pecunia autem sive in
specie, sive in nominibus est res fluxa: Et si in specie sit facile diffluit
and usu consumitur: Nomina autem etsi initio idonea; debitoribus decoquentibus,
inania sunt. Quemadmodum vero ob utilitatem receptum est, ut pecuniae sit quasi
usus fructus ita est quasi feodum: istud enim proprie loquendo est tantum in
rebus soli and stabilibus and feudis tantum; non vero allodialibus (ita dictis
quod nullo laudato and recognito alio dominio, ad proprietarium pertinent pleno
and integro jure nec libato and diviso in Dominium directum and utile: Licet
autem apud alias Gentes praedia quaedam allodialia sint, nobis omnia sunt
feudalia.) Et Feodum quidem in feudis de proprietate and dominio dicitur, prout
distinguitur ab usu fructu and aliis quae circa feuda versantur juribus: Per
Metaphoram tamen Feodum transfertur ad pecunias and nomina ita ut is in Feodo
esse dicatur cui jus summum and proprietatis competit: plaerumque vero evenit
sive seculi vitio (in nova commenta prurientis) sive Notariorum Incuria aut
imperitia ut Chirographorum stylus a primaeva simplicitate deflectat, sic haud
raro nec immerito dubitatur penes quos sit pecuniae and Nominum Feodum.

Quaestio Prima.
SI igitur Sempronius Pater, Pecuniam crediderit and Chirographo stipulatus sit
eam and usuras sibi solvi si superstes sit; Eo autem per obitum deficiente
Titio filio suo and Titii haeredibus and quibus dederit, seu assignatis: Ita
tamen ut Sempronio liceat de pecunia and Nomine disponere Titio and haeredibus
ejus inconsultis nec consentientibus: Quaeritur, In ista facti specie ad quem
nominis istius Feodum pertineat? Et videri possit Feodum ad Titium filium
pertinere cum nulla sit mentio Sempronij haeredum: Et Feodi ea sit natura ut ad
haeredem transeat, qui in jure eadem persona censetur: Dicendum tamen
Sempronium in Feodo esse; penes Titium vero and ejus haeredes spem and jus
successionis: Nam quae Feodi and proprietatis vel essentialia vel naturalia
sunt (ut sciz.) Dominus de re sua disponere possit and ut ea ad haeredes
transeat) ea Sempronio competunt; potestas enim disponendi etiam non expressa
inesset; and Titius Sempronio substitutus in jus ejus succedit and pro haerede
habetur (provisionis saltem ut loquimur) idque ex eo elucescit quod si
accessisset etiam hypotheca and sasina, terris pro Pecunia in hypothecam datis,
i^sdem conceptis verbis Sempronio sciz.) and eo deficiente Titio filio and ejus
haeredibus and assignatis; Titius eo casu extra omnem quaestionis aleam haeres
foret: ubi autem eadem sunt verba and eadem ratio, idem jus est and esse debet.

Quaest. 2da.
IN ista facti specie supra memorata, Quaeritur etiam an Sempronius de isto
nomine disponere possit, nedum inter vivos sed Testamento aut codicillis eo
legato; cum debitum Chirographarium and mobile sit?

Respondendum videtur, Sempronium eo ipso quod tam haeredibus quam executoribus
praeteritis, Titium elegit and substituit sibi, instar haeredis provisionis,
and interciso ordinario succedendi ordine quasi Tallia; Titium in ea re
haeredem esse voluit: Voluisse etiam nomen esse haereditarium, de quo moribus
nostris nisi inter vivos non licet disponere; nec de ea re est Testamenti
factio: Nec ad haeredem institutum in mobilibus seu executorem nominatum
pertinet, quod ab intestato ad Executorem dativum non pertineret.

Quaest. 3tia.
IN ista etiam specie, Quaeritur, Si Chirographum in actorum codicem seu
Regestum (sive ut loquimur Registrum) referatur, vel a Sempronio, vel eo mortuo
a Titio, ut instar sententiae habeatur and ex eo sit executio parata: An eo
casu Titio executio competat; ita ut Literis Executorialibus and Cornuationis
(ut loquimur) impetratis, debitori mandari possit ut Titio solvat sub poena
Rebellionis: Et comminatione ni pareat, eum Exlegem and Rebellem denunciatum
iri?

Respondetur. Titio actionem quidem competere adversus debitorem, non
executionem summariam, cum non sit Creditor primarius and ab initio, sed jure
successionis ut substitutus and haeres talliae aut provisionis: Haeredi
siquidem ex Chirographo nunquam executio summaria competit, nisi a decessore in
acta relatum and post ejus obitum in haeredem translatum sit; vel haerede
agente per viam actionis ut in acta referatur, de ea re sententia sequatur.

Quaestio ista, utpote de formula, haud magni momenti esse videtur; eventu
tamen fieri potest ut sit maximi: Processus enim cornuationis ex longa and
catenata serie diligentiae conflatus, magno temporis and operae and sumptuum
dispendio ad ultimam forte metam deductus inanis corrueret; si constiterit
Titium haud rite processisse, cum ei summaria executio haud competeret; adeo
multum est been coepisse: Sublato enim fundamento superstructa corruunt, and
paria sunt in jure non fieri and non rite fieri.

Quest. 4ta.
IN specie supradicta Respondimus nomen in persona Sempronii primarii
creditoris haereditarium: Superest tamen adhuc scrupulus and quaestio an in
persona Titii substituti sit etiam haereditarium, an vero ut mobile ad
executores Titii pertineat? Sed

Respondetur, Nomen etiam quoad Titium haereditarium esse: absurdum enim foret,
partim haereditarium partim mobile esse: and cum ab initio haereditarium sit
non desinit esse haereditarium; nisi creditor vel substitutus facto aliquo
declaret naturam nominis innovatam velle; literis forte impetratis and debitore
jusso solvere sub poena Rebellionis.

Quest. 5ta.
IN illa facti specie superius memorata, cum essent quinque rei debendi in
solidum, uno ex iis defuncto, Sempronius creditor de eadem pecuniae summa sibi
dari curaverat ab haerede ejus syngrapham seu oblgationem corroborationis; sic
dictam quod priore obligatione salva ad eam ut accessoria et auxiliaris accedat
eamque corroboret: eaque obligatione stipulatus fuerat pecuniam sibi solvi,
ipsoque per obitum deficiente non Titio ejusque haeredibus in principali
obligatione substitutis, sed Gaio ejusque haeredibus: Quaerebatur igitur utrum
post mortem Sempronii, pecunia ad haeredes Titii praemortui ex prima
substitutione; an vero pertineat ad Gaium ex seounda?

Respondendum, Videtur eam ad Gaium ejusque haeredes pertinere: Sempronius enim
facultate usus quam sibi reservaverat, and quae etiam non expressa penes eum ut
dominum and feudatarium fuisset, novissima substitutione priorem sustulerat:
and licet notarii imperitia aut oscitantia haud cautum sit pecuniam solvendam
tam ex principali quam accessoria syngrapha Gaio and ejus haeredibus; id tamen
jus supplet and subintelligit: posteriora siquidem derogant prioribus; nec
possibile est ut idem jus sit in solidum penes plures and diversos creditores:
ad haec in ijs quae sunt facultatis and arbitrii, voluntas posterior operatur
and praevalet utcunque expressa; and magis valet quod agitur quam quod
concipitur.

Quest. 6ta.
HAud dissimili ratione, si debitum sit haereditarium (hypothecarium sciz.)
addito pacto de terrarum hypotheca; postea vero creditor nova syngrapha in
corroborationem accepta stipuletur pecuniam sibi et executoribus solvendam;
statim nomen haereditarium esse desinit: Licet enim posterior syngrapha sit in
corroborationem et absque praejudicio prioris, ita ut ex utraque syngrapha
pecunia debeatur et exigi possit; mutantur tamen nominis qualitates et
accidentia extrinsica; ex principali siquidem obligatione haereditarium; ex
accessoria mobile est: nec interest debitoris quos sibi velit creditor haeredes
aut executores aut substitutos; adeo ea de re voluntas creditoris ambulatoria
est and novissima derogat praecedentibus.

Quest. 7ma.
CUm in specie cujus saepius mentio facta est, Gaius substitutus sit Sempronio
in syngrapha, in corroborationem data ab haerede tantum unius ex pluribus
correis debendi: quomodo agere poterit adversus reliquos debitores nec ex
principali nec accessoria obligatione Gaio obligatos?

Resp. Action utili in factum Gaium adversus omnes correos experiri posse (eam
Angli vocant Action upon the case) narrata facti specie superius exposita: nec
minus ut expeditior sit adversus debitores actio potest etiam agere adversus
haeredes Titij substituti in prima obligatione, ut eam sibi cedant.

Quest. 8va.
CUm pecunia creditur, and Chirographo Sempronio creditori Titius ejusque
haeredes and executores substituti sunt; diximus nomen istud haereditarium
esse: verum sententiae isti refragari videtur constitutio novella, Caroli
secundi Act 32, Parl. 1. 1661, Ea siquidem statutum est, omnia nomina ad
executores pertinere, nec haereditaria esse nisi in casibus ibi exceptis; qui
(ut vulgo dicitur) formant regulam in non exceptis: ij autem sunt tres viz. Si
obligatione haeredibus tantum consultum sit and disertis verbis arceantur
executores: si accedat hypotheca and investitura, quae est Ius reale and
haereditarium, nec ad executores pertinet cum sint haeredes tantum in
mobilibus: and si pactum sit de creditore investiendo ex quo investitura and
sasina sequi potest. Idem Ordines prius statuerant tempore Turbarum and funesti
inter Regem and populum dissidii Anno. 1641. Act 57: quod adhuc extat in Codice
apocrypho actorum istius temporis: Nec injuste quidem, si materiam spectes, sed
frustra and irritum defectu potestatis legislativae quae penes solum Regem est:
Is enim solus sancit, unus sancit pro authoritate, sed praevio Ordinum consilio
and consensu: sed,

Resp. Utrobique, tam Regia constitutione, quam illo ordinum statuendi conatu,
agi tantum de ea nominum specie quae vulgaris and frequentior est; Cum sciz.
Ita in creditum itur ut pecunia debeatur, and reddenda sit creditori ejusque
haeredibus and executoribus; quo casu sancitur ea ad executores pertinere: in
aliis vero casibus, ubi singularis aliqua ratio obest suadetque nomen nec
creditorem voluisse nec posse ad executores pertinere; Lex ista locum non
habet: Et cum varii casus nec de regula nec legis sint, nec de iis cogitatum,
eos omnes excipere nec necesse vix possibile erit: in compertum autem est
Sempronium creditorem cum Titium ejusque haeredes sibi substituerit, Executores
exclusos voluisse: Et in genere, ubicunque pecunia (ut ita dicam) talliatur;
and interciso ordinario succedendi ordine, haeredibus Talliae, aut provisionis
prospicitur nomen haereditarium est; e. g. Si quis Chirographum acceperit sibi
and haeredibus forte inter ipsum and uxorem procreatis, quibus deficientibus
haeredibus de corpore suo, quibus etiam deficientibus aliis provisionis
haeredibus; nemo ut opinor arbitrabitur nomen illud, quo consulto tot
haeredibus consulitur haud haereditarium esse: licet in Chirographo nec de
executoribus submovendis nec de investitura aut sasina danda caveatur.

Quaest. 9na.
QUod superius dictum est substitutum Sempronio ei in Jus nominis succedere and
haeredem provisionis esse. Sed de ea re ambigitur, and Quaeritur an Sempronio
haeres esse possit, qui eo defuncto e vestigio agere potest adversus debitores
ex obligatione etiam sine alia aditione; licet ex inquisitione quindecemvirali
(ut moris est) haud compertum and declaratum sit, eum Sempronio in ea re
haeredem esse: accedit quod haeres succedit in universum Jus substitutus vero
in isto nomine in rem unam and singularem and forte exilem? Tenendum tamen est
substitutum haeredem esse Sempronio saltem provisionis: quandocunque enim
dominium and feodum alicujus rei sive fundi sive nominis est penes aliquem
tempore obitus, ea ad alium transmitti and transire nequit nisi haeres sit: nec
alio Titulo aut Jure succedit substitutus ubi nomen est Chirographarium tantum;
quam ubi est etiam Hypothecarium: certum autem est ubi debitum Hypothecarium
est, sasina secuta, substitutum titulo haeredis, nec aliter posse, succedere:
imo substituto praemoriente, Sempronio substituti haeres Jus nominis haud
nanciscitur nisi Sempronio haeres sit; Et ex Inquisitione constiterit and
declaratum sit eum esse haeredem.

Quaest. 10.
MOribus nostris haeres nullum Jus consequitur nisi haereditatem adeat, sive ea
sit in praediis sive in aliis rebus haereditariis. In terris autem duo sunt
modi adeundi, ut sciz. a Superiore seu domino directo, vassallo defuncto,
haeres agnoscatur and ejus jussu and seu praecepto (quod Clare Constat dicitur)
ut haeres investiatur: vel ex inquisitione Judicis ad quem ea res pertinet
constet, and ab eo renunciatum sit eum esse haeredem, and Sasina secuta sit: In
aliis vero rebus unicus adeundi modus ex inquisitione sciz. Cum igitur in casu
superiori, substitutus nulla praevia Inquisitione secundum obitum Sempronii,
statim and recte adversus debitorem agat, haud immerito dubitatur an Sempronio
haeres sit? sed,

Respondetur, isto casu aditionem haud deesse imo necessariam esse; cum enim
haereditas aut opulenta aut damnosa sit; ut invito non datur beneficium ita
damnum and injuria non debet inferri; nec ullo jure nisi civili apud Romanos
haeres necessarius est, and apud eos unico tantum casu: substitutus autem ipso
facto adit and haeres est, si debitum ut suum petat and ex Chirographo agat:
Ideo autem solenni ex institutione adeundi modo haud opus est, cum ex
Chirographoeum Sempronio succedere clare constat, neo in claris ulterius
inquirere necesse sit.

Quaest. 11ma.
UBi debitum hypothecarium est and sasina vestitum: substitutus post obitum
creditoris nec recte agit nec aliquid Juris consequitur, nisi haereditatem
adeat and a domino direct and sponte agnitus and sasitus sit, vel ex
inquisitione Jussu and mandato Regis investitus: Quaeritur igitur quae sit
ratio discriminis, cum Chirographarius substitutus statim mortuo creditore and
jus habeat and debitum condicere possit; hypothecarius vero non nisi adita
haereditate nec minus manifestum sit ex obligatione substitutum succedere!

Resp. Rationem differentiae in promptu esse; In Chirographario siquidem debito
cum Jus personale tantum sit, and ex Chirographo evidens sit substitutum
succedere; ut substitutus adeat nulla alia formula opus est sed ex Chirographo
agendo; vel alio quovis actu Jure suo agnito adiisse censetur: Sin debitum
Hypothecarium sit, cum penes creditorem duplex sit Jus, reale sciz. per
Sasinam, and personale ex Chirographo; quod reali (utpote potiori and
nobiliori) semper accedit; neutrum transit ad substitutum nisi adierit and
sasitus sit, Sasina a domino volente and sponte data, vel ex Inquisitione and
Jussu and Mandato Regis. Cum igitur ut Chirographarius succedat, unica voluntas
substituti ejusque factum requiratur; In Hypothecario vero tam voluntas and
factum substituti adire volentis quam domini directi eum in vasallum
recipientis: Ideo Chirographarius Jus suum petendo, vel alio actu Jus suum
agnoscens, confestim succedit; nec aliud agendum superest: In hypothecario
vero, si dominus directus forte difficilior, substitutum recipere renuit vel
cunctatur; Inquisitio necessaria est, ut ex ea rite facta domino Regi
innotescat substitutum, creditori haeredem esse; quo comperto, superior
praeceptis Regis ex Cancellaria sua morem gerens substitutum recipit Sasina
data: Si vero ter monitus (ut moris est) haud obtemperat, in subsidium ex
praecepto Regis per Vicecomitem Sasina datur.

Quaest. 12ma.
IN specie saepius repetita, cum Chirographo vel simplice vel hypothecario
Pecunia debetur Sempronio; and eo deficiente per obitum, Titio ejusque
haeredibus; si Titius praemoriatur Sempronio superstite, and postea mortuo;
Titii haeredes in ea re haeredes erunt Sempronio; nominis enim feodum penes
Titium nunquam fuerat: Ambigitur, an qui Sempronio haeres esse vult, etiam
Titio haeres esse debeat actu and aditione; and ut practici loquuntur
deservitione? An vero satis sit eum esse haeredem Titio habitu, and qui ei
proximior and actu haeres esse queat si velit? De ista Quaestione licet magni
momenti, and in praxi and quotidiano usu saepius recursante, nulla (quod sciam)
decisio est; adeo ut mihi integrum sit dicere quod sentiam, salvo eorum
Judicio, penes quos vel legis vel sententiae ferendae authoritas erit. Cum
igitur pro utraque part haud desint rations, nec cae leves; in isto conflictu
hae animum fluctuantem impulere ut pedibus in illam sententiam eam; requiri
sciz. ut qui Sempronio haeres esse vult etiam Titio haeres sit habitu and
proximior; nec necesse esse ut ei Haeres sit actu and adeat: In omnibus
dispositionibus men's and voluntas disponentium attenditur, in iis autem
dominatur quae Voluntates dicuntur institutionibus sciz. and substitutionibus
haeredum; quae nedum in Testamentis sed inter vivos fiunt, sapiunt tamen
naturam Testamenti vel donationis mortis causa. Cum autem quis haeredes Talliae
aut provisionis (ut loquimur) instituit, id unice vult satagitque ut in rebus
suis haeredes instituat: non vero ut aliis and in aliorum rebus vel instituat
vel substituat haeredes. Et substitutio pupillaris qua pupillo, and exemplaris
(ad pupillaris exemplum) qua furioso haeres datur, singularia sunt Iuris
antiqui and municipalis Romanorum, nec alibi usurpata: Quando igitur Sempronius
vel alius quilibet, Titium ejusque haeredes sibi haeredes aut Talliae aut
provisionis substituit, ratio haud habetur civilis adeundi actus, sed Juris
adeundi and sanguinis, ut qui ut alterius haeres ad successionem vocatur,
eatenus alteri uni forte ex liberis aut cognato suo ea necessitudine junctus
sit, ut alteri haeres esse possit si velit and e re sua sit; si enim adeunti
vel exigua spes lucelli affulgeat, quod aditurus sit haud dubitandum; sin
alterius haereditas damnosa sit, nec instituentis nec haereditatis ejus
interest ut ei necesse sit alienam adire; quae nedum inanis sed etiam damnosa
suam exinaniret quantum libet pinguem and opimam: Ut de vaccis proditum est per
somnium a Pharaone visis adhuc deformibus and strigosis, etiam pinguibus and
nitidis devoratis: Nec aliquid a ratione vel Jure magis alienum est, quam ut
quod in favorem introductum est in odium and perniciem retorqueatur. Adhaec in
materia haereditaria, tam in Jure quam praxi and usu and stylo, apud nos
vocabulum haeres non pro eo qui adiit haereditatem sed pro adituro vel
cuiadeundi jus est saepius accipitur; haereditas siquidem est jus successionis;
and de adeunda (secundum doctores) magis proprie quam de adita dicitur: ubi
enim adita est and successum, desinit esse haereditas and jus succedendi: hinc
est quod ubi per Breve de morte antecessoris mandatur Judici idoneo ut inquiri
faciat, quis defuncto sit legitimus haeres, intelligitur haeres habitu and cui
Jus sit succedendi; non vero haeres actu and qui adiit; de quo cum jam adierit
supervacanea esset tam inquisitio quam aditio.

Id in ista specie facti luce clarius est, si quis enim liberis orbus, fratres
habeat; and inter eos, qui sibi haeres futurus esset, virum prodigum and and
obaeratum; and consulto eo praeterito substituit ejus haeredes: ut reor, nemo
opinabitur eum voluisse ut sui haeredes prodigo and decoctori actu haeredes
sint: Et quod una via solicit curaverat ne fieret fratre praeterito,
fortunarum suarum naufragium and jacturam voluisse fieri alia via fratris
haeredibus institutis, si haeredes nedum habitu sed actu esse debeant: Imo
aliquando, cum quis alterius haeredes sibi adsciscit and substituit, evenire
potest ut instituenti haeredes sint, alteri vero vix habitu haeredes esse
possunt; si necessitudo and jus sanguinis haud desit obsit vero civilis aliqua
ratio; ut v. g. fratris haeredibus institutis, si praemoriatur instituens
fratre adhuc superstite, qui ei haeres fuisset si eo quo instituens diem obiit
tempore decessisset; instituenti haeres erit, nec fratris mors operienda erit,
and tamen ei haeres nec habitu esse potest qui instituenti succedit; Ea ratione
obstante quod adhuc superstes haeredem habere nequit, vel si fratris haereditas
integra and ex ass adita sit, adeo ut amplius haeredem habere nequeat,
facultate adeundi per aditionem absumpta; quia si frater cujus haeredes
vocantur praemortuus sit sine liberis and perduellionis damnatus, instituente
postea defuncto; si alius sit frater qui perduelli haeres foret si ad pacem and
fidem Domini Regis decessisset, and instituenti haeres erit licet neutro casu
fratri nec habitu nec actu haeres esse posset; obstante sciz. non naturali
ratione and sanguinis defectu, sed Jure and ratione civili, ob eas quas supra
memoravimus causas.

Quae pro altera part afferuntur, viz. quod ei quorundam sive opinio sive
error (and magis communis) suffragetur; and vulgo dicitur error communis jus
faciat, hisce presertim rationibus subnixus, viz.) cum quis vocatur sub modo
aut qualitate ut alteri haeres sit qualitatem nedum adesse sed praeambulam
antecedere oportere, nec instituenti haeredem esse posse nisi prius alteri
cujus haeredes vocati sunt haeres sit: cumque Haeres nomen Juris sit non
personae, alterius haeredem non admittendum esse, nisi ex Inquisitione alteri
haeredem esse compertum sit; ex Inquisitione autem alterius haeredem renunciari
moribus nostris nihil aliud esse, quam alterius haereditatem cernere, and actu
adire. Istae inquam rations facile diluuntur; nam cum patribus errasse
utcumque excusat, errore autem ratione evicto and agnito, nemo adhuc errandum
esse sentiet: Et communis error quando est in facto, and circa conditionem aut
qualitatem personae, ut quondam. Barbarii Philippi; qui cum servus esset
praetor Romanus fuit; in isto and similibus casibus, vel si forte praelatus vel
notarius haud legitimus pro legitimo tamen tentus and reputatus sit, hactenus
communis error Jus facit ut quae ab iis gesta sunt haud corruant, publica
utilitate postulante; ne publicus and communis error Reipublicae noceat: Error
autem in Jure non excusat nedum Jus facit; and qualitas sub qua vocatur haeres
alterius, haud deest si haeres sit habitu and proximus, ut superius
demonstratum est. Denique qui Brevi Regis impetrato postulat ut judex inquiri
faciat an haeres sit instituenti, ejusque tantum haereditatem adit, licet
alteri haeres sanguinis and habitu and esse and per inquisitores renunciari
debeat.

Quaest. 13.
AN eo ipso quod Sempronii haereditatem adiret Titii haeres; etiam Titii
haereditatem adiisse videatur, cum Titii haeredes Sempronio substituti sint;
adeo ut provisionis haeres Sempronio esse nequeat nisi haeres Titii sit
quaerendum est? parum quidem interesse videtur utrum Titio haeres esse ex
inquisitione, and postea Sempronio ex alia inquisitione etiam haeres esse
comperiatur; an vero ex una and eadem Inquisitione tam Titio quam Sempronio eum
haeredem esse declaretur. Caeterum voluntas and propositum (nedum maleficia sed
and) Civiles actus distinguit; cum itaque Titii haeres Brevi ex Cancellaria
impetrato inquiri postulat an sit Titio haeres, sine dubio Titii haereditatem
adit; Id enim unice agit and vult, ut Titio actu haeres sit: Verum ubi Brevi
impetrato de morte antecessoris inquirendum curat quis Sempronio haeres sit,
and clameo seu petitione exhibita petit ut declaretur se haeredem esse
Sempronio cum haeres proximus Titii sit, eo casu nec adit nec ei propositum est
ullam nisi Sempronii haereditatem adeundi: An vero Titii sit haeres inquiritur
tantum obiter and tanquam de qualitate praeambula; sine qua Sempronio
provisionis haeres esse non potest; non vero ut Titii haereditatem adeat, and
ei haeres actu sit: sufficit enim ut superius disseruimus ut Titio haeres sit
sanguinis and habitu: adeo in Jure iidem actus ex animo and fine diverso
plerumque diversos habent and sortiuntur effectus.

Quaest. 14.
NIhil quidem a Religione Judicantis magis alienum est quam (...) ea divino and
omni Jure vetita aegre tamen vitatur; and quod de Mart and Venere and de
Vulcani vinculis occultis sed tenacibus in fabulis est, verum est de Affectibus
animum impedientibus, ne Verum and Justum cernere possit: imo ubi Lex and
regula haud deest, interdum instar Lesbiae, color aliquo eo torquetur, quo
affectus impellit: ubi autem Lex aut regula deest, sibi homines Lex sunt ut ait
Apostolus, sensu multum diverso: and Judicantis pro lege affectui gratificandi
arbitrium sibi permissum arbitrantur. Curandum itaque quantum fieri potest, ne
arbitrio, Legibus and Justitiae inviso, locus sit. Licet autem sit homonomia in
ipso nomine Haeredis, and materia anceps and arbitraria; utrum haeres de eo qui
est actu haeres, an de eo qui habitu and sanguinis haeres est tantum,
intelligendum sit: Arbitrium tamen videtur istis regulis substringi and
coerceri posse.

1mo. Ubicunque alterius haeres ad alterius haereditatem vocatur satis est eum
alteri haeredem esse habitu; utque ei facultas and jus sit adeundi si velit and
prosit, non vero necessitas si nolit aut noceat.

2do. Tum materia subjecta tum id quod agitur multum inspicitur: In materia
igitur non successoria, ubi mentio fit haeredis, nec agitur ut succedat sed ad
alium finem and effectum, intelligendus est semper haeres habitu non actu; e.
g. In tabulis nuptialibus seu Contractu quem matrimonialem dicimus, synalagma
est and mutua ultro citroque obligatio; sponso enim de dote; sponsae de doario
cavetur; and liberis de successione: quia vero obligatio sine action and
executione inanis esset, nec uxor nec liberi sub potestate and ferula mariti
futuri, contra eum agere queunt; ideo clausula executiva introducta est, qua
cavetur; ut actio and executio competat Necessariis quibusdam and eorum
haeredibus, ad ea persequenda quae uxori and liberis ex eo contractu debentur
aut praestanda sunt: Eo casu si aliquis ex haeredibus egerit, ex ea clausula
qua sibi non consulitur sed ob sanguinis and necessitudinis vinculum in aliorum
rem officium and sollicitudo injungitur; nemo rationis compos nedum
Jurisprudens opinabitur, eum summovendum nisi actu haeres esse velit; and
haereditati damnosae se implicare non obstante Juris regula officium nemini
debere esse damnosum. Haud aliter sentiendum eo casu quo decimae (ut plerumque
fieri solebat) ad longum tempus locantur, conductori ejusque haeredibus and
assignatis; ita ut locatio durante vita conductoris, and secundum eum trium
haeredum successive duratura and aequaeva sit. Haeredes enim, cum quaeritur
quamdiu locatio duratura sit, intelliguntur qui sanguinis and and habitu
haeredes sunt, licet non actu; si enim (ut saepe evenit) locationis Jus cessum
fuerit nec ad haeredem pertineat, haud credendum tres haeredes, Jure alienato,
in aliorum rem alienanti haeredes fore actu, and adituros: Cumque locatio sit
conductori haeredibus and assignatis, durante tot haeredum vita, non agitur ut
penes haeredes Jus istud semper futurum sit, sed ut sive sit penes haeredes
sive singulares successores, ut ejus duratio, cum ex natura locationis perpetua
esse nequeat, definiatur ex vita trium haeredum.

Sic in judiciis declaratoriis Juris, Nonintroitus forte aut aliis ejusmodi and
Rescissoriis, quia non sunt actiones rei persecutoriae, nec iis aliquid dari
vel fieri petitur sed agentis jus tantum asseritur and declaratur; necesse
tamen est ut omnes quorum interest conveniantur; defunctis iis quorum interesse
poterat haeredes eorum necessario citandi sunt; nec necesse tamen est ut sint
haeredes, actu and vel adeant vel repudiant.

3tio. Ubicunque haeredibus sanguinis consulitur, cavetur tamen ne actu
haeredes sint; ne adeundo litibus aut debitis haereditarie subjaceant:
Aequivocum haeredis nomen de eo qui proximus and habitu haeres sit
intelligendum est, exemplum fuit insigne in ea cujus superius meminimus facti
specie, cum sciz. Frater adhuc liberis orbus, fratre parum frugi aut prodigo;
ideo eo praeterito fratris haeredes resignatione facta sibi si non agnascantur
liberi haeredes substituit; veritus ne si frater succederet etiam sua
profunderet.

Illud quoque addi potest, quod instrumentis sponsalitiis cum vir ad secunda
vota convolat, saepius haeredibus prospicitur; ut a sponso terrae and praedia
dentur vel acquirantur, aut ut certa pecuniae summa collocetur sub usuris; and
terrarum aut ex iis annui reditus hypotheca; sed ea lege ut penes Conjuges
ususfructus tantum sit, haeredes vero ex conjugio feodum and proprietas; ut
superiore ita isto casu liquet id agi, ne haeredes patri succedant cum ex
priore matrimonio liberos forte habeat ei haeredes in universum futuros: liberi
vero ex secundo matrimonio in Terrarum aut annui reditus feudum ex pacto ipsis
concessum succedere nequeant, cum penes patrem haud futurum sit: Ea igitur
interpretatio fieri debet ut id quod agitur and actus valeat, and evitetur
absurdum; maximum autem foret si quod una via prohibetur aut cavetur alia
eveniat: and dum Charybdis evitatur, incurratur Scylla non minus exitiosa.

Quaest. 15.
SUperius Respondimus Titium ejusque haeredes, Sempronio in Chirographo
substitutos, ei haeredes esse provisionis: Quaerendum an Sempronii Creditoribus
teneantur? and quidem dicendum est eos teneri and obnoxios esse; nam omnis
haereditas etiam particularis, and in Chirographo praedio aut alia re
particulari, eatenus est successio in universum Jus; secundum haereditatis
definitionem: ut nedum commoda sed incommoda and onera ad eum pertineant and
redundent, sed quatenus debitis subjaceat and oneribus: quaestio difficilior
nec levis momenti est, and alio forte loco ubi de haeredibus Talliae and
provisionis and aliis particularibus haeredibus agetur, magis opportune
ventilabitur.

Feus.
IF a Fever may Refute as in the case of other holdings? The difference being,
that Feuda are Beneficia, and invito Beneficium nec datur nec retinetur:
Whereas Feus are Emphyteuses and upon the matter perpetual Locations; and as in
Locationibus either ad tempus how long so ever, the Conductor cannot renounce,
so their appears to be eadem Ratio in Feus.

Whether there be Non-entry in Feus, and the Liferent Escheat of the Fever does
belong to the Superior, seeing they are not proprie Feuda? And yet it is thought
sapiunt naturam Feudi.

If there be Non-entry: Whether before Declarator, the Superior will have right
to the retoured Duty, which is the Feu-duty, besides the Feu-duty due to
himself: And after Declarator to the full profits?

Feuda Nobilia.
FEuda nobilia sine Nobilitate dari possunt: Adeo ut aliquis ab Imperatore
investiri posset in Ducatu aut Comitatu, nec tamen Dux aut Comes sit. These.
Besold. in litera I. 18. verbo. Innhabern. des. p. 428.

Fiar.
1. WHen Lands are Disponed to a person, without mention either of Heirs or
that he is Fiar or Liferenter; or that they are Disponed Heretably. Quaeritur,
If he be Fiar?

2. In Conjunct Fee where there are no degrees of Substitution, whether is the
Husband or Wife Fiar?

3. When Lands are given in Conjunct-Fee to the Husband and Wife, and their
Heirs; who is Fiar?

4. If the Husband be Fiar, whether at least the Heirs betwixt him and her, are
to be understood his Heirs: or his Heirs whatsoever?

5. If Lands be Disponed to two Brothers by their Father, and their Heirs; if
they be both Fiars ex semisse?

6. If when Lands are Disponed by a Father to two Brothers and the Heirs of
their Body; if one die without Heirs of his Body, whether it be substitutio
reciproca?

7. When Lands are Disponed to Husband and Wife and their Heirs of the
Marriage; and these failieing the half to the Husbands Heirs, and the other
half to the Wifes: Quaeritur, Whether the Husband be so Fiar, that the Wifes
Heirs, failieing Heirs of the Marriage, will be Heirs of Provision as to the
half?

8. When it is intended that the Wife should be a Joynt-fiar: If the Right
should not be to the Husband and her; and after their Decease the half to his
Heirs and the other half to her Heirs?

9. When a right is given to Two Persons and to the longest Liver of them Two,
and the Heirs of the longest Liver, who is Fiar? And if the Fee be in pendenti?

10. When the Fee is provided by Contract of Marriage to Bairns; and
accordingly a Right is granted in the foresaid terms, there being no Bairns for
the time: Quaeritur, When a Child is born whether the Fee be immediately in its
person?

11. If it be in solidum in its person and thereafter others be born Quaeritur,
Quid juris, and if concursu faciunt parts?

12. In Conjunct-fees where there is no substitution, the Heirs determine the
Fee.

13. Where there are degrees of substitution, The person whose Heirs succeed
first is Fiar; And all the Substitutes thereafter are Heirs of Provision to the
Fiar by progress.

14. When a Band is taken to a person and his Heirs; if his Grandchild by a
Daughter decease having no issue, whether the Child being Heir, his Father will
succeed to him; albeit his Father cannot be Heir to the Grandfather, and
haeres haeredis should be haeres instituentis?

Fiars of Bonds
A Bond being in these terms, To a man and his Wife and the Heirs of the
Marriage; which failieing to the longest Liver of them two and the Heirs of the
surviver, Quaeritur, who is the Fiar?

A Bond being granted to a Husband and his Wife and the longest liver of them
two in Conjunctfee; and to one of their Sons expressly named and the Heirs of
his Body: whilks failieing to the Heirs to be procreat betwixt the Husband and
the Wife; whilk failieing to the Wifes Heirs and Assigneys, Quaeritur, Whether
the Fee of the said Sum pertains to the Husband, or to the foresaid Son, or
to the Wife? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Right of Succession terminates upon the
Wife and her Heirs, which seems to import that she is Fiar. 2do. As to the Son
the said Sum being provided to his Heirs in the first place It seems that the
Fee should pertain to him: Seeing the Heirs of his Body are to succeed in the
first place, and the Fee of Money (as it is said of the Vsufructus of Money,
That it is quasi Vsufructus) is quasi feodum and Proprietas: and properly that
is said to be Property which belongs to a person and descends to his Heirs:
And yet it is thought that the Fee of the said Sum does belong to the Husband,
in respect the Money being his own was lent by him in behalf of himself and the
foresaid persons: and albeit when a Bond is conceived simply to a Husband and
his Wife in Conjunctfee and to her Heirs and assigneys, she is Fiar; for the
reason foresaid, that it is to belong to her and her Heirs only. Nevertheless
when there is diverse degrees of Substitution of Heirs of diverse persons and
of a Wife in the last place, the person whose Heirs are provided for in the
first place ought to be understood to be Fiar: and these in secundis tabulis
and in a more remote degree, to be only Heirs of Provision Failieing the
former: and if the Son had survived or his Heirs, It is absurd that they should
be Heirs to their Mother and not to their Father; And that the Mother being
Fiar should have power to Dispone of the Sum in prejudice of her Husbands
Children. And albeit the said Sons Heirs be first named yet it is thought that
he is not Fiar, seeing he is to be Heir of Provision to his Father: as if an
Infeftment were granted to his Father and Wife in Conjunct-fee; and failieing
of them be decease, to a certain person their Son and the Heirs of his Body:
The Son in that case would be Heir of Provision.

A Bond being granted to a Man and his Wife and longest Liver of them Two and
their Heirs: And the Wife having survived, Quaeritur. If she will be Fiar of
the said Bond?

A Person having Infeft his Creditors for security of Debts, and while they be
paid respectively. Quaeritur, Quatenus They are Fiars whether in solidum, or
ex part: And qua part? Respondetur, They are Fiars proportionally, and ex
part effeiring to their Debt.

Fiars in Tailies.
BY a Contract of Marriage; Lands being given in Tocher and the Right thereof
so conceived that they were Disponed to the Husband and the Gentlewoman in
Conjunct-fee and Liferent, and to the Heirs of the Marriage: Whilk Failieing to
the Heirs of the Husband his Body in any other Marriage: Whilk Failieing to the
Woman's Heirs and Assigneys whatsomever. Quaeritur, who is Fiar? Answer. That
though where there is but one degree of Substitution, ( viz. Failieing the
Heirs of the Marriage the Woman's Heirs) The Woman is Fiar; Because res pertinet
ad eos quorum haeredibus providetur: But where there are diverse Degrees of
Substitution (as in this case) the Husband (cujus haeredibus maxim
prospicitur) It is thought should be Fiar; Seeing not only the Heirs of the
Marriage gotten by him, But in the next degree his Heirs of any other Marriage
are substitute: and in ultimis tabulis, The Wifes Heirs, and as Heirs of
Provision to the Husband: and the Husband having given a Jointure, it is
thought to be in Lieu of the Tocher, and to belong to him as Fiar and not as
simple Liferenter.

A Bond for a Sum of Money being granted to a Man and his Wife and longest
Liver of them Two, and to their Heirs and Assigneys secluding Executors: And
the Wife having survived the Husband, and a Bairn being likewise on Life of
their Marriage: Quaeritur, Whether the Relict will be Fiar?

If a Bond be granted to Two Brothers in the terms foresaid, and one of them
deceasing having left Children, and the other surviving having also Children:
Quaeritur, who is Fiar?

Fictio Juris.
QVaeritur, A Debtor being disseas'd what way can the Compriser be Infeft?
Answer. The Decree of Reduction puts the Debtor quoad the Creditor in the
same case as if he had not been denuded Fictione Juris.

Fiscus.
IN Dubiis ubi non est plena Probatio fisco non favendum. Besol. Thesaur.
liter. L. p. 556. vide Auctores ibi citatos.

Commissa Fisco.
MErces committuntur Fisco ex causa fraudati vectigalis ipso Jure; ita ut
statim desinant esse ejus qui deliquit: itatamen ut ob contradictionem partis
requiratur sententia declarativa. De Jure fluminum. 206.

Flumina.
FLumina a Rivis distinguuntur magnitudine, vel aestimatione circumcolentium
Hering. de molendin. Quaest. 15. n. 4.

Flumina Publica.
FLumen publicum est illud quod perenne est. Th. Scipman. de Jure Fluminum seu.
jus Fluviaticum p. 3. n. 20.

Flumina publica sunt in potestate and patrimonio Principis, and de Regalibus
sunt, idem P. 5. n. 52.

Publica sunt superiorem non recognoscentis, and Majestate fulgentis, Ibid n.
7. and quorum usus omnibus Expositus est.

Flumina publica sunt, quae sunt perennia and de Regalibus, plerumque
navigabilia, and quae navigabile aliud faciunt, and ad principem pertinent: Vsu
vero patent singulorum commodis and utilitati, non etiam commercio seu Juri
emendi, acquirendi, alienandi. Quaest. eadem. Number. 10.

Flumina Censitorum vice funguntur, and ex privato in publicum addicunt, and ex
publico in privatum, dum uni adimunt and alteri addunt, Jus fluviat. p. 5. 24.
etc.

Forfaulture.
A Subvassal being Forfaulted, Whether His Majesty's Donator will have Right to
the Estate free of Servitudes, and Rights not consented to by the immediate
Superior? Caldwells Relict contra Daliel.

When the Lands fall in His Majesty's Hands by Forefaulture, or otherways by
the suppressing of Benefices, or any other occasion; if there be Vassals
holding of the same; May he Dispone the said Lands and Superiorities? Ratio
Dubitandi; That a Superior cannot interpose. Answer. There is a difference
betwixt Vassals holding Originally of His Majesty, and these who hold ab initio
of other Superiors: As to the first they cannot be prejudged so as to be put to
hold of any other than His Majesty, and to be more remote from the Fountain:
The others are not prejudged, seeing they are put in the condition they were in
formerly: and as the former Superior might have Disponed the Superiority, and
resigned; so His Majesty cannot be denied the same Power: and His Majesty's
Disposition is Fictione Juris equivalent to a Resignation, seeing there is no
other Superior in whose hands the King can resign.

If a Subvassal, to a Vassal holding of the King, be Forefaulted for Treason;
will subaltern Rights granted by him fall under Forefaulture? Seeing it is
pretended that such Forefaultures belong to the King not as Superior but Jure
Coronae and as Prince; and noxa caput sequitur: and the King has no prejudice
having a Vassal. Yet I think that these Rights should fall, Quia resoluto Jure
Dantis resolvitur Jus accipientis: And if the Subvassal should Forefault his
Lands by Recognition, his Vassals Right would Forefault: And it is against
reason, That Treason being Crimen gravius, The Forefaulture and poena should be
Levior: And Treason is Crimen feudale and against the King as Superior
paramount: and as the betraying of a mediate Superior will import Forefaulture,
not only of the Subvassal but of his Vassals; there is the same or greater
reason, that Treason against the King should have the same effect: and the
reason that the Forefaulture of the Subvassal should belong to the King is,
because the Crime is committed against him as highest Superior.

If the Kings immediate Vassal should confirm the Inferior Rights, if there be
any alteration of the case? Seeing the King is in place of the Vassal, because
the Crime is committed against the King as Superior, and he should be in no
better case: and the Vassal if he were to have the benefit of the
Forefaulture, could not Question the said Rights.

If a person Infeft in Liferent be Forefaulted for Treason, will the Liferent
expire though he survive? Seeing he is nullus, and after Treason does neither
transmitt cedendo nor delinquendo.

A Person being Infeft in Trust and to the use and behoof of another;
Quaeritur, If he commit Treason will he Forefault the Right of the Lands to His
Majesty? Seeing albeit his Right be to the use and behoof of another yet he is
Vassal; and as the French say he is homme vivant and confisquant; and there is
no reason the Superior should be defrauded; and the granter of the Right is to
be blamed that he trusted such a person.

By the English Law, though a person Dispone for Onerous Causes, he is not
Liable to warrant unless he be expressly bound; otherways the acquirer is
presumed to take his hazard: But with us no Warrandice, is absolute Warrandice.

Quaeritur, If a Donator to a Forefaulture has Action for Exhibition and
delivery of the Evidents?

The Vassal of a Subject, having granted a subaltern Right to be holden base,
and the same not being confirmed by the mediate Superior: Quaeritur, Whether
the Subvassals Right foresaid, will fall under the Forefaulture of his immediate
Superior being Forefaulted? Answer. It is thought that it will fall under the
Forefaulture, in respect that if the person Forefaulted had committed a Crime
against his Immediate Superior whereupon the Lands would have recognosced or
Forefaulted to him, The Subvassal his Property would have fallen under the
Forefaulture; and there is eadem if not major Ratio in the case of Treason, The
King being Superior Paramount, and the Crime against him being also a Crime
against the mediate Superior; there being no greater wrong than to be a Traitor
to the Superior. Caldwell and Glanderstoun.

Quaeritur, Quid Juris, If the mediate Superior had confirmed the Subvassals
Right?

Quid Juris in the case of Forefalture for Treason? And if there be a
difference in the case of Forefaulture in Parliament and before the Justices?

Lands being Comprysed and a signature being past upon the Comprysing, but no
Infeftment being taken thereupon: Quaeritur, If the Debtor commit Treason in
the interim, whether the same will fall under Forefaulture? Answer. It is
thought that it will not, seeing the Debtor was fully denuded; there being no
vestige of Right in his person; seeing he is divested by the Comprysing as if he
had resigned, and the Superior had accepted the Resignation.

Quaeritur, Quid Juris, If there were only a Comprysing without a Signature?
And the Question may be more general; Viz. If in all cases the Heretor be so
denuded that he cannot prejudge the Compryser, by any Deed whereupon
Recognition or other Forefaulture may follow, in favors of the Superior:
otherways a Malicious Debtor may, of purpose, do such a Deed to prejudge his
Creditor.

To consider if there be a difference betwixt a Disposition and Resignation
accepted by the Superior: And a Comprysing; whereupon nothing has followed?

Item. If the presenting of a Signature on a Comprysing to the Exchequer, be
equivalent to a Resignation in the Superiors hands and accepting?

Item. Whether a Charge to other Superiors to enter the Compryser be
equivalent to a Resignation?

If after a Person is Forefaulted, an Estate should fall to him, as appearand
Heir to any person, he being yet on Life; whether would the same pertain to the
King or to the next Heir, as if he were Deceased? Seeing he is nullus being
Forefaulted, and is not in a Capacity to be Appearand Heir.

If a Forfaulted person have Children that are ante nati; Whether or not will
they be prejudged by their Fathers Forfaulture: as to any Capacity or Estate
belonging to him? Whether will they succeed to their Grandfather or any
relation upon the Fathers side; Seeing their Blood is corrupted and they cannot
represent their Father being nullus as said is?

A person having Married an Heretrix, and being thereafter Forfaulted,
Quaeritur, If the Blood of the Children be so tainted and corrupted That they
cannot succeed to their Mother? 2do. If the Mother should not dispone in her
oun Lifetime; Whether her Estate will fall to the King by the incapacity of the
Children, being her appeirand Heirs?

An Heretrix being Wife to a forfaulted person, If als long as he lives the
King will have right to the Mails and Duties Jure Mariti? 2do If she may
dispose of her Estate without his Consent seeing he is nullus in Law: And yet is
her Husband, the Marriage not being dissolved with the Forefaulture?

A Father having Disponed his Estate to his Son, with Reversion and power
either to Redeem or Dispone; Quaeritur, If the personal faculty may,
notwithstanding, be comprysed during the Fathers Life; and may be used even
after the Death of the Father? There is the same Question as to Forefaulture.

A Woman being Heretrix of Lands in Scotland; and the same being Tailied to the
Heirs of her Body, whilk Failieing to certain other Heirs: with the ordinary
Clauses irritant that she and they should not have power to prejudge the
Tailie; Quaeritur. If her Husband being Forefaulted, the Blood be so corrupted
that her Children cannot succeed, and if their Interest of Succession will fall
to the King?

If a Tack set for an Onerous Cause and for payment of Debt; will prejudge the
Donator to the Forefaulture?

The Creditor having an Action of Reduction competent to him for Reduceing an
Infeftment as being in defraud of him; if thereafter the Debtor should be
Forefaulted, and the Creditor reduce the said Right; what way shall he be
Infeft; seeing he cannot Compryse or Adjudge; the Debtor being Forefaulted?

There being a Minute of Contract anent the selling of Lands, and the Buyer
being thereafter Forefaulted; Quaeritur, If the King or his Donators will have
Right to the said Minute in the same manner as the Buyer? or if the Seller can
raise a Declarator to be free of the Minute? Seeing albeit where there is a
clear Right and Interest belonging to a person Forefaulted, the same will
pertain to the King; yet when a Bargain is only in fieri, and there are diverse
obligements upon the part of the Forefaulted person, the Seller ought not to be
in worse case, and in place of a Subject have so powerful an Adversary. The
Earl of Tarras, and the Heirs of Walter Riddel.

The Lord of Cesnock having acquired from Castlemaines the Barony of
Castlemaines, but not being Infeft but base before the Forefaulture, Quaeritur,
If by his Forfaulture, these who had Rights holden of Castlemaines not
confirmed by the King will be in any hazard? Answer. It Is thought not: Seeing
any Right Cesnock had to the said Lands, was not as the Kings Vassal: In which
case the subaltern Rights would have fallen; and Castlemaines remaining the
Kings Vassal, Cesnock had only the Right of property holden of Castlemaines:
And as to Castlemaines Right holden of the King, Cesnock had only Jus ad rem by
the Contract or Disposition; so that thereby the King by the Forefaulture may
come to Castlemaines Right, and force him to denude himself of the same; but it
cannot be said that the said Estate came in the Kings hand by the Forefaulture
of a Vassal.

Sempronia having Right to certain Lands which are parcels of a Barony Feued to
her Authors by the Earls of Argyle who held the same Feu of the Archbishops
of St. Andrews; who did confirm the subaltern Rights granted by the said
Earls: Quaeritur, Whether the said Lands belonging to the said Sempronia do
fall under the Forefaulture of the Earl of Argyle, notwithstanding the
confirmation granted by the Bishops: In respect the said Rights are not
confirmed by the King?

In Answer to the said Querie, It is thought, that the said Lands do not fall
under the Earls Forefaulture, for these Reasons.

1mo. The Earl of Argyle did Forefault only what did belong to himself, Nam
noxa caput sequitur; and the said Lands did not belong to him in Property, but
only in Superiority: And there is a difference betwixt the said case, and the
case of Lands holden immediately of the King himself; which by the Forefaulture
of his Vassal are Forefaulted; and does return to the King as he did give them
pure and free, and without the burden of any other Right granted by the person
Forefault, but such as the King did consent to and confirmed: Whereas in the
case in Question, The said Earl did not hold the foresaids Lands immediately of
the King but of the Archbishop, who stands still His Majesty's Vassal: And as
his own Right is not prejudged by the said Forefaulture, so the Right of the
sub-Vassal consented to and confirmed by him, is not prejudged by the said
Forefaulture.

2do. Lands holden of the Bishop waird, or which would fall in his hands upon
Recognition or otherways by the deed of the Earl of Argyle, being Disponed by
the Earl to be holden of himself; will not recognosce by the Earls Deed in
Disponing the Superiority or otherways, if the Bishop had confirmed the
Subvassals Right; And there is the same reason in the case of Forefaulture, in
respect by the common Law when Lands do fall and are confiscat, they fall to
the immediate Superior: And by our custom in the case of Treason the King has
that Privilege, that the Lands which are Forefaultare Confiscat and
Forefaulted to him; because the Crime is committed against him. And therefore
the Lands holden of other Superiors do Forefault to the King, no otherways
than they would belong to other Superiors, if the Forefaulture did belong to
them; In which case the confirmation of the Subaltern Rights by the immediate
Superior of the person Forefaulted, would save the Subaltern Rights that they
could not fall under Forefaulture.

3tio. By the Law and Custom of the Kingdom it is lawful Subinfeodare; and
albeit it may be pretended that if the Bishop had not confirmed the Fews
granted by the Earl of Argyle they would have fallen by his Forefaulture though
lawful ab initio, seeing res devenit ad aliam causam and resoluto Jure dantis
resolvitur jus accipientis: Yet in the case of confirmation by the Bishop,
there is a great difference; seeing the Subaltern Right does not only depend
upon Argyl's Right so that it falls with it; but has another Foundation
whereupon it does subsist; Viz. The Bishop's own Right and the confirmation
granted by the Bishop; and specially in this case, seeing it appears by the
confirmation that the same is granted not to gratify the Subvassal, and to
prevent prejudice to him by the Forefaulture of Argyle if it should fall out,
but in order to the Bishop's own Interest and Advantage; In respect by the
confirmation there is reserved to the Bishop, beside the Feu-duty payable to
Argyle, a Feu-duty to himself and his Successors; with a Clause irritant if it
be not paid: And fictione brevis manus, the Feuar is in the same case as if
the Bishop ab initio by one Charter had Disponed the said Lands to the Earl of
Argyle in Superiority, and to the Feuar in property for payment to the Earl of
Argyle of the Feu-duty mentioned in Charter, and to the Bishop the said other
Deuty: In which case Argyl's Forefaulture could not prejudge the Feuar of the
Right of Property granted by the Bishop himself, nor the Bishop of the said
Additional Duty.

4to. By the Acts of Parliament K. Ja. 2d. and K. J. 4. anent the setting of
Feues and by custom ever since, The setting of Fews was so speedful and
necessar in order to the policy of the Kingdom; That Vassals are not only
allowed but invited to set their Lands in Feu; which in effect is a general
confirmation of all Fews; so that the Fewers should not be in hazard either by
the Waird or Non-entry or by any Deed or delict of their Superior; but should
be liable only to pay their Feu-duties to these who should have Right upon
occasion of the same: and the said Barony being of a large and vast bounds,
albeit it was Fewed to the Earl of Argyle; yet for the laboring and bringing
it in, it was necessary to set it in parcells to other Fewers holden of him:
and the Fews in Question are granted before the Year 1606.

A Subvassal holding of a person Forefaulted, and his Right not being confirmed
either by the Forefaulted persons immediate Superior, or by the King,
Quaeritur, If his Right will fall under the Forefaulture? Ratio Dubitandi;
Licebat infeodare, and noxa caput sequitur: and yet is thought it will fall
under the Forefaulture; Because resoluto jure dantis etc. And though it be
lawful to grant Sub-altern Rights yet it is always cum sua causa.

A Superior being Forfaulted, and his Vassals Right not being confirmed, and
so falling: Quaeritur, If His Majesty should confirm the Vassals Right, if that
will be habilis modus to secure against a poster or Donator? Ratio Dubitandi;
The Vassals Right being altogether extinct by the Forefaulture, there is
nothing to be the subject of a confirmation, which cannot be of non entis; and
the Vassal should have obtained a Gift upon the Forefaulture. And contra, The
Vassals Right not being null of it self, but such as could not prejudge the
King when Lands return to him by the Forefaulture of the Superior, because he
did not consent to the same; his consent thereto at any time may convalidate
the Right before Jus be quaesitum to a Donator.

If, after Forefaulture His Majesty having granted a Remission, the person
Forefaulted is redintegrated to his Estate, as if the Forefaulture had not
been: or if he should take a new Right upon the Forefaulture?

When a Forefaulted person has Right to succeed to any other person as Heir; so
that not only his own Estate but what would belong to him if he had entered
Heir, would fall to the King by his Forefaulture; Quaeritur, will the King be
Liable to the Debts of the Defunct; seeing he does not succeed to the Traitor's
own Estate and Patrimony, but in haereditatem quae est nomen universitatis,
both as to the Debita and Bona: and there is no reason that the Defuncts
Creditors should be prejudged, unless they had been in culpa either themselves
or their Debtor.

His Majesty having presented, upon Forefaulture, a Vassal; If that Superior
should be thereafter Forefaulted; Quaeritur, If the Feu not being confirmed,
will fall under his Forefaulture? Ratio Dubitandi: The Fever is in the same
condition with other Subvassals; so that if he do not apply for confirmation he
is liable to the same hazard. And yet on the other part it may be thought, that
the reason why Confirmation is necessary is, because when Lands return to the
King they return as they were given free of all Rights and Burdens, but such as
the King did consent to; which does cease in this case; seeing the King is not
only Consenter to the Subvassals Right but is Author by the presentation.

A Person having committed Treason, and thereafter his Kinsman to whom he might
have succeeded, being Deceased, Quaeritur, If that Defuncts Estate will fall to
the King, or go to the next Heir? Ratio Dubitandi: That there seems to be a
difference, betwixt the case in the fifth Question of the Title Heirs, when a
person being Appearand Heir, and having haereditas delata before he commit
Treason, the same should fall to the King; seeing he was Haeres habitu, and had
jus radicatum in his Person before his Treason, and therefore Forefaults the
same to the King. Whereas in this said other case, when the Succession fell,
the Traitor could not have any Right in his Person being nullus and incapable
of Succession: So that it cannot be said that he is Legitimus and propinquior
haeres.

A Person holding Lands Ward of the King did give an Infeftment to be holden of
himself Blensh, and the same being confirmed by the King, the granter was
thereafter Forefaulted, so that the Subvassal did come to hold of the King:
Quaeritur, Whether he will hold as he did formerly, or Ward as his immediate
Superior did?

A Person being Appearand Heir both in Land and Heretable Sums, but not being
served Heir; And being Forefaulted after the Decease of his Predecessor:
Quaeritur. If he does Forefault not only the Lands but the said other Heretable
Estate? Answer. It is thought there is a difference betwixt Lands, and any
other Heretable Estate; seeing the Appearand Heir is obliged to enter to his
Lands to the Effect the Superior may have a Vassal Liable to Service or other
Duties; so that his not entering is delictum, vel quasi; and the Lands are in
Non-entry: And he is in the same case in Relation to the Superior, as if he
were entered: Whereas, as to any other Heretable Estate, he needs not own or
claim the same but if he pleases; and he cannot have Right unless the same be
settled upon him by a Service: and consequently cannot Forefault that which is
not his. Vide supra, in the Question concerning Cesnocks Forefaulture.

A Band being granted to an Englishman, but bearing Registration in Scotland;
and being granted by a Scotsman: If the Person Creditor be guilty of Treason,
whether it will fall under Forefaulture in England, or Scotland?

Cum essent Sempronio duo filii, Primogenitus patre adhuc vivo perduellionis
damnatus fuerat; postea patre mortuo, utroque filio superstite (nam perduellis
fuga se subduxerat) de haereditate patris ambigitur an ad primogenitum and ex
ejus persona ad Fiscum pertineret? Nam Jure civili quod indigno aufertur fisco
quaeritur: and Jure nostro haeres apparens, Majestatis damnatus, nedum sua sed
bona haereditaria and praedia quae sua forent, si adita esset haereditast,
amittit and ad fiscum transfert.

Sed distinguendum, Et multum interest, an filius, praemortuo patre, crimen
postea admiserit; an vero (ut in casu praedicto) ante patris obitum Majestatis
reus and damnatus sit: priori casu cum primogeniti persona adhuc integra sit,
confestim a morte patris dies cedit and haereditas ei delata est; adeo ut qui
etiam patre superstite haeres fuerat in spe, Jam incipit haeres esse habitu and
spe certa and radicata, cum libuerit actu and aditione haeres futurus: si
igitur postea maximam capitis diminutionem patiatur, haereditas ipsi delata and
jus succedendi infiscum transit: altero vero casu, filio ante mortem patris
damnato, haereditas patris morte nec delata est nec deferri potuit, utpote
poena servo, and qui in jure nullus, nec personam habeat in qua successionis
jus radices agere queat: his consequens est, fratrem juniorem patri haeredem
fore; quia absurdum esset patrem a crimine alienum, and forte tam suis quam
familiae meritis commendatum, ex delicto filii nihil amittere dum viveret (noxa
enim caput sequitur) morientem autem tum bona tum familiam and memoriam
perdere: nec perduellis aut fisci melior debet esse conditio, quod damnatus
poenae se substraxerit: and extra quaestionis aleam est, secundogenitum patri
haeredem futurum primogenito patri praemortuo.

2da. In ista specie facti suboritur quaestio, viz. si venia data restituatur
primogenitus, an frater desinit esse haeres? Et quidem distinguendum est, 1mo.
An cum restituitur, haereditas integra and ex ass adita sit, fratre ex
inquisitione haerede renunciato, and in omnibus quae patris fuerant praediis
investito (cum enim terrae in haereditate sunt, ante investituram haud censetur
esse aditio) isto casu restitutio quae est ex gratia nemini nocet nisi
concedenti; nec adimit jus fratri quaesitum: and quod rite constitutum and
quaesitum est haud corruit etsi casus evenerit a quo incipere non poterat.

2do. Sin restituatur primogenitus, haereditate nondum ullatenus adita; eo casu
quia res adhuc est integra and sublato obice per restitutionem, qui oberat ne
haeres esse possit; incipit haeres esse habitu and aditione actu haeres erit.

3tio. Haereditate partim adita partim non, fra re in quibusdam terris
investito in quibusdam haud sasito; novissimo isto casu frater in iis quidem
terris in quibus investitus est haereditatem retinebit; in reliquis
primogenitus haeres erit: tantum adeo discrimen est inter jus inchoatum and id
quod penitus consummatum and quaesitum est: Multa enim cadunt inter calicem
supremaque labra.

Forisfamiliation.
QVaeritur, If the granting of a Provision to a Child imports
Forisfamiliation; so that the Child cannot claim a Bairns part? Or if it be to
be considered what the subject of the Provision is? Viz. Whether it be
Heretable or Moveable: Seeing in the first case it seems that the Provision
being out of a different Subject should not exclude from a share of Movables?
David Scot Son to Walter Earl of Buccleugh.

Funeral Charges.
IF Funeral Expenses should be deduced as a Debt off the whole, or only off the
Deads part?

If the Funeral Charges for Burying the Husband, should affect the whole
Moveable Estate, or the Deads part? Answer. It should affect the Deads part;
seeing it is not a Debt contracted during the Communion: And the Deads part
cannot be used or employed better than to Bury him.

If the Funeral Charges should be deduced in Relation to the Quot, so that the
Quot should be only of the Deads part free of the said Debt? Answer. It is
thought, it should not be deduced, for the reason contained in the preceding
Querie.

G.
Gestio Haeredis.
IF an Appearand Heir meddle by entering to the possession of Lands, whereof the
Defunct was in possession; but his Title is found thereafter to be void: Will
his medleing import Behavior and aditionem passive.

Gift.
THE late King having granted to a certain person the Gift of an Office at His
Majesty's presentation; There is a Gift of the said Office granted to another
person by one having Right by a late Gift to present to the said Office;
notwithstanding that the person who had the former Gift ad vitam or culpam is
yet Living and is not deprived: And it is now desired, that His Majesty should
not only ratify the said late Gift, but that of his certain knowledge, proper
motive, and by virtue of his prerogative he should give a new Gift of the said
Office; Revocking and annulling the former Gift granted by the late King to the
present incumbent; and giving power to the person to be presented by the New
Gift, to enter presently to the Exercise and benefit of the said Office, by
himself and his Deputes: And ordaining the present Incumbent to deliver up the
Registers; and recommending to the Lords of Session to construct His Majesty's
Gift with the greatest latitude that their Nobile Officium can allow: And
containing a promise to ratify in Parliament.

Quaeritur. Whether a Gift of the Tenor foresaid be according to Law? It is
Answered, That the samen is altogether against Law and Form, for these Reasons.

1mo. By the common Law there can be no valid Gift of an Office or place,
unless the same be Vacant, and the manner of Vacation expressed in the Gift;
seeing the Office belonging to another who has Right to and in possession
thereof, the same is not in the hands and power of these who has Right to
present, so that they may give the same. 2do. If it be pretended, that it may
be taken periculo petentis, and that the Incumbent may be thereafter deprived
or may decease; and that the Gift may be effectual in either of the said cases:
Such a pretense is both against Common Law and our Practique; seeing it imports
votum captandae mortis: And, by an express Act of Parliament, Gifts of Escheat
should not be given before they fall by Horning: and there is the same Reason
as to all other Gifts. 3tio. That a former Gift granted, by the late King, who
undoubtedly had Right to give the same, should be Revocked and Annulled without
a previous citation of the person concerned; and without so much as a hint of
any reasons why his Right should be taken from him; is a Streach not only
against Law and Form but against Humanity and Justice which is defined Jus suum
cuique tribuere, and neminem laedere. 4to. That, what cannot be done in Law and
Justice, should be desired to be done by virtue of His Majesty's Prerogative,
is an Injury to so just a Prince; And it is of a dangerous preparative that His
Majesty's Prerogative should be pretended for Favors to private persons, that
are Unjust and Illegal. 5to. Whereas it is desired, that it should be
recommended to the Lords of Session, to construe His Majesty's Gift, if it
should be granted, and if there should be any Question upon the same; with the
greatest Latitude that their Nobile Officium may allow; The said Desire and
Style is Illegal, and without any precedent; and should not be a precedent
hereafter: seeing there ought to be no prelimitation upon the Lords of Session:
And it is their Duty, and may be expected from them, that they will construe
His Majesty's Grants according to Law and Justice: And their Nobile Officium;
being as the Highest Judicatory, to do Justice according to Law, they have no
Latitude to recede from the same.

Gift of Escheat with Backbond.
IF a Backbond do so affect the Gift of Escheat, that the Donator cannot Assign
the same?

Gifts of Forefaulture.
LAnds being Disponed by His Majesty, as being in his hand upon Forefaulture,
conform to a certain Decree of Forefaulture mentioned in the Right, with the
Clause cum omni Jure; and the King having, the time of the granting the
Disposition, Right to the Land as being in his hands for committing another
Deed of Treason after the former; whereupon there was not a Decree the time of
the Disposition: Quaeritur. If the said former Decree be taken away, whether
the Donator will have right to the Lands upon the Supervenient Deeds, and new
Decree of Forefaulture following thereupon? Ratio Dubitandi, The said Right is
upon a special Ground, and causa limitata limitatum producit effectum: And the
Clause ^um omni Jure is only Clausula executiva; and is only to be understood
of Inferior Rights to Mails and Duties, by reason of Ward, Non-entry or
otherwise; and not of the right of Property upon other Grounds. Swinton.

Gifts of Recognition.
A Gift of Recognition bearing Lands holden of the King Ward, to have been
Disponed; but not specifying the same; or special as to the Lands but not as to
the persons in whose favors the Disposition is made: if it will be valid?

Gift of Ward.
THE Superior having gotten a Gift of his own Ward, either to himself or to
another for his behoof, gratis; Quaeritur, If the Subvassals may claim the
benefit of the said Gift, and to be free of the said Ward? Ratio Dubitandi.
That in effect the said Gift is a Discharge of the Ward; which being Discharged
to the Superior is Discharged to the Subvassal, whose Property falls in Ward
only consequentially: and on the other part, as the Superior and Donator to the
Ward, may take advantage of the same both against the Vassal and Subvassals;
the Vassal ought not to be in a worse case than another Donator.

If Gifts of Ward and Non-entry prejudge singular Successors.
THere are some Casualities which are Fruits of Superiority, and have Tractum
temporis as Ward and Non-entry etc. And these being Gifted will be effectual,
during the whole time of their endurance; as to the Granter and his Heirs: But
there may be question as to singular Successors; Whether the Donator will have
right to the Ward and Non-entry, for Years after the Giver is denuded? Ratio
Dubitandi; That resoluto Jure dantis resolvitur jus accipientis; and such Gifts
are of the nature of Assignations to Mails and Duties, which are not effectual
but during the Right of the Cedents: And the Ward and Non-entry do belong to
the Superior by reason he wants a Vassal to serve him; and the singular
Successor having that prejudice, he ought after his Right to have the benefit
of the Casualities. Vide Liferent-Escheat. Quaest. 7. in Lit. E.

Goods belonging to the Rebels at the Horn.
A Creditor having affected the Movables of the Defunct, by confirming himself
Executor Creditor; and having got possession of the same whereby he is
satisfied of his Debt: Quaeritur, If the same may be evicted from him by a
Donator to the Defuncts Escheat? Answer. It is thought, they cannot be evicted:
Seeing, in favorem commercii, Goods belonging to Rebels may either be Disponed
and given by themselves in payment of their Debt, or poinded or otherways
affected, before Declarator and Diligence, done by the Donator to affect the
same.

Grana crescentia.
WHat is the reason for the astriction of Grana crescentia? Answer. Fevers are
in effect Coloni and perpetual Tacksmen; And they ought not to be in better
case than Tennants, whose Grana crescentia were upon the matter thirled, the
Food and Expenses of Laboring being deduced, it is thought the Tennent will
have no more than will entertain him.

Great Seal.
A Gift of the Estate belonging to Bastards or Forefaulted persons whereupon
there was no Infeftment, being granted under the Great Seal, Quaeritur, will it
be valid? Ratio Dubitandi, The ordinary way of passing such Gifts is under the
Privy Seal.

H.
Heirs.
A Child being served Heir to his Mother, and thereafter the Child's Father
being served Heir to the Child; Quaeritur, if he can be said to be Heir of Line
to his own Wife, and ought to be discust before other Heirs?

A Woman being Married to a Bastard, and having a Child, Quaeritur, as the
Child will succeed to the Mother, whether the Child having no other Heirs, his
Father being a Bastard; (so that he cannot have any Cognati upon the Fathers
side) will his Mother be Heir to him? Ratio Dubitandi, That by the Common Law
the Mother does succeed; and as the Child does succeed Ratione Cognationis and
Relation to his Mother, it seems that for the same reason she should succeed to
him, the Relation being mutual.

Quaeritur, If a Son of a former Marriage having Right to succeed by
Substitution, in the case where the Father provided Lands to the Son of a
second Marriage, and the Heirs of his Body: Whilks Failieing to the Fathers
other Heirs and Assigneys, for implement of his Contract of Marriage: There
being no other Children of the second Marriage, must he be Heir to his Father;
the substitution being (as said is) in favors of the Fathers Heirs? Ratio
Dubitandi, That in many cases the word Heir to another person than the person
De cujus successione agitur, is to be understood haeres habitu vel potentia,
and non actu; As if upon considerations a Brother should pass by his Brother of
purpose, and Failieing his own Heirs should substitute the Heirs of his
Brothers Body: But in this case it would seem by the Obligement of the said
Contract of Marriage and the said right, he has intended that he should be
represented himself, Failieing the Heirs of his Marriage. Vide the tenth and
eleventh Questions in the Title, Successor titulo Lucrativo, Litera S.

If that should be the Construction; Quaeritur, Quid Juris, If the Son of the
second Marriage should decease, the Father living: Seeing the Son of a former
Marriage cannot be served Heir to his Father? Cogitandum.

Lands being entailed to diverse persons substitute and the Heirs of their
Bodies, whilk Failieing to the other Heirs of Tailie successive, Quaeritur, If
one of the said Heirs of Tailie be Forefaulted before the Death of the person
in Fee leaving descendents of his own Body, whether will the next Heir of
Tailie succeed? Ratio Dubitandi; Because the next Heir who would succeed,
Failieing the Forefaulted person and the Heirs of his Body, cannot be said to
be proximus; seeing the Children of the Traitor are nearer: And though they be
nulli and mortui civiliter they are not naturaliter nulli: So that they being
incapable; and the others not having jus sanguinis; it may appear quod nullius
est pertinet ad Regem. It is thought, that the nearest of Kin should exclude
the Fisk; Seeing qui sunt nulli, they are not to be considered as to any effect;
and especially in that which is odious and exclusive: And it is hard, that the
Estate should be Forefaulted by the Crime of a person who had never Right to it.

Behaving as Heirs.
QVae Ratio, That the owning a Title of Honor, and sitting in Parliament does
not import Behaving as Heir; and yet the owning and intrometting with a Sword,
or Armor, or any thing else will import Gestionem? Answer. That Creditors
being to be satisfied out of the Goods and Estate belonging to a Defunct
Debtor; If the Appearand Heir does meddle with any part of the samen, Eo ipso
adit passive, quia miscet se rei, which should be Liable to the Executors
Execution: But a Title of Honor is not such an Interest, as could be any way
Liable to the Creditor, and the Appearand Heir in owning the same non libat
haereditatem.

Quaeritur, If a Ratification by any Appearand Heir of a Right granted by the
person he was to succeed to, being yet on Life; will import Gestionem? Ratio
Dubitandi; That he could not be Heir nor Gerere during the Defuncts Lifetime:
And on the other part, the ratification is granted because he is Appearand
Heir, and might question the Right: And as one may be Liable passive by
accepting a Right in the Defuncts time, whereby he is Successor titulo
lucrativo; so he may Behave by a Deed in the Defuncts time.

Heir of Conquest.
THere being three Brothers, and the middle Brother having an Estate and
deceasing after the decease of his Elder Brother, who had diverse Sons; and the
Younger Brother being on Life, Quaeritur, Who will succeed to the middle
Brother as Heir of Conquest? Ratio Dubitandi; 1mo. The Younger Brother being
Heir of Line; and who would be Tutor to the Children of the middle Brother, if
he had any; it may be doubted if there should be a representation in conquest;
the Heir of Conquest not being properly Heir? 2do. Conquest ascending gradatim,
whether would the Youngest or Eldest Son of the Elder Brother succeed as Heir
of Conquest, being both collateral to the Defunct?

Discussion of Heirs.
A Person, having provided his Estate to his Daughter, with power to Dispone
and Redeem, is obliged that if he should make use of that power in prejudice of
his Daughter, he and his Heirs Male and Successors, in that Estate and Dignity,
should be obliged to pay a certain great Sum of Money at the first term after
his Decease: Quaeritur, whether his other Heirs or Executors, and not only the
Heir Male, will be Liable to pay the said Sum, at the least in subsidium, The
Heir Male being first discust? Lauderdale and Lady Yester.

Quaeritur, Quo ordine, A Successor Titulo Lucrativo should be Discust? Answer.
It is thought, that he should be discust before the Heir of Tailie, being in
effect a general Heir: Unless Lands be Disponed to an Appearand Heir of Tailie,
in which case he should be considered as an Heir of Tailie.

When the order of Discussion is Renounced; If the Heirs of Tailie or Provision
may have recourse for their relief against the Heir general; who by Law is
first Liable to the Debts: Albeit as to Creditors that order be Renounced?

Heir and Executor.
GIfts of Ward, Marriage, Non-entry, Do these belong to the Heir or Executor?
Answer. They are in rem, and some has tractum, and therefore belong to the Heir.

A Person being obliged by a Bond to Dispone Lands for a certain price, and the
Creditor having charged upon the said Bond, and being content to pay the price,
and in the interim the Debtor deceasing; Quaeritur, If the Creditor obtain a
Decree for implement against the Heir, whether the party bound to Dispone, his
Heirs or Executors will have Right to the Price? Answer. It is thought, that
the Heir will have Right; seeing there is no Sum due to the party bound; but if
he Dispone, which is only in obligatione, the said Sum becomes due upon his
Disposition; and is not due to any but to a Person who is to Dispone; and the
Heir only can Dispone.

If by Contract one of the Parties has Disponed and is obliged to Infeft in
Lands; and the other is obliged to pay a Sum of Money as the Price. Quaeritur,
If the Seller decease before the Disposition be fulfilled, whether the Sellers
Heirs or Executors will have right to the Price? Ratio Dubitandi, The Heir only
can fulfill, and therefore ought to have the Price; and on the other part, the
Heir is Liable to fulfill by the Disponers Obligement: But the Disponer having
taken the Obligement to pay the price in favors of himself his Heirs and
Executors, the Sum by the Act of Parliament should pertain to the Executors;
And it appears that the Disponer, in place of his Lands, intended to have a
personal and Moveable Estate.

What is the Reason of Difference betwixt the last and former case? Answer! In
the last, there is a Moveable Obligement for payment of Money: And in the other
there is no Obligement upon the Creditor, but upon the Debtor to Dispone; But
so that if the Disposition be made, a Sum is to be paid, which cannot be paid
but to the Disponer's Heir after his decease, who only can Dispone, the
Debitors Executors can have no right to the same; and it was in the Creditors
option either to charge for implement or not, so that the Money was not in
Obligatione but in Condition or modo, If implement should be craved.

When an Order of Redemption is used, and the Money consigned, and thereafter
the person against whom the order is used deceases; Quaeritur, Whether the same
will belong to his Heirs or Executors? Answer. It is thought, it should belong
to the Heir, for the reason foresaid in the last Querie; Specially seeing an
order of Redemption may he used against an Appearand Heir: And if that
Appearand Heir should after Consignation decease, the Money could not belong to
any representing him, who had no Right; and therefore it can belong to no
other, but to the Heir, who should be thereafter Heir, and Infeft and should
Renounce: And therefore it is thought, that the Money being the Redeemers
Money, and upon his hazard until Declarator, it is never Money of the person
against whom the order is used until Declarator; and then being his in specie
is moveable, and belongs to his Executors.

If a Wadset be granted to a Man, and his Wife, and the longest liver of them
two, and the Heirs of the Marriage etc. And an order of Redemption be used and
declared against the Husband; and thereafter he decease: Whether in that case,
the Money consigned will be heretable, and ought to be given up to be employed
for the Wife in Liferent, and the Heirs in Fee? Answer Affirmative.

A Bond being ab initio heretable by Obligement to Infeft, and Infeftment
thereupon; And thereafter there being a Bond of Corroboration granted for the
same Sum, but not heretable; bearing to the Creditor only his Heirs and
Executors: Quaeritur, Whether the Sum be Heretable or Moveable? Ratio
Dubitandi, The same is due, both by an Heretable and Moveable Bond; and the
Moveable Bond being Posterior seems to be a Novation of the former, and
posteriora derogant prioribus. Et contra, the said Sum is due still upon
Infeftment, and the subsequent Bond is only in accessorio; So that jus
principale and primordiale is more to be considered, as to the question
concerning the nature and quality of the Right.

Heirs Male.
A Father, his Eldest Son being Dumb, of purpose to exclude him, as being
unable to manage, Does by a Bond of Tailie settle his Estate upon another Son,
and the Heirs Male of his Body; Whilk Failieing to his other Heirs Male; with a
Provision, That his said other Son and his foresaids should be obliged to
entertain the Elder Brother: And if the said dumb person should at any time
have the Faculty of his speaking, he should succeed, and the said Bond should
be void: Quaeritur, If the Brother who has got the Estate decease before the
Elder, without Heirs of his Body; If the Elder Brother would succeed to him, as
Heir Male? Answer. It is so evident, that it was intended, that the Elder
Brother should not succeed, except in the case foresaid, if he should have the
said Faculty of his speaking, And the said Tailie being made of purpose to
seclude him: It is thought, that he cannot succeed by virtue thereof; And his
Heirs Males is to be understood his other Heirs Male, by the Dumb Person, who
is excluded.

Obligements, in Contracts, in favors of the Heirs of the Marriage.
A Person being obliged by his Contract of Marriage, with a second Wife to
resign certain Lands, for an Infeftment to himself, and the Heirs Male of the
Marriage; and to employ also 60000 lib. for the Heirs of the Marriage; And his
Eldest and only Son of the first Marriage being bound by a Bond granted
thereafter, for implement of the said Contract of Marriage, in the same manner,
as if he had been obliged by the Contract; And the Father having accordingly
resigned, and taken Infeftment; and the Son of the second Marriage being Infeft
as Heir of Provision, in the Lands provided as said is in favors of the Heirs
of the said Marriage: Quaeritur, If the Son of the first Marriage, being after
the said Contract Infeft in the Fee of the Fathers other Estate, will be Liable
to relieve the Heir of the second Marriage, of the Debts contracted after the
said Fee, as Successor Titulo Lucrativo; or being bound for his Father as said
is: Upon that pretense, that his Father ought to perform the Obligements of the
said Contract cum effectu; and to free the Heir of the second Marriage of his
Debts? It is thought, that the Contract being once fulfilled by taking the
Infeftment foresaid, and by employing of the said Sum; both the Father and his
Cautioner, the Eldest Son, were immediately Liberate, the said Obligement being
satisfied; The import of the same being, that the Son of the second Marriage
should succeed as Heir in the said Lands, but not that he should be free of
his Debt: Or that being free, the Father could not Dispone the Lands for an
Onerous Cause. But if the Father had Disponed the Lands, provided by the
Contract, without an Onerous Cause, after the Elder Son his Fee; or had
resigned of purpose, to defraud the Heir of the second Marriage; the Father
would be Liable de Dolo, and the said Deeds reduceible: But the Eldest Son,
being once Liberate, by implement, would not be Liable. Tweeddale contra
Drumelior.

There being Heirs General, and Heirs Male, and of Provision; and Heirs of a
second Marriage, being provided by their Mothers Contract of Marriage to
certain Provisions, whereunto they have Right as Heirs of Provision: Quaeritur,
quo ordine will the Heirs of the second Marriage be liable to Debts and
Discussion? Answer. It is thought, that they being Heirs upon an Obligement and
quasi creditores, it would appear that they should be Liable in the last place
in subsidium, all others being discust.

In Contracts of Marriage, The Husband being for the most part obliged to
provide and resign his Estate, for Infeftment to himself and the Heirs Male of
the Marriage; which Failieing to his Heirs Male of any other Marriage; which
Failieing, the Heirs Female of his own Body, the Eldest succeeding without
Division: Quaeritur, If the Husband should resign and take such a Right upon
Resignation; but thereafter should resign in favors of other Heirs: Whether
the Heirs of the Marriage may question the said alteration, and what way? Ratio
Dubitandi, That an Heir is eadem persona, and cannot question the Deed of the
Person whom he represents. Answer, He is not simply Heir, but Heir of the
Marriage: And as to Obligements in his favors he is Creditor. 2do. It is
thought, he may pursue a Reduction of the foresaid Deed, as being in prejudice
of him as Creditor: or he may pursue the Heir of Provision by the posterior
Right, for implement of the said Obligement.

Quaeritur, When by such Provisions, there are other Heirs substitute to the
Heirs of the Marriage: Whether the Husband may alter the Destinations as to the
said other Heirs? And if he do, if they may question the Deed? Answer. It is
thought, that the Heirs of the Marriage are only in Obligatione: And the other
Heirs in destinatione mariti, which he may alter.

A Person being obliged by Contract of Marriage to resign certain Lands in
favors of himself and his Wife in Liferent, and the Heirs Male of the
Marriage; whilk Failieing, his Heirs whatsomever: And likewayes being obliged,
that what he should get by his Wife, by any Legacy, or Right. or Assignation in
her favors, to secure and employ the same to himself, and her in Liferent, and
to the Heirs of the Marriage; which Failieing to his Heirs whatsomever: And he
having accordingly resigned, and taken Infeftment, to him and her, and the
Heirs foresaid: And a Sum of Money having fallen to her, and being uplifted and
Discharged, both by him and his Wife, before Inhibition; and thereafter there
being Inhibition upon the said Contract at the instance of certain Friends, at
whose instance Execution is appointed to follow: These Questions do arise. 1mo.
If notwithstanding the said Inhibition, he may Dispone the Lands? Answer. He
may Dispone the same, being Fiar: And the import of the said Obligement is,
that the Right of Succession, as to the said Lands, should be secured to the
Heirs of the Marriage, in case the Father should decease in the Fee of the
same; so that he cannot provide them to other Heirs: But it is not intended
thereby, that the Father should not have the Right competent to all Fiars: Viz.
That they may dispose of the same, if their condition requires.

Quaeritur, If he may at least Dispone the same without an Onerous Cause?
Answer. It is thought not, seeing all Obligements should be understood, ut actus
valiant and operentur: And though the Father be Fiar, his Fee is by the said
Obligement so restricted in favors of the Heirs of the Marriage, that he
cannot, fraudulently, and to evacuate the said Obligement, Dispone without an
Onerous Cause.

If the Inhibition will be effectual as to the Sum e. g. of 10000 lib.
neveremployed? Answer. It will be effectual as to the Wife: But as to the Heirs
of the Marriage, there may be question. Ratio Dubitandi, That there being an
Obligement, it ought to be once fulfilled by employment to him and his Wife,
and to the Heirs of the Marriage: And on the other part, seeing notwithstanding
the Inhibition he might have disposed of the said Sum, if it had been employed;
there is eadem Ratio, if it be not employed; Seeing his Condition may be such,
that he cannot employ the same.

If it be not to be considered, what truly his Condition is? And if it be such
that he cannot employ the said Sum without Ruin; That he should not be obliged
to employ it Dicis Causa to be thereafter uplifted? And if a Process may be
intented against his Children, to hear and see it Found and Declared, that he
should have power to Dispone notwithstanding of the said Inhibition and
Obligement foresaid, both as to Lands and Money? Seeing if the Money were
employed, he could, and might dispose of the same being Fiar: And he is not in
that Condition to raise the said Sum, and employ it. Watson of Damhead.

Heirs Portioners.
WHen Women succeed as Heirs whatsomever ( v. g. Three Daughters) they succeed
as Heirs Portioners, without any privilege of Primogeniture. Quaeritur, if the
Three Daughters succeeding be deceased, leaving each of them Sons and
Daughters: Will the Eldest Son of any of them exclude the rest of the Children,
and be Sole Heir Portioner to the Grandfather? Ratio Dubitandi, As
Primogeniture is introduced for the preservation of Families, which does not
militate in successione Foeminea, Women being finis and caput Familiae; There
ought to be no respect to the same in the second Degree, and nepotibus, as
there is not in primo gradu in filiabus: There being utrinque eadem Ratio.

Where there is a plurality of Heirs Portioners, and some of them become Lapsi:
may the Debt be recovered in solidum, from these who are Responsal? Cogitandum.

If a Barony descend to Heirs Portioners, will all have Right of a Barony?

If any Superiorities belong to the Barony, will the Eldest only be Superior?

Heirs of Provision and substitute.
WHatever belongs to a Defunct in Fee and Property (whether Land or any other
Interest) the time of his decease, cannot be transmitted but to
Representatives; or these who are instar haeredum, and bonorum possessores, as
in the case of Lands provided to Bairns of the Marriage, the Bairns are in
effect Heirs of Provision: And if Sumes be provided by way of Substitution to
another person, after the decease of the Creditor; the Substitute will be
Liable to the Creditors Debt, other Heirs being discussed.

Heirs of Provision being oftimes Strangers, and in re certa: Quaeritur, will
they only be Liable secundum vires?

If a Right of Lands be given to a person without mention of his Heirs; And
Failieing of him by decease, to another and the Heirs of his Body: Quaeritur,
Will not the said person who is so substitute be Heir of Tailie? And if it be
so in Lands, why not so in Bonds granted to persons and Failieing of them by
decease to other Substitutes?

Heirs of Tailie.
QVaeritur, If there be no Heretable Estate belonging to an Heir of Line, out
of which the Executor may be relieved of heretable Debts: Will the Heir of
Tailie be obliged to relieve the Executor of such Debts? Ratio Dubitandi; Heirs
of Tailie are not properly Heirs, but Bonorum possessores; and Liable to Debts
only in subsidium: whereas the Heirs of Line and Executors are properly Heirs:
and the Heir of Line, if the Executry be great and more considerable than the
Heretable Estate, may Confer: which is not competent to the Heir of Tailie or
Provision.

The same Question may be betwixt an ultimus haeres and the Executor nominate
of a Bastard Legitimate.

Haereditas being successio in universum Jus; Quaeritur, Why is an Heir of
Tailie called Hoeres, who succeeds only in rem particularem, as Fundus? Answer.
He succeeds in omne Jus talliatum, and non singulari Titulo; But as
representing the Defunct in ea re: et non interest Whether there be any thing
in haereditate quando haeres succedit eo jure; et majus et minus non variant
speciem.

If after a person has succeeded as Heir of Tailie to a certain Barony, the
same be evicted; whether will he be Liable to the Defuncts Debts? Ratio
Dubitandi; semel haeres semper haeres, and sibi imputet that adit damnosam
haereditatem: On the other part, the Heir having succeeded, and having
contracted quasi aditione with Creditors; intuitu, that the said Land was to be
his; the said quasi Contractus should be considered as ob causam datam and non
secutam.

Heirs of Provision and Tailie, who are to succeed only in rem singularem,
albeit Titulo universali: Quaeritur, If they will be Liable to the Defuncts
whole Debt, though far exceeding the value of the Succession: Or if they should
be considered as haeredes cum beneficio Inventarii; and should be Liable only
secundum vires: There being no necessity of an Inventar, the subject of their
Succession being only as said is res singulares? Answer. It is thought, that if
one be served general Heir Male, without Relation to a singular Subject (as to
certain Lands) he would be Liable in solidum: But if he be served only special
Heir in certain Lands, he should be Liable only secundum vires.

There being a Right made in favors of a Person as Heir of Provision of a
great Estate; and in favors of another as likewayes Heir of Provision of an
inconsiderable parcel; Quaeritur, If the person succeeding almost to all the
Estate will be considered as Heir of Tailie, and will be Liable to relieve the
other as Heir of Provision?

When there are two Heirs of Tailie in diverse Lands, of which the Rent is not
equal, but the one much disproportionable and less than the other; Quaeritur,
If they will be Liable to the Debts equally, or proportionally?

Quo casu, Heirs of Tailie may be considered, as Creditors.
ONe having Tailied his Estate by a Disposition to One and the Heirs of his
Body, whilk Failieing to other Substitutes; and by a Contract betwixt him and
the Person to whom he Disponed his Estate, he having taken the said person
obliged to do no Deed in prejudice of the Tailie, but to preserve it
inviolable: Quaeritur, If he the Disponer should make a Disposition
notwithstanding; may the Heirs of Tailie pursue Reduction of the same, as being
made in Defraud of them, being Creditors by the said Contract?

If after the said Contract is Registrate, the Heirs of Tailie have Jus
quaesitum: So that the Contracters cannot Discharge, or prejudge the same?

Haereditas.
OMnis haereditas quandocunque aditur, cum tempore mortis defuncti continuatur,
Perez. Lib. 2. inst. tit. 14.

Haereditas jacens sustinet Personam Defuncti. Ibidem.

Si Haeres instituatur sub impossibili condition; instituitur pure; and
conditio habetur pro non adjecta. Perez. ibidem.

Idem, Si institutio fiat ad tempus: habetur enim tempus pro non adjecto, and
utile per inutile non vitiatur, Ibidem.

Aditio haereditatis.
ADitur haereditas, vel verbo, vel facto; verbo declarat (scilicet voluntate)
se velle haeredem esse: Facto vero Gerendo pro haerede, and immiscendo, Dummodo
sciat delatam ad se haereditatem: Regula enim est, Omnia quae animi
destinatione agenda sunt, non nisi vera and certa scientia perfici possunt.
Perez. Lib. 2. tit. 19.

Aditio haereditatis non requirit hodie solennia verba, ut olim Cretio. Ibidem.

Haeres Contrahens.
HAEres videtur contrahere cum Creditoribus and iis satisfacere debet.

Repudiatio Haereditatis.
QVi repudiavit haereditatem, non amplius ad eam admittitur: qui tamen a
Creditore rite interpellatus est ut haereditatem adeat, and repudiat; non
prohibetur eam adire quoad alios Creditores.

Qui haeres institutus est sub condition, ut non adire, ita non potest
repudiare ante eventum conditionis: Regula enim est, Quod quis si habere velit
habere non potest, repudiare nequit.

Servus Haeres.
INstituto servo haerede; eo ipso datur libertas sine qua haeres esse non
potest, Perez. lib. 2. inst. tit. 14.

Vltimus Haeres.
IF a Donator by a Gift of Vltimus Haeres will be Liable to the Defuncts Debt
personally Effeirand to the Estate? And if he be not, what course shall be
taken to affect it?

If such Universal Successors be Liable in solidum, (If they be found to be
Liable Personally) unless they give up an Inventar? And what shall be the
method of giving up an Inventar?

Heirship Moveable.
IF a Son that is Forisfamiliat, and has a Family, will get a Moveable Heirship
by his Father? Ratio Dubitandi, He is sufficiently instructed, and aocomodated
as Pater Familias: And e Contra, the other Children, though Forisfamiliat will
be Executors, and Exclude him; and in that case there is no Reason, that all
should be Executry, and the Heir Excluded.

Whether a Coach and Cart will fall under Heirship with the Horses belonging
thereto the time of the Defuncts Decease? And whether not only the Plough, but
Oxen or Horses that goes in the same, will belong to the Heir?

An Heretrix being Married, Quaeritur, If she may have a Moveable Heirship?
Ratio Dubitandi, That she is in Familia Mariti, and has none of her own? Lady
Levin.

Quaeritur, If a Jewel may fall under Heirship; upon pretense, that it is the
Jewel of the Family? Ratio Dubitandi, Jewels are only Jocalia; and Heirship is
properly Instrumenta fundi, or Domus: And in England are called Heir-looms.

In Saxonia and finitimis regionibus peculiares quaedam species sunt in quibus
proximus agnatus succedit; quas Heergevvettam, vel res expeditorias vocant.

Inter reliquas res, ad eum pertinet equus optimus cum ephippio viri mortui,
gladius, optima armatura, etc. Besold. Thesaur. litera H. 33. Heergevvettam.

Money consigned for Redemption whether Heretable or Moveable?
MOney being consigned upon an order of Redemption, Quaeritur, If after Decree
of Declarator the same be heretable or moveable? Ratio Dubitandi, That it
belongs to the Creditor, and is moveable, and as it were in Cash; which of its
own nature is moveable: And on the other part, Surrogatum sapit naturam
surrogati, and as the Relict would have a Terce, so the Heir, who only can
Renounce, ought to have right.

Sums Heretable or Moveable.
A Sum being due by Contract, whereby the Buyer of Lands is obliged to pay the
price; But so, that it is provided that it should be retained for payment of
annualrent, until an infeftment of warrandice upon the Lands be purged:
Quaeritur, whether the said sum be Heretable or moveable?

Homologation
Sir William Ker having got a Right under the great Seal to debateable Lands
upon the borders, wherein Ker of Cherrytrees pretended a Right and Interest and
Property by a prior Gift; and Bennet of Grubet an interest of Commonty: The
said Sir William Ker and Cherrytrees did by a minut oblige themselves to
communicate their Rights, so that Sir William Ker should dispone to Cherrytrees
his Right as to the part of the said Lands Cherrytrees was in possession of;
and that Cherrytrees and his Successors should be obliged not to question Sir
William Ker his Right: Thereafter Cherrytrees offered to assign the said minut
to Grubet: Quaeritur, whether or not the accepting of the said assignation
would import an homologation of Sir William Kers Right, and a passing from
Grubets Right: And if Grubet by the Obligement forsaid, would be obliged not to
question Sir William Kers Right as to Grubets part of the said Commontie?
Answer, That actus agentium non operantur ultra eorum intentionem; and Grubet
did not intend to prejudge himself, but to better his Right and to be free of a
plea; and he could not question Sir William Kers Right upon that which he was
to have from Cherrytrees; But could not be barred to question the same upon his
oun Right which he had not from Cherrytrees.

A Tailie bearing a clause irritant, That the course of Succession should not
be altered, and that the Contraveener should Lose the Right; And the Heir of
Tailie in minority having resigned in favors of other Heirs that were not
contained in the Tailie, and being infeft upon the said resignation; Quaeritur,
if the said Heir after majority continues to possess and to administer, and has
granted Commission for doing other deeds concerning the Management of the
Estate intra quadriennium utile, but before intenting of reduction Ex capite
Minoritatis: Will he be thought so to homologat the said alteration, that he
cannot question the same, and cannot be reponed against the committing of the
said clause irritant? Answer. It is thought that the possession will not import
homologation, seeing it may be ascribed to the former Right which cannot be said
to be altogether extinct by the said other Right; the same being null at Least
annullandum and reduceible. Vide Tailie altered in Litera T.

Horning
IF a person charged may be Denounced year and day after the charge without a
new intimation?

If a Pupil may be charged and Denounced, and taken with Caption? It is thought
not, seeing he can neither Velle nor Nolle, nor obey nor disobey.

There is not Eadem Ratio as to Minors.

If it may be objected against a Judge that he is at the horn, seeing Parties
may be debarred from pleading as not having Personam; And there is the same
Reason to debar Judges a Judicando?

How far a Husband is liable for his Wifes Debt?
Seeing the Husband by his Marriage has Right Jure Mariti to all moveable Estate
belonging to the Wife; and acquires the same per Vniversitatem, as if she had
made an Assignation and Right in his Favors. Quaeritur, Whether he will be
liable to all her Debts, at least Moveable; quia penes quem commoda penes
eundem incommoda? At least if he will be liable peculio-tenus, in quantum
locupletior factus est?

If there be any difference betwixt a Husbands getting a Tocher, and when there
is no Tocher but Jus Mariti? Seeing in the first case, he is a Creditor by
Contract singulari Titulo: And in the other, he has right Titulo Universally
omnium bonorum, which are understood Debitis deductis.

If a Husband may be liable for his Wifes Debt, the Marriage being dissolved?

Item, If after the Marriage is dissolved, any Debt come to his knowledge, that
did belong to his Wife during the Marriage: Whether he might pursue for the
same?

How far the Husband will be concerned in his Wifes Debts, Active or Passive?

De Hypothecis, vulgo Wadsetts.
LIcet tam instrumento alienationis quam Charta a Domino directo concessa
terrae ipsae alienentur, Jus proprietatis nonnunquam haud transit; sed
inferius, Hypothecae forte ceu impignorationis: Cum enim juxta regulam plus
cautionis sit in re quam persona, aliquando praedia a debitore alienantur in
majorem cautionem and securitatem ut loquimur. Hypotheca autem terrarum alia
apud nos impropria dicitur, alia propria, nec minus ista, haec magis proprie
est impignoralis. Pignus siquidem and hypotheca proprie datur, ut Creditori
caveatur, non vero ut utatur nisi die solutionis adveriente, debtor in mora
aut non solvendo sit: impropria vero Invadiatio ea dicitur, cum creditor
praedii jus and investituram nanciscitur ut sibi tam de sort quam usuris
cautum sit, sed ea Lege ut praedii possessio penes debitorem remaneat, non jure
proprietatis qua prorsus exuitur, sed conductionis: id fit pacto in Instrumento
alienationis inserto, quo Creditor qui per alienationem Dominus et vasallus
est, praedium ut suum relocat debitori, stipulatus annuam mercedem quae
solennes et licitas pecuniae usuras haud excedit; addito etiam pacto de
reversione seu retractu, seu redimendo, quando aut debtor aut creditor
voluerit; aut prout convenit inter contrahentes: Hypotheca quae propria dicitur
ea est, quando sciz. praedium non tantum in Cautionem sed (...) alienatur; and
tam terrae quam pecunia quasifunctionem recipient; ita ut pecuniae usus
quaecunque sit ad Debitorem; praedii vero usus and possessio etiam naturalis ad
Creditorem pertineat; sed sub modo and pacto de retrovendendo: Ex his varia nec
levia emergunt Dubia.

Inter ea est illud, si ex delicto Creditoris qui ex Investitura vasallus est,
feudum ad Dominum Superiorem redierit; terris forte (si praedium militare sit)
ultra modum licitum and semissem alienatis, aut alio delicto feudali, vel ex
crimine laesae majestatis: An Dominus illud habeat ut optimum maximum, and
quale ab initio charta originali ab eo aut ejus Decessoribus aut Authoribus
profectum fuerat: vel tantum ut Hypothecatum aut Impignoratum, and Retractui
and Juri reluendi obnoxium.

Plerisque (ut arbitror) videtur Creditorem mulctandum jure suo tantum, salvo
debitori ejus culpae haud affini jure suo and Retractu, cui Dominus Superior
consenserat pacto isto de redimendo in ipsa charta inserto: and pro hac
sententia stare videntur trita illa Juris Axiomata; Noxam caput sequi, Nec
ullum facto suo sive ex facto sive ex delicto, plus juris in alium transfer
posse quam ipse habet.

Verumtamen acriore and fixo obtuitu penetrantibus and ut par est omnibus
rationum momentis ultra citraque scrutinatis, Jurisconsultis adversa ut opinor
placebit sententia, earum (quae sequuntur) rationum suffragio subnixa, siquidem
illud quod agitur magis inspici quam quod concipitur, and actus agentium ultra
eorum intentionem haud operantur: quicquid autem inter Debitorem and Creditorem
agatur, id inter Dominum and Creditorem vasallum agitur, ut ex alienatione
prioris vasalli isti is sufficiatur and ei vasallus sit, eodem nec alio modo
aut jure quam prior, Dominio directo and ejus fructibus and compendiis salvis
and illibatis: interea haud autem exiguum est, ut, ex Recognitione ob
alienationem aut quovis delicto Feudali, Feudum domino commissum, ad Dominum
remaneat quale ab initio fuerat, aut rediturum fuisset, si prior vasallus
deliquisset: Nec praesumendum Dominum, pro laudemio quod in Hypothecis si non
minus haud majus esse solet eo, quod pro alienatione simplice dependitur,
Dominium suum ejusque fructus velle carpere aut imminuere.

Accedit, quod pacta ista inter Debitorem and Creditorem, quoad Dominum sunt
extrinsica; nec ejus jus aut Dominium directum sed vasalli and Dominium utile
afficiunt: Quamdiu igitur Creditoris Jus and Dominium utile adhuc durat, pactis
istis subjacet; eo autem sublato and amisso, pacta ista, quae ei inhaerent and
accessoria sunt, cum principali evanescunt.

Adhaec; feudo ex delicto Creditoris qui vasallus est Domino commisso aut ob
Perduellionem amisso; vel praedium ad Dominum pertinebit, quale fuerat ante
Hypothecam, aut jus tantum Hypothecae: Dici autem nequit Hypothecam Domino
committi, ea enim est cautio in rem pro pecunia, and inanis and accidens esset
sine subjecto, si Domini esset sine pecunia, quae, ut nunquam ejus fuit, ita
demum redire nequit.

Nec obstat illud, Neminem plus juris in alium transfer quam ipse habet;
multis enim casibus Jus quod vasalli fuerat, sed facto suo imminutum, and vel
servitutibus, vel Juri Retractus ab eo concesso obnoxium, before ad Dominum
redeat, feudo ex delicto commisso.

Nec magis officit, quod Dominus pactis istis videtur consensisse; ea enim non
inter Dominum and Debitorem and Creditorem inita sunt, sed a contrahentibus
ipsis apposita and chartae inserta ne personalia videantur; and ut afficiant
vasalli jus ad quoscunque ejus successores perveniat; non vero ut imminuant aut
laedant jus Domini directi; id ex ipso pacto de reversione ejusque verbis
elucescit; eo enim cavetur praedium per Debitorem ejusque haeredes and
assignatos redimi and relui posse, sed a Creditore ejusque haeredibus and
assignatis in jus creditoris succedentibus; Dominio autem utili ex delicto
caduco and extincto nillum jus superest creditori, in quod ejus haeredes aut
assignati succedant; quodque ab iis redimi and retrahi possit; nec Dominus,
vasallo ob delictum dominio utili privato, in id creditori succedit: Jus enim
suum ex delicto amittit quidem, non autem transmittit nec amissum transfer
potest: utque unaquaeque res ad naturam suam facile redit; ita plena
proprietas, quae ante concessionem vasallo aut iis a quibus causam habet domini
fuerat, eorum jure extincto ad dominum redit and reviviscit.

Porro, si ex delicto Creditoris, qui solus in feudo and vasallus est, non
committatur feudum ipsum quale a domino profectum fuerat; sequitur illud tum
incommodum tum absurdum, Latifundia sciz. and Baronias quae pro modicis
pecuniarum summis in cautionem and Hypothecam impropriam dari solent, spreto
domino impune alienari posse; debitore penes quem est jus reversionis illud
cedente; ex ejus enim facto and alienatione nihil domino obvenit aut
committitur, in quem nihil commisit aut deliquit jure suo usus, cum in feudo
and sasina haud sit nec ulla inter eum and dominum necessitudo and obligatio
interveniat, quae alienationem impediat.

Ex supra dictis conficitur, in Hypothecis, vasalli jus quoad Debitorem pactis
de retrovendendo and relocando substrictum and obnoxium esse; quoad vero
superiorem liberum and solutum: and creditorem eodem quo alii vasalli jure
censeri: nec queri potest debtor, cum creditoris fidem and conditionem suo
periculo elegerit; and si locuples sit adversus eum pro damno resarciendo agere
possit.

Si haec sententia durior videatur, facile erit ejus rigorem emollire pacto de
retrahendo, ita ut diserte caveatur praedium, nedum a creditore ejusve
successoribus, sed and a Domino si ad eum pervenerit ex delicto creditoris,
retrahendum; pecunia credita ei persoluta: sic domino scienti and volenti nec
fraus nec injuria fiet.

Tacit Hypotheck.
QVaeritur, If a Tacit Hypotheck being not only of Fructus, but Instrumenta
Fundi, Quid Juris in Grass-Rooms, where there is nothing paid but Silver?

What is the effect of a Tacit Hypotheck? And if a Tennent should sell his
Corn in a Market, may not the Master pursue Action Hypothecaria against the
Buyers, who should know the condition of these with whom they Deal?

The Heretor of Lands or Master having a Tacit Hypotheck for a Years Duty:
Quaeritur, If the said Hypotheck be alse well for the Stocking upon the ground,
as of the grouth and Increase?

Quaeritur, If the Rests of diverse Years amount only to a Years Duty; whether
the Master will have any Hypotheck as to an Years Duty so made up? Or if it be
understood only of the Rests of the immediately preceding Year?

I.
Immobilia.
QVAE res inter Immobilia computentur? These. Bes. litera L. p. 597. ad finem.

Poenae and mulctae non exactae immobilibus accensentur Ibid. Item servi
ascriptitii, Ibidem.

Munitiones cum castro consideratae tormenta and arma bellica, si testator res
pretiosas in Familia servari jussit. Ibidem p. 597.

Immobilia per applicationem and aliis modis.
IMmobilibus accrescunt and accedunt mobilia variis modis; quod enim
applicatione perpetua corporibus alterius naturae affixum infossum aut
inaedificatum est, Immobile fit; nam mobile Immobili cohaerens Immobile
censetur, Hering. de mol. quaest. 8. N. 18. and 19.

Per immutationem res mobiles sortiuntur naturam Immobilium, ex quinque causis.
1. Facto hominis, ut Affixione, Infossione, Adjectione. 2. Legis potestate and
fictione, ut cum colonus ascriptitius aut mancipium rusticum glebae serviens
pro re Immobili censetur. 3. Attributione seu destinatione, ut lignum ad
aedificium destinatum inter Immobilia computatur. 4. Subrogatione ut, quibusdam
casibus, pecunia. 5. Subjecto v. g. quando Jura nomina and actiones ad
Immobilia competentes aut mobilia pro talibus habentur. Hering: de. molend.
Ibidem. n. 20. and sequen.

Imposition upon the Pint of Ale.
QVaeritur, If the Gift of the Town of Edinburgh and other Burghs, of Two
Pennies upon the Pint of Ale, or Two Merks upon the Boll of Malt, may be
questioned by any concerned, upon that ground, that being a burden upon the
People it could not be laid upon them, without consent of Parliament? Answer.
It is thought, it may be questioned. 1. For the reason foresaid, being the
fundamental of the Liberty of the People. 2. The whole Country is concerned,
and has prejudice thereby, In respect that they who dwell within the Lothians,
will suffer as to the price of their Bear; which will be less in consideration
of the said burden of Two Merks upon each Boll, and consequently the whole
Country will be prejudged; The price of the Bear in Lothian being the standart
almost of the whole Country, Edinburgh being Communis Patria; And the Drink
upon that occasion being both worse and dearer: And the Shires of Lothian
having concurred they came, in end, to a condescendence, that the Town should
be obliged never to desire the like: And it is thought, that the Gift, both in
passing at the Exchequer, and ratification thereof in Parliament, was so
qualified. 4. A Bond was given by the Town to that purpose to the College of
Justice, and also to the Shires, and both were trusted to one of the
Commissioners for the Shires to be kept; and, it is informed, was given back
by him viis and modis, 5. The pretense of Debts, and alteration of the way of
living of the Magistrates is frivolous, Seeing the Town ought not to Contract
Debts, the Magistrates being only in effect Curatores; And the King could not
lay a Burden upon the Country for payment of his own Debts; and the Debt of
the Town is no less than it was formerly before the first Gift: and the
Magistrates should not live upon what is given to the Town. 6. As to the
pretense of his Majesty's Prerogative; it is against Law, and the common style
of the Chancery, which should not be altered; and His Majesty does make use of
his Prerogative to remitt the rigor of Law, but not to give Illegal Grants,
rei alienae, to prejudge and Burden others: And therefore such Grants are ever
understood Salvo Jure, and to be periculo petentis. 7. The dispensing with the
former Bond is of dangerous consequence; His Majesty's Prerogative being never
against Justice; and for taking away the Bonds and Rights granted to the
People, without their own consent: otherways there should be no security for
Liberty and Property.

Impositions of Burdens upon Shires.
Seeing Shires are not Incorporations, Quaeritur, If upon any Pretext
whatsomever, The Major part may lay any Burden upon the Shire, or any part of
it without their Consent?

Impositions voluntary upon Shires.
WHen any Charges for Banner, Trumpet, or Coat etc. for the Heretors, are to be
paid, Quaeritur, Whether the same are to be paid viritim and per capita; or
proportionally according to the Valuation? Answer. They are Personal and not
Patrimonial: and are to be paid with respect to the persons, and not their
Estates.

Improbations.
IF Pursuers of Improbations should consign? Of late some are of Opinion, That
Consignation is to be made only when Improbation is proponed by way of
Exception: But the Act of Parliament anent Caution in Improbations, in place of
which Consignation is come, is clear as to all Improbations by way of Action or
Exception.

It appears, there should be a difference betwixt a general Improbation, at the
instance of Heretors and Buyers, which is a Tentative used to try the condition
of the Lands if they be affected with any latent pretenses: And the case of
special Improbations, and Improbations of certain Writes; and that in this case
there should be Consignation; but not in the other: unless upon Production, a
particular Right be taken to be Improven.

When in Improbation Writes are produced, and certification craved contra non
producta; and it is alleged that the Defender has produced sufficiently to
exclude the Pursuer: Quaeritur, If notwithstanding certification should be
granted? Answer. By the late Practique the Lords are in use to hear the parties
debate upon the Right: which is thought hard, seeing if the Defender be
confident of the Right he has no prejudice by granting the Certification, and
having gotten long terms he ought to produce all Writes called for: Seeing
Improbation est processus tentativus, and in order to try the Defenders
pretense, and not to debate a Right.

Impugning the Authority of Parliament.
BY an express Act of Parliament, The Impugning the Authority of the Parliament
consisting of three Estates, is Treason. Quaeritur, If the misconstrueing, or
Impugning the proceedings of the Parliament, if they amount to Treason? Answer.
There is a difference betwixt Impugning Authority, and Proceedings of
Judicatories; seeing Judges may have an unquestionable Authority, and yet their
proceeding may be questioned: And Papists, and Heretics cannot controvert the
Authority of Parliament, and yet may be dissatisfied with and misconstrue the
proceedings of the same: Which practice, though Criminal, does not amount to
Treason. Traquair. Item, The Earl of Argyle.

Incendiarium.
INcendiarii. vide in These. Bes. Lit. M. 72. p. 647.

Incorporations.
JF a College or Corporation, being in Law a Body, may Forefault the Rights of
the Corporation, and in what case? Ratio Dubitandi, Magistrates are only
Curators, loco Curatorum; and the University never Dies; and Bishops, and such
other sole Corporations, though they commit Barratry, do not Forefault in
prejudice of their Successors.

When a Town or Incorporation, that has Power to Contract Debts, do grant Bond
obliging the Magistrates and their Successors, and bearing Horning and other
Executorials, Quaeritur, If succeeding Magistrates may be charged with Horning?
And if they be denounced, will the Escheat of their own Movables fall, or only
of Movables belonging to the Town? Ratio Dubitandi, Officium nulli debet esse
damnosum; and they are not bound themselves personally, but only they and their
Successors in officio in behalf of the Corporation: And on the other part, if
they should not be Liable, the Execution would be elusory: and though it is not
just that they should pay such Debts out of their own Estate, yet they are
liable to pay the same out of the Estate of the Corporation: and if they cannot
raise so much for the time, out of that Estate; they should Suspend, and make
it appear, that they are neither in mora nor in culpa.

Quid Juris, As to Comprysing or Adjudication as to such Bonds? Whether it
should be only of the Public Estate, or of the present Magistrates likewise?
Specially after the Letters are found orderly proceeded, upon a Suspension
discust against them.

After the Magistrates are denounced and Year and Day at the Horn, Quid Juris,
as to the Liferent Escheat, whether will that of the Town fall? and how long
their Liferent shall be thought to endure? Or if the Liferent of the
Magistrates, and each of them will fall?

If the succeeding Magistrates may be charged summarly, and if they be
Denounced will their own Escheat fall?

Infeftment of Annualrent.
LAnds being affected with two annualrents to diverse persons, and being
comprised for the bygones of the first; Quaeritur, If after the expireing of
the Comprysing, the Compryser (the Lands being sufficient to pay both
annualrents) will be Liable to the second Annualrenter? Seeing the Lands were
affected therewith the time of the Comprysing: And though the first annualrent
was prior, the Debtor did no prejudice to give the second; the Lands (as said
is) being able to pay both.

If the second Annualrenter may redeem?

Base Infeftment.
LAnd, holding Feu, being disponed to be holden either of the Disponer or of
the King; And the Disponer being obliged to infeft by two Infeftments, the one
to be holden of himself Blensh; and the other of the Superior as the Disponer
held: Quaeritur, If the Buyer think fit to hold of the Disponer and does not
make use of the Procuratory; Whether during the time that he continues to hold
of the Disponer will he be liable to relieve him of the Feu-duty?

Infeftment in a Right, both of Property and Annualrent.
A Sum of Money being lent, and thereafter (for further security) the Debtor
having granted a Disposition, whereby he is obliged to infeft the Creditor in
an annualrent out of certain Lands; And likewayes to infeft him in the property
of the Lands (being extended to a twenty pound-land) for security both of the
principal Sum and annualrent; So that he might have Recourse both to the Lands
and Possession of the same; until he be satisfied, both of the principal Sum
and bygone Annualrents: And that by two Infeftments under reversion: and that
he may have recourse to either Right as he should think fit: and though he
should make use of either, that he should not be precluded, but make use of the
other alse often as he thinks fit: which Right is granted by a Charter and Seasin
following upon the same. Quaeritur, There being a Non-entry of the Creditor;
whether before Declarator, the Retour-Duty of the Lands, or the Annualrent of
the Sum (being one hundred pounds sterling Yearly) will fall and belong to the
Superior? Seeing the Annualrent valet seipsum. It is Answered. That it is
thought, the Right being instar Hermaphroditi, and neither properly a Right of
Annualrent nor Property, and yet both, It is thought, that in Law (as a
Hermaphrodite is repute to be sexus praevalentis) so in this case Jus
proprietatis trahit ad se Jus inferius: And it being the Design of the
Creditor, to secure both the principal Sum and Annualrent, and that the Debtor
should continue in possession (and in Wadsets improper, where the Debtor is to
possess either upon a Back-tack, or otherways, the Annualrent is not Debitum
fundi) It is therefore intended that there should be a Right of Property; But
so that the Annualrent should be secured in manner foresaid: As if in a Right
of Wadset with a Back-tack, it should be also provided, that the Back-tack Duty
should be Debitum fundi, and that it should be lawful to the Creditor to poind
the Ground for the same, as if it were secured by an Infeftment of Annualrent.

Infeftment for the use and behoof of another.
IF a Right be granted to the use and behoof of another, will the Right
Forefault by the Treason of the Vassal, in prejudice of him to whose use it is?
de quo vid. Wadset Heretable or Moveable, Let. V q. 4.

And farther if the Vassal be Year and Day at the Horn, whether will his
Liferent fall in prejudice of the Vsuarius? And if the Vsuarius be Year and Day
at the Horn, whether will his Liferent fall to the Superior or not? Ratio
Dubitandi. That Vsuarius is not Vassal, and yet has real Interest out of the
Lands holden of the Superior.

Conditional Infeftments.
A Mother, being debarred from her Jointure many Years, upon occasion of
Incumberances, and upon that Ground being Creditrix to her Son for a
considerable Sum of Money; and likewayes out, of respect to her Son, having
taken a Right to a Comprysing for certain great Sums, Did Assign to her Son
(being the only Son of her Marriage with his Father) both the said Interests,
to himself and the Heirs of his Body, whill^ Failieing to herself and her
Heirs; with a provision that he should not have Power to alter the said
Destination; and if he should alter the same, the Assignation should be void:
But the Son, having made no use the said Comprysing, and there being no
Infeftment thereupon, is Infeft in the Estate as Heir to his Father, Quaeritur,
What way his Mother and her Heirs may be secured, so that the said provision
may be effectual to them, in case the condition exist by the Failieure of the
Heirs of his Body? Answer. It is thought, that the Son should give her a Bond,
making mention of the Mothers favor to him, and of the said Substitution and
provision, and that it is just it should be made effectual to her in the case
foresaid, if it should fall out; and that by the Assignation her Right is
Liquidate in the case foresaid, to 40000 Merks, to be paid to her and her
foresaids: Therefore, without prejudice of the said Assignation and Provision,
he should be obliged and his other Heirs succeeding to him in his Estate,
Failieing Heirs of his Body, to pay to her and her Heirs the Sum foresaid at
the first Term of Whitesunday or Martinmass after the existence of the said
Condition, and the Failie of the Heirs of his Body: And for her better security
he is to be obliged to Infeft her, and her foresaids in an Annualrent effeirand
to the said Sum out of his Estate, beginning the first Terms payment, at the
Term of Whitesunday or Martinmass after the Failie of Heirs of his Body in case
they faill; with this provision, that in respect the said Infeftment is not to
be effectual, but in the case foresaid, it shall not be prejudged nor
questioned upon pretense of any length or lapse of time or Prescription: And
that the same shall not Commence or begin to run, until the said Right become
effectual in the case foresaid.

Public Infeftments.
IF an Annualrent to be holden of the Disponer, be confirmed by the King:
Quaeritur, If that Confirmation will make it public?

If an Annualrent be Disponed out of diverse Lands, to be holden of the
Granter; and a Decree of poinding of the Ground be got as to some of the
Lands, will it make the Right public as to others?

Inhibition.
INhibitions upon Bonds or Contracts, if they import only, that nothing should
be done in prejudice of the same and execution thereupon? So that the person
having reduced upon the Inhibition, cannot make use of the same to sustain any
Right, but such as Depends upon the Ground of the Inhibition?

Both the person Inhibited, and the person receiver of a Right being out of the
Country the time of the Inhibition: Quaeritur, If the Right be Liable to
Reduction? Ratio Dubitandi, Both the Inhibited and the party Receiver should be
certiorated, and put in mala fide: And as the Person Inhibited is not
certiorate, if he be out of the Country, if the Inhibition be not Execute at
the Peer and Shore of Leith, so there is eadem Ratio as to the Lieges.

An order being used upon a Conventional Reversion or Legal, against (...)
Person Inhibited: Will the Inhibition affect the Renounciation granted by him;
seeing he may be forced to give it, and it has Dependence upon a Right before
the Inhibition?

If an Inhibition being Execute against the Debtor only, and being in cursu
only as to the Inhibiting the Leiges, where the Lands lie being at a great
distance; and Intimation in the mean time to the party who is about to bargain
with the Debtor; will put the said party in mala fide; So that there may be a
Ground of Reduction, Ex capite Inhibitionis against the party Inhibited; and
that the said Right is fraudfully made and accepted, without a necessary cause,
in defraud of the Creditor, and after intimation of his Diligence?

A whole Barony of Land being affected with an Inhibition, and being thereafter
Disponed in several parcels to diverse persons: If one of the said purchasers
should be distressed by a Reduction ex capite Inhibitionis may he have recourse
against the others for their proportional parts, for his Relief they being in
rem correi debendi? Vide Annualrent Quaest. 1ma.

If after an Inhibition is Registrate, and Forty Days are past; if the
Creditor getting notice that his Debtor has Lands within other Shires, may
inhibite the Leiges there, and Registrate within Forty Days? And if in that
case the Debtor must be himself again certiorate?

By a Minute, an Estate much incumbered being Disponed; and the price being
agreed upon at a certain rate per Chalder or 100 Merks, But so that the
Incumberances should be purged by the price pro tanto, and any Ease by the
Creditors should redound to the Seller; and the whole incumberances being
purged, the Buyer should Count for the superplus of the Free-Money, and should
pay beside 20000 Merks, after all is purged: Quaeritur, Whether the Benefit of
the said Contract can be affected with an Inhibition, or with Arrestment, at
the instance of Creditors of the Disponer? Ratio Dubitandi; The said Benefit
is not Liquid.

If Inhibition does affect Lands acquired after Inhibition? Answer Affirmative,
The Debtor not being Discharged to Dispone the Lands he has presently, but
simply his Lands and Estate.

If at least it affects such Lands as are acquired, within the Shire where
the Inhibition has been used?

Quaeritur, If Inhibition does affect Bonds though Moveable by the Act of
Parliament, so that the Creditor cannot Assign the same?

Quaeritur, If Inhibition does affect Bonds, so that the Creditor cannot
thereafter Assign the same? Ratio Dubitandi, That it is thought, they affect
only real Estates and Interests; and there is no mention of Bonds and Debts
which are Personal; and they come not under the General of Goods and Gear,
which are real things: Whereas Debts are Nomina, and Entia Juris and Rationis.

If Inhibitions affect Lands acquired thereafter? The Ratio Dubitandi is, No
Diligence can affect non Ens, and what did not belong to the Debtor: And if
Inhibition will not affect Lands when it is not Execute at the Market Cross
where they lie, much less can it affect Lands that has not Situm as to the
Debtor, and does not pertain to him: and the narrative of the Inhibition is,
that the Debtor intends to defraud his Creditor, by putting away his Lands,
which does not militate, as to Lands which he has not then.

A Bond being granted after Inhibition, and thereupon the Debtor being
denounced, and his Escheat Gifted, Quaeritur, If the Horning and Gift may be
Reduced ex capite Inhibitionis? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Ground being taken
away the Superstructure falls, so that the Bond being reduced the Horning does
fall. Contra, The King is not concerned upon what Ground the Rebel is at the
Horn, if the Horning be valid and formal; and the Inhibition does import only,
that the Debtor should not give any voluntar Right, whereupon his Estate
(which is the subject of Execution for Debt) may be taken away: but not if he
should commit Crimes, either of Treason, or should be Rebel, or do deeds
whereupon Recognition may follow; That the King or other Superiors should be
prejudged of their Right and Casualities of Forefaulture, Liferent-Escheat,
etc. George Marshal contra

Inhibition upon Teinds.
IF Inhibition upon Teinds interrupteth prescription, without a citation;
specialy where the possessor is in possession by a Right?

If Inhibition puts a party bruiking by a Right, in mala fide; so as, before
his right be reduced, to be liable for bygones after the Inhibition? Tweeddale.

If to the effect foresaid he be in mala fide, because being Commissioner for
the Earl of Lauderdale; he prevailed upon the same Grounds against Oxenford.

Insinuatio.
DOnationes, quae excedunt summam quingentorum solidorum sive aureorum,
insinuandae sunt; ut effusae donationes coerceantur, and ne fraus struatur
Creditoribus falsis donationibus. Insinuatio est publicatio donationis apud
acta, vel ejus quod agitur apud Judicem in scripturam redactio. Perez. Inst.
Lib. 2. tit. 7.

Instance.
BY the common Law of the Romans, and by the custom of France, Instantia perit
after three Years, as to all effects of it, v. g. Interruption of Prescription:
But without prejudice of the Action, if it be not prescribed, so that a new
Action may be intented.

Instantia.
INstantia perempta omnia acta perire dicuntur, quod intelligendum de
ordinatoriis non de decisoriis: and Instantia perempta vitium Litigiosi non
attenditur. These. Bes. in Liter. I. 22. verbo Instank.

Instrumentum Guarentigiatum.
INstrumentum quod Doctores vocant Guarentigiatum (seu confessatum habet
Executionem paratam, and vim sententiae. Besold. These. verbo Guarentigiatum
Instrumentum. p. 338. Sect. ultima.

Interdiction.
IF Interdictions be null, because the Executions do not bear Oyesses? Park
Gordon.

If a Person having no real Estate, but personal Bonds, may he not be
interdicted if there be cause? at the least that he cannot give away his Estate
without an Onerous Cause? Ratio Dubitandi, Interdictions, are thought only to
affect Immoveables. Mr. John Bruce Minister.

If a Husband can be interdicted to his own Wife, being in ejus potestate and
cura?

If an Interdicter can consent to a Deed in his own Favors?

If Interdiction be loused, will Debts contracted in the interim be valid?
Ratio Dubitandi, That by the lousing it is acknowledged that he is not
prodigus: And seeing no Act of Prodigality or Facility before or after can be
instructed, ex extremis praesumitur medium, and that he was not prodigal in
that interim.

If the Heir of a Person Interdicted will be liable to a Personal Execution, or
real against his Movables?

Inter december Dies.
DIctio (Intra) includit sua extrema, and excludit ea quae sunt extra: and si
Terminus assignetur ad aliquid faciendum Intra december Dies, qualibet die
dictorum december dierum actus fieri potest. These. Bes. Lit. I. 16. verbo Inner.

Intrometter.
THere being a difference between an Executor confirmed after Intromission, and
a Donator to the Defuncts Escheat though declared: viz. That the Executor is
liable to the Creditors, but not the Donator. Quae Ratio, that the Escheat
declared should free the Intrometter?

If the Declarator be after intenting of the Cause, will the Intrometter be
free?

Invecta and illata.
IF a Person astricted as to Invecta and illata tholing Fire and Water, should
buy unground Malt, and after he had brought it within the bounds astricted has
sold it; will he be Liable for astricted Multures?

Duobus Investitis per modum Confirmationis, sed posterius acquirentis Jure
prius confirmato, uter sit potior?
CVm praedia alienantur de superiore tenenda, id fit vel per modum
Resignationis vel Confirmationis: si igitur Alienatio fiat de Domino superiore
tenenda, per modum Confirmationis, and ex ea sasina secuta sit: postea vero
alienatio terrae eodem modo tenendae alteri fiat, and ex ea nedum sasina sed
Confirmatio accesserit, ac denique prioris acquirentis Jus sed posterius,
confirmatum furit: Quaeritur, Ex iis acquirentibus uter potior sit? Et quidem
dubitationis si ulla, ea subesse videtur ratio, quod per Resignationem alienans
penitus devestitur: sasina autem cum sit in re, plus posse and tribuere videtur
quam resignatio quae ad rem tantum est: verum explorati Juris est posterius
acquirentem potiorem esse, cum prior nactus sit jus perfectum and omnibus
numeris and partibus absolutum, idque a potestatem habentibus; alienans
siquidem nec alienatione nec sasina priori data Dominus esse desiit, and penes
quem est Dominium penes eum remanet potestas alienandi per quam Dominium
definitur: sicut autem alienatio alienanti Dominium haud adimit cum sit jus
personale, nec in re tantummodo sed ad rem consequendam, ita nec sasina ex ea
dissasitur, cum sit prorsus nulla and irrita utpote praedii de Domino directo
tenendi: nam sasina praedii de aliquo tenendi inanis and sasina haud censetur,
nisi is de quo tenendum est praedium vel per se vel per balivum suum eam
dederit; vel per alienantem dandae vel prius datae confimatione sua consensum
and autoritatem accomodaverit.

Ex istis elucescit quanti momenti sit habilis agendi modus: ut enim apud
Physicos tria rerum naturalium dicuntur esse principia, Materia Forma and
Privatio; totidem etiam apud Jurisconsultos rerum agendarum statuuntur
principia, Potestas scilicet Voluntas and Modus: sine potestate velle vel
conari dementia est: sine voluntate potestas iners, nec in actum sese exserit:
si adsit utraque tam potestas quam voluntas etiam enixa, desit autem modus
habilis and ad actum explicandum idoneus, actus nullus and inefficax est; Forma
enim and Modus (ut vulgo dicitur) dat esse rei: Et haud fieri, and haud rite
and debito modo fieri, paria sunt: Cum igitur acquirens omisso modo acquirendi
per resignationem, qua resignatione facta, tam alienanti quam alteri, tum
alienandi tum acquirendi potestas praeriperetur, istum per confirmationem
maluerit; in eum quadrat (quod multis aliis casibus locum habet) illud
Brocardicum, Quod potuit noluit, quod voluit facere nequivit.

Investitura.
INvestitura est vel propria vel abusiva, per illam possessio vacua in
accipientem transit; per hanc haud transit, nec enim in possessionis substantia
sed in signo and praeambulo quodam consistit. Jus fluviat. p. 737. n. 77.

Jura complexa.
JVra complexa as Escheats single, Societies for certain Years, do these fall
under Executry? Ratio Dubitandi, The subjects are mobilia: Contra, they are not
liquid and cannot be valued, so that there can be no appretiatio or male
appretiata.

Juramentum.
JVramentum sortitur naturam, and conditiones contractus cui adjicitur, and
intelligitur rebus in eodem statu permanentibus. These. Besold. verbo Ehegelubd.
p. 207.

Jurisdictio.
MOribus Jurisdictio non datur Jure Magistratus sed in agris consistit, ab iis
inseparabilis sicut servitus in gleba, and sigillum in cera: and est super
territorium prout nebula super paludem, per potentiam activam.

Proinde si territorium dividatur, minime Jurisdictio separatur, sed una cum
partibus dimembratur. These. Besold. Litera L. p. 547.

Jurisdictio Camerae Imperialis.
AN Caesaris morte, Jurisdictio Camerae Imperialis expiret, vel sit in
Suspenso? Besold. These. verbo Camergericht. 136.

Jus accrescendi.
WHen a Sum of Money is payable to a Widow in Liferent, and to the Children of
her late Marriage in Fee: Quaeritur, If any of the Children should decease,
Whether their part will accresce to the Survivers? or if they must be Executors
or Heirs to the Child deceased? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Fee is not given to
individuals nominatim, but to Bairns and Liberis; and before it be declared
that they have Right as Liberi and so the Fee established in their person, they
are deceased; and therefore locus est Juri accrescendi: as in the case of Heirs
Portioners before they be served Heirs, if some of them decease, their Right
will accresce to the Survivers.

Jus Mariti.
MArriage being dissolved within Year and Day, by our Custom the Husband has
neither Tocher nor any other Benefit by the Law as Courtesy: Neither the Wife,
if she survive, will have Jointure or Terce, if there be no Children.
Quaeritur, if the Husband has not Jus Mariti as to Movables, whether Extant or
consumed? Ratio Dubitandi. These other Provisions are presumed to be in respect
of a Marriage durable and standing, at least for the said space; whereas the
Right foresaid is founded upon the Relation of Maritus; and ipso momento that
he was Married he was Husband: But it seems, that seeing the Wife would not
have Jus Relictae by the Death of her Husband, he should not have Jus Mariti;
ne Societas iniqua and Leonina sit: But as to bona consumpta, it seems that
fecit sua, being bona fide Possessor.

If a Husband lying at the Horn, and being thereafter relaxed, will lose only
the Mails and Duties of his Wifes Lands resting before and becoming due during
Rebellion? Or if his Jus Mariti and Right to these Mails and Duties, during the
Marriage, will fall entirely; seeing he might Assign his Jus Mariti, and his
Right not being during Life he is in the case of an Assigney to a Liferent,
which falls under the Assigneys single Escheat?

If a Provision in a Contract of Marriage with a Widow (having given a Tocher)
that her Husband shall not have Jus Mariti to a certain Sum, nor to any other
Sum except the Tocher (specially she having diverse Children of her first
Marriage) be not valid? Lady Red-house.

A Bond being conceived in favors of a Woman conditionally, who thereafter
Marries, and dies before the condition exist: Quaeritur, If the Husband will
have Right Jure Mariti? Answer, he will; per Legem quae Legata. ff. de Reg.
Juris.

Quid Juris, As to conditional Legacies, if the condition exist after the
Husbands Death, if they will belong to her self? Vide the said Rule and the
reason of the Difference.

If his Jus Mariti may be Comprysed? And if it may, whether the said Right will
fall under the single Escheat of the Compryser?

If a Husband be Forefaulted; Quaritur, If his Jus Mariti falls under the
Forefaulture? Ratio Dubitandi. The Husband has Jus Mariti, upon pretense and in
order to Administration; and the Law presumes that he will Administrate as he
ought: and the Relation and Jus Mariti haeret ossibus and is personal.

There being a Provision in a Contract of Marriage; that the Woman should be
excluded from any Interest in Terce or third of any other part of Movables; so
that the Terce is no Communion as to her; Quaeritur, If notwithstanding there
will be Communion as to the Husband, so that he will have Jus Mariti, as to any
Moveable Estate belonging to his Wife?

A Woman having Right to an heretable sum, if Diligence and charges be used for
payment, Quaeritur, If ipso Jure it becomes moveable, so that the Husband has
thereafter Right Jure mariti? Answer, It is thought that, as to the Decision of
this question, much will depend upon circumstances; and if diligence be used in
order only to secure the Sum, and that the Debtor be suspect, the Sum will be
still heretable: specially if adjudication follow in favors of the wife and
her Heirs.

Quaeritur, If a Provision in a Contract of Marriage, that the wife should
retain a Right of sums belonging to her, and that she may dispose of the same
without consent of her Husband, be valid and to be sustained? Answer
Affirmative, seeing such pactions are not contra bonos mores or jus gentium; But
on the contrare, are conform to the Roman Law: and when any advantage is
introduced in favors of a Husband, or any Person jure positivo or municipali,
they may renounce the same. Mr. John Arthur.

Quaeritur, If the Husband be Liable to the Wifes debts and quatenus? Answer.
It is thought, he should be Liable; quia penes quem Emolumentum, penes eum
onus; But it is thought he should be Liable only quatenus Locupletior, and
according to his intromission and as a Tutor, the Wife being in Tutela mariti:
and though he has Right jure mariti and Communionis, to that which belongs to
his Wife, that should be understood Debitis Deductis.

If, after the Marriage is dissolved, it be found that there was a Debt
belonging to the Wife during the Marriage, Quaeritur, If the same will belong
to the Husband surviving, Jure Mariti? Answer, It is thought, The Law gives
what belongs to the Wife, to the Husband as Administrator; And the Law presumes
that he Administers behoovefully: But if a moveable Debt was not known the time
of the Marriage, and is yet due, there may be some Question; and yet it is
thought, that it should fall under the Communion.

If the Wife be provided in satisfaction of Terce or Third; Quaeritur, In that
Case, If such a Bond will fall under Communion, or if it will belong to the
Husband Jure Mariti? Cogitandum.

Jus Mariti and Relictae.
IF the loss ariseing by the act of Parliament anent Unlawful Ordinations and
Marriages, be understood to be a Privation; so that such Rights cease as if
they were not Married; amittuntur, non commutantur: and the wife and Husband
have Right to their own estate, free of jus mariti and relictae, as if they
were not Married? Lady Aitoun.

Jus Relictae.
A Woman, by contract of Marriage being provided to a Liferent of all that
should be Conquest, whether Lands, Sums, or Goods, Quaeritur, If she will have
Right to the half or third of the movables jure relictae? or if eo ipso that
she is provided to, and accepts a Liferent, it appears that she renounceth
her Communion? Whereas on the other part, that provision being in her favors,
and she not being excluded; it seems she and her Executors should not be
excluded by it.

If the Husband may, by Donations in Liege poustie, prejudge the wife and
bairns of their part? Answer the nature of the Gifts is to be considered, if
they be so immodicae and inofficiosae, as it may be presumed, they are given of
purpose to frustrate them.

Jus Superveniens.
IF a Person having no Right to Lands should dispone the same, so that the
acquirer should be infeft upon his Resignation; and there after the disponer
should acquire the same, and being infeft upon the resignation of the Heretor,
should dispone and resign in favors of another for onerous causes so that he
should be infeft: Quaeritur, which of these, who acquired these Lands, from the
same author will, be preferred?

That Brocard Jus Superveniens etc. will it hold in the case, where the Right
is supervenient not to the disponer, but to his heirs? or where the Heir to the
Disponer had Right himself the time of the disposition?

Quaeritur, quo casu Jus Superveniens accrescit? And if it should be understood
of the Right only of movables, and such things as may be transmitted without
infeftment? And not of Lands and others, which cannot habili modo be conveyed,
much less accresce, without Infeftment?

Justice-General.
IF the Justice-General may be Judge to Ryots, or any Crime or Delict, whereof
the pain is not defined by Law, but left arbitrary?

K.
Nearest of Kin.
THE Interest of the nearest of Kin is, that they may be confirmed Executors,
and if they die before confirmation they do not transmitt: and yet if the
Testament be confirmed by any person, nascitur actio against the executor, who
is Liable to the nearest of kin which they transmitt.

There being three persons who are nearest of kin to a Defunct, and the edict
is moved and served at the instance of the Procurator-fiscal, and two confirmed
only: whether will the third have action against the other two as nearest of
kin for a part? Ratio Dubitandi. That these who are executors of Law cannot
have Right de facto; unless they confirm; that being modus adeundi in
mobilibus: and the nearest of kin by the act of Parliament has only an action
in the case where he cannot adire, there being executors nominate and confirmed
who have Right to the office and a third part, so that the nearest of kin may
pursue for the rest.

When the nearest of kin have action against the Executor Nominate, if some of
them decease before confirmation, whether will they transmitt the forsaid
action? Ratio Dubitandi, it is not Officium but Jus legitimum, which may be
transmitted, as the relicts part and bairns part, without respect to the
confirmation: and on the other part, it may seem, that seeing they did not
intent action before their decease, they do not transmitt; and in such cases
the intenting of action is instar aditionis, and there is no representation in
movables.

There being two Daughters, of which one, being Married, by her Contract of
Marriage accepts her Tocher, in satisfaction of what she could Pretend to by
the decease of her Father and Mother, Quaeritur, the Father having survived the
Mother, whether will the other Sister have entirely her Mothers part as nearest
of kin to her? Ratio Dubitandi, The other had renounced: And on the other, part
the Mothers part did entirely belong to her self and to her nearest of kin: and
the said sister that renounced is alse near to her Mother as the other? Vide
Renunciation, Litera R.

KING.
IF the King take burden, in a Discharge granted by a Minor, that he shall
ratify at perfect age, Quaeritur, whether the Kings successors will be liable
representing their predecessors? Ratio dubitandi, The King succeeds not as Heir
but Jure Coronae: as in the case of single incorporations, V: G: Bishops, who
are said to be successors, and are not Liable to the debts of their
predecessors, or in the case of feuda ex pacto and providentia? Cogitandum.
Earl of Tweeddale and Duke and Duchess of Monmouth.

If the King be in the case of other Minors? So that a revocation is not
sufficient, unless a reduction be intented Debito tempore, intra quadriennium
utile?

King and Prince.
IF the King and Prince be to be considered as incorporate, so that these who
succeed are in the case of successors of Churchmen, and do not succeed by
Inheritance, but by succession?

L.
Laudimium.
LAudimium debetur Usufructuario, non Proprietario. These Besoldi verbo
Handlohm. P. 359. versus finem.

Licet Dominus directus, post alienationem ab Emphyteuto factam, novum
possessorem investiat, nulla facta mentione Laudimij aut ab eo censum recipiat,
tamen suo juri non censetur renunciare, sed Laudimij integram exactionem habet,
nisi express donaverit, Ibid. p. 360. sect. 2.

Laudimium nondum exactum connumeratur inter fructus pendentes: and si
Emphyteusis pertinet ad parochum, illud non exactum, ad haeredes haud
transmittitur; sed cedit ei qui in beneficio succedit. ibidem.

Lawburrows for Burghs.
IF a Burgh be Liable to find Lawburrows for their Burgesses? The Lord
Thesaurer-Deput.

In Lecto.
IF in Lecto, a Person, having children, may marry their Mother, in order to
their Legitimation, in prejudice of his Heirs?

If after a criminal and capital sentence, a person condemned be in Legitima
potestate? Seeing he cannot be said to be in Lecto, and the Sentence does not
affect immobilia.

If a man on deathbed be accessory to Treason, whether will his Estate
forefault in prejudice of his Heir? It seems, that though in Lecto Lands
cannot be sold or annailied any way in prejudice of the Heir, that being only
the case of the old Law of deeds in Lecto: Yet consequentially a man on
deathbed may do many deeds in prejudice of the Heir, and a Traitor on
deathbed may be taken out and punished.

If a Band being heretable, may be made moveable of purpose in Lecto? Executors
of Colonel Mathison. George Hadden.

If an infeftment be given, of Lands holden Ward, upon the resignation of the
Father in Lecto; and a reversion apart to the Father to redeem upon a
Rose-noble; Quaeritur, if the Ward and Marriage be cut off? Answer. if the
Lands hold of a Subject, Sibi imputet that he did not enquire and know the
condition of the Disponer: But if they hold of the King, there may be some
question; Seeing the Kings Grants may be questioned upon Obreption or
Subreption, and the negligence of his Officers should not prejudge him: and it
appears the course forsaid, was taken of purpose to defraud the King of his
casualities, being in spe proxima; and the disponer having Provided for himself
that he should be master of his Estate by the Reversion forsaid: It is thought
there is a Decision in the said case, in favors of the King which should be
tried.

A person on deathbed having made a Disposition in favors of a Creditor, but
to the Prejudice of his other Creditors (The Defuncts whole estate being
disponed in favors of the Creditor forsaid) Quaeritur, If the Defunct could on
deathbed prejudge his other creditors, and prefer one to all his other
Creditors? Seeing persons being on deathbed are not in Liege Ponstie as to any
deeds But the making of Testaments; and not as to deeds inter vivos; and if the
Defunct in his Testament had made such a Conveyance in favors of a Creditor it
could not have been sustained; and any deed done on deathbed is upon the
matter but a Legacy or codicill: and a dying person should not be allowed to do
any fraudulent deed; and it is a fraud where, there are many creditors, to give
one the whole estate: and a person in Lecto cannot Prejudge his Heir; and a
fortiori ought not to prejudge his creditors, who would be preferable to Heirs:
and as in the case of comprysings within year and day all creditors should come
in pari passu; So Dispositions on Deathbed ought to be to the behoof of all
other creditors? Cogitandum.

A Defunct having on deathbed made a Disposition relating to a former and in
corroboration of it did nominate two of his Name to succeed; Quaeritur what
will be the import and effect of it? Answer. It being on Deathbed it cannot
have the effect of a Disposition unquestionable; but only of a declaration of
the defuncts will, which ought to Determine (at least to have weight with) the
friends.

If a person stricken with a Palsy, So that he cannot go abroad, but otherwise
having sound Judgment and Memory; if after a considerable time he decease in
that condition, will he be thought to be in Lecto after the contracting the
Palsy? Ratio Dubitandi, That persons Paralytick cannot be said to have morbus
sonticus; and diverse, after they have been so, have been able to do affairs
and have had Children; and therefore it is thought, that it is to be considered
if there be a Complication of any other disease, of which it may be thought
that he dyed; and from the time of the contracting that sickness he is to be
esteemed to be in Lecto.

What is the reason that a third party acquiring a Right made in Lecto, though
bona fide will be liable to reduction?

Legacies.
Quaeritur, If an universal Legacy, which upon the matter is a Testament and
ultima Voluntas de universitate Bonorum, may be proven by the oath of the
nearest of Kin? Answer. It is thought it may be so Proven; Seeing Scriptura is
not de forma Legati; and a Legacy not exceeding an hundred pounds may be proven
by witnesses; and a Legacy exceeding that value is not probable by witnesses,
not because That Scriptum is de essentia, but ob fluxam fidem testium: and
therefore whatever value it be of, it may be proven by the oath of the nearest
of Kin.

If a Person being named Executor and universal Legatar shall be forefaulted
before he be confirmed, will his interest forefault to the King? Ratio
Dubitandi. albeit a Legacy will forefault, yet in this case the Legacy being
universal, and being subjoyned to the Nomination, is of the nature of
Institution; which, being an office, does not forefault.

If a Legatar should commit Treason before the Testators decease, will his
Legacy be void, as in the case of his decease? Answer, The Legatar not being
capax tempore mortis Testatoris, having committed Treason, the Legacy is void.

If a Legatar do not own the Legacy may a creditor affect the same? and if
there be a difference betwixt the Legacy and a Donation? vide Donatio non
acceptata. in Litera D.

Conditional Legacies.
A Legacy being Left to an appearand heir, with that provision, that the
Legatar should not question the Defuncts will, having disponed his estate both
heretable and moveable to another, both by Disposition and testament: and a
clause irritant being adjected to the Legacy, That the legatar should both not
impugn, and should ratify the Defuncts deed; and should dispone and convey any
Right he had, in favors of the said other party; and if he failied or
contraveened in either, that he should lose his legacy: Quaeritur, If the
appearand heir should pursue an Exhibition ad Deliberandum, and being required
should not be free to ratify and dispone presently; whether the clause irritant
be committed? It is answered, That the said legacy is not left in these terms,
that if upon Deliberation having a time granted for that purpose; he should
think it his interest rather to accept the legacy than to own his Right of
succession, he should have the said legacy: But the samen is left, in case he
should cheerfully acquiesce to the Defuncts will, which he is obliged to do
presently; being obliged to dispone Sine die: and ubi Dies non adjicitur
praesenti die debetur.

Legal Reversion.
IF a Minor have a Right to a legal reversion, as singular successor to the
Debtor, Quaeritur, If he will be in the same case as a Minor that is heir to
the Debtor, so that he may redeem at any time before he be of the age of
twenty five years? Or if there be a difference, upon that account that the
Heir or his predecessor has Right ab initio; whereas the singular successor
Incidit in jus; and the reversion being Limited by the Law in favors of the
Creditor, it ought not to prorogate by the deed of the debtor Hamilton of
Wishaw.

Legatars and Intrometters.
IF Legatars may pursue Intrometters, and if the Defenders will be heard to
debate whether there be free Gear?

De Legatis.
LEgata sunt Testamentorum appendices, and legatarij quo dammodo haeredes.
Perez Lib. 2. Tit. xx.

Legatum Rei alienae.
QVaritur If a person on Deathbed should name his appearand heir Executor; and
should leave in Legacy to another an Heretable interest, or should otherwise
dispone Lands; whether or not the Heir confirming the Testament may question
the same as to the Legacy foresaid? But in this case the question will be, how
far Res aliena (or such as is aliena as to the power of disposing the same in
Lecto) may be Left? and Testaments being favorable, and the Intention of
Testators being most to be considered, whether or not the Executor should
redeem that which is Left in Legacy being Heretable, and be liable in
estimation and to the value thereof if it be res aliena? Or should satisfy the
Legacy if it be res sua but Heretable, at least so far as the Executrie will
extend. v de Death-b d. Quaest. 2 and 3. Litera. D.

Res aliena si Legetur, non debetur nisi sciverit Testator rem alienam esse;
non enim praesumitur Legare voluisse si scivisset rem alienam esse. Perez. Lib.
2. Tit. xx.

Incumbit autem Legatario probare Testatorem scivisse rem esse alienam, nisi
conjunctis personis Legata fuerit: pro quibus praesumitur ex affectu eum
Legaturum fuisse etiamsi alienam, Perez. ibid.

Vbi Legaturres haredis valet Legatum, nec refert sciverit Testator, an non
haeredis esse; facile enim praestetur nec redemptione opus est. Perez. ibidem.

Dominium rei suae legatae transit in Legatarium statim a morte Defuncti.
Ibidem.

Legatum a Legatario acquisitum, ante mortem Defuncti.
SI Legatarius, vivo testatore, rem Legatum consequutus est Titulo oneroso
emptionis vel alio, haeres tenetur solvere pretium quod dederat Legatarius; nec
enim censetur habere rem cui pretium abest; sin vero Legatarius eum adeptus est
titulo Lucrativo, aliter dicendum est, nihilque ab haerede petere potest; nihil
enim ei abest and duae causae Lucrativae in unum hominem, and unam rem,
concurrere non possunt. Ibidem. si ex duobus testamentis.

Res eadem duobus Legata.
CVm eadem res pluribus Legatur conjunctim, singulis debetur in solidum sed
concursu fiunt parts; and ideo si unus defecerit, vel sprevit Legatum vel
decessit vivo testatore Collegatarijs accrescit. Perez. Lib. 2. Tit. xx.

Legitima Liberorum.
MOribus nostris Primogenitus est Haeres ex ass; and in universum Jus
immobilium; Terrarum scilicet and aliorum quae immobilibus accensentur: nec
minus ex mobilibus libat and praecipit mobilia haereditaria, vulgo Moveable
Heirship: Et apud Anglos Heirloom, optione permissa optimum quodque eligendi
tam ex supellectile quam ex instrumentis rusticis, and militaribus Armis,
Equis, aliisque ejusmodi; ut tam Domi quam Ruri ad colendum, and si opus fuerit
ad militiam and profectiones tum in bello tum in pace utcunque sit instructus:
reliqua autem mobilia sive res sive nomina, Marito and uxori and Viri liberis,
etiam ex diversis Matrimoniis (si adhuc in Familia) communia sunt, deductis
debitis, si Pater-familias obaeratus aut Debtor sit; nec enim aliter bona
intelliguntur nisi aere alieno subducto: Ea communio licet sit inter conjuges
and liberos habitu and spe; haud cedit tamen nec actu vim suam exerit, nisi
Matrimonio dissoluto per alterius conjugis obitum. Matrimonio durante, rerum
communium non solum Administratio sed Dominium est penes Maritum, and potestas
disponendi haud aliter quam de suis: nec ut communio ista cedat, opperiendum
est ut conjux emoriatur and penitus fato defunctus sit, sed confestim ut mori
incipit potestas illa Legitima (vulgo Liege poustie) desinit, and communio
effectum sortiri incipit. Mori vero incipit, imo civiliter, pro mortuo habetur,
postquam morbus invasit Lethalis and sonticus, qui cuique rei agendae
impedimento sit; adeo ut nec domo proreptare possit, nec negotiis (uti solitus
erat) superesse, eundo ad Templum aut Forum and loca publica ubi plerumque
salus animae and negotia procurantur: quamdiu enim animus Ergastulo corporis
coercetur and ejus Ministerio and organis necessario utitur, vix fieri potest
ut corpori aegro men's sana sit: Accedit, Quod ubi Cadaver ibi aquilae, and
moribundis adsunt and advolant plerumque (amici ut videri volunt sed) corvi and
haeredipetae, ut captent and eblandiantur aliquid; nec id difficile est: aegri
siquidem tam corpore quam animo infirmo, and assiduis eorum (quorum opera tunc
opus habent) officiis and Blanditiis impares and obnoxii, facile dant and
jactant quae propediem sua haud futura sunt: ex eo tempore igitur quo aeger
sese domi abdidit, nec amplius in propatulo, Foro aut Ecclesia sui copiam
facit, licet ex morbo non decumbat lento sortasse eoque magis periculoso,
dicitur esse in Lecto aegritudinis and in extremis agere: and alienatione
Terrarum, aut rei alicujus haereditariae ei prorsus interdicitur: Et si secus
faxit aut alienarit, haeredi actionis rescissoriae remedio facile succurritur:
Sic non sine summa ratione prospectum est haeredibus, ne quid in eorum fraudem
fieret a parentibus aut decessoribus in extremis, cum sui parum compotes sunt:
idque non semel cautum Jure veteri, quod Libris Majestatis aliisque Libris
Juris continetur; iis Elogium illud, quod Libri Juris nostri sint, haud
negarunt Principes nostri; nec immerito, quod dictum velim pace viri
Consultissimi Cragii iis paulo iniquioris: Quemadmodum enim Virgilius aurum ex
stercore colligit Ennii; Juris Studiosis ex Libris istis (and non tam stercore
quam Juris nostri veteris sive ruderibus sive Rudimentis) licet multa colligere
aurea and scitu nec inamoena nec inutilia.

Sed moribus nostris and usu Fori (cum eadem subsit ratio) idem Jus introductum
est in favorem Viduae and Liberorum; and ut plerumque ubi Jus deficit Senatus
supremus supplet instar Praetorum, ita ex aequitate accommodavit remedium utile
ne Legitimis suis fraudentur, nec liceat Patri familias in Lecto aegritudinis,
conjugis aut Liberorum, mobilium parts and Legitimas imminuere, nedum
abalienando penitus eripere: quin etiam in Matrefamilias praemoriente, ex
communione ejus Legitima cedit statim ea in Lecto aegritudinis constituta; nec
ex eo tempore Marito, quam vis Domino and in Legitima potestate permittitur
aliquid facere in fraudem uxoris, aut eorum qui in Jus ejus succedunt: multum
autem interest, uter viran uxor praemoriatur; viro enim superstite cum Liberis,
ex obitu uxoris cedit communio, and Legitima tantum uxori ejusque proximis and
successoribus, iis mobilium triente ceu quatuor unciis and partibus decisis:
quae supersunt Bes, viz. Ceu octo unciae and parts adhuc communia sunt Patri
and Liberis. Sed ut superius dixi habitu tantum and spe; fieri enim potest and
saepe evenit, ut Communio inanis sit, Liberis Patri praemorientibus, vel
Patrimonio acciso, vel aliquo casu defecto: ubi autem viro contingit in fata
concedere uxore and liberis relictis, communio cedit ad omnes effectus tam
uxori quam liberis; adeo ut ex mobilibus triens uxori, alter triens accedat
liberis, tertius Patri-familias relinquitur, de eo, nec ultra testari potest si
voluerit: si intestatus decesserit, suum trientem liberis relinquit adinstar
haereditatis, adeundum Jure quasi haereditario, sed haerede submoto and
excluso: Liberi enim trientem Patris haud vindicant ut suum and Legitimam, sed
in eum succedunt, quasi haeredes in mobilibus modo solenni: and haeredi legibus
satis superque consultum est, cum solus haeres sit ex ass in immobilibus,
reliquis liberis praeteritis and exclusis: Sin haeres e re sua esse duxerit,
haereditate omissa, inter liberos admitti and ex Patrimonio paterno sive
haereditate and terris, sive mobilibus, aequo cum caeteris nec ampliori Jure
aut part, Potiri; id ei facile permittitur; unicuique enim licet renunciare
Juri pro se introducto: nec minus haeres haereditatem adit, and in Terris (si
quae sunt) investiendus est, ut rerum haereditariarum Jus adeptus, Fratribus
habili modo eas confer and impertire possit. sic collatione facta, defuncti
Patrimonium, quod ad haeredem vel ad liberos ut liberos, aut Executores, aut
proximos cognatos pertineret, ab intestato ultra citraque inter haeredem and
liberos communicatur. Testamento autem facto si ex liberis aliquis vel Executor
vel Legatarius sit, quod ex Testamento consequitur haud tenetur confer; nec
enim id habet ut legitimam and ex dispositione Juris vel ut unus ex liberis,
sed Testatoris voluntate and ut quilibet; verum cum penes haeredem sit optio,
mature and re integra debet eligere; si enim haereditatem adeat pure nec
testatus se velle confer, vix postea aditur nec ad collationem admittitur,
elegit enim nec eligenti licet variare.

His altius positis and praemissis, uti par erat in materia usu quidem and
moribus satis obvia, sed (quod sciam) in libris non satis enucleata, ex iis
eliciendum, Quid Juris sit in ista specie facti.

Diem obiit Sempronius sed intestatus, Maevia uxore superstite cum tribus
liberis Caio, Titio, and Publio; Viduae triens mobilium Jure relictae (ut
loquimur,) Titio and Publio alter triens cesserat ut Legitima and liberis,
tertius etiam triens iis obtigit sed ut executoribus and quasi haeredibus
mobilium ab intestato; adierant etiam dati a Judicibus ad quos pertinet
Testamentorum probatio and Executorum datio; sed Caius promogenitus cui delata
erat haereditas decessit haereditate haud adita, eo forte peregre profecto aut
aliter impedito; ejus morte ea ad Titium secundogenitum devenit and adita est:
Contra Titium agebat Publius frater condictione ex causa ut restitueret quae ex
mobilibus, vel ut Executor, vel unus ex li beris nactus fuerat; cum res ad
alium casum devenerat and eum a quo non potuisset incipere; quod ea habuerit
causam and unicam fuisse quod haeres non fuerat sed unus ex liberis, and cum eo
effectum evanuisse; eum nunc haeredem and integra and opima haereditate
locupletatum, ea debere esse contentum; nec sine injuria aut invidia ex
mobilibus aliquid libare aut retinere posse: and in Libro isto cujus mentio
superius facta vetus reperitur Decisio. 1553. Julii, qua contra haeredem
Judicatum in causa Alexandri Law contra Robertum Law.

Sed cum ista ex libris Curiae and Regestis Decisio haud promatur, sed ex
compilatoris nescio cujus libro and notis, salva rerum Judicatarum Authoritate
quae apud me magna est, integrum mihi esse reor ut in contrariam sententiam
pronior sim, iis adductus argumentis: Cessit siquidem Legitima liberorum
ejusque semis ad Titium pertinens confestim a morte Patris; Theoph. lib. 2.
Titul. de Legatis.. 20. Theoph. eodem libro Instit: titulo. 19. de haeredum
qualitate and differentia. 5.
cedere autem tum Legitima tum Legatum dicitur cum actio pro iis competit; and
ii, quibus Jus cessit, si decesserint antequam res ab eo sibi debitas
consequantur, Jus tamen and actionem ad haeredes transmittunt. Ea autem est
definitio Juris consummati and perfect quaesiti: Jus igitur, Titio ita
quaesitum and in eo quasi fixum, quomodo avelli and ei eripi queat haud video:
alia quidem est ratio defuncti (ut loquuntur) partis ceu trientis, ejus semis
ad Titium pertibat ut unum ex proximis cognatis and executoribus; is a morte
Sempronii statim Titio delatus est: haud cessit tamen ex eo tempore sed tunc
demum cum Titius adiit, and Patri Executor datus est: Jura enim haereditaria,
vel quasi, quae pertinent ad aliquem ut haeredem and successorem in alterius
Jus universum, non cedunt nec quaeruntur nisi haereditate adita; in mobilibus
autem Executoris datio and confirmatio est instar aditionis: utcunque enim
suppositum sit Titium Executorem datum a judice, defuncti triens cessit
Executoribus and istius semis Titio, Jus adeo firmum and ad haeredes
transiturum, si Titius Caio praemortuus fuisset, morte Caii intercidere and
irritum fieri, a Jure and Ratione videtur alienum. Ad haec mortuo
Patre-familias, cum de patrimonio quaeritur, an integrum and ex ass ad eum
pertinuerit coelibem forte and orbum, an vero commune fuerit uxori and liberis;
Et quota uxoris and liberorum pars sit, utrum semis an triens; Et liberorum
Legitima an ex ass unius sit; An si plures sint liberi in quot uncias and
parts dividenda sit: Tempus mortis Patris-familias inspicit Lex, de futuro
haud solicita, nec quae tunc sunt quotae augeri aut minui possunt; quamvis
Patrimonium rerum quae in eo sunt interitu and fructuum and foetuum accessione
augeri potest and minui. Posito igitur Patrem-Familias decessisse testatum,
relictis vidua and liberis; viduam autem and liberos haud diu superstites
fuisse morbo aut alio casu extinctos; tamen Executor Patris-familias haud assem
sed trientem tantum consequitur; licet tempore aditionis ceu confirmationis,
nec liberi nec vidua extiterint; extiterant enim tempore obitus Testatoris and
tunc parts fecerant; eae autem semel quaesitae eorum morte haud evanescunt,
sed ad cognatos proximos and Executores transeunt. Posito etiam Patrem-familias
mortuum, superstite uxore and unico tantum filio praeter haeredem, nec alios
reliquisse liberos, filium autem secundo genitum impuberem postea obiisse;
fratre superstite; eo casu ex patris mobilibus haeres trientem consequitur sed
ut Executor fratris and ejus Legitimam; nec vidua aut Patris Executor audiendi
si pro trientibus semisses petant, causati rem ad alium casum devenisse, nec
haeredem ex mobilibus aliquam partem carpere posse. Si Objiciatur in isto casu
haeredem ex mobilibus nullam partem nancisci immediate and Jure suo, sed
mediate and morte fratris, and ut ejus Executorem; In specie autem facti de qua
agitur Titium tum haeredem fuisse tum unum ex liberis, and suo Jure
haereditatem patris adiisse, nec minus ut unum ex liberis, Legitimae liberorum
semissem adeptum; Jura ista (...) nec penes unum consistere aut retineri posse.
Istud facile diluitur; tempus enim mortis Sempronii Patris-familias intuendum;
eo autem tempore Titius erat unus ex liberis, nec haeres erat aut esse poterat,
Caio primogenito superstite; ei haereditas morte patris delata, ad Titium haud
immediate sed ex fratris morte pervenit; Titio quasi per surrogationem and
(...) in locum primogeniti subeunte: Cum igitur Titius, eo quo Pater obiit
momento, inter liberos fuerit, and ipso Jure Legitimam nactus est, nec injuria
retinet quod Jure habuit: Si Caius patris adiisset haereditatem ei Titius
haeres foret, nec minus sic patris haereditate potitus legitimam retineret:
Quod autem Caius haud adierit, Titio nec imputandum nec officit: Patrimoniorum
siquidem conditio, and Jura viduae and liberorum, legibus constituuntur; nec
aequum est ea ex arbitrio haeredis pendere aut ambulare. Porro haereditatis
delatio and Facultas adeundi, aliis casibus nedum hoc, haud parum operatur;
haerede enim perduelli and Majestatis reo, haereditas etiam non adita amittitur
and Fisco quaeritur.

Legitimation per subsequens Matrimonium.
A Person after his first Marriage, of which he had Children, having Married
again, and having diverse Children by the Woman Married to him in that second
Marriage, elder nor the first Children, which are thereby legitimate:
Quaeritur, Whether the Eldest Son with the second Wife, will be preferred to
the Son of the first Marriage, as to the Right of Succession? Ratio Dubitandi,
The first Marriage was Contracted Spe, and in contemplation that the Children
of that Marriage would succeed, and the Eldest Son by his Birth had Jus
primogeniturae, as the first Lawful Son, which could not thereafter be taken
from him: and e contra, the Son of the second Marrriage, the time of the
Fathers Death, which is to be considered as to the question of the Succession,
is his Eldest Lawful Son. Cogitandum.

If a Person may Marry on Deathbed, in order to the Legitimation of Natural
Children, in prejudice of his Agnats, who would otherwise succeed?

Marriage and Legitimation.
THere being a Declarator intented, to hear and see it found that the Children
were Lawful; in respect there was a promise and Copula, Quaeritur, If the
pursuit, being after the Fathers Decease, in order to the Succession to the
Good-sire, the promise may be proven prout de Jure, as it might have been
before? My Lord Neutoun told me, that after the Fathers decease it is found not
probable by Witnesses. Lord of Lauder.

Lenteratio.
LEuteratio. vide Appellatio in Litera A.

Libellarius Contractus.
LIbellus, sive Libellaria, est contractus, quo interveniente scriptura res
immobilis venditur, certo pretio, certa insuper pensione in singulos annos; ea
lege plerumque addita ut stato and condicto tempore renovetur; denuo numerato
pretio certo vel arbitrario. Hering de molendin. q. 29. n. 4.

Est Italis usurpatus, and dicitur a scriptura and Libello, seu brevi charta.
Ibidem. n. 6.

Liberi.
INdefinito Liberorum nomine, censetur actum de natis tempore Contractus, non
de nascituris. Hering de molendin. quaest. 20. n. 19.

Liferenter.
IF a Liferenter of Lands Stock and Teind having Set the Lands to Tennants for
a Duty for the Stock and drawing the Teind, and having deceased before
Martinmass after drawing the Teind: Quaeritur, will she be Liable to the Heir
for the half of the Teind? Ratio Dubitandi. For the Heir; That she dying before
Martinmass, he ought to have the half of that Years Duty: And for the
Liferenter, that she had Right to the Teind after it was separate and
collected, so that she might have disposed of it; and having gotten it, it
cannot be taken from her; and that the Legal terms are to be considered in the
case of Debt, when dies cedit; but in this case nihil debetur, but she has
Right to the Fruits Teinds, and Quota of them in the same manner as the
Tennant, and as if she had labored. Vide Third and Teind. Letter T. Vide
Titular. litera T. q. 2. vide Milns. Litera M.

Where Grass Roums are set for payment of a Silver Duty (by the Tennent
entering at Whitsunday) the half at Martinmass, and the other half at
Whitesunday thereafter; Quaeritur, If the Liferenter decease after Martinmass,
whether the Martinmass Duty will belong to her Executor? Ratio Dubitandi, That
the Duty payable by the Tennant, entering as said is, and going away at the
next Whitesunday is payable in respect of the Cropped, and proventus of the next
Year, either of Corns or foetura animalium; and it is without question that a
Tennant paying a Silver Duty for a Corn-Roum, albeit he pay at Martinmass after
his entry, yet it is paid for the next years Cropped; so that the Liferenter can
pretend to no part thereof, deceasing the time foresaid: and on the other part,
it appears that there may be a difference as to Grass Roums, seeing the half of
the Duty seems to be paid for the profit of the Grass, from Whitesunday to
Martinmass, which falls within the Liferenters Right.

Quaeritur, Quid Juris, As to Salt-pans and Milns if the Liferenter have the
same in her own hand, whether her Right is presently determined by her Death?

The same being set to Tennants from Candlesmass to Candlesmass: If the
Liferenter deceased after Lambmass and Martinmass, will her Executors have any
part of the Duty after Lambmass?

When Rentals are set in these terms, That beside the Rental Duty there should
be every five Years a considerable Sum paid, as in Contractu Libellario;
Quaeritur, If the Liferenter will have Right to that Sum, if it fall to be
paid during the Liferent?

When the whole Estate of a Nobleman is Disponed reserving his Liferent, or of
a Baron; will the Liferenter have Vote in Parliament, and Voice in the Election
of Commissioners for Shires?

A Lady being Infeft upon her Contract of Marriage in Lands for her Liferent;
Quaeritur, If Tacks set thereafter by her Husband will bind her? Vide Terce
quaest: ultima.

Executors of a Liferenter.
IF a Woman deceaseth after Whitesunday before her Husband, will her Executors
have Right to a part of the years Farms?

Liferents.
DIes as to Liferents (when the question is betwixt the Executor of the Fiar
and Liferenter) cedit at Whitesunday and Martinmass as the Legal Terms.

Quaeritur, If a Bond be, to a Man and his Wife the longest liver, payable at
Lambmass and Candlemass; and the Husband deceasing after Candlemass will the
Husbands Relict have Right to a half year at Whitesunday?

If a Father be Infeft in Liferent in Lands, and be content to renounce his
Liferent in favors of his Son? Quaeritur, If it be habilis modus to extinguish
his Liferent? Ratio Dubitandi, He is the Superiors Vassal during his Life, and
cannot cease to be Vassal without the Superiors consent, at least sine
refutatione.

When a Vassal is Year and Day at the Horn, if he has granted a Right to be
holden of himself, what will be the Import of his Liferent?

If a Liferenter do Dispone his Liferent of Lands; or if the same be Comprysed
from him, and thereafter he be Year and Day at the Horn: Quaeritur, If the
Superior will have Right to the Liferent, as if the said Right had not been
granted? Answer. It is thought, he can have no other Right, than such as the
Liferenter had, and affected with the said Right.

If the Liferenter be Forefaulted, will not the King have the Right of the said
Liferent without the burden of the said Rights? And if it be so, Quae Ratio
Discriminis? Answer, The King will have Right to the said Liferent entire; and
the reason of the Disparity is, that Treason is Crimen feudale, and when the
Vassal Fiar or Liferenter does Forefault, the Right comes to the King Pure,
and without any Burden but such as he has consented to; Whereas Horning is not
Delictum feudale but commune: and the Liferent does not belong to the Superior
Jure feudali, but Statuto, so that he ought not to be in better case than the
Rebel.

Quando Dies cedit as to Liferenters.
WHen Rent of Lands is Victual, the Heretor dying before Whitesunday the
Liferenter has Right to the whole Year; if after Whitesunday but before
Martinmass, The Relict has Right to the half; but if after Martinmass to no
part, because Whitesunday and Martinmass are Termini Legales as to the
question, Quando dies cedit. Quaeritur, therefore, whether when Rent is all in
Highland Roums and agris pascuis, the custom being in some places that the
Tennants entering at Whitesunday, pays the half of the Rent at Martinmass
next; and the other half at Whitesunday thereafter, Quid Juris as to the
Relict, the Husband dying after Whitesunday or after Martinmass?

The same Question is, If, in the Lowlands in Corn-Roums, the Tennant and
Master agree, that the Duty should be paid in Money by the Tennant entering at
Whitesunday, the half at Martinmass, and the other half at Whitesunday?

Vasallus Ligius.
NEmo potest esse simul duorum Vasallus Ligius. These. Bes. litera L. p. 597. ad
finem.

Limitation of Fees.
LAnds being Disponed to a person, and the Heirs Male descending of him; which
Failieing to the granter and his Heirs, Quaeritur, If his foresaids faill; what
way will the Granter being Superior and his Heirs attain to the Right, whether
as Heir of Provision to the Vassal? or per vi. am Consolidationis, and by a
Declarator that he has Right by the return foresaid; and that the Property is
consolidate with the Superiority?

Whether he will be Liable to the Vassals Debts? Ratio Dubitandi, The Vassal
was Fiar and might Contract Debt, and whoever succeeds to him ought to be
Liable thereto.

If the Right be granted to a Person, and the Heirs of his Body, without any
further Provision or mention of return, whether will the King have Right as
ultimus haeres, or the Superior? Answer. The Fee not being simple but limited;
It is thought, that the Superior should have Right seeing the Fee is limited.
And the King cannot succeed but by way of Representation and as haeres ultimus,
and there can be no Transmission beyond the Limitation. But if the Lands be
given to a Man and his Heirs whatsomever, the Fee is simple; and the Granter
having simply and absolutely given away the same, he can pretend no Right to
the same; and the King comes under the generality of Heirs whatsomever, being
ultimus haeres.

Litiscontestation.
IF Removings, Spuilies, and Ejections, which are interdicta possessoria
Litiscontestatione perpetuentur for forty years, or only three?

The same Question may be for Servants Fees, House-Mails, and such other
Actions which prescribe in three years.

Quo casu Possessor in mala fide constituitur per Litiscontestationem and
quando non?
LItiscontestatio possessorem malae fidei constituit, adeo ut ab eo Tempore; ad
restitutionem fructuum teneatur: hoc tamen verum est in iis, qui per
Litiscontestationem vere in mala fide constituuntur, veluti si res feudalis
Emphyteutica petatur, aut vindicetur, ob feloniam commissam: aut quia tempus
locationis transactum est veraque sit causa vindicationis, quam etiam possessor
nec minus obstinate contendit.

Secus est, si ego rem emo ab eo cujus esse putabam, tu vero dicis eam ad te
pertinere, and nihil adducis praeter petitionem and nunciationem, tunc quia
bonam fidem habeo, Litiscontestatio me non vera sed ficta efficit malae fidei
possessorem; and a fructibus merito excusor, donec sententia feratur. These.
Besold. in litera K. 48. verb. Kriegsbevvestigung. Sect. pen. p. 478.

Locus Poenitentiae.
AFter Articles of agreement are subscribed, of which one is, that they shall
be extended in a Contract: Quaeritur, If there be Locus poenitentiae? Ratio
Dubitandi, Because antequam totum negotium in mundum sit redactum licet
poenitere L. 17. Cod. de fide Instrumentorum.

An agreement being to be perfected in Writ, whereby one of the Parties was to
be obliged to pay a Sum of Money; there was a Letter Written thereafter by that
person, desireing that the Write may be drawn, and bearing that he should
perform conform to the said agreement, Quaeritur; If he be bound by the said
Letter, so that there is no Locus poenitentiae? Answer. It is thought, that the
bargain being to be perfected in Writ, and until then there being locus
poenitentiae, The Letter promising performance does imply a condition. Viz. If
the Write be perfected and subscribed: seeing upon the drawing of Writes there
may arise Questions which may hinder the perfecting of the same, and multa
cadunt inrer calicem etc.

M.
Mare.
MAre dicitur esse de districtu illius Civitatis. seu loci, qui confinit cum
Mari: and habentes Jurisdictonem in territorio cohaerenti Mari, dicuntur habere
Jurisdictionem in Mari intra centum milliaria. Jus Fluviat. p. 152. and 496. n.
23.

Marriage.
IF the Superior Infeft the Appearand Heir being unmarried, does he pass from
the Marriage?

If Marriage be due, if the Appearand Heir be either senex or valetudinary? And
either unfit or unwilling to Marry?

It seems Celibate is not Delictum, so that the Casuality thereby should
arise to the Superior; but only the Marrying without the Superiors consent
infers contempt, and consequently Delictum and poenam?

If the Appearand Heir be Married in his Fathers time and have Children, and
thereafter Marry after his Fathers decease, will a Marriage fall to the
Superior?

If the Marriage of the Appearand Heir of Ward-Lands should be modified, with
respect to the value of the Ward Lands, without consideration of his Debts? It
appears that the Superior should not be in worse case by the Deed of his
Vassal: and yet he may be in better, for if the Heir have beside a personal or
other Estate, the Marriage will be modified to be such, as the Tocher to a
Person of that Estate may be thought in probability to amount to.

If a Person holding of the King, and other Superiors Respective; of the King
blensh, but of them Ward; may resign in the Kings hands to be holden Ward in
aemulationem, and of purpose to prejudge the other Superiors? Saltcoats.

If Parties be Married publicly. Quaeritur, If it be not our that they are
impotent, as if it may be proven that before the Marriage the Man was
Castratus; is it competent to the Heir or any other person concerned in the
point of Interest (but the party prejudged) to question or dissolve the
Marriage as null or dirimendum, upon that or any other Ground?

If a Marriage be unlawful; and either of the Parties be in bona fide, which
does legitimate the Children. Quaeritur, If these Children will succeed with
other Children of lawful Marriages, at least to their Parents?

If they will succeed to their other Kinsmen? or if the Legitimation will only
import that they are not Spurij, and that they have Testamenti factionem?

If a marriage after Inhibition, may be reduced upon that ground?

What are the Legitima Remedia to compel parties to consummate marriage upon
Contracts? Whether they may not only be decerned by the Commissars, but by the
Church, under the pain of Ecclesiastic censure?

Where some Lands hold of the King Taxt-ward, and others hold of him Simple
ward, Quaeritur, will he get both the simple Marriage and the taxt? Sir John
Cuninghame says, it was decided in the case of Innernytie, for both.

Marriage being dissolved within year and Day, whether the Gifts, and Jocalia
given hinc inde may be repeated? Item, whether the gifts given by friends will
fall under communion? So that the Maxim, that Marriage being dissolved within
year and day is in the same condition as to all intents as if it had not been,
Is only to be understood of Dos and Donatio propter nuptias.

If an old Woman super annos, and past the age of Marriage being about
Threescore years, shall succeed in the Right of ward-Lands, whether Marriage
will be due? John Bonars Heir

Quid Juris if a widow either man or woman, inter annos nubiles shall succeed
to Ward-lands? Barclay of Pearstoun.

If a Person have only two acres, or a mean interest in Ward-lands, but a very
great interest otherwise, Whether will his Marriage be considered with respect
to his whole Estate?

Seeing the Marriage of appeirand Heirs belongs to the eldest Superior,
Quaeritur, who shall be thought the eldest Superior, whether the eldest as to
the Lands, or as to the Vassal; and if it be to be considered, which of the
Lands, was first given in Tennandry?

Quid Juris when a Marriage is fallen, but not declared nor gifted?

A Marriage being contracted betwixt a woman Pubes, and one that is impubes,
Quaeritur, If it be a Marriage, at least as to her, so that she cannot marry
with another in the interim that he is not pubes? Ratio Dubitandi. That a
Contract being mutual cannot Claudicate.

A Father, by his daughters Contract of Marriage, having disponed to her and
the second Son of the Marriage, and the other Heirs therein mentioned his
Estate, under Reversion and certain other Conditions; and in special if he
should ordain a certain Sum should be paid by these who should succeed to the
Estate, to his Daughter and her forsaids: and the said contract bearing also a
Tocher of five Thousand pounds to be paid presently to the Husband: Quaeritur,
If the Marriage be dissolved within year and day without Children, whether the
Contract will be ineffectual as to all intents, as being causa data and non
secuta cum effectu? Or whether it be as to the Right of the person of the
Daughter, either as to the Estate or as to the said Sum ipso facto void, at
least reduceable? And whether she may repeat the Tocher from the Husbands
Heirs? Lady Yesters contract of Marriage, being dissolved within year and day.

A person being Heir to his Father in a great Estate holden blensh; And having
a small piece of Land holding ward, which he may succeed to as Heir to his
Father. Quaeritur, If notwithstanding he is Heir general and Heir in special in
the Lands holden blensh, he needs not Enter to the said ward Lands, in order
to be free of a Marriage, which would be considered with respect to the whole
Estate? Ratio Dubitandi. That being Heir as said is otherwise, he cannot refuse
to be Heir of the said Lands. Answer. It is thought, that if he was charged to
enter Heir in special at the instance of a creditor in special, he could not
renounce: But the superior cannot urge him to Enter, but will have only the
benefit of a Nonentry: Seeing the said other Lands, and any interest he had as
general Heir are distincta patrimonia from ward Lands, and he may own the one
without the other.

If the superior may affect and evict the said ward Lands by adjudication, for
the Marriage of the appearand Heir, considered with respect to his other
Estate, in prejudice not only of the appearand Heir, but of any who should
thereafter be appearand Heirs? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Marriage being but a
Casuality may exceed more than the double of the value of the Lands, which is
absurd. Cogitandum.

If the appearand Heir will notwithstanding be liable to the Marriage, albeit
he does not enter nor renounce to be Heir, as to these Lands? Ratio Dubitandi.
That Refutatio of vassals is not admitted, unless they satisfy the casualities
already fallen. Answer. It is thought, he may renounce and be free of the
casualities personally; without prejudice to the superior to affect the Ground:
and the case is different from that of vassals infeft, Seeing they having
accepted the Right they cannot offer to renounce, unless they pay what was
formerly due to the superior, being fructus Dominij; whereunto not only the
Ground but they are liable personally, by reason of their Right and possession,
and it cannot be said that the appearand Heir, has either. Mortounhall.

There being diverse Adjudications of Land holding ward within year and day,
but Infeftment only upon one; and that adjudication whereupon Infeftment is,
being before the debitors decease, and therefore stopping the Ward; and the
rest after but within year and day of the first Infeftment, Quaeritur, If the
first be satisfied by intromission, may the superior claim the Ward of the
appearand Heir of the Debtor being Minor, in respect the act of Parliament
Debtor and Creditor does relate only to the interest and and competition of
creditors, and does not prejudge superiors of their Right and casualities; and
the adjudger Infeft is only vassal; and the other adjudgers are not vassals;
and by them the superior can have no casuality either of Liferent, Ward, or
Marriage? Cogitandum. L. Bancreiff.

When diverse Lands are holden of the King, some in simple Ward and others Taxt
as to the Ward and Marriage, Quaeritur, when the Marriage falls, whether the
King will have both the simple Marriage and the taxt Marriage? Answer. That
since at one time there can be but one Marriage, there can be but one Casuality
for the same: and as the King would have but one Marriage, albeit there be
diverse Lands holden ward of him simple-Ward; So in the case foresaid, where
there are some taxt, he cannot have two Marriages; and the taxt being only
aestimatio, where there can be no Marriage there can be no Taxt due: The same
question may be of Lands holden simple and Taxt-Ward of a Subject.

A person being charged with Precepts out of the Chancery to Enter a person
presented upon forefaulture, and in respect of his Contumacy the person
presented being Infeft upon a Precept out of the Chancery and thereafter
deceasing. Quaeritur, the Lands holding Ward, whether the Marriage of the
appearand Heir will belong to the King or to the Superior? Ratio Dubitandi.
That the Superior not having owned the defunct to be his vassal, he cannot
claim the Marriage of his Heir: and on the other Part The King is not Superior,
and grants only Infeftment in Subsidium: and does what the Superior without
reason refused to do: and there is a great difference betwixt the case
foresaid, and that, when the Superior not being Infeft himself is therefore
charged to Enter, with certification to Lose the Superiority during his Life;
Because in the first case, there is no contempt of the Superior, but a wrong
done to the person who would enter being a stranger to the Superior not being
formerly his vassal: and in the other case there is both a wrong to his own
vassal, and a contempt of his own Superior that he is in non-entry; and the
more aggravated, that being charged to enter he continues in non-entry; and the
act of Parliament therefore provides that he should Lose the Superiority.

It is informed by James Hay, That the Lords have lately found, That when Lands
are holden some simple-Ward and some taxt, both the single and taxt Marriage
will be due: The President being of another opinion.

If a Superior Infeft his Vassal being Minor, before the Marriage fall by his
attaining to the age of fourteen years, may he claim the Marriage after it
falls?

If he Infeft him after the Marriage has fallen, whether does he pass from the
Marriage?

Marriage Clandestine.
BY the act of Parliament anent unlawful Ordinations, these who are so Married
amitting jus mariti and relictae, Quaeritur, If the Husband Loses his
Curiality or the woman her Terce? Or only Jus mariti as to the Communion of
movables; Acts Specially penal being stricti juris, and there being, beside,
other pains?

If Clandestinae Nuptiae without consent of Parents, though they bind the
parties so that they cannot Marry with any other, yet will be null as to
Parents and friends, that the Children cannot succeed to them against their
will?

Materna Maternis.
IF in no case that Maxim Materna Maternis has place with us? And in special
(in that viz.) if a Person succeed to his Mother and decease without Heirs upon
the Fathers side, will the Fisk exclude the Mothers friends, the Estate being
profectitious and descended from her?

In Allodialibus there is no succession of the Mother or her friends active;
but in feudis foemineis, if a Son should succeed to his Mother, and should
thereafter Die; Quaeritur, whether his Heirs upon the Fathers side would
succeed to such Lands, or his Mothers Heirs? Ratio Dubitandi That the said
Lands are given ab initio, primo investito and his Heirs, which must be
understood haeredes Sanguinis: and the son having succeeded to his Mother, his
Heirs upon the Fathers side cannot be thought to be Heirs either to her or her
predecessors: and therefore in that case it is to be thought, that the Rule
should have place Materna maternis: and there is the like reason in Patents of
Honor being quasi feuda; and being granted by the King to the receiver of the
Patent and his Heirs.

A Person, as said is, being infeft in Lands as Heir to his Mother, and dieing
without issue: whether will his nearest Kinsman upon the Fathers side or
Mothers side succeed to him in the said Lands? Ratio Dubitandi, That by our
custom the Fathers friends are always preferable; and that Rule Paterna
Paternis and Materna Maternis has no place: and yet it is thought that in
mobilibus, when a person has Right to the same as Executor to his Mother they
go to the nearest of Kin upon the Fathers side; Because there is no affectio as
to mobilia, and there is no Limitation or Destination of Heirs as to these; But
as to Lands, when the Right is taken to a man and his Heirs, and a woman
succeeds to the said Lands, and thereafter her son as Heir to her, if the son
die without issue, his Mothers Heirs ought to succeed: Seeing by the Infeftment
no person can succeed but he that is Heir of blood to the person first infeft,
either immediately or mediately.

Quid Juris, as to Bands for Sums of money? Answer. It appears, that there is
eadem Ratio, Seeing there is in bands Limitatio haeredum.

Matrimonium
SOla nuptialis benedictio and solennis and publicus in Ecclesia benedicendi
ritus, vera est Matrimonii apud Christianos executio; ex quo tempore jura
Matrimonii vigorem suum obtinent, Licet concubitus non fuerit secutus.
Christenius de jure Matrimon. Disser. 1. quaest. 1.

Si post sponsalia pura, concubitus accesserit, and sponsa conceperit, sponsus
vero ante confirmationem diem obierit; de jure, partus non est Legitimus, quia
non est ex justis nuptiis. Idem-eadem disser. Quaest. 2.

Isto casu licet interdum Sponsalia habeantur pro Matrimonio, illud locum habet
solummodo, quoad vinculum mutuae promissionis, ne illud temere solvatur, non
quoad reliquos Matrimonii effectus. Idem. eadem. diss.

Jure Civili, Divino, and Canonico, non aliter Legitimum est Matrimonium quam
si Parents consentiant; nec minus Matris quam Patris consensus requiritur,
praesertim mortuo Patre.

Non interest, utrum consensus sit expressus an tacitus; paria enim sunt
consentire and non contradicere. Idem de sponsalibus. Diss. 1. quaest. 3. p.
17. and 18.

Parentibus non permittitur Matrimonium impedire, si id fiat injuria; and cum
causa sit cognoscenda, Statutis quarundam Civitatum, cautum est parents isto
casu ad Judices Ecclesiasticos seu Commissarios causarum Ecclesiasticarum esse
citandos; and si Liberi sint minores viginti quinque annis, non tenentur
parents rations sui Dissensus proferre; sin Liberi annum vigesimum quintum
expleverint, Parentum oppositio non aliter locum habet, quam si justas
Dissensus causas proferant. Ibid. P. 19.

"Si Titiae ea condition Legetur, si arbitratu Seij nupserit, habetur pro non
adjecta, and debetur Legatum licet conditioni non pareatur. Christen: de spons.
quaest. 17.

Si ad sponsalia clandestina, quae consensu Parentum carent, concubitus
accesserit, non confirmatur Matrimonium, si parentibus justae causae sint
dissensus: haec sententia curijs Holland: placuit. idem quaest. 20.

Mensis.
SI Mensis simpliciter proferatur, intelligitur de mense solari and Duodecima
part anni, vel triginta Diebus. These. Bes. in Litera M. 68. verbo Monat. p.
664.

Mensura Taxative and Demonstrative.
INterest utrum Mensura in venditionibus Taxative, an vero Demonstrative
adjiciatur: illud fit cum ab ipsa mensura contractus initium sumit, hoc cum a
corpore. Jus fluviat, P. 810. n. 58.

Militia.
THE Gentlemen that went out in a Troup in the late Expedition, having been at
Charges for a Banner, Trumpet, and Coat, etc. Quaeritur, If the said Charges
may be laid upon the whole Shire? Answer Negative, Seeing the Militia-Horse did
not go out; and it was munus Personale upon the Heretors within age to go out.

Miln.
A Defunct being in Possession of a Miln being a Horse-miln; whether will the
said horse and other instrumenta mobilia that are in the Miln, belong to the
Heir?

Quid Juris as to Milns when they are either set to Tennants or possessed by
Liferenters quoad the duties of the year wherein the Liferenter dies? vide
Liferenter Litera L. and the like cases of Third and Teyna and Titular. Litera
T.

Ministers Stipends in a Reddendo.
IN Infeftments of Erection, the Reddendo is ordinarily a blensh Duty, and
beside to Pay to the Minister the stipend therein mentioned Quaeritur, whether
the stipend be Debitum fundi? Ratio Dubitandi, That what is due upon the
Reddendo not relating to Lands, but to Teinds which are not fundus and
subjectum permanens, But a Benefit ariseing out of the Lands; such a Reddendo
non afficit fundum; no more than Teinds and a valued duty.

Minor.
WIll the Heir of a Minor be restored upon that ground, That the Lands being
Entailed he resigned in favors of the Heirs whatsomever? There being no Lesion
to the Minor.

Minor non tenetur Placitare.
MInor non tenetur placitare holds not, ubi agitur de Dolo, culpa vel
obligatione Defuncti, as in Recognitions, Forefaultures, etc. Cranburn contra
Lady Carnegy. Humby contra his Neice.

Reduction upon minority.
LAnds being disponed to a Minor, and after his prefect age the Bargain being
questioned as being to his prejudice, in so far as the same was for Eighteen
years purchass and a half, and the same might have been bought at Seventeen
according to the rate of the times. Quaeritur, If such Lesion not being Enorm
(and modica) be relevant? Ratio Dubitandi, The defender contracted bona fide
with a Tutor the pupills Father, and Licet Contrahentibus se invicem decipere,
and non constat notourly, That that was the rate; and some of the witnesses
declare the contrare; and the defender will get a Buyer at the same rate.
Tweeddale contra Drumelzior. vide Annualrent for Damnage, Litera A.

Decree against Minors.
IF a Decree against Minores indefensos, no Curators being called in special
but in general at the market Cross if they have any for their interest, be
null? Ratio Dubitandi, Gesta cum adultis non habentibus Curatores are not void:
and on the other part, by the common Law Datur Curator ad Litem, and Minor non
habet personam standi in Judicio; and lata Contra Minores indefensos sententia,
non Tenet. L. 45. 2. ff. de re judicata. vide Perez. Institut. Lib. 1. de
Curatoribus. Danturne invitis.

Mobilia.
IF Mobilia has Situm, when they are here animo and destinatione Domini; so
that when they belong v. g. to Englishmen they are to be thought Res Scoticae
and to be affected with the Laws of Scotland; and he cannot dispose of them by
a nuncupative Will. And e Contra, If he should change their situm, and
transport them to stay in England?

Mobilium vilior possessio.
MObilium vilior and abjectior est possessio and facilius acquiritur and
amittitur, quam immobilium; in ea non cadit tanta affectio: non est Locus in
ijs redhibitioni Gentilitiae sive juri (...). Hering. de molend. quaest 8. n.
58. and sequent.

Mobilia sequuntur conditionem personae sive Domini, adeo ut ejus ossibus
adaereant active and passive: Immobilia autem co-haerent Territorio.

Modus habilis.
IF a person having Right to Lands (wherein another is infeft and in
Possession, so that he has the benefit of a possessory Judgment) should dispone
his Right, which is preferable in favors of the said party who is infeft and
in Possession as said is; and thereafter another person upon a posterior
disposition should complete his Right by Infeftment: whether or not will the
said prior Right at least Extend to and import a discharge of the action of
reduction, and militate against the singular successor?

If a Reduction being intented, the pursuer judicially Declare that he passes
Simpliciter from the said action, will that bar a singular successor; Seeing
the said Declaration is upon record, whereas in the case above mentioned the
disposition is a Latent deed, which cannot prejudge a singular successor?

If at least if it were Registrate in the register of seasins, it would
prejudge; being none of the Writs appointed to be registrat therein?

Molendinum.
NOn licet molendinum exstruere in flumine publico, sine Principis consensu.
Frits: Jus fluviatile p. 10. n. 128.

Molendina aquatica.
MOlendina igitur aquatica sunt de Regalibus. Idem p. 13. n. 175.

Molendina Bannaria.
MOlendina bannaria sunt, ad quae integrae Communitates vel Pagi praecise ire
coguntur. Jus Fluviat. 1225 versus finem.

Quae appellatio inde videtur sumere originem, quia Bannire apud veteres
Germanos idem significat quod Sancire, Jubere, Edicere. Hering. de Molend. q.
11. n. 2, and 3.

Molendina navalia Immobilibus accensentur.
MOlendina navalia pro immobilibus habenda sunt. Hering de Molendinis q. 8. n.
26. quia aedificans ea intention and destinatione ea extruit, ut semper and
perpetuo non pro motu sed pro molitura in ipso flumine manerent; nec (...) and
molendinum aquaticum perpetuae morae causa ad ripam exaedificatum, plus
praestare potest quam Molendinum navale; nec in illo quidquam nominari potest
quod huic non insit, rotae molares and caetera omnia. idem q. 8. 26. and
sequen. Ea destinatio and attributio ad molendum, molendinum immobile reddit.

Molendina (...)
MOlendina (...) alata, seu vento agitata, immobilibus accensentur: Idem eadem.
quaest. n. 40.

Districtus Molendini.
VEndita moletrina, licet non fiat mentio districtus, id est, jus cogendi
subditos molitoris ad molendum, venit tamen; quia simplex rei alienatio
pertinentias rei continet. Jus Fluviat. p. 1229. n. 31.

Quomodo qui sunt in districtu Molendini cogi queant?
ETiamsi is qui emit Molendinum, non posset Jurisdictionaliter cogere Rusticos
inhabitants in districtu Molendini; potest tamen eos cogere per actionem, per
manus injectionem in frumenta and fruges Molendas. Hering. de Molendin. q. 11.
n. 145.

An qui sunt in Districtu alibi molere possint?
SUbditi in aliis Molendinis molere possunt si Dominus Molendini non procuret
eorum grana in mola sua bannaria contundi intra spatium viginti quatuor
horarum. Idem quaest. 11. 139. and alii ibi ab eo laudati.

An Extrui possit Molendinum quod noceat vicino?
SUperioris Molendini Dominus prohibere non potest, ne in inferiori loco alius
Molendinum exstruat, tametsi ex eo futurum sit ut superioris reditus
diminuatur; quia ex eo quod quis suo Jure facit, teneri non potest, licet
alteri per consequentiam noceatur: distinguendum est, qua ratione superiori
vicino noceatur, nam si ob id solum quod minus frequens sit Superioris
Molendini commercium prohibendus non est, cum suam posset quisque conditionem
Meliorem facere, etiam cum alterius detrimento, dummodo citra injuriam: Si vero
ob id quod cursus aquae impediatur, and ex restagnatione fiat ut superius
Molendinum perinde exerceri nequeat, prohiberi potest: nam sic debet quis rem
suam meliorem facere, ne vicini Deteriorem reddat. Heringius, de Molendinis. q.
14. n. 30.

An Molendinum possit Extrui sine licentia Principis?
IN flumine publico navigabili aut tale faciente, non nisi ex principis
licentia: sed in alio non navigabili, attamen publico, sola Gentium authoritate
Molendinum extrui potest. Idem quaest. 15. n. 39.

Restagnatio Molendini.
SI duo in eodem flumine Molendina possederint, quoad Restagnationem pacta and
consuetudo primum servantur; his deficientibus, qui prior aedificavit primas
habet parts. Idem quaest. 20. n. 10.

Vsus Molendinorum Juri Civili ignotus.
QUae de Molendinis nunc obtinent and in usu sunt, Juri civili ignota sunt
maxima ex part; nam post Imperii translationem ex Orient in Occidentem
tempore Caroli Magni, etiam Juris mutatio successit; and usus Molendinorum alio
loco esse coepit quam apud Romanos: adeo ut Molendina exstruendi facultas hodie
non amplius sit communis, sed privata ut plurimum; siquidem Principibus,
Comitibus, and Baronibus ab Imperatore; a Principibus rursus viris nobilibus
and aliis cum Territorio and feudis Jure Clientelae tribuitur; ita ut jus
Molendinorum pro beneficio Regali aut principali aestimetur. Heringius de
Molendinis. Quaest. 7. n. 4. and sequent. p. 124.

Vbi convenit, ut pro Familia molatur, quid Juris si aucta sit?
SI in concessione feudi aut Emphyteuseos aut simplicis Conductionis, pactum
adjiciatur quod debeat accipiens molere frumentum pro tradente, ipsiusque tota
Familia; eaque si aucta fuerit pro omnibus molere debet gratis, aut eodem quod
convenerat pretio: potest enim evenire ut Familia minuatur and sic molitor est
in lucro: Cum igitur penes eum eo casu foret Lucrum, debet damnum sentire: Idem
obtinet in Furno, and concessione Lignorum pro familia. Hering. de molen.
quaest. 20. n. 15. and sequen.

If a Mother and her Friends may succeed?
IF in no case Cognati on the Mothers side can succeed? Answer. It is thought
that they ought to succeed; seeing the Son succeeds to his Mother and her
Friends; and Jus successionis should be reciprocal, being founded upon
Proximity of Blood, which is the same to the Mother and to the Son: But in this
our Custom is lame, and opus est vel constitutione vel Decisione.

Mutuum.
MVtuum and Commodatum and such other Contracts which are said Recontrahi, and
not nudo consensu; Quaeritur, If they may not be said to be Contracted, when a
Write is Subscribed thereupon, obligeing persons to lend Money or Commodare?
Answer. Such Contracts cannot be said to be Mutuum or Commodatum nisi res
intervenerit: And yet datur ex iis actio praescriptis verbis, or in factum.

N.
Non-entry.
IF the Superior of Lands holden feu, will have, during Non-entry, both the
Feu-duty as his own, and the Non-entry Duty as Casuality and Fruit of his
Superiority?

The Superior being in Non-entry. Quaeritur. Though the Non-entry were
declared, whether the Liferent Escheat of the Subvassal would belong to the
immediate Superior? Ratio Dubitandi, It is not a feudale Delictum and
commissum; but ex lege, which is in favors of the immediate Superior.

If the Superior suffer the Appearand Heir to be in Non-entry and to possess
without a Process for Nonentry; If he may have a real Action of poinding the
Ground against a singular successor?

If the full Duties will be due to the Superior upon account of Non-entry
following the Ward, albeit the Superior was not in possession during the Ward?

Quaeritur, When Lands are Disponed by a Baron to be holden of himself; If
before Declarator of Non-entry the full Duties be due, when the Lands are
Disponed without any mention of Retour or Extent? Answer. If the Lands be
Disponed to be holden from the Disponer of the King, a proportion only of the
Retour Duty is due; Because the King and the Disponer having condescended that
the old Barony should be extended, That part which is Disponed to be holden of
the King censetur eodem Jure with the rest of the Barony; But when the Baron
Dispones a part to be holden of himself without any mention of Extent, the full
Duties may be claimed, at least the proportion of the valued Duty.

Novo-damus.
THE King having granted a Charter with a Novo-damus, Quaeritur, If he should
have succeeded to a person having a better Right either upon Forefaulture or
Recognition, or as next Heir; will the Novodamus bar him? Or if the Novo-damus
should be understood to be restricted to any Right or pretense or claim the
King may have to the Lands by the Right of the Resignant, as falling in his
hands by Forefaulture of him or his Authors, or otherwise from their Right,
and the committing of the same, either for ever or for a time?

Quid Juris as to other Superiors having succeeded to persons having a better
Right?

Quid Juris, If other Superiors have received any Vassal upon Resignation or
otherwise; if they may question their Vassals Right upon another
unquestionably better, falling to them as succeeding to any other person?

Lands having fallen to the King by Forefaulture, the person Forefaulted having
but a Right of Superiority, the Property belonging to Vassals: Quaeritur, If
upon Resignation of the Subvassal in the Kings hands as immediate Superior by
the Forefaulture; a Charter with a Novo-damus will put him in that Condition,
as if he had from the beginning holden of the King; so that the King cannot
interpose another Superior by Disponing the Superiority that did belong to the
Traitor? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Novo-damus is equivalent to an Original
Grant: And yet is thought, That the Novo-damus is only an accessory Right, and
in effect Clausula executiva; whereby the King gives the Property, that
belonged to the Resigner with all Right he could pretend thereto; But not the
Interest and Superiority that belonged to the Traitor, unless it were expressly
Disponed: and actus agentium non operantur ultra eorum intentionem. Duncan of
Lunaie.

The King having granted to my Lord Kincardine, and thereafter to the
Chancellor a Gift of the Wards and Non-entries that had fallen or should fall
during the time therein mentioned Respective; and thereafter having given
diverse Infeftments with a Novo-damus. Quaeritur, If the foresaid Donators
could be prejudged by the said Novo-damus? Answer. It is thought that the
said Novo-damus are of the nature of Gifts or Discharges of such Casualities,
which the King might grant before Intimation made to the persons of the said
Gifts.

Nullitas ex verbis non licebit.
VErba non licet vel non licebit, annullant actum; important siquidem
necessitatem praecisam; negant potentiam, resistant actui and aliter factum
invalidant. These. Bes. in Litera K. 31. verbo Kan. Sect. ultima. p. 469.

Clausula ex nunc prout ex tunc.
VErba Ex nunc prout ex tunc, sunt retro activa and important canonem latae
sententiae; operanturque actum completum etiamsi verbum futuri temporis sit
adjectum; adeo ut unum tempus insit alteri, extremum in primo, and primum in
postremo. Heringius de Molendinis quaest. 1. n. 45.

Nundinae.
NVndinarum solennium Jus, ad majora Regalia pertinet.

Nunquam Caesar consuevit alicui dare Nundinarum privilegium, nisi prius
adjacentibus and vicinis Civitatibus quarum interesse potest, auditis.

Nundinarum favor magnus est, quia earum tempore res aut personae alicujus
arrestari non debent; Secus in Mercatis.

Quemadmodum tempore Nundinarum in loco illarum arrestare aliquem non licet;
ita etiam nec in illo sine quo Mercatores ad Nundinas venire non possunt, These.
Besold. in Litera M. 43. p. 631.

O.
Oath of Coronation.
IF what is required and promised, by the King the time of his Coronation, be
understood to be Conditiones Regni, so that the same not being fulfilled the
People is free? Answer. These are not Conditiones either Suspensivae or
Resolutivae, but modus regnandi: And albeit Modus ought to be fulfilled, and
subjects who are under a Coercive Power may be urged to observe the same; yet a
Prince who is subject to no higher Power relinquitur Religioni Juramenti, and
Deum solum habet ultorem.

These Similies may be urged to this purpose, viz. A Father is obliged not to
provoke or wrong his Children, and that is Modus employed in the Relation of a
Father; and yet if he do otherwise the Relation is not taken away: And when
Parties are Married, there is Stipulation hinc inde of mutual Duty, not only as
to Chastity, but as to other Duties, and yet though they fail in the same,
being only Modus vinculi conjugalis, the Marriage is not dissolved except in
the case of Adultery: That Duty of mutual Chastity being inter essentialia, and
the other Duties inter naturalia conjugii.

Qualified Oaths.
WHether qualified Oaths may be received before Inferior Judges? Answer. It is
thought not: The question whether the qualities should be construed qualities
or Exceptions, being of that difficulty, that they are not to be decided by
Inferior Judges.

The Lords are not in use to receive qualified Oaths unless they be given in to
be seen by the other Party, and upon debate be found Relevant; so that the
person who is to give his Oath may be admitted to Swear in the terms of the
same, as being properly Qualities and not Exceptions. Quaeritur, What Qualities
ought to be sustained? And seeing it is the common opinion that intrinsic
qualities may be received; Quaeritur, What Qualities are to be thought
Intrinsic? Answer, These are Intrinsic that are inherent in the Act and
Matter in question v. g. If it be referred to the Defenders Oath that he
promised to pay the Pursuer a Sum of Money, he may declare in what Terms he
promised, pure, in diem, or sub Condition.

If it be referred to a Parties Oath that he is Liable for a House-mail (having
taken and dwelt therein) after three Years. Quaeritur, If he may declare with
that Quality that he paid the same? Ratio Dubitandi. That it is Extrinsick,
and not a Quality but an Exception: On the other part, quomodo unumquodque
ligatur, solvitur; and the Debt not being proven but by his Oath, he may prove
payment the same way. 2do. There is a presumption in Law, which is the Ground
of so momentary a Prescription, That such Debts are not so long owing; And
therefore it ought to be proven by the Defenders Oath they are owing. 3tio. It
is the common practice, that Parties that are not bound by Write think they are
in tuto to pay without Writ.

If he declare not positive that he paid, but that he Assigned a bond or Debt
in satisfaction. Quaeritur, If that Quality should be received? Answer. It is
thought, that it is not intrinsic.

Correspective Obligements.
QVid Juris, If there be correspective Writs of one Date, but not in one Body,
as v. g. a Disposition of Lands and a Bond of the same date for payment of the
price: If the Exception competent against the price ( viz. The Disponer cannot
be liable unless the price be paid) will militate against the singular
Successor? Ratio Dubitandi, The Disponer sequitur fidem: And the Obligement to
pay the price is not in corpore juris; so that the Assigney is in bona fide to
take a Right thereto: and Contra, Personal Exceptions competent against the
Cedent are competent against the Assigney, in Obligations personal hinc inde.

It is informed, that there is a Decision, That such Exceptions are not
competent against Assigneys.

Mutual Obligements in Contracts.
IF there be a mutual Contract anent the selling of Lands and payment of the
price; and the Buyers creditor comprise the minute in so far as it is in his
favors; whether he will have action for implement unless he pay the price?
Answer. He will not: Seeing the final cause of the Disposition is the Price.

If Offices do Escheat by Horning?
IF the Keeper of a Register, or Writer to a Seal be at the Horn Quaeritur, if
his Office will fall under his Escheat? Ratio Dubitandi, That nothing is
Escheatable but that which may be transmitted and is applicable to another;
whereas an Office is a personal Function, and industria personae eligitur,
which is so personal that it cannot be conveyed by his Escheat to another.

If at least the Rebel does forefault his interest, if he be year and Day at
the Horn? And Quid Juris as to Judges, who have places from the King, and as to
Commissars, and Ministers, that are presented by other Patrons, whether by
their Rebellion they be so disenabled, that they cannot enjoy their Places, and
their Patrons can present others?

Whether at least Relaxation will repone the Rebel, and take away the
Inability?

Omissa and male appretiata.
A Person being named Executor and universal Legatar. Quaeritur, If a Testament
ad omissa and male appretiata be confirmed, will the principal Executor Loss
both the Office and the Benefit of the Legacy, as to what is omitted and male
Appretiat? Answer. It is thought, he will Loss both, in respect of his Fraud
and Perjury, in the same manner as the nearest of kin confirming, will in the
like case, loss not only the Office but the Benefit competent to him, as
nearest of Kin, as to that which is omitted, or male Appretiate.

Operae.
IN Materia Operarum Consuetudo and praescriptio multum consideratur. Jus
Fluviatile p. 121. n. 3.

Order of Discussing.
WHen a Defunct does oblige him and his Heirs, renuncing the order of
Discussing, Quaeritur, will the Heir of Line be liable to Relieve the Heirs of
Tailie and Provision, as to such Debts for which by the Law he should have been
first Discust?

P.
Pactis Privatorum non Derogatur Juri Communi.
THat Law That Pactis privatorum non derogatur juri Communi what way it is to
be understood? And if it be only as to Solemnities, or Formalities provided by
Law, and not when the Law provides any benefit in favors of a person, as a
Communion in favors of a Husband and Wife; or Courtesy or Terce, or such like?

The Prince, and under him the Judge, and in special (...) (sed quis custodiet
ipsum Custodem) the Lords of Session, have not a Legislative Power: And when
there occurres a Case not formerly decyded, and the best governed Nations do
not agree anent the Point in question; some being for the Affirmative, some for
the Negative; and upon probable Reasons on both sides, sustinendum Judicium:
Or, if the Question be of an Exception from a general Rule; the Rule is to be
stuck to, until there be a Law to the contrare; as in that case, whether Minors
should be debarred from the Remedy of Restitution, by their Oath; conform to
the Novel sacramenta puberum: Which in effect is to make a new Law.

Parliament.
IF Reductions may be pursued summarly before the Parliament in prima
instantia? It is thought, that although when my Lord Lauderdale was
Commissioner, that was done, in the Case of the Lord Forrester against General
Ruthven's Relict; and at the instance of the Lord Dundie against Pittaro; And
there is now a Complaint at the instance of Edzel against The Earl of Crawfurd
for reducing the said Earl his Title: yet such Processes would not be sustained
before the Parliament, If it were represented, That by Diverse ancient Laws,
and for great Reasons it is provided, that all Complaints in civilibus should
be first pursued before the Judge Ordinary.

Passing from a Right.
IF a Tacksman of Teinds having a Tack yet to run, take another Tack of the
said Teinds: Will he be thought to pass from the former? Lauderdale contra
Tweeddale.

Patents of Honor.
PAtents of Honor being granted to a Person, and his Heirs Male of his Body;
Quaeritur; 1mo Whether the appearand Heir may sit in Parliament and not be
Liable as Behaving? It is thought, (whatever may be pretended as to Custom) in
strict Law he should be liable; seeing in General, the owning an Heretable
Interest is aditio passive, and gestio pro haerede. 2do. Quaeritur If a Patent
and Title thereby, may be resigned as feudum for a new Patent to the Resigner
and other Heirs than in the former? Cogitandum. If it may be resigned,
Quaeritur, If the Resigner must be first served Heir? Cogitandum.

If a Nobleman having a Patent to him and the Heirs Male of his Body, should
thereafter resign his Title and obtain a new Patent to him and his Heirs Male
of his Body, which failiening to his eldest Heir Female without Division: And
the Heirs Male should faill; may a Nobleman who in the interim has got his
Title betwixt the first and second Patent; claim place before the Heirs Female,
as having Right by the second Patent, being before theirs: Or if the Heirs
Female will have place as representing their Predecessor, who had Place by the
first Patent, seeing the second is but a Continueing of the first in favors of
him who got it, with an alteration only as to his Representatives: And they who
had posterior Patents were not concerned who should represent him; and it was
uncertain whether the first Heirs should faill; so that they might have any
prejudice by the change Roxburgh contra Lothian.

Pecunia Pupillaris.
IF a Tutor uplift the Maills and Duties of Lands, a quo Tempore will he be
liable to stock the same, so that the Pupils Means be not unprofitable? Or if
this be not Casus arbitrarius, according to the variety of Circumstances?
Balhousy and the Tutor of Dumb James Hay.

If a Tutor be not liable for Annualrents, and when should they be stocked?

Pensions granted by the King.
QVaeritur, Seeing Pensions granted by private Persons are binding, and are a
Ground of Action; Whether Payment of Pensions granted by his Majesty may be
denied? And if not, What Remedy is competent?

Personalis Actus.
ACtus, in quo est apposita dictio Ipsi, in contractibus non stat restrictive,
sed tantum demonstrative; ideoque non impedit transmissionem; and Contractus
non obstante dictione ipsi ad haeredes transeunt, quia quilibet praesumitur suo
haeredi ut sibi prospicere; quae praesumptio non tollitur ex dictione sibi,
quia est violenta and procedit ex visceribus naturalibus, contrariam
probationem non admittentibus.

Si in alia Dispositione sit simplex concessio, Dictio sibi non restringit: and
adjectio personae in concessione de sua natura ad haeredes transitoria non
facit quod concessio sit personalis, and non transitoria.

Secus est in concessione non transitoria, puta ubi electa est industria
personae: vel in actu personae cohaerente. These. Besoldi, in litera I. 10.
verbo Ihme. p. 425.

Pignora.
SErvi Aratores and Boves Aratorii, and Instrumenta rustica pignori haud
capiuntur, l. 7. Cod. quae res pignori obligari, etc.

In obligatione generali rerum quas quis habuit aut habiturus est, non
continentur quae verisimile est quemquam specialiter obligaturum non fuisse, ut
supellex quam quis habet in usu quotidiano and necessario, vel quae ad
affectionem ejus pertinet.

Invecta in praedium urbanum tacit oppignorantur; secus in praediis rusticis
quia sufficit in iis fructus teneri, Heringius de molendinis q. 28 n 12 ad 18
inclusive.

Studiosorum supellex libraria sub tacita illa oppignoratione non venit.
Ibidem.

Ea tantum invecta censentur obligata, quae illata sunt ut perpetuo ibi sint;
ideo nomina and instrumenta obligationum and merces illatae ut venderentur haud
veniunt. Ibidem 20.

Creditor jure civili poterat pignus alienare, etiamsi pactum non intervenerit;
praevia tamen denunciatione ut debita solvat; and licet pignus alienare,
cessante debitore in solutionem per biennium post denunciationem. Perez. Lib.
2. Tit. 8.

Plenishing; If a Wife be provided to a part of it?
BY Contract of Marriage, a Wife is provided, in satisfaction of Terce, Third
or other part of Movables, except the half of the Plenishing of the House the
time of the Husbands Decease, Whereto it is provided she shall have Right.
Quaeritur, If there be no Free Gear, will the Heir be obliged to free the half
of the Plenishing? Ratio Dubitandi. The Contract bears she should have Right;
and she is in the same case as if her Husband had disponed for an Onerous Cause
the Plenishing he should have the time of his Decease: And on the other part,
it seems this Provision should be understood Conditionaliter, if there be free
Goods: And the Clause being an Exception from a Renunciation, both the
Renunciation and Exception from it, ought to be of the Regula, and of that
which would belong to her, if she were not excluded, which could only be the
free Gear.

If the clauses do not bear besides the Heirship, Quaeritur. If she will have
Right to the plenishing, without Deduction of the Heirship? Eadem Ratio
Dubitandi.

Possessor.
PRocessum ligitiosae possessionis, Hispani Interim, Galli Recredentiam, Belgi
Provisionale remedium, alii processum informativum appellare solent, Budaeus
litem vindiciariam. These. Bes. in Litera I. 29. verbo interim mittel.

Possessor bonae fidei fructus consumptos suos facit absolute, extantes vero
Dominocedunt.

Possessor vero malae fidei, nec consumptos nec extantes suos facit, sed
Dominus extantes vindicat; consumptos vero condicit condictione sine causa.
Perez. lib. 2, Tit. 5.

Poinding of the Ground.
A Lord of Erection having Disponed Teinds, and the Reddendo bearing a Sum to
be paid for a proportional relief of the blensh duty payable by the Lord of
Erection; and certain Bolls of Victual to be paid also for his relief to the
Minister: Quaeritur, Will the Minister have action for poinding the ground?
2do. What will the Superiors poinding the Ground import?

A Decree of Poinding the Ground being got against the Heretor for the time
and the Tennants: Quaeritur, If after the Death of the Heretor the Lands may be
comprysed for the Bygones from the Appearand Heir, without a Decree of
transferring, or a new Decree: Answer. It is thought, there is no need of any
other Decree; the Decree being Really founded; which may be recovered against
an Appearand Heir, and put in Execution by Comprysing, or poinding against him.

Prerogative
IF the Question betwixt Roxburgh, and Lothian, should be determined with
respect to his Majesty's Prerogative being the Fountain of Honor? It is
thought, that His Majesty's Concessions, whatever the Subject be, should be
judged Jure communi; And that Jus quaesitum, whether as to Honor and
precedence or any thing else, cannot be taken away upon any such pretense. The
Prerogative is instar littoris which is defined quo fluctus Hybernus exaestuat:
So that as the Sea does not go beyond the Shore when the Sea is most full; so
the Prerogative and Plenitudo Potestatis does never go beyond Law, which is a
great Littus and Boundary of just Power.

The Royal Prerogative is acknowledged and asserted by diverse Laws and Acts of
Parliament of this Kingdom; But how far the Extent of the same may reach, is a
point of State and Policy of the highest nature and importance, and not to be
defined by the Opinions of Lawyers, but by the Highest and Legislative
Authority.

The Royal Prerogative is not only asserted in the general by the Laws of the
Kingdom; but diverse and great Powers Rights and Privileges belonging thereto,
are in special declared by diverse Acts of Parliament; both in Relation to the
Government, and in Relation to His Majesty's Interest, and Questions, and
Causes, betwixt Him and His Subjects; As the Power of Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments; The Choising and Appointing Officers of State, and Commissioners
and Judges; To make War and Peace; And that there can be no Meetings to Treat
or determine in Matters of State without His Majesty's Authority and Warrant:
And that upon no pretense there can be any Rising in Arms without His Warrant;
And His Right to Custums; And Power to grant Remissions for the Highest Crimes:
And that the Negligence of His Officers cannot prejudge Him. And albeit by the
Common Law the Eldest Superior is preferable, yet when Lands are holden of
diverse Superiors Ward, the Marriage of the Vassal, which otherwise would
belong to the Eldest Superior, does pertain to the King, tho as to the Vassal
his latest Superior: And by custom, albeit the going to a Miln, for never so
long a time, being facultatis, does not import Servitude without a special
Astriction, yet the repairing to His Majesty's Milns, by the space of Forty
Years, does induce a Servitude, without any other constitution: As to which and
other points of the Prerogative, explained by Law and Custom, Lawyers may and
ought to give their Opinions in Law.

But as to Lawyers and Juris-consults, it is said, Turpe est sine lege loqui,
and ubi leges silent they cannot but be silent: And the Laws of Scotland, which
ought to warrant the Resolutions and the Opinions of Lawyers, in Questions
concerning the State and Government, are only the Statutory Law and Acts of
Parliament, and the common Law and custom and undeniable practique of the
Kingdom.

As to the Civil Law of the Romans; it was only the Municipal Law of that
People; And by reason of the great Equity of it, in Questions de Jure privato,
tho it has not the force of Law with us; yet it is of great Authority and use
in cases not determined either by statute or custom; But, as to Questions of
State and Government, the Civil Law is of no use with us; in respect the Laws
of all Nations, concerning their State and Government, are only Municipal; and
the Constitution of the Respective States does vary both from that of the
Romans; and for the most part each from another: So that any Questions,
concerning the same, cannot be solidely or warrantably Answered, upon
Principles or Reasons brought from any Law, but the constitution of the
Government and Laws and Customs of the Nation and Kingdom concerned.

It is conceaved, That when the Opinion of Lawyers is asked, Res should be
integra, and they should be at liberty to give their Opinion freely and without
prejudice, which they cannot do after His Majesty has any way predetermined
them, by declaring his own Royal Will and Pleasure.

As to that Question, What can be said, in Law, in defense of these who have
acted contrary to Law, in Obedience to His Majesty, or upon his Royal
Dispensation; if they should be questioned in the time of Succeeding Kings?

It is Answered, That, upon the Grounds foresaid, nothing can be said
positively to secure them, from Question, either by our Law or Custom; The said
case being not mentioned nor determined by either: But it is to be thought and
presumed, that His Majesty's Prerogative being asserted by the Laws foresaid,
and His Majesty's owning that power to Command and Dispense as a part of His
Prerogative, and they conceiving that it was not their duty to dispute His
Majesty's Power; Succeeding Princes will not think it their interest, to be
severe against any person, for exceeding in Obedience to their Royal
Predecessors.

Prescription.
IF a Feu-Charter of Kirklands, not confirmed by the King or Pope, with Seasins
thereupon, may be a Title to warrant Prescription?

Temporary Prescriptions, as in case of House-Mails, Servants Fies, Ejections,
etc. If they run against Minors?

The Vassal retouring his Lands to be in Non-entry Fourscore Years, Quaeritur,
If he may object Prescription quoad the retoured Non-entry Duties? Seeing after
the Years of prescription, he confesses the same to be due: and Temporalia ad
agendum sunt Perpetua ad excipiendum?

If His Majesty's annexed Property does prescrive?

If Prescription run, against these who were Forefaulted by the Usurper, Qui
non valebant agere: Found for the Negative, Lauderdale contra Tweeddale; That
Lauderdale his Father and Good-Sire non valebant agere, Because upon his
Fathers Resignation Queen Ann was Infeft in Liferent, and might have excluded
them during her Lifetime: and though he might have intented a Declarator; yet
that being such an Action, as could not bring him to possession, he was not
obliged to intent it: This Reason appears not to be without some Question,
seeing if there were a Liferenter and Fiar, and the Fiar should not prevail with
the Liferenter to join in an Action for interrupting prescription, the Fiar
should be without remedy if he would not interrupt by Declarator: and if a
Declarator do interrupt, it cannot be said that non valebat agere. 2do. A
Declarator would have brought the Lord Thirlestoun to Civil possession, at
least so far as it would have been declared, that the Queens possession was
his, and by virtue of the Right thereof he was Fiar: And if the Queen would not
own the possession to have been by that Right, she should have been forced to
remove: So that by that Action they might have attained natural possession.

Before the Act of Parliament 1621. anent Comprysings, the Legal ran against
Minors; which argues, that the Temporary Prescriptions of Spuilies, for
House-Mails, Removings etc. run against Minors.

If there be a difference betwixt the time of prescription in England and
Scotland? Whether is prescription inter decisoria?

Item, If Prelates, provided before the Act of Parliament 1585. (against
Dilapidations) may notwithstanding thereof set Tacks without hazard? Seeing the
Act seems to militate only as to persons provided thereafter.

If a Feu-set contrary to the said Act against Dilapidations, may be a ground
of Prescription? Ratio Dubitandi, That by the said Act, the Patrimony of the
Prelates is extra Commercium, and is of the nature of the annexed property and
quod non est alienabile non est praescriptibile. Vide, Dilapidation in litera D.

If in all cases when an Obligement or Interest and Right is in the Defenders
Right, whereby he bruiks, may he allege Prescription, as he cannot do in the
case of Reversion, there being Eadem Ratio?

What is the Reason, that Reversions Registrate do not prescribe? Seeing Bonds
Registrate do notwithstanding prescrive.

If a Faculty granted to a Person as v. g. to the Disponer of Lands, and a
power to Dispone the samen, or to Redeem upon a penny, does prescrive being
granted apart?

If, Prescription being alleged against a Bond, it be Relevant to reply and to
offer to prove by the Excipients Oath, that to his knowledge the the Debt is
due, and true, and not satisfied?

If a Reversion be granted only for five Years, Quaeritur, If in that case it
prescribes against Minors? Vide de Retractibus Gentilitiis, if they prescribe
against Minors?

If a Minor acquire Right to a Comprysing near expired, singulari titulo, will
the Reversion be prorogate? and if there be a difference betwixt a Minor
succeeding as Heir, or otherways Singulari Titulo?

Prescription against the King.
THE Act of Parliament 1617. Militateth against the King, as to real Actions;
when the Defender has prescribed a Right by possession founded upon the Rights
therein mentioned; as appears by the express words and the ground of that
Prescrption, being not so much odium and negligentia non petentis as favor
possidentis, which is the same as to the King as to another: But in that part
of the Act anent, the prescription of Personal Actions, there is no mention of
the King, and he cannot be said to be negligent; and it is declared by Act of
Parliament, that the negligence of his Officers shall not prejudge him.
Quaeritur therefore, if Prescription in that case be competent against the King?

Verba semper and quandocunque designant temporis infinitatem: and si in pacto
de retrovendendo adjiciatur haec clausula, ut quandocunque venditor and ejus
haeredes velint pretium offerre, Praedium recipere possint, non obstante
triginta annorum praescriptione, Jus redimendi semper and in perpetuum
competit; nisi possiderit Emptor pro suo; vel contradixerit Reluitioni: ab eo
enim tempore incipit praescriptio: In Contractibus enim nullum verbum debet
esse otiosum, verba autem quandocunque etc. essent otiosa si non operarentur.
These. Bes. litera I. verbo 5. Je und allwegen p. 423. and 424.

Princeps potest privato privilegium concedere, ut ipse solus in aliqua part
maris aut fluminis publici piscari possit; aliosque ne id faciant prohibere:
Loca publica, and quae Jure Gentium communia sunt, praescribi possunt tanto
tempore cujus initii memoria non existat: praescriptio enim immemorialis vim
habet privilegii seu Tituli, and potius praesumpta concessio quam praescriptio
dicitur; and praesumptio ex ea exsurgens est Juris and de Jure, nec admittit
probationem in contrarium. Jus Flaviatile. p. 260. n. 261.

"Praescriptio impium praesidium Novel. 9.

Respublica and municipium non restituitur adversus praescriptiones temporales;
quae Jure veteri, respuebant restitutionem. vide Frisch. Tom. 2. Exercitat. 2.
n. 58. and sequent.

Jure Novel: praescribitur contra Rempublicam and Civitatem, Triginta vel
quadraginta ann. ibidem. n. 63.

Praescriptio Conventionalis a Defuncto coepta currit contra Rempublicam quae
ei successit, Ibidem. n. 65.

In Praescriptione, Jure Civili bona fides requiritur ab initio, nec desinet
usucapiens acquirere licet mala fides superveniat: Jure autem Canonico bona
fides requiritur toto tempore.

Requiritur etiam Titulus, id est, justa causa possessionis and habilis ad
transferendum Dominium.

Res furtivae and vi possessae Jure Civili usucapi nequeunt. Perez. Instit.
Tit. 10.

Nihil enim operatur bona fides aut Titulus propter vitium, nisi vitio purgato,
nempe re furtiva reversa in potestatem Domini.

Servus Fugitivus non usucapitur, quia fugiendo sui furtum facere dicitur.

Si quis mala fide, absente forte Domino vel negligente aut eo decedente sine
successore, fundum alienum possederit and vendiderit Emptori bonae fidei, non
obstat usucapioni vitium quasi rei furtivae; non enim fundi locive furtum
committitur, aut rerum immobilium facilis est interversio.

Res Fisci usucapi non possunt, quia Juris publici sunt: bona autem vacantia
usucapiuntur quae haeredem non habent, si antequam a Fisco occupentur ab alio
possideantur; quia nondum Fisco denunciata, non sunt Fisci, sed manent in
Commercio.

Presentation upon Forefaulture.
QVaeritur, If a Composition be due to the Superior for receiving a Vassal,
presented by the King upon a Forefaulture? It is thought, That it is not due;
seeing he is obliged to receive him; and the Lands belonging to the King by the
Forefaulture, he does a Favor to the Superior by presenting one in his place.

The King having presented a Vassal to the immediate Superior, some years after
the Forefaulture of the former Vassal, Quaeritur, Whether the Person presented
will have Right to the Duties become due since the Forefaulture, or if the same
will belong to the Superior? Cogitandum. But it seems, that the King having no
Right to the Lands, which he cannot hold of a Subject, but having only Right to
present a Vassal in the interim, the Duties should belong to the Superior,
seeing the Property belongs to no Person; And the Superiority draws unto it the
Right of Property and the Superior not having a Vassal ought to have the duties
of the Lands: Otherwise if the King should not present for many years he should
want the Fruits and Benefit of his Superiority: And it is not his fault that he
wants a Vassal, seeing hardly he could force the King to present. The Lord
Tarras.

Process against Strangers.
IF a French Man or Hollander v. g. should retire out of France or Holland
hither, and should be Pursued in this Kingdom at the instance of these who have
contracted with him in the Place where he was, Quaeritur, If Process should be
Sustained against him here? And if it should, according to what Law should he
be Judged? Seeing our Judges are not presumed nor obliged to know any other Law
but our own and the civil Law. Answer. They ought to have Process according to
the Law of the Place where they Contracted, which may be known upon a
Commission.

Seeing Mobilia and Immobilia habent situm viz. illa fixum, ista vagum, Quid
juris as to nomina Debitorum, utrum sequuntur personam Debitoris an Creditoris?
So that a Debt due by a Scotsman to a Stranger should be considered as a Scots
interest and res Scotica; and a Testament concerning the same should be
confirmed in Scotland.

Quid Juris as to annualrents, when the Laws of the Place where the Creditor
lives and our Laws do vary?

Quid Juris, When the Debtor being a Scotsman and having granted Bond in
Scotland, has retired elsewhere, both as to the effect of confirmation and
Annualrent whether Lawful or no Lawful? And if the Annualrent should be ever
considered with respect to the Place, where the Debtor was Incola the time of
the contracting?

Procuratories of Resignation.
IF Procuratories of Resignation, granted by Magistrates, Expire by the decease
of the granters?

Promise to Dispone, not in writ.
IF any Person or their Heirs may be pursued, for implement of a promise to
dispone Lands and Heretages; it being referred to the Oath of the Person that
made the Promise (or of his Heir if he be deceased) that such a Promise was
made? Answer. That it is thought, that as when upon a Treaty and Agreement
Writs are drawn, Parties may Resile, before Writs be subscribed; There is
eadem, if not major Ratio in Promises, which cannot be perfected but in Write,
Et nihil actum creditur, dum quid supersit agendum, nisi accedit Juramentum,
Vide Emphyteosis, and what the Lawyers say in such Cases, where Write is
necessary.

Protections.
IF Persons cited to appear before the Justice or Council, or imprisoned by
order of the Justice or Council, may be taken or arrested upon Caption or
otherwise, for a Civil Debt, though they have not Protections?

Provision in favors of Bairns.
IT was provided by Contract of Marriage, that the Conquest should be employed
upon Rights to the Husband and Wife in Conjunct Fee, and to the Bairns of the
Marriage in Fee, Quaeritur, If the Husband, having acquired a considerable
Estate, may he advantage his Heir or any other of the Children, and give a
greater Proportion to them than the rest? Or will the Conquest belong to all
equally? Ratio Dubitandi, It were hard that the Father should not have power to
divide his Estate amongst his Children, and in Consideration of it to oblige
them to be dutyful. On the other part, the provision being in favors of the
Children which is nomen collectivum and universale, indefinitum aequipollet
universali. 2do. If that Power were allowed to a Father, it may be abused; and
intending to marry again, he may deal with one of his Children, and giving more
nor his Proportion, he may by transaction settle all the Conquest on him; and
take a great part of it back from him in prejudice of the other Children. 3tio.
By that Provision there is a Legitime settled upon the Children; and as the
Father cannot prejudge them of that which is given them by Law, but the
Bairns-part must divide equally, so he cannot prejudge them of that Bairns-part
provided by Contract; unless by the same, the Father had that arbitrium and
Power given to him, as sometimes it is.

Provision in Bonds.
A Bond of provision being granted by a Brother to a Sister, for a Sum to be
paid to her at the next Term after the Bond, without mention of Heirs or
Assigneys, but with a Provision, that if she should decease unmarried it should
return to the Granter and his Heirs; Quaeritur, If, she having assigned the
Bond, the Assigneys will have Right, albeit she deceased unmarried? And what
the import of the said provision is, whether a Substitution, or a Quality of
the Fee and a fidei commissum, that she should not assign but with the burden
of it? Ancrum younger contra Mangertoun.

Provisions in Charters.
IF Lands be disponed to be holden of the Disponer, with a Provision that if
the Vassal be year and day at the Horn, his Liferent shall not pertain to the
Disponer; but (now as then, and then as now) shall be given and belong to
himself. Quaeritur, Quid Juris? Ratio Dubitandi, Dolus futurus non potest
remitti; and being pactum contra legem made to fright from Disobedience and
Rebellion, the Rebel ought not to have the advantage of it: Nor the Superior,
because remisit; and quod aufertur indigno, cedit Fisco.

If such Pactions will bind singular Successors in the Superiority? Ratio
Dubitandi, That they can be in no better case, than their Author; and these
Pactions are in rem Active and Passive: And the Superiority being only by the
Disposition and Infeftment thereupon, it is qualified with the said Provision,
and cannot be transmitted otherwise than as it is Jus affectum and limitatum.

Provisions in Contracts.
A Father being obliged by Contract of Marriage, to employ a Sum to himself and
his Wife in Liferent only, and his Bairns of that Marriage in Fee; which
failiening to his Heirs and Assigneys: If Infeftment should be taken in these
Terms, whether is the Father Fiar, so as the Bairns could not succeed but as
Heirs of Provision to him. Mr Andrew Marjorie-banks Contract of Marriage.

If the Fee were secured to the Children, By and Infeftment to a Trustee to the
behoof of the Children; if it be the Fee of all his Estate, and being a
merchant, and thereafter People contracting with him as a Person of a visible
Estate, would the Creditors be prejudged by such Provisions in a Contract, not
public by Infeftment upon it, or Inhibition? The same case.

Provisions in favors of Daughters.
BY Contract of Marriage it is provided, that in respect the Estate was
Entailed, The Daughters should be provided, If there be one, to 50000 Merks; if
two to 60000: whereof to the eldest 37000 Merks and to the other the remainder;
to be paid at their age of sixteen years or their Marriage. Quaeritur, The
Father having survived, and there being two Daughters of the Marriage at their
Mothers Decease, of which the Elder died not long after; long before the age
foresaid. 1mo. Will the younger surviving get 50000 Merks, being now the only
Daughter of the Marriage? 2do If at least she will have the portion of the
elder being 37000 Merks? 3tio. If her Sisters Portion will accresce to her as
nearest of Kin? 4to. If the said Provisions be conditional, viz. If they Marry
or attain to sixteen Years? 5to. If such Provisions be personal? at least so
far, as if after the Term they be not assigned and the Daughters die, they will
not transmit, there being no mention of Heirs? 6to. The said Sums not being due
upon account of Creditum, but of Provision for a Livelihood, that they may be
married, or at least have a Competency to live upon; Quando Dies cedit? Whether
after dissolution of the Marriage, or when they attain to the Age foresaid?
Scot younger of Ancrum.

Publica.
COnfirmatio munerum publicorum hodie a Principe successore petitur; sed si
denegaretur injuria fieret a Principe. Jus Fluviat.

Publicum seu publica utilitas varijs modis dicitur, viz. 1mo. Cum in universum
and particulariter Commodum affertur, quod in Sacris, Sacerdotibus, and
Magistratibus, consistit. 2. quae in universum conducit, non autem singulis; ut
quoties de locupletando fisco agitur. 3. Quae privata proprie, licet ex ea
consequatur publica utilitas; ut cum dicimus, Tutelam esse munus publicum, and
Testamenti factionem esse juris publici. Hering. de molend. Quest. 15. n. 14.

Pupils.
IF in Law Pupils who have neither Velle nor Nolle, may be Charged and
Denounced?

Q
Quartering.
IF there may be Quartering for Impositions laid on by the Major part of the
Shire, though there were ground for the same? Answer, Negative, Seeing
Quartering is Remedium Extraordinarium and Militare, and cannot be used but
where there is a Law to warrant the same: But in such Cases, if there be any
thing done behoovefully for the Shire, They who are refractory may be pursued
action negotiorum gestorum, before the Sheriff or other Judicatories, and upon
Decreets the ordinar Execution may follow.

Quorum.
IN the case of Mr. John Bayne of Pitcairly mentioned in the Title. Dispositio
collata in arbitrium alterius in litera D. The Friends being so named that the
major part should have power to determine; There being Three of Ten. viz. The
Chancellor, Sir John Nisbet, and Tarbat, sine quibus non, and in case of any of
their decease, Sir William Bruce. Quaeritur, If all the three sine quibus non
must consent? Or if it be necessar only that there should be a Quorum of the
Meeting? Ratio Dubitandi, His nameing Three sine quibus non, appears to be upon
that account, because two might not agree. 2do. It were hard, if all the
Friends should agree but one of the sine quibus non, It should be in his power
to evacuate the Defuncts Will and Design. 3tio. When a Commission is given to
Three Persons to be Judges or Arbitrators, they must all be present, and yet if
two agree though the third dissent, their sentence will be valid.

If any one of the Quorum, sine quibus non, should settle with the Heirs, of
design to question the Defuncts Deed. Quaeritur, If he (as having Forefaulted
his Trust) should be in the same case as if he were Dead?

R.
Ratihabitio.
RAtihabitio retrotrahitur ad initium, and Mandato comparatur.

Jus Ratium.
JVs Grutiae vel Ratium (Flotrecht) jus, viz. Traducendi ligna super flumine ad
Regalia spectat. Jus Fluviat. p. 97. n. 11.

Jura Realia in Re and in Rem.
JVra Realia vel sunt in Re ipsa vel in Rem tantum: Jura autem ad rem interdum
sunt in rem, personalia tantum sed ad rem consequendam, ut Dispositiones,
Contractus, and Reversiones ubi non sunt Registratae.

Jura in Re and Terris sunt ea quae per Sasinam competunt (nulla enim Sasina
nulla Terra) scilicet jus Dominii (vel directi vel utilis) vulgo superioritatis
and proprietatis, Jus ususfructus and conjunctae infeodationis, Jus Hypothecae
seu impignorationis vulgo Wadsets, Viduarum Triens seu Tertia, Curialitas
Scotiae indulta Maritis conjugibus, si Vxor in Terris successor aut Haeres and
prolem enixa fuerit, licet haud vitalis statim moriatur: ea enim Jura Viduis
tam marito quam conjugi competunt, ex sasinis and in terris in quibus alteruter
obiit vestitus and sasitus; ut ex Brevipatet.

Jura autem Reversionis and Regressus moribus nostris Realia sunt and in Rem;
ut adversus non tantum haeredes sed singulares successores efficacia sint;
idque hand sua natura, cum re ipsa sint tantum personalia pacta de
retrovendendo; sed moribus nostris ubi rite Registrata sunt, etiam adversus
emptores, aut alios singulares successores, rata and valida habentur; cum
insinuata iis innotescant aut sciri possunt.

Nec minus servitutes praediorum, and conductiones seu assedationes, Jura
Realia and in Rem sunt sine sasina, si ante venditionem possessio accedat.

Rebellion.
A Bond being Assigned by a Rebel and the Assignation not intimate before the
Rebellion. Quaeritur, Whether the Assigney, or the Donator will be preferred?
Ratio Dubitandi, That the Assignation denudes the Cedent, and the Intimation is
not necessary but to exclude another Assigney: And the Rebel by his Rebellion
does not transmit but amitts and Forefaults any Right that he has, which being
in nullius bonis is Domini Regis; whereas it cannot be said that the Bond was
in nullius bonis after the Assignation, seeing it is then in bonis Cessionarii.

Whether the Rebels Goods ought to be Liable to Creditors?
Seeing Bona are understood Debitis deductis, and by the custom of all Nations
when they are confiscate Transeunt cum sua causa, and with the burden of Debts,
what can be thought the reason that it is otherwise with us? Answer, It is
thought, that seeing Lands when they are Forefaulted either to the King, or to
the Superior, they return in the same manner and ut optima maxima as they were
given, that condition being employed in all Rights of Lands that the Vassal
should be faithful and Loyal. It has been thought (but upon mistake) That
Movables and other personal Estate should be confiscate in the same manner,
without respect to Debts, whereas there is Dispar Ratio; Lands, as said is,
being given by the Superior with that quality, whereas personal Interests are
simply allodial, and ought to be forthcoming to Creditors; who, though they
have not a Right to the same, yet have that Interest, that they are the Subject
of Execution: and it appears to be unjust, and to obstruct Trade, if it should
be otherways.

Recognition.
LAnds being Wadset for a Sum, far below the value of the half, with a
Back-tack. Quaeritur, if there be ground for Recognition, if the Land hold
Ward? Ratio Dubitandi, The whole Lands are Wadset.

If Infeftments of Warrandice be Ground of Recognition?

A Vassal holding Ward, gives a Charter to his Subvassal or his singular
successor upon Resignation, with a Novo damus, Quaeritur, If the Novodamus will
import a Recognition?

A Gift of Recognition being given of certain Lands, whereupon the Donator is
Infeft; and thereafter another Gift being given of the same in favors of of
another person, who is also Infeft after the former Donator, but preveens by
obtaining a Declarator upon his Gift; the former not being declared: Quaeritur,
Which of the Donators will be preferred? Ratio Dubitandi, That the first
Infeftment seems to be preferable, the Superior being thereby denuded: And on
the other part, when Casualities and Escheats are Disponed, which fall ex
delicto (as the case of Escheats by Horning) There is no consummate Right
before Declarator.

Whether an Appearand Heir if he Dispone, and Infeftment follow, the Lands will
recognosce? Ratio Dubitandi, Quod nullum est, nullum sortitur effectum: And not
being Infeft he cannot give any effectual Right.

Minors Disponing Ward Lands, Quaeritur, If they may be Reponed against
Recognition? Ratio Dubitandi, They ought not to Reponed against Delicta, after
they are puberes and Doli capaces: And such Deeds importing Recognition, are
Crimina and Delicta feudalia.

A Person being Infeft in Ward Lands, with a Faculty and Power to the Disponer
to Redeem and Dispone upon payment of a penny, Quaeritur, If the Disponer make
use of that Power and do Dispone, and if an Infeftment without consent of the
Superior be taken, whether there be Locus Recognitioni? Ratio Dubitandi, That
he is not Vassal; and the Superior has not consented that he should have, and
use that Power.

Lands holden Ward being Wadset for a Sum far beneath the value of the Lands
with a Back-Tack, Quaeritur, If there be place for Recognition, seeing it is
intended only, that the Creditor should be secured, and the Back-Tack Duty is
within the half of the Rent? Answer. It is thought, notwithstanding, that there
is ground for Recognition; seeing the whole property is Disponed, and the Vassal
has only a Superiority, and is a Tennant only of the Property? And beside, the
Superior has that prejudice, that if his Vassal be Year and Day at the Horn,
the Liferent of the Property will not belong to him, but only the Liferent of
what is payable to his Vassal by the Wadsetter by the Reddendo of the Wadset
Right: and the Liferent of the Back-Tack will fall to the King, and the Vassal
may thereafter Discharge both the Back-Tack and the Reversion, so that the
Subvassal would have Right to the hail property without the Superiors Consent.

Redemption Heretable or Moveable.
QVaeritur, If Lands being Redeemable and an order used, will the Sum consigned
belong to the Heir or Executor? Ratio Dubitandi, Surrogatum sapit naturam
surrogati, and the Defunct intended that the said Sum should be Heretable being
fixed upon Land, and the Debtor had no power to alter the Defuncts Intention,
as to the condition of any part of his Estate. It is otherwise, when the same
is consigned, in Obedience to a premonition at the instance of a Creditor.
Vide. Executry quaest. 2da. in litera E.

If a Declarator of Redemption does denude the Wadsetter, so that the Superior
without any further Deed, either of Renounciation or Resignation, may Infeft
the Granter of the Wadset?

If the Superior has received the Wadsetter, and has given him a Charter
bearing the Lands to be Redeemable, will he be obliged upon Redemption to
Re-enter the Granter without a Regress? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Granting of
the Charter with that Quality seems to import a Regress. Answer. It is thought,
that it does not import a Regress; it being a Provision betwixt the Parties,
and to be understood Civiliter, that the Superior should not be obliged to
Re-enter the Debtor being once denuded, but upon such Terms as he shall think
fit, otherwise there should be no use for Letters of Regress.

Order of Redemption.
AN Order of Redemption being used, may the User pass from the same, the other
Party being unwilling?

An Order of Redemption being begun, by Premonition at a certain time to
receive the Money contained in the Reversion, and before the term the person
premonishing being deceased, Quaeritur, If his Heir being served before the
term, may prosecute and complete the order by Consignation? Ratio Dubitandi,
Premonition may seem to be personal. And e contra, the Heir is Eadem Persona,
so that the premonished is not concerned, whether he receive the Money from the
Person himself or his Representatives.

Reduction.
WHen a Right is reduced Ex capite Minoris Aetatis, or Circumvention, or upon
any other Ground, so that the Infeftment whereby the Disponer was disseased is
taken away; Quaeritur, If the Disponer must be re-seased? Ratio Dubitandi,
Fictione Juris By the Reduction he is reponed as if he had not been disseased:
And on the other part, Dissasina being facti, quod factum est fieri infectum
non potest: And when Wadsets are Redeemed, albeit the Right be loused and
extinct by a Decree equivalent to a Reduction, yet the Redeemer must be
reseased.

After Redemption, What way should the Redeemer be reseased? Whether upon the
Resignation of the Party infeft upon the Wadset; Or what other Way? Answer,
Wadsets were of old granted upon Reversions not contained in the Body of the
Right; and then the Disponer was in use to get a Regress, whereupon the
Superior did re-enter him; but now the Reversion being in the Body of the
Right, the Disponer is in the same case as if he had a Regress, and should be
infeft in the same manner: The Wadsetter being denuded by the Decree, he has
no Right in his Person to resign: and therefore it is thought, that the same
course should be taken, both in the case of Redemption and Reductions, as
formerly, when Regresses were in use.

Reduction Ex capite Fraudis.
IF a Reduction be pursued of the Right as Fraudulent, may not the Defender
allege, that the Disponer had Bona, either Movables or others equivalent to
the Debt, which may satisfy the same; and offer to satisfy the Pursuer upon an
Assignation of the Debt due to him; to the effect he may have Recourse against
the said other Estate of his Author? Answer. It is thought, the said Defenses
would be relevant, and Assignations could not be denied.

Infeftment after Reduction.
A Person having disponed Lands and resigned, and being so divested by Charter
and Seasine, If he should thereafter reduce the said Right; Quaeritur, what way
he shall be reseased, Seeing the Right was not Jus Nullum sed Annullandum: and
the Seasine and Resignation that divests is Factum quod non potest fieri
infectum?

Reduction Ex capite Metus.
QVaeritur, If Rights being made dolo vel metu, and upon these Heads or Ex
capite Lecti being reduceible; and such Actions being in rem, a singular
Successor acquireing a Right from the person liable to such actions will he be
in the same case as Persons acquireing from Confidents? Ratio Dubitandi, Acts
of Parliament are stricti Juris, and cannot be extended.

Reduction upon Minority.
IF Interlocutors in Jure against Minors may be reduced ex capite Minoris
aetatis and Laesion? Answer Negative, Seeing Minors cannot be restored, but
where either there is captio by the deed of another to their prejudice; or by
their own deed, through their Facility; or where there is an omission of
Defenses: But where Defenses are not omitted, and being proponed and advised
are repelled as not relevant, The Interlocutor, which is a Deed of the Judge,
cannot be reduced but upon iniquity.

Reduction Ex capite Lecti.
A Father having acquired a Right to his Eldest Son of certain Lands, reserving
his own Liferent, and a Power to dispone etiam in articulo mortis: And
thereafter having on Deathbed made use of the said Faculty, and disponed the
said Lands to a second Son, Quaeritur, If the said Right may be questioned by
Reduction Ex capite lecti, as being made in prejudice of the Heir? Ratio
Dubitandi, That the said Disponer could not do any Deed then, in prejudice of
his Heir; And on the other part, that the eldest Son, having accepted the said
Right with the said Provision, cannot question the same. 2do. The Heir is not
in this case to be considered as Heir, but as quilibet, Seeing he is not in the
case of an Heir succeding in a Right as Heir, seeing the Right was not in the
Person of his Father; and he himself was Fiar with the quality forsaid. 3tio
The Law of the Majesty is only in the case of Rights granted to a Person and
his Heirs simply; and the reason of the Law is express, that the Defunct, when
he was in health having had no thought to dispose of his Heretage, when he
grants Rights on Deathbed of the same, is presumed to have been imposed upon,
or that the said Rights on Deathbed were Elicite, or granted by him in Delirio
and fervore passionis instantis: Whereas the said Faculty, being reserved in
the Right, argues the Fathers intention ab initio if he should think fit even
then etiam in articulo, being sedati animi: Nevertheless the said Right was
reduced. Davison contra Davison. November 1687.

Re-entry after Redemption.
IF Wadset Lands be holden of the Superior, and the Reversion be contained in
the Charter; If the said Reversion be not equivalent to a Regress in respect of
the Superiors consent to the same? And what way the Vassal may be entered upon
the Redemption, especially if the Creditor be dead; and his appearand Heir will
not grant a Renunciation, and cannot resign? Answer. The Superior may be urged
to grant a Charter, making mention of the Wadset, Redemption, and Declarator,
and by Law that he is liable to re-enter, the Vassal having redeemed.

Regalia.
MAjora Regalia cohaerere dicuntur Imperatoris ossibus, ut ab eo avelli
nequeant.

Imperator alios sibi assumere potest in partem Solicitudinis, non vero in
plenitudinem Potestatis, quae omnem respuit Divisionem; and quasi Sanctum
Sanctorum est, in quod nemo admittitur nisi Princeps. Bes. These. in Litera K.
3. verbo Kayserliche, P. 450.

Integra Territoria, seu Provinciae, Ducatus, Principatus, Comitatus etc. cum
Jurisdictione territoriali in feudum Statibus Imperii, Ducibus, Principibus,
and Comitibus, and Civitatibus Imperialibus conceduntur: cujusmodi feuda
Imperii immediata, omnia regalia Jura and Emolumenta eo spectantia continent.
Frit: Jus Fluviat. P. 106. n 3.

Regalia non sunt Res, sed Jura Regi aut alii Superiorem non recognoscenti, in
signum supremae potestatis, necnon in praemium immensi laboris, quem pro
Imperio and Regimine sustinent, ad Rempublicam tuendam competentia. Heringius
de Molendinis. q. 9. n 47. and sequen.

Regality.
IF Rights of Regality imply and import a Right to Escheats upon Horning,
albeit they be not express thereanent? Ratio Dubitandi, It is the common
Opinion, that they are imported: Ex adverso, Gifts of Escheat upon Rebellion
are inter maxima regalia, and Rights of the same are stricti Juris. 2do. All
Letters of Horning bear, That the Rebels Goods should be escheat and brought in
for His Majesty's use. 3tio. Regalities being Privileges of Jurisdiction, and
Exemption from the ordinary Courts of Shires and Justices, carry only such
Escheats as are incident to Jurisdiction, as Mulcts and Fines of persons
unlawed, or sentenced in Courts of Regality. 4to. Declarator of Escheats cannot
be pursued before Regality-Courts but only before the Session. 5to. In other
Cases of Escheats, upon account of Crimes or Delicta, as for Theft, Slaughter,
etc; the Crime is not against the King directly, but consequentially, as
concerned in the Loss of a Subject: But Rebellion on Horning is directly
against the King. It will be fit to see the Right of an Ancient Regality.

Suppose that the Lord of Regality has Right to the Escheat upon Horning, will
he have Right only to such Movables, as are within his oun Territory, Or to all
the Rebel his Movables, even such as are within the Regalities of others?

If a Right of Regality may be granted, not only for Lands holden of the King,
but for such as hold of other Superiors? Ratio Dubitandi. That the King being
the Fountain of all Jurisdiction, in whatsomever Lands or Bounds, whether they
hold immediately of himself or not, may delegate and give thar Jurisdiction to
whom he pleases, whether the Lands hold of himself or not: And on the other
part, the said Jurisdiction being annexed to the Lands and given intuitu of the
same, it is hard that a Vassal should be above his Superior; and his Superior
being it may be Baron, a Right of a Barony-Jurisdiction cannot be given in
eadem Baronia; and far less of a higher Jurisdiction: And no Right can be
given to a Vassal in relation to his Lands, but such as would pertain to his
Superior, if the the Lands come in his hands by Non-entry or otherwise: And the
Right of Regality, which did never pertain to the Superior himself, cannot come
in his hands by Non-entry or otherwise.

Writs registrate, that cannot be found in the Register.
IF it be Evident that a Writ was put in the Register, and yet cannot be found,
neither Principal nor Booked, What Remedy?

Registratio.
APud nos Instrumenta aut Literae Registrari dicuntur, cum referuntur in
Regestum sive Librum publicorum, vel actorum vel monumentorum. Registratio
autem celebratur duobus modis, and ad diversos fines and effectus.

Ubi enim Instrumentum sive simples and (...), obligatio scilicet aut
Chirographum aut Dispositio; aut (...), contractus scilicet inter duos aut
plures, in librum actorum refertur; and plaerumque fit ut vim and instar
sententiae obtineat, and executionem paratam, virtute claulae Executivae and
Registrationis (ut vocant) in omnibus fere instrumentis solennibus, istis aut
similibus verbis. viz. Et pro majori securitate and nos (ii scilicet qui
obligantur) volumus and consentimus ut praesens Instrumentum inseratur and
Registretur in Libris Supremae aut inferioris Curiae competentis, ut ita
nanciscatur vim sententiae Dictorum Judicum, ut Literae Denunciationis and
Cornuationis (ut practici loquuntur) continentes spatium sex dierum and alia
necessaria (ut par est) pro ea exsequenda Dirigantur: and constituimus (...)
aut eorum quemlibet Procuratores nostros ad effectum praedictum.

Sic sine lite and processu, ad ultimam processus metam and exitum devenitur,
sententiam scilicet and Executionem omnimodam; fictione enim brevis manus omnia
ad processum and sententiam requisita quodammodo insunt: vice enim Citationis
(quae supervacua est ubi parts praesto sunt and consentiunt) procurator etiam
Rei intervenit, dicis causa, and consentit; Judex etiam secundum Instrumenta
exhibita per procuratorem, eoque postulante ut juxta Clausulam praedictam, ad
effectum praedictum, in Regestum referantur, decernit: actuarius etiam and
Clericus Curiae decretum seu Extractum expedit.

Illud autem tribus partibus constat. 1mo Enim praemittitur decretum eaque
sequitur forma, Edinburgi (...) die Mensis (...) 16 (...) Coram Dominis
Concilii and Sessionis comparuit, T. W. Advocatus procurator pro D. P. W.
Obligato in Chirographo infra scripto, and exhibuit dictum Chirographum,
petiitque illud inseri and Registrari in Libris Concilii and Sessionis ut vim
sententiae dictorum Dominorum obtineret ei interponendam; qua literae
Cornuationis and aliae necessariae desuper dirigantur modo inibi specificato;
quam postulationem dicti Domini Rationi consonam Judicarunt, ideoque ordinavere
and ordinant Dictum Chirographum inseri and Registrari in libris dictae curiae,
and decrevere illud obtinere vim sententiae ipsorum, and Literas Cornuationis
and alias necessarias inde dirigi modo infra-scripto. 2do. Subjungitur Tenor
ipsius Chirographi. 3tio. Sequitur Clausula ista viz. Extractum de libro
actorum per me. viz. Vel Dominum Rotulorum Clericum Registri, vel ejus
Deputatum Clericum, qui subscribit nomen suum.

Instrumento autem Registrato, autographum seu originale a Clerico retinetur in
publica custodia; Exemplari (ut superius diximus) Extracto and Creditori dato,
ex quo executio sequitur tam realis quam in personam: nec absimile est illud
Extractum Instrumento Guarentigiato, cujus saepe mentio habetur tam apud
Jurisconsultos quam Practicos; ex eo enim, non minus quam ex sententia solenni,
Executio parata est.

Caeterum omnis definitio in Jure periculosa est, and Juris remedia etiam
optima interdum remedio indigere videntur; nec Registrationis saluberrimo
instituto suum deesse videtur incommodum: Instrumenta enim cum in publica
custodia sint, Incuria Clericorum, aut servorum fraud facile intercidunt aut
subtrahuntur; ea autem perdita esse subodorati debitores aut eorum haeredes,
action Falsi (eam Improbationem dicimus) intentata, saepe liberantur; nulla
Judicis sed summa actoris and reapse injustitia. In causa enim Falsi agitur, ut
exhibeatur Instrumentum de quo quaestio est; ea, in libello, comminatione (seu
ut practici loquuntur Certificatione) nisi exhibeatur irritum fore, nec ullam
ejus Rationem aut fidem habendam esse in Judicio vel extra Judicium. In ista
autem causa Falsi, haud satisfacit Exhibitio exemplaris rite Extracti; nec
immerito and sine ratione; Instrumentum enim ipsum multa fortasse sufficeret
argumenta, tam ad veritatem astruendam quam ad falsitatem arguendam, ex
comparatione Literarum, and Subscriptionibus Testium and Partium; and alia
plurima quae Extracto tantum exhibito desiderantur.

Hac Ratione impulsi nec provisis incommodis pluribus and gravioribus (ut omnis
mutatio etiam in melius est periculosa) Angli Judices tempore nuperae
Usurpationis (si fas est praedones and perduelles Judices vocare) in res novas
semper prurientes (annitentibus maxim Scotis qui eis assidere ut Collegae haud
erubuerunt) statuto sancierunt, Instrumentum ipsum exhibendum quidem, ut in
acta referatur, Creditori reddendum ut penes eum remaneret.

Registratio enim cum sit actus voluntariae Jurisdictionis quolibet tempore
etiam feriarum explicatur, non tantum extra Judicium, sed nec ullo alio
fundamento nititur nisi consensu partium, and clausula Registrationis in
Instrumento ipso inserta; Instrumento autem penes Creditorem remanente nec in
custodia publica asservato sententia esset inanis sine ullo probationis
adminiculo quod in actis sit. Adhaec, eadem and majora sequerentur incommoda;
saepe enim non tantum ejus penes quem Instrumentum est, sed aliorum interest ut
servetur, praediis forte haeredibus Taliae and Provisionis ita dispositis ut
multi sint gradus Substitutionum: eo, and multis aliis casibus tutius esset and
aequius, Instrumentum illud in publica custodia esse, ut sic omnibus quorum
interest consultum sit, quam Instrumento penes unum retento, ejus negligentia
vel dolo reliquorum Jus periclitari.

Praeterea, Creditore penes quem Instrumentum est, decoquente, and cum Debitore
suo colludente (ut id genus hominis fallax est) facile esset illudere
Creditoribus suis, qui Instrumentum istud per adjudicationem sibi addici
obtinuerunt, Instrumento, in causa Falsi consulto intentata, haud exhibito.

Mihi autem in isto Recessu and unice satagenti quomodo prodesse utcunque
possim, videtur; omnibus quorum interest consultum fore, and incommodis and
commentis quae ultro citroque adduci possunt obviam iri, si tempore
confictionis Instrumenti ejus Copia aut exemplum describatur, ab eo qui
Instrumentum ipsum scripserat, and ei subjiciatur breviculum seu brevis nota ab
eodem scriptore scripta, iisdem partibus and Testibus Subscribentibus, and
ejusdem Datae; eo qui sequitur aut simili tenore.

Nos vero (obligati scilicet in Instrumento) agnoscimus Copiam suprascriptam,
verum esse and integrum exemplar Instrumenti seu Contractus inter nos confecti
ejusdem datae and tenoris; and volumus and consentimus ut virtute clausulae
Registrationis in dicto Contractu insertae, nec non virtute praesentium ut
praedictum Instrumentum coram curia exhibitum in Libris Curiae Registretur,
habiturum vim ad effectum suprascriptum: nec non volumus and consentimus, quod
extractum praefati Instrumenti in omnibus causis etiam Falsi and Improbationis
exhibitum, una cum isto Breviculo, sufficiens erit and efficax ad omnes
effectus, haud secus quam si Instrumentum ipsum exhiberetur aut productum,
satisfaceret.

Registrantur Instrumenta non tantum Executionis sed custodiae causa, and ad
futuram rei Memoriam; ut plaerumque fit in Acceptilationibus and Apochis,
quando concedens ad nihil faciendum obligatur, adeo ut Executione haud opus
sit; ne tamen intercidant, consentit ut ad futuram rei memoriam; in libris
actorum inserantur and asserventur.

Registrantur etiam Instrumenta nec Executionis nec custodiae sed Insinuationis
ergo; idque summa ratione and necessitate nedum utilitate; unusquisque enim
scire debet conditionem ejus cum quo contrahit juxta regulam Juris.

Id autem scitu difficile est, isto tempore Candoris and Bonorum Morum effoeto,
Fraudis autem feraci; saepe enim eveniebat ut comparatis praediis ut optimis
maximis, nec cirta justum and maximum pretium, emergerent qui sibi Jus in iis
vindicarent, vel Dominii vel Retractus seu Reversionis; sic iis vel evictis vel
modica pecuniula redemptis Emptor delusus tam Terris quam pretio carebat,
action adversus venditorem plaerumque inopem prorsus inani. Scire igitur
expedit conditionem rei de qua contrahitur, an sit penes Disponentem and
penitus sua, nec aliena sit vel Jure Dominii, nec Hypothecae nexu aut annui
reditus aut alio onere gravata; aut Retractui aut Reversioni obnoxia: Nec minus
cognitu necessaria est conditio vendentis aut alterius contrahentis, licet enim
Dominus sit and Dominium sit potestas de re sua Disponendi, Juxta regulam
Juris, quilibet est Rei suae Arbiter, subjungitur tamen in ista Regula Nisi Lex
obstet; Lex autem obstat Dominis ne de rebus and Terris suis libere disponant,
Legum vinculis forte praepeditis, Inhibitione scilicet, quando in rem and ad
instantiam Creditorum inhibiti sunt: aut in rem suam and suorum haeredum iis
bonorum suorum Administratione interdictum est: aut quando Rebels Denunciati
sunt and Exleges: De quibus impedimentis alibi and suis locis disseruimus.

Ut autem incommodis ex ignorantia tam conditionis rei quam personae obviam
eatur, utque conditio utriusque innotescat, plurimis Constitutionibus and
Legibus enixe cautum est.

If a Disposition may be Registrate, the Disponer being on Life but the
receaver being Deceast? Ratio Dubitandi, Registration is to the effect it
should have the force of a Decree, and there can be no Decree in favors a
Dead Person.

Regum Contractus.
COntractus Principis habet vim Legis, quoad observantiam; immo potentior est
Lege intensive; quia ligat successorem, quod Lex non facit: secus vero
extensive, quia Lex ligat omnes Contractus.

Regius etiam ex lege successor, factum Principis antecedentis principali
nomine peractum, ejus licet non sit haeres, ratum ut habeat conveniens est:
alioqui publica fides, and dignitas principalis collaberetur, These. Besold. p.
549.

Reges absoluti non litigant depossessionati, Le Roy plaide saisi, These. Bes.
p. 560.

Relief of Cautioners.
IF Cautioners finding the principal to be in a worse condition, may pursue for
Relief before Distress? At least to be secured out of his Estate?

Relocation.
A Tack being set and the Setter being deceased. Quaeritur, If after his
decease, and no person being Heir to him, the Tacksman may be said to bruik per
tacitam Relocationem; seeing there is none that can be said to be Relocans?

Reluitio seu Retractus.
INter Juris Interpretes celebris est Contraversia de Jure reluendi, seu
Retractus, quod apud nos Reversio dicitur, an ei praescribi possit? qui
affirmativam tuentur; regulam; qui negativam, exceptionem, Sententiae suae
fundamentum adducunt; Regula est, Omnes actiones, omnia Jura etiam maxim
longaeva, longissimo tempore, id est lapsu quadraginta annorum praescribi and
extingui. Exceptio est, Ea quae sunt merae facultatis haud praescribi. Apud nos
lis ista sopita est; Constitutione enim Regis, Jacobi Sexti Act. Parl. 12.
1617. Cavetur omnia Jura Contractus and inter alia Reversiones and Retractus,
and ex iis actiones, 40. annis praescribi; Exceptis Reversionibus quae sunt in
corpore Juris, and investitura excipientis; and iis etiam quae insinuatae and
in Archiva publica and regestum relatae sunt: quibus casibus (cum nulla subsit
suspicio falsitatis, ut ait Lex ista) actiones ex iis statuitur esse perpetuas.
Sed cum Contractus, Chirographa seu obligationes, praescribantur, licet
insinuatione publica and in archivis sint, qui fit ut ubi eadem and par est
ratio dispar Jus sit?

Remissions:
IF the Exchequer, when Remissions are not given by the King, may grant
Remissions sine causae cognitione, upon a Letter of Slains?

If Remission can be given for Murder? Answer. The Kings Power is not limited:
but in Justice, Remissions cannot be given, but in the cases that by the Divine
Law, and Law of Nations, the benefit of the Sanctuary may be competent:
Whereas by Act of Parliament, there is no Sanctuary for forethought Felony.

Renounciation.
QVaeritur, If the Father or his Executor may urge the Daughter who has
renounced, to confirm her self Executrix to her Mother, to the effect her
Renounciation may be effectual? Vide of nearest Kin. Quaest. 4ta. litera K.

Renounciation by Daughters at their Marriage.
IF a Man have a Son and Two Daughters; and both the Daughters Renounce all
Executry, Debts, Goods, and Gear whatsomever, either provided to them, or which
may fall or pertain to them by the Decease of their Father or Mother,
Quaeritur, If the Son will be both Heir and Executor?

If a Person charged to enter Heir and renounceing, may notwithstanding be
served Heir? Answer. He may be served: and no other person or Creditor can
oppose, upon pretense of the Renounciation, seeing Charges to enter Heir are
Personal Diligences as to the Chargers only: and Renounciations in obedience
thereto do militate only in favors of the Chargers.

If the Charger may oppose? Answer. If he has any prejudice or Interest he may
oppose; but it is thought he can have none, seeing notwithstanding of the
Service, what is done upon the Charge, or Renunciation will be effectual; and
the Renounciation is actus involuntarius for Obedience: and with us there is
not Locus successorio Edicto: And it were hard if Haereditas should be Opulenta
that the Heir could not Enter.

Renunciatio Juri Publico.
REnunciare potest Debtor immunitati Nundinarum; quia licet favorem publicum
habeant nundinae, principaliter tamen de privatorum commodo agitur: and regula
communis est, Quoties privato favori Lex aliquid introducit principaliter,
licet secundario publicam causam annexam habeat, Renunciari huic favori posse.
These. Bes. Litera M. 43. P. 631.

Res Fiscales and res privatae Regis.
REgalia and res Fiscales, and res privatae Regis, magno intervallo inter se
distant; ^ae enim sunt privati Patrimonii, quae Principi ratione personae and
non ratione dignitatis obveniunt; At quae Rex ex suis provinciis and
ditionibus, ut Rex vel Princeps percipit, ea ad ipsius Patrimonium Fiscale
pertinent, nec ad haeredes transeunt licet in rebus privatis succedant, nisi
etiam in principatu succedant. Hering. de molend. quaest. 9. n. 71.

Re-seasin upon Reduction.
A Right being granted to be holden of the Superior; and after Infeftment,
being reduced Ex capite Doli vel Metus. Quaeritur, Whether the former Right
revives, Or if there must be a new one, what way is it to be taken? It is
Answered. That it is thought, that the Seasin being taken away, and being Facti
which cannot be infectum, there must be a new Seasin; and the Superior is to be
dealt with to give a precept, making mention of the former Seafin and Decree
of Reduction; and that he is willing to receive again the Disponer.

If the Disponer be deceased Quomodo shall his Heir be infeft? Answer. Being
served Heir he may apply to the Superior, for a Precept mentioning as said is,
and that he his Heir.

If the Lands be holden of the King, what course should be taken? Answer. upon
application to the Lords by Bill, they may grant warrant to the Directors of
the Chancery, to give precept of the nature foresaid.

If the Superior may be forced to receive his former Vassal in the case
foresaid? And if he should, will Composition be due? Answer. It is thought,
that he ought to receive him but upon composition; seeing having once entered
his Vassal, he is not obliged to Re-enter, but upon Composition.

Reservation in favors of Relicts.
BY Contract of Marriage, a Lady having accepted a Liferent-provision, in
Satisfaction of all she could claim, either of Terce or Movables, excepting
and reserving the third of the plenishing of the House, Quaeritur, whether by
the said reservation she has a Right settled in her person to the third of the
Plenishing, free of debt and moveable Heirship? Or if the said Third be only
understood of free gear, the debt being paid, and Heirship deduced? Item if
the said Third be liable to a Bairns part, if all the Executry be exhausted but
the said Third?

Resignation.
IF a Superior, who is a singular Successor, may infeft upon a Resignation in
his Authors hands, as upon a Comprysing the time of his Authors Right?

IF a Superior has given a Charter upon Resignation whereupon there is no
infeftment, Quaeritur, If he be denuded of the Superiority, will the singular
Successor therein, be obliged to renew the Right, and to grant precepts to that
effect, and by what action he may be urged?

Quaeritur, If after Resignation, the Disponer and the Person in whose favors
the resignation is made, may agree and recede from their bargain without
consent of the Superior, upon pretense that the Resignation is in favorem; and
every Person may renounce Juri pro se introducto? It is thought, They cannot
and res non est integra, there being a quasi contractus betwixt the Superior
and them.

If after Resignation accepted, the Superior be denuded, whether his Successor
will be obliged to infeft him? And what way he may be urged? It is thought,
That Succedit in rem cum sua causa, and upon a Bill to the Lords there may be a
warrant to direct precepts, as upon a Retour.

If an Instrument of Resignation in favorem, will prejudge a singular
Successor, seeing it is not Registrate?

De Resignationibus.
Quaestio Prima. An Resignatio, in Manibus Domini Superioris, alienantem
penitus devestiat?
ALienato praedio, and ex mandato in Instrumento Alienationis inserto,
Resignatione subsecuta, and a Domino directo admissa, Quaeritur, An ea
Alienantem ita devestiat, ut nullum Juris vestigium penes eum supersit, nec eo
mortuo aut delinquente, custodia haeredis minoris, aut Maritagium, vel alia
emolumenta Domino directo obveniant?

Respondere visum est, Alienantem penitus devestitum and Dominio utili exutum;
nec ex ejus obitu vel delicto, obventiones (quae sunt Dominii directi fructus)
deberi Domino directo: omnia siquidem, quae Vasalli ut devestiantur facere
solent aut debent, rite peracta sunt: nec obest quod unius interitus est
alterius ortus, nec Jus proprietatis and Dominii directi a Domino discedit,
nisi alii acquiratur; dici autem nequit Emptorem aut eum cui Alienatio facta
est, Dominum aut Vasallum esse, antequam a Domino directo investitus and
sasitus sit; Jus siquidem nedum ad rem, per alienationem quaesitum est ei in
cujus favorem Resignatio facta est, sed tantum non in re; and inchoatum
eatenus, ut feudum sit penes Dominum directum, quasi per fideicommissum, and in
rem ejus cui alienatio facta est, ita ut eum ejusque haeredes investire
teneatur: and in Jure quod prope est, multis casibus idem censetur.

Quaestio Secunda. An ex Persona Resignatarii, and ejus vel obitu vel delicto,
Custodia Haeredis and alia emolumenta Domino directo obveniant?
SI post Resignationem a Domino directo admissam, nihil commodi ei obvenit vel
ex obitu vel delicto alienantis, quia Vasallus esse desiit, Quaerendum? An
saltem ex obitu vel delicto ejus cui Alienatio sacta est, custodia and
Maritagium haeredis, ususfructus ex Rebellione per Annum and Diem, aliaeque
obventiones ordinariae and solennes ei cedant quae debentur cum Vasallus vel
moritu^ vel deliquit: nec Vasallus dici potest, quia nunquam sasitus fuit;
Juxta tritum illud, nulla Sasina nulla Terra: Verius tamen and Juri
consentaneum videtur, eo tempore quo per Resignationem, Terrae sunt in manibus
Domini superioris, Jus and Dominium directum haud sterile and effoetum esse:
and ejus fructus ei haud negari debere, isto color vel captione, quod alienans
devestitus Vasallus esse desiit, Emptor autem nondum Vasallus est: nam si
Domino nec renuente nec cunctante, per eum non stet quo minus Emptor
investiatur, Emptore praemortuo vel negligente, vel fato vel ejus negligentiae
imputandum quod Vasallus non fuerit and investitus: ubicunque enim de Domini
commodo agitur, pro investito habetur qui a Domino parato investituram haud
petiit, nec ejus mors vel mora Domino obest: hac ratione haeres Vasalli
haereditate haud agnita, si ad pubertatem pervenerit, ejus Maritagium Domino
debetur; and ex ejus delicto, vel ususfructus vel praedium ipsum ad Dominum
pertinet, etsi nunquam ei Vasallus fuerit: id quidem interest inter haeredem
ejus qui Vasallus and in feudo investitus obiit, and haeredem Resignatarii;
quod in illum, feudum quod decessoris fuerat renovatur and transmittitur; in
isto vero feudum incipit; nec est Haeres Emptori, in feudo quod ejus nunquam
fuerat: Verum illud facile diluitur, quemadmodum enim in Jure qui in utero est,
ad varios effectus fictione Juris pro jam nato habetur; haud secus ubi feudum
constituitur and eo nascendo maturuit, ut ab alienante abdicatum and in manibus
and penes superiorem sit; sed ea lege and fiducia, ut acquirenti novum
infeofamentum concedatur, pro enato habetur; nedum quoad superiorum and
compendia and emolumenta ad eos pertinentia; sed ad quosdam alios effectus;
Haeres enim Resignatarii qui morte praereptus decessit sine sasina; etsi primo
investitus sit ex alienatione, succedit tamen in Jus acquirentis and non suo
sed Jure haeredis; and fictione brevis manus feudum nanciscitur ut
haereditarium: Haud secus quam si Acquirenti investito, ipse (eo mortuo) ut
haeres investitus fuisset; ideo feudum in ejus persona haud novum and
Conquestus, sed haereditas censetur: Et si decesserit orbus and sine liberis ad
Agnatos ex latere descendit. Adhaec, licet feuda plerumque Acquirenti sint
libera, ut de iis pro arbitrio suo Disponere possit haeredibus: quaedam vero
sunt fideicommissaria and vinculata, ut nec alienari nec aere alieno gravari
possunt; Feudum tamen haud ut liberum consequitur, qui parente praemortuo
primus ex Alienatione investitur; sed si Conditionatum sit, conditionibus
parere debet; and nisi paruerit feudo mulctandus ex lege Commissoria seu
Clausula irritante; adeo in Jure spes proxima and radicata multum attenditur
and operatur: and acquirenti nedum spes sed ex Resignatione Jus, adeo radicatum
fuit, ut Resignatario and ejus haeredibus, and Jus ab eo habentibus auferri vel
avelli nequeat: and Domino necesse sit feudum iis per Investituram tradere qui
primi erant per Resignationem: dumque Vasallus ex Charta and praecepto sasinam
and traditionem operitur, interim umbra quaedam traditionis praecedit, fundo
Domino sursum reddito per fustis and baculi traditionem, in favorem
acquirentis, and statim per idem symbolum rursum reddito Resignatario aut ejus
procuratori.

Quaestio Tertia. An in Feudis, quae de Domino Rege tenentur, idem Jus sit,
adeo ut per Resignationem Vasallus devestiatur?
AN in omnibus Feudis, sive ea de Rege sive de aliis superioribus teneantur,
idem Jus sit, operae pretium est quaerere? Et quidem ubi eadem ratio idem Jus
est, and a contrario ubi dispar ratio diversum Jus. Id autem nec parum est
discriminis inter Dominum Regem and alios superiores; quippe hi rerum suarum
providi and satagentes, sua Jura and commoda scire and debent and praesumuntur,
si nesciant aut negligant suo periculo and dispendio est: Rex vero in id unice
intentus ut Regno been sit nec quid detrimenti capiat, Eaque Reipublicae mole
obruitur ut rebus suis and privatis superesse nequeat: Quin and Quaestor and
Proquaestor aliique quibus sacri Patrimonii procuratio demandata est, viri
Illustres and impigri in omnibus fere Curiis Regis assidui and impliciti; tot
negotiis distinentur, ut nedum supra vix omnibus pares esse queant: Hinc
Obreptio and Subreptio, vitia in largitionibus principum saepe sed frustra
vetita: hinc etiam negligentia, haud ex socordia quae in viros amplissimos and
diligentes non cadit, sed reipsa, ut quibusdam casibus dolus, etiam sine dolo
and reipsa esse dicitur: Ideo Constitutione Regis Jacobi Sexti: Parliamen. 16.
Cap, 14. necesse fuit cavere, Ne Officiariorum and Ministrorum Regis
negligentia Regibus noceat: consultum igitur videtur esse, nec rimam
relinquendam qua irrepant, nedum portam aperiendam qua erumpant frauds; id
autem futurum, si statuatur ex Resignatione in manibus Regis (aut eorum quibus
id munus commisit ut Resignationes recipiant) Vasallum penitus devestitum esse;
nam Resignatio ista fit nulla indagine aut inquisitione praevia, quaenam sit
Resignantis aut Feudi conditio; an is aeger vel moribundus, and forte nothus
aut Bastardus; an vero Feudum Jure aliquo affectum sit, aut obventione ante
Resignationem debita and cedente, aut Regi caducum and commissum ex delicto;
sic haud difficile erit Regem fraudare imo Iudificare, E. G. Resignatione feudi
militaris facta a Vasallo, cui haeres sit infans aut impubes, in favorem
Emptoris simulati, si praemoriatur alienans, causabitur Emptor eum devestitum,
nec haeredis impuberis vel Custodiam vel Maritagium obvenisse: Sin
Resignatarius morte praereptus sit, alienans dicit se haud devestitum, nec de
Alienatione aut Resignatione constare; notarius siquidem qui Resignationibus
faciendis adhibetur plaerumque obscurus, and ejus opera utentibus addictior
est: Contractus autem vel dispositio ex qua Resignatio fit, penes contrahentes
remanet, and cum sine ea Resignatio inanis sit, ea celata vel deleta facile
erit rem eo redigere, ac si nec Alienatio nec Resignatio celebrata fuisset; and
prout ex te eorum videbitur, and magis commodum, Colludentium arbitrium erit
utrum alienans an vero acquirens eorumque haeredes Regi Vasalli forent; Ut est
in Apologo de homine fallaci and dolo ancipiti numen ipsum fallere auso, and
periculum facere an omnia sciret and vera responderet; cum enim sub vestis
lacinia passerem haberet, sciscitatus est, an avicula quam haberet viva an
mortua esset, certus, si Oraculum vivam diceret, eam necare illiso cerebro; sin
mortuam, promere vivam: Responsum penes eum esse utrum vivam an mortuam malit:
sed mill sunt nocendi and fraudandi arts, quas refer nec tutum est saeculo
isto in frauds nimis prono, cum vel memorare docere sit: verum re penitus
inspecta videtur Respondendum, idem Jus esse in omnibus feudis, nullo inter
Regem and alios superiores discrimine, nisi quoad accidentalia quaedam and
extrinseca, de quibus non curat Lex; Eadem autem est utrobique ratio; ea
scilicet, postquam Vasallus devestitus est Alienatione, and ex ea Resignatione
facta and admissa; ex ejus vel delicto vel obitu, nihil vel commodi Domino
directo, vel incommodi acquirenti posse evenire; Rex enim licet supremus, et ut
Angli loquuntur Superior paramount, in Feudis sive dandis sive renovandis Jure
haud Praerogativo sed communi utitur: Et cum sit fons Jurisdictionis, quod
Juris in alio statuit, eo uti haud gravatur: Nec obstant quae attigimus
Incommoda; nec Incommodum Argumentum, nedum Jus solvit; ea hominum sort, ut
nihil humani incommodi expers and vacuum sit: Imo inter regulas Juris ea est,
Omnem Definitionem in Jure periculosam, adeo ut vix fieri possit quin aliquo
incommodo subvertatur: Ex adverso, haud desunt incommoda multa and gravia; in
isto igitur conflictu, ut praesumptiones leviores and debiles fortioribus
cedunt, ita incommoda aliis and gravioribus diluuntur: Si igitur aliter
statuatur, quae populo and acquirentibus timenda sunt incommoda magis p
aegravant; Rex siquidem de lucro captando, hi vero agunt de damno vitando; Rex
de obventione and lucello casuali, and directi Dominii fructibus jactura levi
and facili resarcienda; aliis subinde renascentibus.

Quaestio Quarta. Si Alienatione facta, and ex ea Resignatione; alia postea
fiat, and ex ea etiam Resignatio in favorem alterius, isque primus Investitus
fuerit: and post eum prius acquirens: Quaeritur uter Potior?
ALienatione facta and ex ea Resignatione, si postea alius Emptor vel aliter
acquirens, ex posteriore Resignatione prior investitus fuerit, and post eum
prior acquirens fuerit etiam investitus ex priore Resignatione, haud immerito
Quaeritur, Uter potior Jure, and praeferendus sit?

De ea ratione, apud authors nostros, nihil certi aut expediti Juris
reperitur: Quibusdam quidem, qui prius investitus est, licet ex posteriore
Resignatione, potior videtur; ea ratione subnixis, quod ubi jus per varios
gradus perficitur, aut ex pluribus partibus integratur, is praeferendus sit,
qui per reliquos gradus in summum prior innititur, and ex omnibus partibus Jus
integrum and completum nanciscitur; nec enim in Certamine Equestri qui statim a
carceribus perincitatis, impetu alios praetervolat, Brabeum consequitur, sed
qui totum emensus curriculum primus ad metam decurrit.

Verius tamen est, and consequens iis quae superius disseruimus, primum
Resignatarium licet posterius sasitum, jure potiorem esse; and posterius
acquirentis jus nullum and irritum esse; utpote a non habentibus potestatem
profectum. Summus quidem est Diligentiae favor, and vigilantibus jura
subveniunt: Ac quod de Julii Caesaris foelici and omnia vincente industria
exemplari, proditum est isto versu,

Nil actum credens, dum quid superesset agendum. ID in jure assequendo, and ubi
de eo diligentia certatur locum habet: Sed in ista specie, tantum abest ut
secundus Resignatarius prior jus consummatum adeptus sit, ut nec ullum habeat
vel habere potuerit, vel ab alienante vel a domino directo: alienans siquidem
dominio utili per alienationem and Resignationem in rem primi acquirentis,
penitus exutus, nullum habuit quod in secundum transferret; Juxta illud etiam
pueris notum and inter ludentes tritum, Qui nihil habet, nihil dabit, and juris
prudentiae principium and regulam, Nemo potest transfer in alium plus juris
quam ipse habet.

Nec magis ex alterutra Resignatione, in favorem vel prioris vel secundi
Resignatarii, penes dominum directum jus aliquod erat, quod in secundum
transferret; cum enim prima Resignatio in rem and favorem tantum primi
acquirentis fuerat, and limitata causa producat tantum limitatum effectum; ex
ea Resignatione, nec secundo Resignatario nec alii nisi priori praedium dari
potuit: Ex secunda vero Resignatione, cum sit prorsus cassa and inanis facta,
scilicet ab alienante prius devestito, and qui nullum jus haberet quod
resignaret; ex ea nullum jus erat penes Dominum directum quod transferret in
secundum.

Hinc est quod Resignatione facta, haud dubii Juris est vasallum subfeudum and
praedium de se tenendum alii non posse disponere; Cum igitur jus inferius and
ut loquimur Bassum dare nequeat, an adhuc penes eum erit Jus and potestus per
novam alienationem and Resignationem, praedium alteri concedendi, ut jus majus
and nobilius and de domino Superiore tenendum consequatur? Obstante juris
regula, Cui non licet quod minus est ei quod majus est non licere.

Cum praedia acquiruntur per Resignationem, eorum dominium non statim and
instar Boleti emergit, sed per varios gradus constituitur and elaboatur: iivero
sunt, ut proprietarius and qui utile dominium habet alienet, ut deinde vel ipse
vel (quod plerumqe fit) ejus procurator, jus suum and dominium in manus domini
directi resignet; adhibito notario and Instrumento Resignationis in favorem
acquirentis confecto; utque Superior praedium non jam Vasalli, sed cujus jus
penes ipsum est, disponat Carta sua, addito mandato de Resignatario
investiendo, vulgo Praecepto Sasinae; and demum ex eo, acquirens investiatur:
per priores istos gradus devestitur alienans, sed in gratiam and in rem
acquirentis; per posteriores investitur acquirens; Quemadmodum autem, ubi Scala
adeo angusta est, ut per gradus singulis tantum ascensus sit, prioribus
gradibus per aliquem vel occupatis vel sublatis, in superiores inniti nullus
nec speratur nec conatur; Haud secus in feuda acquirendo, ex ista graduum
serie, prioribus, quibus alienans dominio and jure suo nudatus est, sed in
primi acquirentis gratiam, per eum occupatis; alteri posterius acquirenti, in
ulteriores gradus penetrandi, nec spes nec Locus relinquitur: exinde de jure
acquirendo and diligentia, frustra certamen esset, praedio per priorem
Resignationem Resignatario adeo affecto and addicto, ut alterius esse nequeat.

Ad haec cum duplex sit Resignatio praediorum, vel ad Remanentiam, vel in
Favorem; utriusque quoad Resignantem idem and par est effectus, ut devestiatur
scilicet; and quod ejus fuerat dominium utile, ejus esse desinat, and penes
Superiorem and in ejus manibus collocetur: utroque casu dominium utile cum
directo e vestigio coalescit and consolidatur; sed eo discrimine, quod ubi
Resignatio fit ad Remanentiam and in rem ipsius Domini, Consolidatio id
operatur, ut tam utile quam directum dominium penes Dominum sit, sed ut suum
nec divellendum; ubi vero Resignatio fit in favorem, dominium utile ita
transit, ut interea cum directo conjunctum, penes dominum Superiorem sit; sed
ea lege and modo ut Resignatarium investiat: nisi enim Dominus esset, and etiam
utile haberet dominium, nec id Carta sua dare posset: quod and ex ipsa Cartarum
ex Resignatione stylo manifestum est; nam iis Dominus directus terras disponit,
non ut amplius alienantis, sed quarum Jus ad alienantem pertinuerat, and per
Resignationem translatum and collocatum est in manus suas, sed ligatas ea lege
pro novo scilicet Infeofamento acquirenti dando. Ex his sequitur, vasallum per
Resignationem sive ea fit ad Remanentiam sive in favorem, pariter devestitum;
and post alterutram, in ejus fraudem, nec honest nec utiliter alienare posse.

Accedit quod haud pridem in mores nostros irrepsit, and iste apud alias Gentes
frequentior, ut Investitura detur in usum and rem alterius quam Investiti: si
igitur alienatio fiat domino directo sed in rem and usum alterius, and ex ea
Resignatio facta sit ad Remanentiam, Isto casu haud ambigendum, alienantem
frustra alienare in fraudem usuarii, in cujus rem and usum praedium domino
directo alienatum and sursum redditum fuerat. Nec magis dubitandum est, and ea
Resignatione quae fit in favorem, Alienanti ademptam omnem alienandi
potestatem; nam utraque Resignatio fit in manus Superioris sed in rem alterius,
and ista quae fit in favorem pariter transfert praedium in domini manus,
quodammodo ad Remanentiam, and apud eum remansurum; donec ex lege fiduciae,
quae in Resignationibus contrahitur, Resignatarius investiatur.

Demum, Resignatio adeo solennis and in rem, and Dominii ab alienante
translativa est, atque in ea tot actus interveniunt tam alienantis qui
Resignat, quam Domini directi qui Resignationem admittit, and jus penes se
translatum Resignatario reddit, tradito symbolo in Fidem and Arrham
Investiturae subsequuturae; intervenientibus etiam Notario and Testibus; ut
Resignante mortuo, defunctis etiam tum domino directo tum Resignatario,
Resignatio tamen ejusque vis and effectus haud intercidat and evanescat; nam
and iis casibus, Investitura a Domini directi successoribus, Resignatario aut
ejus haeredibus, vel ab eo causam habentibus, dari debet. Ea Argumenta sunt,
Per Resignationem Dominium utile ab Alienante discedere, ita ut in Superiorem
transferatur, and cum Dominio directo cui interea unitum est, transeat; nedum
ad Domini haeredes, sed ad Successores quoslibet singulares. Ex istis omnibus,
quae ut de re and quaestione tanti momenti prolixius disceptata sunt,
manifestum est alienanti per Resignationem dissasito, nullam vel juris umbram
vel vestigium superesse; and Alienationem and ex ea Resignationem si quam
posterius fecerit, and Investituram etiam priorem ea, quae ex priore
Resignatione secuta est, inutilem and nullam esse; ut a non habentibus
potestatem: saltem annullandam action Rescissoria, quae nobis Reductio
dicitur.

Quaestio Quinta. An is qui in Dominium directum successit Titulo singulari,
teneatur Acquirentem in vasallum recipere ex Resignatione in manibus Authoris.
EX eo quod superius dictum est, Dominium scilicet utile, ex Resignatione in
manus Superioris sursum redditum, cum Dominio directo, ad successorem in eo
etiam singularem transire; ea suboritur Quaestio, An Successor singularis
teneatur acquirenti, vel ejus haeredibus, dominium utile a directo sejunctum
reddere? and si renuat, quod Juris remedium iis competat? Nulla siquidem inter
dominum directum, qui ex Resignatione terras, quoad dominium utile, in manus
suas recepit, intercessit necessitudo cum Successore; qua eum representet, ut
haeres aut alio titulo universali; aut ex Fiducia, quae in Resignatione
intervenit, fidem ejus liberare teneatur: Nec magis negotium ei fuit cum
Resignatario; vel ullus, quo obligetur, vel contractus, vel quasi contractus.

Sed praeter Personales, sunt aliae etiam Obligationes in rem, quibus res ipsa
subjacet, and qui eam nanciscitur sese subjecit: Sic qui adipiscitur praedium
servituti obnoxium, licet ejus dum acquireret nulla mentio aut exceptio fuerit,
patientiam tamen, and quae ex servitute debentur praestare tenetur: Idem de
Annuis Reditibus and pactis de Retrovendendo and Retractibus ceu Reversionibus
and Lege Commissoria dicendum; res enim semper transit cum sua causa and onere;
nec alio aut pinguiore Jure Successor utitur, quam eo quod decessor aut Author
habuerat: Ea autem est causa dominii directi, ut quandocunque Dominium utile
per Resignationem cum eo conjunctum est, qui eam receperit vel ejus Successor
etiam singularis, gravatus sit Resignatario and ejus Successoribus Dominium
utile restituere.

Si id facere cunctetur vel renuat Dominus directus, in promptu remedium est,
ut sciz coram Senatu ceu Collegio Judicum in Causis Civilibus Supremo, actio
summaria intentetur; and exhibito Instrumento Resignationis, and novissima
Carta and Investitura Auctoribus concessa, petatur juxta eam novam fieri
Resignatario vel ejus haeredi, Sententia lata: Si Dominus directus haud pareat,
sed adeo contumax sit, ut Rebellis and Exlex denuncietur Banno publico, and
Cornu pro Tuba inflato, ut moris est, quod ideo Cornuatio apud nos dicitur;
Demum jussu and mandato Senatus, Cancellarii Director praeceptum Sasinae
diriget pro Resignatario, vel ejus haerede investiendo, Ita ut de Domino
directo teneant, nec vasallus Jure suo fraudetur, nec dominus suo etiam culpa
sua decidet; Mulctandus tamen ob pervicaciam and Rebellionem, bonis omnibus
mobilibus tam rebus quam nominibus Regi caducis; quod Eschetam vocamus.

Ista sunt intelligenda de praediis quae de Subditis tenentur: Rex enim and
Quaestores Regii, quique alii ei a Rationibus sunt, id quod justum est haud
gravate facere praesumuntur.

Quaestio Sexta. An Superior nedum Resignatarium ejusque haeredes, sed
Cessionarios investire teneatur?
QUaestionem praecedentem de Resignatario ejusque haeredibus recipiendis,
excipit ista de Assignatis, sic Cessionarii (sed parum Latin) apud nos
dicuntur: omnia autem Jura, moribus nostris, cedi possunt, de quibus
Investitura haud sequutura vel nec dum secuta est; Si igitur alienatis
praediis, and ex alienatione Resignatione secuta, acquirens ea and jus suum per
Alienationem and Resignationem sibi quaesitum, per Cessionem in alium
transtulerit, Quaeritur, An Dominus directus Cessionarium recipere teneatur? Et
quidem extra quaestionis aleam, videtur recipiendum esse; Alienatio etenim tam
acquirenti quam haeredibus and assignatis ejus facta est; nec minus in eorum
favorem Resignatio a Domino Superiore admissa est. Tenendum tamen est
Cessionarios recipere Dominum directum haud teneri; Feudum siquidem Beneficium
dicitur, and Beneficium nec invito nec ab invito datur and exprimitur; Interque
Feudi sive essentialia sive naturalia illud est, ut Domino inconsulto nedum
invito dari nequeant: Nam Feuda, initio and jure primaevo, dabantur a Dominis
viris militaribus and sibi devotis, ob Fidem and Virtutem Bellicam, tam ipsorum
compertam, quam posterorum praesumptam, juxta illud Poetae, Fortes creantur
fortibus, and bonis. etc. Licet autem saeculo degeneri, Feuda etiam
degeneraverint, ut instar patrimonialium sint, and Feuda in ipsis Feudis
desideres; Tamen fere ubique illud retinet, ut pro Vasallo and veteri Clienti,
novus and extraneus non possit obtrudi; Etiam isto tempore quo bellum, ut ait
Ennius, Magis cauponatur quam belligeratur, and mercenario milite conducitur
and dolo magis quam virtute geritur. In Gallia, and aliis haud multis
Regionibus, ubi favore Commercii (qui summus est) concessum est Feuda alienare,
id fit eo temperamento; ut pro recognoscendo and laudando Domino, Compositio,
ut loquimur, and Laudimia Domino directo pendi debeant, certa part pretii in
id decisa, and Legibus definita. Caeterum apud nos, Feuda de Domino tenenda,
nisi Dominus consenserit, frustra (interdum haud impune) alienantur; Si
militaria sint, and Custodia, and Maritagium haeredis, ad Dominum pertinent:
nec adhuc parum refert qualem Dominus sibi asciscat Vasallum. Aliarum enim
rerum, juxta Juris Regulam, Duo non possunt esse Domini in solidum, in Feudis
vero duo sunt Domini and perpetui, fed Dominio diverso and dispari; ita ut
penes Superiorem, Directum; penes Vasallum sit Vtile; and utrique ex eodem
Fundo fructus sint and proventus, Vtili quidem Naturales, Directo vero Civiles
and Obventiones; Ex ista, ut fere omni communione, plerumque nascitur
quaestionum and litium seges, de Warda, Maritagio, Non-introitu and aliis
Obventionibus, quae cedunt Domino directo: ut igitur litibus and rixis obviam
eatur, and de dominii sui fructibus mature and officiose (ut par est)
satisfiat, si mutandus sit Vasallus Domino directo cavendum est, ne pro viro
probo and bonae indolis, morosum and dyscolum; and pro devoto and cliente,
potentiorem and tantum non adversarium nanciscatur. Iis de causis nec injuria,
Domino ita consultum est, ne invitus Vasallum novum and incommodum habeat.

Nec obstant quae superius dicta sunt, Dominum sciz. Resignatione in ejus manus
facta in Favorem and in Gratiam acquirentis and ejus haeredum and assignatorum,
eo ipso consentire, ut acquirentis tam haeredes quam assignatos in Vasallum
recipiat; verba enim ista tam in Alienationis quam in Resignationis
Instrumentis, intelligenda sunt civiliter and secundum subjectam materiam,
sciz. ut Resignatione facta Resignatarium and Haeredes ejus investiat (Haeres
enim in Jure censetur eadem persona cum defuncto) Cessionarium vero si sibi
visum fuerit: Imo si Resignatarius investitus sit Charta ipsi and Haeredibus
and Assignatis concessa, Feudo mulctatur, si militare sit, and Vasallum in
Feudo vel de se vel Domino tenendo, sine Domini consensu, investiret.

Cum duae sint Alienationes, altera Resignatario, altera Cessionario, una autem
Investitura: Si Dominus assignatum ex Cessione investire paratus sit,
supervacuum est quaerere, an unum aut duplex Laudimium Domino solvendum sit;
cum Domino integrum and penes eum arbitrium sit vel haud admittere, vel quibus
convenerit conditionibus and Laudimiis eum recipere; Et si Dominus per
compendium, Cessionarium brevi manu recipere velit, Charta and ex ea Sasina ei
tradita; haud invidenda videntur Domino Laudimia, quae consequeretur si
longiore and operoso circuitu nec modicis sumptibus, Charta and Sasina
Resignatario tradita, and Resignatione in gratiam Cessionarii, and ex ea
repetita iterum Charta and Sasina, assignati Investitura absolvenda esset.

De Resignationibus a Domino directo acceptatis, An devestiant Resignantes?
SUpposito in facti specie, Vasallum Feudi militaris illud vendidisse; and
Resignatione facta per procuratorem ex Mandato, inter alias clausulas solennes
in literis seu Instrumento venditionis inserto, and per Dominum directum seu
Superiorem recepta, coram notario and testibus, ut moris est, and de ea
Instrumento confecto; sed postea diem obiisse relicto Haerede impubere, Emptore
nondum investito, Quaeritur, An Custodia and Maritagium Haeredis venditoris,
Domino directo obveniant and debeantur? Haud inficias eo utriusque partis
Patronis haud deesse argumenta; nec ea quidem levia: sed omnibus ultro citroque
perpensis, Negativa verior, et Juri et Aequitati magis videtur esse
consentanea: Eo tamen temperamento et cautela, si omnia bona fide acta sint, et
dolus absit, et omnis machinatio fraudulenta; venditore forte in extremis et
morbo sontico laborante, et venditione properata, ut fraus et fucus fiat Domino
inscio, et commento isto fraudato istis et aliis Dominii sui fructibus, morte
Vasalli imminente, propediem obventuris; Si forte venditore et Emptore amicis
et colludentibus, et Domino (ut fere Magnates sunt) haud satis attento,
consulto differtur and sustinetur Investitura, ejusque petitio, ut ancipiti
dolo frustretur Dominus; Causantibus, si praemoriatur venditor, eum penitus
devestitum; si Emptor, eum nondum investitum nec Vasallum fuisse.

Ubi igitur praedium venditum, and Resignatio in Domini volentis and
acceptantis manum facta est, nec ulla fraus, aut fraudis suspicio subest,
venditor Dominio utili exutus and penitus devestitus est, adeo ut ad eum
devestiendum, omnia ab eo acta sint; ita ut nihil supersit agendum: Nec ullum
penes eum sit Jus vel Juris umbra; nisi pacto inter eum and Dominum convenerit,
ut a Resignatione recedatur; quod plerumque fit, cum supervenit alius Emptor,
and Resignatione facta in ejus gratiam, novo Emptori gratificatur Dominus,
Charta and Investitura ei concessa: quod plerumque sed parum honest fit, non
obstante priore venditione and Resignatione: quo casu posterior Emptor sed
primo Investitus, and Jus plenum and perfectum consecutus, praefertur priori
Emptori etiam investito sed posterius: Prior enim tempore, quoad Jus completum,
potior est Jure.

Cum igitur venditor quoad Dominum and Emptorem sit devestitus, et quoad
seipsum active; nec enim, ita devestitus praedio divendito, ex eo aliquid
commodi aut emolumenti potest consequi, aut ulterius aliquid agere ut
devestiatur; Sequitur eum desiisse esse Vasallum, et devestitum esse Passive ut
ita loquar: Nec ex praedio, quod amplius haud est suum, aliquid incommodi aut
periculi, ipsi aut haeredibus metuendum; Juxta regulam, Penes quem Commoda,
penes eundem Incommoda. Et e contra.

2. Argum. Secundo, Si venditoris filius Investituram petat, et, Domino (ut par
est) renuente, Breve impetrarit e Cancellaria, et coram Inquisitoribus patrem
obiisse ultimo vestitum et sasitum, et se ei Haeredem esse in eo praedio
asserat, Et sententia seu veredicto quindecim-virali declarari petat; ei
obstabit exceptio, feudum a patre abdicatum in Domini manibus esse, et ejus
fidei commissum, ut Emptorem in eo investiat, idque facere debere and paratum
esse.

3. Argum. Tertio, (...) etc. uno dato absurdo multa sequuntur: Dato igitur
Vasallum venditione and Resignatione haud devestitum esse; Hydrae instar, multa
pullulabunt non tam incommoda quam absurda, a Ratione et Aequitate aliena. Si
enim repraesentato pretio et Feudo abdicato, et omnibus peractis quae
faceredebuerat aut poterat venditor, ut Jus suum in Emptorem transferret,
Vasallus adhuc est; tunc ex ejus aut Haeredis delictis feudalibus et Criminibus
si Majestatis sint, Domino Regi; sin etiam sint in Dominum immediatum, Domino
ipsi feudum ipsum committetur, aut feudi ususfructus: Si Venditor, aut ejus
Haeres, Exlex, and per Annum and Diem rebellis fuerit; Si venditor Resignatione
facta statim morte praereptus fit, antequam Emptor investitus sit, sed pretio
praecepto, aut cum Emptori debtor fuerat, fundo in solutum vendito, nec ulla
vel venditoris vel Emptoris aut Domini culpa vel mora intervenerit; Creditores
tamen venditoris praedium, per licitationem aut Adjudicationem sibi addictum
and in solutionem datum consequentur; Emptore and Creditoribus ejus (si qui
sunt) frustra quaerentibus sibi legum praetextu delusis, tam pretio quam
praedio carendum; eo color quod praedium tum venditum, tum a venditore
resignatum, adhuc tamen penes eum and ejus ossibus haeserit, ejusque
Creditoribus and eorum diligentiae obnoxium.

4. Argum. Si, mortuo venditore, Emptor a Domino directo petat Investituram
feudi, per Resignationem in Domini manibus existentis, sed in favorem and rem
Emptoris, and quasi Domini fidei commissi, ut eum investiat; and de
Resignatione constet, cum Dominus Instrumento subscripserit, aut juramento
delato confessus vel habitus sit pro confesso, Resignationem factam and
admissam, Dominum ut Vasallum investiat cogi posse, explorati Juris est:
Emptore autem investito, qua front vendicabit Dominus Custodiam praedii and
filii venditoris, ejusque Maritagium, Non-introitum, aut alias obventiones ex
obitu venditoris, cum Vasallum habeat Emptorem, and ei investituram dederit
praedii ut optimi maximi, and quale ad venditorem pertinebat tempore
Resignationis. Adhaec, Jura ista Wardae, Relevii, Maritagii, and alia ejusmodi,
ideo introducta sunt, ut Vasalli haerede minore and per aetatem officio and
servitiis militaribus impari; Dominus feudum ob servitia concessum, ea causa
cessante, ad tempus quasi condiceret and rehaberet, donec haeres ad Legitimam
aetatem pervenerit: and cum uxores apud viros saepe uxorios plurimum possent,
Domini multum interest, ex qua familia uxorem ducat, ne forte Domino iniquior
aut inimica sit: Eae autem rations cessant Emptore investito, viro ad servitia
militaria parato and idoneo: nec refert quam uxorem ducat filius venditoris,
qui nec est, nec futurus est Domini Vasallus.

Omissis aliis quae pro ista sententia cumulari possent argumentis: quae pro
adversa sunt (quam possum paucis) perstringam and diluam. Primum and in Jure
fere unicum est; si venditor adhuc Vasallus nec devestitus est, ex ejus morte
Custodiam, si infra aetatem Legitimam est, and ejus Maritagium ad Dominum
pertinere, consequens est: antecedens autem verum esse, and venditorem haud
esse dissasitum ita arguitur; penes devestitum nullum residet Jus vel Juris
vestigium, quod alienare, aut in alium transfer queat; nemo siquidem plus
Juris in alium transfer potest, quam ipse habet; venditorem vero, venditione
celebrata and Resignatione secuta, non solum de facto alienare, sed in secundum
Emptorem, Jus etiam nec inutile aut inane transfer posse, ex eo liquet; Quod
secundus Emptor (ut superius attigimus) ex Resignatione in ejus gratiam, licet
posteriore, prior tamen investitus, potior erit primo etiam investito, sed
posterius: Et ab eo si possideat, praedium vendicabit and evincet.

Accedit Cragii nostri, Juris communis and Patrii consultissimi, seu opinio seu
Authoritas; ubi enim quaestionem istam (and satis prolixe) disceptavit; in eam
sententiam non tantum propendere, sed pedibus iisse videtur, Vasallum,
Resignatione tam ab eo facta quam a Domino acceptata, haud devestiri.

Adhaec, quemadmodum Natura, materiam forma quae inerat, nunquam private aut
exuit, nisi nova accedat; haud secus, Jura nulli Jus adimunt nisi alteri
quaeratur.

Sed Responsio in promptu est; primo enim, illud quod supponitur pro
fundamento, Viz. Secundum Emptorem primo investitum, priori posterius investito
potiorem esse, haud indubitatum aut extra quaestionis aleam est. Et Cragius
nullibi quam in ista disceptatione magis perplexus aut minus sibi constans:
Fatetur tamen, de eo fundamento moribus nostris variatum: Et Cragio, David
Mcgilleus Regius Advocatus, vir laudatissimus, ab eo ibi and alibi cum maximi
honoris praefatione laudatus, opponitur: and ejus non tantum sententia sed
Senatus-consultum and authoritas rei judicatae, cujus ibi mentio fit; qua,
Mcgilleo patrocinante; secundi Emptoris Investituram licet priorem, primo
Emptore agente action Rescissoria, nullam and irritam esse Judicatum est; quia
Alienatio facta fuerat a venditore devestito and non habente potestatem.

Hopaeus etiam Juris nostri peritissimus; sed (ut plerisque videbatur) nimiae
and captiosae subtilitatis, atomum and punctum distinguere videtur: Ait enim,
si Vasallus ex Alienatione and Resignatione devestitus, dederit subfeudum de se
tenendum, id irritum fore, utpote concessum a non habente potestatem; sin autem
dederit feudum de Domino tenendum, and Dominus secundum Emptorem primo
investierit, Alienationem and Investituram valere; and investitum priori
Emptori praeferendum. Quomodo autem penes venditorem Jus and potestas sit dandi
Jus nobilius, and feudum de Domino tenendum; eidem autem desit potestas dandi
Jus inferius and feudum de se tenendum, intellectu nedum explicatu difficile
est; Et Oedipo eget. Sed dato nunc moribus nostris in favorem diligentiae,
secundo Emptori, qui praedium bona fide comparavit and sibi vigilavit, Jura
subvenire; and diligentia praevertentem, and Jus consummatum adeptum, priori
Emptori praeferendum; non sequetur tamen venditorem quoad Dominum adhuc
Vasallum esse, nec devestitum quoad alios effectus, and eos praesertim, ut
Dominus, venditore vivo aut mortuo, ex ejus persona aut morte nihil commodi aut
obventionis petere aut consequi posset; cum feudum non tantum alienarit, sed a
sese penitus abdicarit, Domino consentiente, and feudum, per bacilli
traditionem, solennis in Resignationibus symboli, recipiente; sed ut Emptori
traderet; and Dominus confestim and unico contextu, per dicti symboli
traditionem, Emptori feudum reddere and Investituram concedere, si superstes
sit; sin fato functus, ejus haeredi, Juris remediis compelli possit.

2dum. Argumentum est, ab Incommodis, iisque haud paucis quae contrariae
sententiae assertores urgent. 1mo. exaggerant; eo temporis interstitio inter
Resignationem venditoris and Emptoris, Investituram (quod, Emptore negligente
aut moriente, incertum dictu, quam diuturnum futurum sit) Dominium directum
interea sterile and effoetum fore; feudi Custodiam, Maritagium, and alios
Dominii istius fructus and emolumenta, si ex persona venditoris haud obveniant,
quia vasallus esse desiit; ex persona Emptoris haud speranda; nec enim unquam
fuit, nec certum est an futurus sit Vasallus; siquidem multa cadunt inter
calicem supremaque labra: Porro, cum nec Alienationis instrumentum nec
Resignationis penes Dominum sit, sed illud penes Emptorem, istud penes
Tabelliones, homines isto seculo lubricae and suspectae fidei; in suspenso and
incertum fore, utrum Dominus sit venditori an Emptori; and colludentibus facile
esse utrum velint, and prout e re sua et sibi commodum fuerit, Domino Vasallum
obtrudere, celatis Instrumentis aut deletis.

Ad istud Argumentum, haud respondebo, quod vulgo dicitur, Incommodum non
solvere Argumentum nedum Jus: sed ostendam, casu supposito, quae supra memorata
sunt, non sequi incommoda: necenim verum est Dominium directum interea inutile
and infoecundum fore; nam Alienatione and Resignatione facta, quae non tam Jus
est quam via ad Jus, licet Emptor Jus in Re and Completum ante investituram
haud nanciscatur; ex Alienatione tamen Jus habet ad Rem; and ex Resignatione
recepta a Domino directo Jus in Re inchoatum; sed adeo efficax, tam quoad
Dominum quam Resignatarium, ut si venditor dolo malo alii vendiderit, and
Dominus directus dolo affinis fuerit, secundum Emptorem investiendo, neutri
impune sit; sed Actio detur primo Emptori contra venditorem ex Empto: Et si
inops sit, and contra eum actio inanis futura; datur adversus Dominum ex
Stellionatu and dolo, pro damno and interesse: Imo cum Resignatarius
recipiendae investiturae in spe proxima sit, and spes radicata in Jure multum
operetur, si nulla Domini mora aut cunctatio sit, habetur pro investito, quoad
Domini commoda and obventiones: quando enim stat per eum, cujus interest,
aliquid fieri ne id fiat, habetur pro facto and impleto: Si igitur
Resignatarius moras nectet nec Investituram petat, Terrae erunt in
Non-introitu, Et eo durante Dominus fructus consequetur; Et si moriatur,
Custodia and Maritagium haeredis, and ex haeredis rebellione ususfructus, si
per annum in ea perstiterit, and aliae id genus obventiones, ad Dominum
directum pertinebunt: haud secus quam si defunctus fuisset investitus. Et
quemadmodum mortuo Vasallo, ejus haeres etiamsi haereditatem non adierit, imo
repudiarit, pro investito habetur, eatenus ut Dominii fructus and emolumenta
obveniant, v. g. Non-introitus, Maritagium, and ex delictis Eschetae, seu
caduca, and privatio vel feudi vel ususfructus; nec enim ejus mora aut culpa
non petendo Investituram Domino obesse debet: Non absimili ratione;
Resignatarius, ubi de Domini commodo agitur, pro Vasallo censetur; si per eum
stet quo minus sit Vassallus. Quod de Incertitudine objicitur, facile diluitur;
si enim Terrae non tenentur de Domino Rege sed de alio Domino, sibi Dominus
cavere debet and suo periculo si secus faxit, sibique imputatur; nec fere
evenit aut contingere potest, ut Dominus aliquid detrimenti capiat; Vasallus
enim Domino invito haud obtruditur; and ante Resignationem cum Domino
transigitur de Laudimiis, and si quae alia ab Emptore praestanda sunt Domino,
ut ab omni periculo and incommodo securus sit. Non diffiteor long aliam
rationem esse Domini Regis; Cum enim Pater Patriae sit, nec sit e dignitate sua
causari aliquem e subditis sibi iniquum aut infensum; nullo delectu aut
discrimine Resignationes recipit, per eos quibus eam Provinciam demandavit.
Adhaec, Principes de rebus publicis solliciti, privatis superesse nequeunt; and
viris clarissimis, qui a Rationibus sunt (utcunque impigris and sedulis) haud
mirum est si aliquando imponatur; sed fraus deprehensa punitur: and lege
consultissima statutum, Regis Ministrorum Incuriam and Negligentiam Regi haud
officere: nec difficile adhibere remedia quibus fraudibus and incommodis obviam
eatur, and inter alia illud esset haud spernendum, si Resignatione facta
Instrumentum Resignationis statim conficeretur, subscribentibus etiam tam
Resignante quam Resignatario, and apud Cameram Rationum deponatur; alioqui
Resignatio habeatur pro infecta; sic enim constabit Resignationem celebratam,
and incommoda supradicta cessabunt. Interea, quae pro Negativa disseruimus,
intelligi velim, si compertum sit Resignationem factam, nec fraudem subesse, eo
casu; quia omne Jus a Rege ut Juris font profluit; and si scriptum sit,
sanxit; si moribus introductum permisit, and quasi tacito consensu firmavit;
quod in alios statuerit Jure uti debet.

Cum Deus nobis haec otia fecerit aut fieri permiserit, statueram ea utcunque
oblectare id genus exercitationibus; and comperto quaestionem in foro
ventilari, videbar mihi operae pretium facturus, si, in casu arduo, exitus
dubii and ancipitis, and quicunque demum futurus sit magni momenti, quid Juris
sit dispicerem; and quid meae esset opinionis dicerem; id feci eo animi
candore; ut nec in Regem studio, quod mihi semper maximum fuerat, nec alio
affectu transversum rapi, mihi permiserim; licet in causa simili etiam res mea
ageretur, nec socero nec vitrico nec aliis ultimus haeres fui; nec assentatione
aut aliis artibus ab aliquo opes eblanditus aut adeptus sum nec munus: antequam
enim ad munera, eodem quo nunc mihi ereptum est impetu, and ab iisdem raptus
sum tantum non invitus, and eorum quae mihi acciderunt praesagus: Deo
largiente, and industriae Laboriosae and innoxiae, and alienis haud inhianti,
favente, fui and adhuc sum Superior and Dominus directus haud unius Vasalli:
sed cum ista animo agitarem, immo persoripsissem, haud animo praejudicandi
nedum sugillandi amplissimi Senatus sententiam, incertus quaenam futura esset;
sed ne animus negotiis assuetus, immo ab ineunte aetate innutritus, nunc
ignobili otio and desidia torpesceret: tandem mihi nunciatum est Senatum pro
Affirmativa judicasse, secundum actorem Regis Donatarium.

Retention.
QVaeritur, In the Cases of Compensation (mentioned in the Questions second and
third anent Compensation in the Letter C.) If at least the Defender may
pretend, that he should not be in worse case, than if the Assignation were not
made; and therefore ought to have Retention until his Debt be liquidate? It is
Answered, That there is no ground for Retention, but the Defender ought to have
done Diligence to affect the Debt due to him; which he might have done by
Inhibition upon the Dependence, or by assigning his Action, to the effect
Arrestment might have been made in his hands of the Debt due by him.

Cum refundere oportet impensas and meliorationes, Jus Retentionis competit;
quia interest magis per Exceptionem retinere, quam per actionem repetere. Jus
Fluviat. p. 779. n. 78.

Retours.
IF the Sheriff-Clerk, and Sheriff of the Shire, to which the Lands are unite,
may not give Seasin, and will be liable to answer in capiendo Securitatem, for
what is contained in the Retour, as to both Lands?

Retoured Duty.
AN Annualrent of One Hundred Pound Sterling being given out of a Barony, for a
Sum of Money lent to the Baron upon that Surety, to be holden of the Superior,
Quaeritur If the Barony, being of a considerable Rent, suppose Nine Thousand
Merks per annum; and the new extent of the haill Barony being but Twenty
Pounds, if the Annualrent should be in Non-entry, whether the Non-entry should
be the full Annualrent, upon that pretense that valet seipsum? Or if it should
be only a proportion of the retoured Duty, viz. The fifth part? Answer. It is
thought, that it should be only a proportion of the retoured Duty; And valet
seipsum is only understood, when there is no other retoured Duty; And in this
case, it appears there is no other retoured Duty, In so far as the whole Barony
and Rent being retoured, the Annualrent being the fifth part is consequently
retoured: And it were absurd, that for the Non-entry of an Annualrent, there
should be more due than for the whole Barony; Specially seeing the Superior
wants not a Vassal of the Barony to serve him for the whole Barony; and the
Annualrenter is not properly a Vassal obliged to serve, being infeft only for
surety of his Money.

Return of Lands to the Superior, upon a Provision.
IF there should be any Difference betwixt Vltimus Haeres, and the King
succeeding upon a Provision of Return, Failieing Heirs male? Ratio Dubitandi,
An ultimus Haeres and the Donatar is liable to Debts; but in the other Case, it
is doubtful: Because it is a Maxim, that when ever Lands are returned to the
Superior, either ad Remanentiam, or ad Tempus, as in the Case of Forefaulture,
or Recognition, or Ward, or Non-entry, they return pura and ut profecta sunt:
and specially in Ward-lands, and where it appears that the Superior elegit
familiam, and has given Lands with an express Provision of Return; it may seem
reasonable, that seeing he has none to serve him in the Family, he may have the
Lands back in the same condition he did give them.

Return of Lands to the King, failiening of Heirs Male.
THE King having disponed Lands without an Onerous Cause to a Relation or
Servant, and his Heirs male; which Failieing to return, if the Masculine Line
fail, Quaeritur, Will the King have Right without the Burden of Debts? 2do. If
the Lands be comprised, (although the King should be free of Personal Debts)
Will the Compriseing, though expired be void, Quia resoluto Jure dantis,
resolvitur Jus accipientis?

Reversion.
A Reversion being granted, failiening Heirs of the Granters Body; may the
Granter dispone as absolute Fiar? Will his Wife have a Liferent by the Contract
of Marriage? Will she have a Terce? So that the Effect of Reversion will be
only against his other Heirs than those of his Body, if the Lands be not
disponed or burdened by the Fiar? Lamberton contra the Relict of Plenderguest.

What is the Import of that Clause in Wadsets subjoined to Reversions, That it
should not be lawful to redeem, but by payment not only of the Sum given upon
the Wadset, but of all other Sums due by the Granter his Heirs and Successors
to the Receiver and his foresaids; if it be effectual not only against the
Heirs, and those who represent the Granter, but against singular Successors?
Rations Dubitandi, 1mo. The said Clause is neither a Reversion nor Eik to a
Reversion, which ought to be special, and eontain certain Sums, or liquid
Obligements. 2do. Destructive of Commerce, seeing it cannot be constant, whether
the Person having Right to the Reversion, be such as may be dealt with; seeing
it does not appear by the Register, whether he be owing to the Creditor any
other Sums by that upon the Wadset. 3tio. If the Reversion should go per mill
manus, Will Sums due by all these who had Right thereto to the Haver of the
Wadset or his foresaids, be real; So as to affect the Reversion. 4to. may the
Creditor take voluntar Assignations to debts due by his Debtor, and so prefer
such of the Creditors as he pleases, and burden the Reversion, so that the
Debtor cannot redeem. 5to. If other Creditors compryse from the Debtor,
before the haver of the wadset be creditor in other Sumes to the Granter, will
he be prejudged by the Comprysing as medium impedimentum?

What is the Import of an Eik to Reversion? If the Creditor will have a real
interest to affect the Duties, as if it were an Eik to the Back-tack? Ratio
Dubitandi, The said Sum is due upon the Wadset, and eo ipso that it is eiked to
the Reversion, it is eiked to the Tack; and plus valet quod agitur, etc. And on
the other part, Reversions are stricti Juris, and import no more than quod
sonant, viz. That it should not be lawful to Redeem, but upon payment of the
Sum contained in the Eik.

Premonition being used (upon a Reversion) to the Wadsetter for receiving his
Money, Quaeritur, If there be Locus Poenitentiae, so that it may be past from?
Ratio Dubitandi, Licet Renunciare Juri pro se introducto. On the other Part, it
may be pretended, That Jus is quaesitum to the Wadsetter; so that if it be his
interest to have his Money, he may upon the Premonition call for it. The
Question will be greater, if there be an Infeftment of Annualrent with a
Reversion to the Granter, without an Obligement to pay the Principal Sum upon
Requisition; seeing the Person who has Right to the Annualrent, may be concerned
to have the Principal Sum; which he cannot have, if the Heretor do pass from
his Premonition.

If a Comprysing of Lands disponed to the Wife, will Import Jus revocandi
competent to the Husband, so that the Deed in favors of the Wife cannot be
said morte confirmari, in respect of the said medium impedimentum? Item,
Whether at least the Wife will have Right to the Legal?

Reversions of Comprysings against appearand Heirs.
IF Comprysings or Adjudications against Appearand Heirs do not expire before
they be twenty five Years? Ratio Dubitandi, That the Act of Parliament is in
favors of Minors having Right, and the Appearand Heir has no Right: and in
Adjudications they renounce to be Heir: and there is no Reason that the
Creditor should be prejudged, upon Pretense of favor to a Person who has no
Right.

If the Appearand Heir be reponed before he be twenty five Years, the Creditor
who would adjudge the Reversion competent to him, will consequently be restored?

Reversion Personal.
QVaeritur, If a Reversion that is Personal (excluding Heirs and Assigneys) may
be comprysed? Ratio Dubitandi, A Compryser is upon the matter, and in
construction of Law a Legal Assigney: And on the contrare, Voluntar
Assignations are only excluded, but not Comprysing: And there is not par ratio,
because it is in arbitrio of the Person who has Right of Reversion personal to
himself, either to Redeem, or not: but a Debtor having Right to a Reversion,
ought to satisfy his Debt; And if he will not make use of his Right of
Reversion to that purpose, The Law gives a Remedy by Comprising.

If the Compryser of such a Reversion may redeem after the Death of the Person
to whom it granted? Ratio Dubitandi, The Heretor whose Lands are affected with
the Reversion, ought not to be in worse Case, at least as to the Time and
Endurance of the reversion: and the Compriser sibi imputet, That he does not
make use of his Right in time: and he has advantage enough in Law, that the
Reversion being Personal may be Comprysed.

If a Reversion, that is Personal, Does fall under Forefaulture? Ratio
Dubitandi, That the Fisk is not so favorable as the Creditor and Compryser:
And yet it is to be considered, that whatever is competent to the Traitor does
forefault to the Fisk: And otherways, it would be an Encouragement to commit
Treason, if such Reversions and Faculties being only competent to Parents and
Relations, they cannot forefault; so that their Children may bruik the Estate,
notwithstanding of their Treason.

When a Person has right to Redeem personally to himself, after the useing of
the Order he may assign; But Quaeritur, If having proceeded to his Order by
premonition, he decease before completing of the same, in that case he may
assign, and the Assigney may prosecute the Order? Ratio Dubitandi, He has
declared his Will to redeem: And yet on the other part, Actus inceptus non
habetur pro completo: sed Cogitandum.

Quid Juris, In such a Case, In Retractu Gentilitio? And if in any Case, in
actibus arbitrariis facultatis, aliqualis Declaratio arbitrii, be sufficient?

A Reversion being to a Person; and the Heirs male of his Body allanerly,
excluding Assigneys and other Heirs; Quaeritur if it falls under the
Forefaulture of the person to whom the Reversion is granted as said is? Ratio
Dubitandi. That all others are excluded, both Heirs of Line and Assigneyes: And
on the other part, the Reversion is not merely personal, but Jus Haereditarium
transmissibile to the Heirs foresaid of his Body? Cogitandum.

Quae Ratio, That a Reversion granted to a person only, and not to Heirs and
Assigneyes; or a power to dispone reserved in the Right granted with the same,
may be comprysed, and yet does not fall under Forefaulture? Answer. Nothing
falls under Forefaulture that is personal only, and which is neither cessible
nor transmissibile ad haeredes: Whereas a Reversion that is merely Personal,
though it cannot be conveyed by a voluntar Right and Assignation, may be
comprised: Seeing by the Comprising, the Person who has the Reversion his debt
is satisfied; and he ought to have made use of the said Faculty and Right to
that Purpose: And seeing he is in dolo, that he does not make use of it, the Law
does justly provide that it may be comprised, and used to that end; which both
in Law and Conscience he should have used for himself: Et interest Reipublicae
ut quis re sua been utatur.

Legal Reversion competent to Idiots, etc.
QVaeritur, If a Fatuous Person or Idiot, having Right to a Legal Reversion has
the Benefit competent to a Minor, to redeem after his recovery? Answer, It is
thought, not: seeing by our Law and Custom, Minors before the Act of Parliament
1621. had not that benefit: And by the said Act of Parliament, it is given only
to Minors, Et Exceptio firmat Regulam, etc. And neither can Statutes be
extended, nor is there eadem Ratio, seeing the time of Minority is defined;
Whereas a Fatuous Person may live a very long time; and it is hard that the
Creditor should be in incerto all that time, as to his Right and Dominium,
whether it be simple or redeemable. Earl of Kincardin.

If Actions upon Contracts do prescribe against Fatuous Persons? Answer, They
do not prescribe; quia non valent agere: and there is a Difference betwixt
Prescription of Actions, and of Legal and other limited Reversions, which are
only given for a certain time: Because Jus Limitatum, to a certain time
producit limitatum effectum, viz. A limited Action during the said time: And it
being just, and the Compriser or Heretors Interest, That the Reversion should
be only limited, and for the said time, ne Dominium sit in incerto, as said is,
he cannot be in worse case by Reason of the condition of the Party who has
Right to the Reversion, being Minor or Fatuous: and in effect by a Reversion,
the Compriser or Heretors Right, is Jus resolubile sub condition potestativa;
and in such cases it cannot be pretended, that the party could not satisfy the
condition, being Minor and Fatuus.

Rights made by Dyvours.
QVaeritur, Whereas by the Act of Parliament anent Dyvours, Rights granted
without an Onerous Cause, in prejudice of Creditors, are reduceible; without
Prejudice always of those who have acquired Rights from the Confident Person
bona fide: If the said Salvo should be extended to Comprysers? Ratio Dubitandi,
That it appears hard that Creditors should be prejudged, and be in worse case
by the Fraud of their Debtor, and their action (being competent to them and
nata immediately after the fraudful Alienation) should be taken away from them
without their own Deed: and yet the said Salvo being only in favors of
Purchasers, and favore Commercii, and of these who bona fide contract with
Persons that are not inhibited, neither they nor their Authors should be
excluded; and Comprysers cannot plead the favor of Commerce, seeing they have
not any Commerce nor Contract with a Confident Person, but against their will
use Execution against what they conceive does belong to him, which they do upon
their own hazard, and therefore ought not to be in better case than their
Debtor, and cannot have his Right but as he had it, Et cum sua causa.

Fraudulent Rights in prejudice of Creditors.
A Debtor after expired Apprysings, Dispones his Estate so incumbered, by a
Contract bearing an obligement that the Disponer should cause the Comprisers
Dispone their Right: or that it should be lawful to the Buyer to acquire them:
And after all should be purged, the Buyer being obliged to pay the Sum
thereinmentioned, and accordingly having paid the same to the Seller,
Quaeritur, If such a Transaction, though it cannot be questioned upon that head
that it is without a just price, yet may be questioned upon the Act of
Parliament, as being without a necessary cause; and of purpose to defraud
Creditors, who had not preferable Rights?

If a Person be in that condition, that his Debt will exceed the value of his
Estate; and because his condition is not known, and being a person of Credit he
is not inhibited; any confident friend knowing his condition, if he should
acquire a Right to his Estate in hail or in part, for a price equivalent, of
purpose that he may have a Livelihood, Quaeritur, if such a Right may be
quarelled as fraudulent? Ratio Dubitandi, That it is for an Onerous cause: And
on the other part, The Cause was not just nor necessary: and it is presumed
that the said course was taken in defraud of the Creditors.

Right a non habente potestatem.
THE King having Disponed Lands, having fallen in his hands by Forefaulture;
and the Infeftment being past under the Great Seal; the person to whom it was
granted did decease before Seasin; and thereafter another Donator procured a
Right under the Great Seal; and was Infeft thereupon, Quaeritur, If the second
Gift may be questioned as being a non habente potestatem; in respect the King
was fully denuded in favors of the first Donator, and nothing could be done
more to denude him by himself: and the taking of Seasin is not the Act of the
King, but of the Party: And it could not be imputed to the Donator, that he did
not take Seasin, being surprised by Death: And double Rights are forbidden by
the Law?

Rights ad Tractum futuri Temporis.
WHen a Tack or Annuity for certain years, belongs to a person; It does not
belong to his Executors; because it has Tractum futuri Temporis; But if he have
Right to it by the Escheat of another person, it will belong to his Executors.
To consider what is the reason of the difference.

Right in Trust.
HIs Majesty having upon the Forefaulture of the Earl of Argyle given a part of
the Estate to My Lord Lorn with the Title of Earl; beside what he was Infeft in
before: And having given of Provision for the rest of the Children alse many
Lands as would extend to the Rents alloted to them: and having given out of the
Estate a Liferent to the Lady Argyle; and the rest of the Estate to the
Creditors: and having appointed the Lords of Session Commissioners, for hearing
the Creditors claims, and determining the same; and upon their competition for
preference. There is also a Right of the Estate settled upon Three Trustees to
the longest liver of them Three, without mention of Heirs and Assigneys, being
Three Clerks, one of the Session, one of the Council, and one of the Exchequer,
to the uses foresaid; and that the said Estate may be conveyed, and alloted, as
His Majesty had Ordered: Quaeritur, If a Signature to the effect foresaid be
habilis modus? Answer. It is thought, not; Seeing there being no mention of
Heirs, the said Right granted to the Trustees, if they should all Die, will
evanish; albeit it be granted to them in Fee: And therefore it is thought, that
the proper way were, That a Commission only should be granted to the Trustees,
to Dispone to such persons, as the Commissioners should appoint: And as to
Lands holden of the King, Charters should be granted making mention of the
Forefaulture, and Commission and Disposition made by virtue thereof, and
ratifying the same; and conform thereto giving and Disponing the Lands
thereincontained.

Ripae and Ripatica.
USus Riparum est publicus, and cuilibet licet naves ad eas appellere; Ripae
enim hanc servitutem debent flumini, cujus usus sine usu riparum nullus est:
and servitus ista a natura imposita videtur, ut usu fluminis concesso and ea
concessa intelligantur sine quibus eo uti non possumus. Jus Fluviaticum p. 28.
n. 362.

Ripatica penduntur pro trajectione, quae navi fit ab una Ripa in aliam: and
sunt omnia Emolumenta and reditus quae Princeps capit in Ripis fluminum,
vectigalia scilicet and potestas cogendi ad muniendas Ripas. Idem p. 30. n. 375.

Quando Dies cedit in Grass Roums, when there is Question betwixt Fiars and
Liferenters?
IT being the Custom of the Country in some places, That Lands consisting of
Grass-Roums, are Yearly set from Whitesunday to Whitesunday thereafter, for
payment of a Silver Duty at Martinmass after they are set; Quaeritur Therefore,
If the Fiar survive the Whitesunday, but dies before the Martinmass, if he
will have any part of the Martinmass Duty? Or if it will belong entirely to the
Relict, Liferenter, or next Fiar? Answer. It is thought, That he nor his
Executors would have no part of that Duty, being paid for the said Year,
betwixt Whitesunday and the next ensueing Whitesunday: Seeing he deceased (as
said is) before Dies either cessit, or venit. Monmouth.

In some places Grass-Roums are set from Whitesunday to Whitesunday, but the
Term of Payment is Candlemass, and Lambmass. Quaeritur, If the Fiar decease
after Martinmass after it is set, but before the first Term of Payment; if he
will have any part of that Years Duty? Answer. It is thought, he will have the
half; and what ever be the Term of Payment, Dies cedit at Martinmass, for the
half Year preceding.

Seeing for the Duty of Corn-lands, though payable betwixt Yule and Candlemass,
yet Dies cedit at Whitesunday and Martinmass as in the Question foresaid;
Quaeritur, What is the reason of so great difference betwixt these and
Grass-Roums? Answer. That the Duty being paid for the Cropped, the Terms of
Whitesunday and Martinmass are respected; so that the Fiar surviving
Whitesunday, his Executors have Right to the half of the Year; upon that
consideration (as appears) because the Lands are then fully labored, and
Sown; and whoever survives Martinmass has Right to that Terms Duty, because
the Cropped is then fully collected: But as to Grass-Roums set, (as said is) at
Whitesunday to Whitesunday thereafter; the Grass only is to be considered,
which upon the matter is the Cropped of these Roums; and the reason why the Duty
of the whole Year is paid at Martinmass, appears to be, that before Martinmass
the Grass-profites are collected by selling of their Wool and Beasts, at or
before that time.

Quaeritur, If the Fiar decease after Martinmass and has not uplifted the Duty,
will the same divide betwixt him and the Liferenter? And if he has uplifted the
same, if his Executors would be Liable to refound the half to the Liferenter?
Answer, Cogitandum. For if it be not uplifted it appears reasonable that the
Liferenter should have the half, and if it be uplifted, it appears hard that
the Fiar having uplifted the same Jure suo and bona fide, should be Liable to
render any part of the same; specially seeing the Liferenter may have the same
advantage if she should decease after Martinmass.

If Corn Roums should be set in the same Terms, That the Duty should be paid
at Martinmass after they are set, Quid Juris? Seeing the said payment will be
before the next Cropped, and the Fiar may die before both the Terms of the next
Year, for which the Duty is due? Answer. It is thought, that the Fiar cannot
set the said Lands in manner foresaid, in prejudice of the Liferenter: And if
the Tennent take the same that way, it is upon his own hazard: And the
Liferenter would force him to pay the Duty, after the ordinary Terms of the
Country.

Quaeritur, If a Tennent have a Liferent-Tack, and he Die after Whitesunday, If
the Tack will not continue for that Year? Seeing the time of Removing of Goods
necessary for laboring is past before his decease, and Roums being set from
Whitesunday to Whitesunday, annus coeptus, as to Laboring, habetur pro
completo. Vide Annuum Legatum.

Quaeritur, If there be not the same reason as to Liferenters, in Laboring or
possessing the Land with their own Goods, seeing their Executors cannot remove
the Goods after that time, and the Year of the Liferent is begun?

S.
Act Salvo.
QVaeritur, If Ratifications in Parliament, with the Clause, That they should
not be Liable to the general Salvo, Will prejudge a third Petson having
undoubted Right, and having been secured by a general Law, viz. The Act Salvo
Jure: The Ratification being only a private Act, and the persons concerned not
being called?

Seasin.
A Posterior Seasin, but first Registrate, whether will it be preferred to the
prior Seasin, Registrate thereafter though debito tempore?

Registration of Seasins.
IF a Seasin of Reversion granted by a Bishop will militate against the
Successor, albeit it be not Registrate in the Register of Seasins? Ratio
Dubitandi, The Bishop does not succeed as Heir: And yet he cannot be said to be
a singular successor, and Bishops they are Corpora singula.

Special Services and Precepts of Clare constat.
A Person being served Heir-male or Provision in special in certain Lands, and
deceasing before he be Infeft: Quaeritur, If his general Heirs will be liable
to the Debt of that person to whom he was served Special Heir?

The same Question may be moved upon a Precept of Clare constat, whereupon
Infeftment has not followed; seeing in neither of the said cases there is Aditio
Haereditatis before Infeftment; whereas in general Services there is Aditio as
to any Estate, whereupon there is no Infeftment?

Servitude and Extinguishment thereof.
IF a Person who has Right to a Servitude out of other Lands, should acquire
also Praedium Serviens; Quaeritur, If eo ipso that he has Right, both to
Praedium Dominans and Serviens, the Servitude does extinguish; Quia res sua
nemini servit? and if he should thereafter Dispone Praedium Serviens, whether
the said Servitude not being reserved; either he or his singular successor in
the Right of the other Lands can claim the same? Or if he should Dispone
praedium Dominans without mention of the Servitude, but with all Liberties and
pertinents; whether will that Servitude revive, as being only Sopita for the
time, while both Lands belonged to one person, but not extinct by any
Discharge, or deed freeing the Lands of the same?

If a person has constitute by Writ a Servitude, and thereafter Dispone his
Lands without excepting of the same. Quaeritur, If it will militate against a
singular Successor? Answer. Such Jura Haereditaria which are in rem, non
Transferuntur nudis pactis sed traditione; and by possession, which is instar
traditionis: But if the Servitude be Discontinua as v. g. the leading of
Sea-ware, which is not done but at a certain time of the Year, Quaeritur, what
shall be done to perfect the Constitution? It is thought, it may be published
by making Intimation thereof to the Tennents, and at the Paroch Church, and
upon the ground: and the Granter, if need be, may be Inhibited.

Si alicui Jus hauriendi and adeundi conoessum est, utrumque habet: Si tantum
hauriendi, inest aditus: Si tantum adeundi ad fontem, inest and haustus: aliquo
enim concesso, omne illud, sine quo hoc Jure uti nequimus, concessum
intelligitur. Jus Fluviat. p. 89. initio.

Aut vicini aquam hauserunt, Jure familiaritatis aut Jure acquisito; hoc casu
cogi nequeunt, ut in font mutationem admittant; illo possunt. Idem. p. 90. n.
40.

Lords of Session.
IF the Lords of Session have power to Judge Appellatione remota, seeing they
have the same power, which the Lords of Session had formerly? It is thought,
that they have the same power Extensive as to the subject of their
Jurisdiction; but not Intensive, as to the quality foresaid, if it be not
expressed; being ex reservatis quae non transeunt nisi exprimantur: Seeing
Adaequatio, by the clause with the same power, is to be understood as to the
ordinar power belonging to Judicatories and Incorporations qua talia; and not
as to any Extraordinary Power and Privilege: As if a Burgh should be Erected
with the same privileges belonging to any Burgh within the Kingdom, they will
not have Right to be Sheriffs within themselves; by reason other Burghs have
that Right, non qua Burga; but by a special privilege: And some Lords of
Regality do pretend to the Escheats of the Persons within their Regality upon
Horning, and yet a Right of Regality by the general clause, will not carry the
same.

If the Lords of Session be to be considered as Judges only, or Magistrates,
and Praetores habentes Imperium in some cases?

Sheriffs.
IF Precepts of Sheriffs may be put in Execution, by their Officers, after
their Death?

Ships.
IF, a Ship being abroad, Traditio Instrumentorum (to a Buyer, viz.) of the
vendition, be sufficient?

If a Ship be poindable, and quomodo?

Solarium.
SOlarium est vectigal, quod a superficiario penditur pro Jure superficiei in
solo. Jus Fluviat. p. 70. n. 15.

Sponsalia.
IF, after a solemn Contract of Marriage, one of the Parties Marry otherways;
will that Marriage be lawful, even though after Banns upon the said Contract of
Marriage? Answer. Contracts of Marriage and Sponsalia inducunt Jus ad rem, as
in other personal Contracts, and Dispositions anent Lands; but not in re sine
Traditione; which in Marriage, is only when sequitur Benedictio in facie
Ecclesiae, or Concubitus.

If Sponsalia be consummate and purified per Copulam, and a pursuit being
intented for Solemnizing the Marriage, and Declaring the Issue lawful, the
Defender die in the interim; may the pursuit be transferred in favors of the
Wife and Children, ad hunc effectum at least, that she may have Jus Relictae,
and they be Heirs and Executors to their Father? Eadem est quaestio, as to
promise and copula.

Rejecta distinctione Canonistarum in Sponsalia de praesenti and de futuro,
prout illi ista accipiunt: quaelibet Sponsalia, quibuscunque verbis contracta,
nihil aliud sunt quam Conventiones de Matrimonio in futurum contrahendo.
Christenius de Jure Matrimonii. Dissert. 1.. 3.

A modo tamen contrahendi, usu hodierno dividi possunt Sponsalia, in pura sine
adjectione alicujus conditionis, and Conditionalia quae honesta condition
apposita contrahuntur, ut ducam si Pater consenserit; illa de praesenti; ista
de futuro haud male appellantur. Ibidem.

Qui Sponsalia contrahunt, nuptias celebrare compelluntur, legitimis
coercitionibus: and Contractus Sponsalitius, trinundino promulgatur in
Ecclesia, aut pro Curia. Ibidem sent. 6.

Concubitu purificantur Sponsalia sub condition, and statim fit conjugium;
quia censentur sponsi a condition recedere: nec obest protestatio se non
recedere, utpote contraria facto. Christen. de Sponsal. quaest. 9.

Statuta.
STatuta, Ratione Bonorum sui Territorii, obligant etiam non subjectos; ipsas
enim res afficiunt, sive a Cive possideantur sive ab Advena. These. Bes. lit. S.
110. ante finem. addit. p. 902.

Steelbow and Heirship.
WHether a Roum being set in Tack for certain Years with Steelbow-Goods, as
Oxen etc. will the Steelbow Goods belong to the Heir who has Right to the Tack?
Or to the Executor? Ratio Dubitandi, Both the Lands and the Goods are set in
the Tack as Fundus Instructus, and the Duty is payable in contemplation of
both: so whoever has Right to the Tack, has Right to both, the Tack being Jus
individuum. 2. The Goods are like nativi and ascriptitii and addicti glebae. 3.
What is to ly fixed for diverse years cannot be reckoned inter mobilia. 4. It
were hard to think, that a Relict and Bairns should have their Legitim out of
Goods that are not in the possession of the Defunct, nor would be for diverse
years. And it would seem, That eadem est Ratio as to the setter of the Tack,
and his Heirs and Executors.

Pecora dantur in socidam, cum animalium casus in Pastorem transfertur; qua
conventione pecora ferrea effici and appellari solent; quod fit in multis
provinciis Germaniae; ubi cum fundo certus numerus ovium and vaccarum in feudum
dari solet; ita ut Vasallus feudo sinito eundem numerum supplere and restituere
teneatur. Besold. These. in verbo Eisern Biehe. lit. E. p. 224.

Strangers, See Process against Strangers, lit. P.
ALL Nations are Municipia, and the World a great Civitas: They have that
Relation and necessitude, that (...) sunt, and owe Justice to all persons of
whatsoever Nation, according to the Law of the place, where they Contract, with
respect to that place; sibi enim legem dixerunt: If Justice be refused, datur
remedium pig norationis seu Repressaliarum.

Goods or Debts belonging to Strangers.
IF Mobilia or Nomina belonging to Strangers (v. g. in England) should be
confirmed here? Or if it be sufficient they should be confirmed in England?
Ratio Dubitandi, sequuntur personam: On the other part, they are a Scottish
Subject or Interest.

Subjects living Abroad.
A Native Living Abroad and being Popish, and going to the Mass where he
lives, Quaeritur, Whether he Forfaulteth his Estate in Scotland?

Item, If he Intercommune there with persons Forefaulted in Scotland; whether
he be Liable, as having contraveened the Law of Scotland; so that if he have
any Estate in Scotland it may be affected?

If a Prince may command a Subject living Abroad under his Enemy to retire and
come home? And if he disobey, may he be proceeded against, and be divested of
any Fortune and Liberty competent to him as a Native?

Quoties Rex, Princeps, vel alius, in alterius Regis vel Principis Territorio
bona habet and possidet, ratione quorum, Juramentum fidelitatis praestare
solitus est; per hoc non efficitur, ratione suae personae, seu personali
obligatione, subditus aut subjectus; nec quoad personam sortitur forum nisi
secundum quid; ita ut pro tali possessione bonorum conveniri possit, coram
Judice loci, in cujus Territorio bona sunt. These. Bes. in litera H. 70.
Huldigung. p. 402.

Substitutes.
A Bond for a Sum of Money being granted to Sempronius; and Failieing of him by
decease to Titius, and Titius his Heirs and Assigneys, Quaeritur, who is Fiar?
Answer. The first person: Titius being only substitute, Failieing of him by
decease; and Successor in spe.

Quaeritur, If Sempronius may dispose of the said Sum by Testament as he may
inter vivos? Ratio Dubitandi. That Titius is substitute by a deed inter vivos.
Answer. It is thought, he may: Seeing such Deeds are upon the matter Donationes
mortis causa; in which voluntas est ambulatoria.

Quaeritur, If the said Substitute will be liable as Heir of Tailie? It is
thought, he should be liable; Seeing if there were an Infeftment in the terms
foresaid, the Substitute could not succeed but as Heir of Provision.

If a Bond bearing the Substitution foresaid be registrate, Quaeritur If the
Substitute (being named as said is) may charge thereupon? Answer. It is
thought, not; because the Bond being registrate, is a Decree as to the first
Person: but the Substitute having only right, instar haeredis by Succession; he
cannot charge no more than an Heir of Provision.

Substitutio.
SVbstitutio est Designatio secundi, vel ulterioris haeredis.

Substitutio vulgaris est ea quae fit in casu vulgari, haereditatis non aditae
nec acquisitae. Perez. Institut. lib. 2. tit. 15.

Substitutio Pupillaris est, qua Parents Liberis suis in potestate sua and
impuberibus substituunt, in casu mortis ante Pupillarem aetatem, and acquisitae
haereditatis.

Constitutione Divi Marci and Very, substituens in alterutrum casum duntaxat
vel Vulgaris vel Pupillaris substitutionis, in utrumque substituisse
intelligitur; alterum sciz. express, alterum tacit. Perez. Ibidem.

Quaeritur, De substitutionibus in Taliis nostris, istis verbis, viz. Cum
Terrae disponuntur Titio and haeredibus suis de corpore suo prognatis; quibus
deficientibus haeredibus masculis etc. utrum sunt pupillares an vulgares?
Responsio. Eas utramque Substitutionem continere: Deficientibus enim Haeredibus
institutis in primo gradu, quolibet casu, sive non adierint, sive haereditatem
adierint and defecerint, ad substitutos haereditas pertinet.

Substitution in Bonds.
A Bond being granted to the Creditor, and failiening of him by decease to
another person, Quaeritur, If the Person substitute will be liable to the
Creditors Debt, at the least pro tanto; Seeing the Sum was in bonis, and his
Debt ought to be satisfied out of his Estate?

If such Bonds may be altered by the Creditor, not by uplifting which he may do
being Fiar, but also by changing the Bonds, and taking the same to himself and
any other person, or to his Heir? Seeing the Bonds seem to be a perfect Donation
in favors of the Substitute: and on the other part they may be thought mortis
causa.

If the Creditor may dispose of such Sums by Testament?

A Bond being granted by diverse Persons to my Lord Dundonald, and failiening
of him by Decease to his Son the Lord Cochran his Heirs and Executors: and
after the decease of Sir John Nicolson one of the Debitors, he having taken a
Bond of Corroboration from his Brother Sir William to himself; and failiening
of him by decease to his Grandchild then Lord Cochran (his Father being
deceased:) Quaeritur, Seeing the first Bond stands as to the rest of the
Debitors; Whether the Lord Cochran his Fathers Executors, will have Right to
the same? And what course shall be taken to get the Right of the former Bond
settled in Cochran's Person?

Quaeritur, If the former Bond being null; and in the Bond of Corroboration
there be an Obligement to Infeft; if the nature of the Sum as to the former
Quality of Moveable, be altered?

A Bond being granted to Robert Selkirk Merchant in Edinburgh, and Katherine
Inglis his Spouse, the longest liver of them two in Conjunctfie; and failiening
of them both by decease to Robert Selkirk their lawful Son, and to the Bairns
lawfully to be procreat of his Body; which failiening, to the other Heirs
lawfully procreate, or to be procreate betwixt the said Robert and his said
Spouse: Which all failiening to the said Katherine Inglis her own nearest and
lawful Heirs, Executors or Assigneys: with this Provision, That it shall be
leisum and lawful to the said Robert Selkirk Elder at any time dureing his
lifetime, vel in articulo mortis, by himself alone, to uplift, discharge, or
otherways assign and dispone the Sums in the said Bond, in haill or in part, to
any Person or Persons, he shall think expedient, and to make and grant all
Writes, Rights, and Securities requisite thereanent, in due and competent Form,
without the Consents and Subscriptions of the said Katherine Inglis his Spouse
and Robert Selkirk his Son or his foresaids, had or obtained thereto in any
sort.

The abovementioned Robert Selkirk the Husband, and Robert Selkirk his Son
being both deceased, without Heirs either of the Body of the said Robert
Selkirk Younger, or of the Marriage betwixt the said Robert Elder, and the said
Katherine Inglis; so that the said Katharine has Right to the said Bond:
Quaeritur, Whether the same will pertain to her in her own Right as Fiar, or as
substitute in the last place, and representing the Fiar? And who is Fiar by the
said Bond, Whether the said Robert Elder his Son, or the said Katharine, who
pretends to be Fiar, because the Right of Succession terminats upon her and her
Heirs?

It is Answered, That albeit when a Bond is conceived simply to two Persons in
Conjunctifie, and the Heirs of one of them; the Person to whose Heirs the Sum
is provided is understood to be Fiar; yet when there are diverse degrees of
substitution of the Heirs of diverse Persons; the Person whose Heirs are first
substitute is Fiar; and both his own Heirs substitute in the first place, and
the other Heirs of any other Person substitute after them, will be Heirs of
Provision to him: As when a Bond is taken to a Husband and his Wife, the
longest liver of them in Conjunctfie, and to the Husbands Heirs; whilk
failiening, to the Wife her self and her Heirs; tho the Right of Succession as
to the said Bond does terminate upon the Wife and her Heirs, yet the Husband
will be Fiar, both as dignior; and because the Right of the Sum will pertain to
his Heirs in the first place: and to the Wife and her Heirs only upon their
failieur, and as Heirs of Provision to them: And Therefore, In the present
case, the Money being lent by the Husband, and being provided after his decease
to his Son Robert, and the Heirs of his Body, whilk failiening, the Heirs of
the Marriage betwixt the Husband and the Wife; and to the Wifes Heirs, only in
the last place: It is thought, That her Husband is Fiar, and that the Wife and
her Heirs will only have Right as Heirs of Provision unto him: And if Robert
should have had Children, or if there had been other Children to the said
Robert Elder by the said Katharine, it were absurd that they should have had
the Right of the said Sum, which was lent by the Husband, not as Heirs to him,
being their Grandfather or Father, but as Heirs to the said Katharine, being
their Mother or Grandmother; or that the said Katherine surviving her Husband
should have power as Fiar of disposeing the said Sum; or to have given it to a
second Husband, in prejudice of the said Robert her Son, or the Heirs of his
Body, and the Heirs, if there had been any thereafter, procreate of her Husband
and her, tho descended of both.

If it be found by the Lords, that either the said Robert Selkirk Elder, or his
Son Robert was Fiar; the said Katharine must be served Heir of Provision to the
Fiar.

Substitution in Legacies.
A Legacy being left to a Person, and failiening of him by decease to another.
Quaeritur, What the Import of that Substitution is? Answered, It is thought,
That it is Substitutio Vulgaris; and that the Effect of it is, That if the
Legatar die before the Testator, so that the Right do not take effect in his
Person, it should belong to the Substitute: But that is not fideicommissaria;
So that the Legatar dieing after the Testator, it would belong to his
Executors, and not to the Substitutes.

Successio in Maternis.
A Grand Father upon the Mothers side, having the time of his decease two
Daughters, and Children of a third Daughter, Quaeritur, If the two Daughters
will only succeed, and exclude the Children of the third? Ratio Dubitandi, That
Representation is in order to the standing of Families, and in the case of
Primo-geniture; whereas in Successione materna the Interest of Families is not
considered; seeing the Grand Children by their Mother has not so much as caput in
Familia: And for the same reason, mobilia, because they are not the Foundation
of Families, admit no Representation. Answer. It is thought, by our custom,
The Children of the deceist Daughter will succeed with their Materterae: Et non
potest reddi ratio omnium quae a majoribus constituta sunt.

If the Children of the deceast Daughter do succeed, Quaeritur, If the deceased
Daughter has left Sons and Daughters, whether the eldest Son of the said
Children will succeed to their Grand Father? Or if all the Children will be
Heirs Portioners as to their Mothers part? Seeing for the same reason, that
their Mother and Aunts are Heirs portioners viz. That they are finis Familiae;
a fortiori they who are not in Familia at all ought to be Heirs portioners.
Answer. It is thought, that the eldest Son of the deceast Daughter will succeed
as Heir portioner with his Aunts; and the Law does favor not only Families as
to preservation after they are constitute, but likewise as to their
Constitution: And the eldest Son, albeit he be not in Familia materna, may
constitute and be a head of a Family of his oun.

Successio in Stirpes.
SI duo Conjuges ita testentur, post utriusque obitum utriusque haeredes ex
aequo successuros and haeredes fore; tunc non in capita sed stirpes succedunt,
and in duas aequales portiones haereditas dividenda est; quia quilibet suos
haeredes aeque dilexisse creditur; and illis ex aequo prospicere. These. Bes.
verbo. Gleich. 62. P. 323. and 324. sect. ult.

De Successione in Feudo amisso, and quo Jure censenda, utrum Haereditatis an
Conquestus.
QVaeritur De Feudo amisso and reverso, quo Jure censendum sit, utrum
Haereditatis an Conquestus; and de omnibus commissi speciebus competit, sive ob
Alienationem, sive Disclamationem, sive Purpresturam vel Baratriam, aut
qualemcunque Feloniam, aliudve delictum, feudum apertum dicatur; Sed quia
Recognitio frequentissimus apud nos feudi ex commisso vindicandi modus
increbuit, de ea and praxi nostra maxim solenni, and textui accommodatiori,
quaestionem agitabimus: Decisionem ad reliqua commissa indistincte porrigendam
praefati. Quaeritur igitur, cum Superior feudum per Recognitionem sibi
asseruit, utrum feudum Recognitum post obitum ipsius, ut conquestus ascendat?
An vero ut haereditas cum feudo dominanti descendat; posito feudum dominans
haereditarium esse?

Quaestio haec in se difficilis, and gravissimas consequentias secum trahens,
haud aequali tamen difficultate in omnibus Recognitionis speciebus laborat:
Quod ut patefiat, sciendum duas apud nos invaluisse Recognitionis species, ex
causarum diversitate diversas; unam ob defectum Vasalli, alteram ob delictum:
Ex posteriori causa, feudum ob delictum and admissum Vasalli dicitur proprie
committi: Ex priori, Vasalli prosapia, quam in prima feudi concessione dominus
ad feudi successionem asciverat, extincta, feudum dicitur finiri; and cum
stemmate in quo resederat exspirare: si enim ab initio, contessum est alicui
and haeredibus masculis ex ipsius corpore progenitis, vel descendentibus
masculis; Vasallo mortuo, nec ullo ex descendentibus masculis superstite,
dominus feudum ab haeredibus talliae, vel per foeminas descendentibus, revocat;
and hanc feudi revocationem Balfurius Recognitionem vocat, and ejus praxin
prodidit in Tract. de Recognitionibus, datam 18. December. 1506. Regio Advocato
agente contra Joannem and Margaritam Auchtrans haeredes, alterum talliae,
alteram lineae: Et hoc Genus Recognitionis etiam in feudis Francis locum habet:
feudo hac ex causa revocato, etsi dubitari potest, utrum in persona domini ad
quem revertitur, Haereditatis an Conquestus naturam induat; certum est eodem
jure quo feudum dominans censeri, eandem naturam and qualitatem sortiri
respectu successionis; and omni alio respectu, qui ex distractione and
divisione propriorum seu haereditatis and conquestuum, secundum nostram
consuetudinem posset emergere. Quin etiam, hoc casu non solum Dominium directum
dominium utile attrahit, sed possessio civilis possessionem naturalem advocat;
adeo ut Dominus directus possessionem naturalem nactus, non dicatur novam
adeptus, sed veterem continuare possessionem, astipulantibus omnium doctorum
suffragiis, in L. clam possidere. ff. de acquirenda vel amittenda possessione:
Et haec feudi extincti redintegratio adeo Aequitate and Ratione subnititur, ut
fiat in eodem qualitatum statu quibus feudum dominans afficitur, tam quoad
usumfructum, ff. de usufructu: quam hypothecam L. si fundus in principio ff. de
pignor. Et servitutes ex fundo dominante debitas: idque optimo Jure, quia
accessio per modum unionis coiens, eandem prorsus rem constituit, and res cui
unitur omnes suas Qualitates ei impertitur. L. 26. sf. de pacto dotal. Atque
haec decisio, firmissimo and irrefragabili Argumento nititur; quod dominio
utili, quod per infeodationem a directo discesserat, extincto, and per modum
merae privationis annihilato, nihil domino cedit, aut acquiritur; sed
proprietas, quae abscedente usufructu and dominio utili eatenus fuerat
inutilis, eo perempto pura and defaecata emergit: ideoque dominium utile non
redit; sed in persona proprietarii quasi recidivum reviviscit, and dominus nil
nanciscitur, sed quod ante habebat, sed gravatum jure reali in alium devoluto,
eo jure evanescente illibatum, and quasi purificatum incipit obtinere; sicut
cum finitur Emphyteusis vel ususfructus, vel cum res revertitur ad mulierem
soluto matrimonio L. in rebus. C. de Jure dot. Cum igitur nulla hic sit.
Accessio nec Transmissio, sed mera privatio and extinctio, nulla potest esse
acquisitio. Argumenta, quae hanc sententiam enervare videntur, quia in alteram
Recognitionis speciem opportunius and fortius stringi possunt, solvere
supersedeo, donec eam absolvero.

Secunda Species, quae, proprie and (...) Recognitionis nomine usu nostro
indigitatur, procedit, cum Vasallus feudum militare, vel saltem ejus partem
medietate majorem, quomodocunque, vel simpliciter vel sub pacto de
retrovendendo seu reversione vendit, domino inscio and inconsulto; vel saltem
ita gravat annuis reditibus, aliisve oneribus, ut major pars fructuum quotannis
erogetur, and exhauriatur; quo casu feudum amittitur and ad dominum revertitur,
ait Textus, and mores nostri suffragantur: sed quo jure, utrum haereditatis an
conquestus ambigitur, and adhuc sub judice lis est: Certe majori difficultate,
and fortioribus argumentis hic, quam in superiori specie conflictandum est; ibi
enim feudo naturaliter finito and extincto sine facto Vasalli, nec ulla
extrinseca causa interveniente, nulla erit transmissio juris extincti and
elapsi, sed virtute directi dominii utilis attractivi, naturalis consolidatio.
Sed in hac specie feudum in se perpetuum de se non finitur, sed per accidens,
ideoque nova videtur acquisitio in paenam ingratitudinis, and sic veluti ex
causa lucrativa juxta L. apud Celsum.. auctor. ff. de dol. mal. and met.
except. Secundo, Feudum recognitum haereditas videri non potest, cum non tam
per virtualem praedecessorum successionem transmittatur, quam per emergentem
delicti Vafalli occasionem, jure obventionis lucrativae quae omitti potest,
patrono accedere videatur. Adhaec, cum subfeuda in eodem supposito cum feudo
dominanti consluentia, non necessario cum eo coalescant; nec in consequentiam
Consolidationis and unsonis, eadem jura qualitatesque participant; quicquid
enim nonnulli sentiant, ex quibusdam legibus male intellectis, confusionem and
consolidationem astruentes, L. Vranius ff. de fidejuss. L. Papinianus ff. de
servitut. urban. praed. clarioribus legibus refelluntur; quibus cuilibet rerum
suarum moderatio and arbitrium permittitur, L. in re mandat. C. mandat. L. nemo
exteris C. de Judaeis: and receptae and triviali praxi frustra oppedunt;
Constat enim subseuda a domino superiori empta, in eodem supposito coire non
tamen uniri; sed in casu divisionis ab antiqua haereditate dirempta ad haeredes
conquestus transire; idque apud nos observatur, and in Gallia ubi Jus
Consuetudinarium dominatur express sancitum est. Tertium and ultimum
Argumentum, quod maxim officere videtur ne feuda recognita haereditas
judicentur, ducitur ab incommodo; si enim feuda recognita, feudo dominanti
virtute consolidationis ut haereditas accedunt, sequitur feudi dominantis
annexatione and incorporatione domanio and coronae D. Regis facta, and subfeudo
aperto and commisso, subfeudo, inquam, quod ante incorporationem elocatum
fuerat, (post enim, non licet, ne secuta dissolutione, proprietatem semel
annexam alio modo quam in Emphyteusin dare, Constit. 234. Jacob. sext.) feudum
illud domanio accrescere and inalienabile esse, sicut reliquum domanium and
patrimonium fiscale and publicum, non tam principis quam Majestatis and
coronae; nec nisi praevia dissolutione posse a Rege disponi, quod absurdum: nec
enim serenissimis nostris Regibus denegari debet libertas, quam feudistarum
Coryphaei Andreas Isernia and Mathaeus de asslictis, omnibus principibus
attribuunt in L. Imperial. praeterea ducatus tit. 55. de prohib. feud. alien.
Et Galli domanii and Appannagiorum ex Lege fundamentali inalienabilium acerrimi
assertores, regibus suis non invident: his non obstantibus, in alteram partem
non solum propendeo, sed pedibus eundum censeo; eamque moribus nostris, juri
feudali and civili magis consentaneam, nec tot tantisque incommodis laborantem,
argumentis astruere, and contraria diluere, conabor.

Primo igitur, feuda recognita moribus nostris inter Propria seu Haereditaria
numeranda ex eo patet, quod Jure haereditario and antiquo a praedecessoribus
transmisso vindicata; quodque non per modum transmissionis sed extinctionis and
negationis ad Dominum devoluta sint: quamvis enim, ut in priori specie, feudum
non expirarit, and per se extinctum sit; quia tamen accedente Vasalli culpa,
feudum vel ipso Jure vel praevia sententia corruit; ideo merito dicitur
extingui and irritari, ut Emphyteusis in se perpetua, ob desidiem and
Cessationem Emphyteutae biennalem annihilatur and extinguitur Jure cannonico
and Civili; and Jure nostro scripto, constitutione 246. Jacobi Sexti; Ubi
amissio and irritatio Emphyteuse^s vel feudi ex Jure aequipollere dicuntur;
irritatio autem and transmissio ex diametro adversantur, illa enim penitus
annihilat and extinguit; haec Jus ab uno avocat and in alium transfert; cum
igitur nil supersit, quod transmitti vel acquiri posset, necesse est Jus
Dominicum se exserat; and nullo obice objecto, Dominio utili, quod habebat
vasallus, extincto, Dominium utile vi quadam alliciat; vel virtualiter
proprietati and Dominio directo insitum and quasi sopitum resuscitet: and sic
nulla somniari potest acquisitio nec Dominii directi quod Dominus ante habebat;
nec utilis quod interit: and Dominium utile quod Dominus incipit habere non de
novo transmissum accedit, sed antiquum per infeodationem supressum, ea
resoluta, enititur and sese exserit; atque hoc moribus nostris ita fieri,
argumento est, quod cum feudum redit ad Dominum, non cum onere quod in
transmissione fit, revertitur, sed immune and liberum sicut ante primam
infeodationem: adeo ut non solum alienationes and investiturae quae initio
validae, utpote citra medietatem factae constiterant, recognitione subsecuta
corruant, sed etiam Subinfeodationes and Emphyteuses quamvis ab initio recte
constitutae, ex post facto subvertantur, and recognitioni subjaceant: secus
quam in Gallia ubi feuda Domino aperta oneribus a vasallo impositis obnoxia
sunt, Test Molinaeo.

Atque hanc sententiam juri feudali maxim esse consentaneam, facile liquebit,
perpensa natura feudi: Feudum nonnulli definiunt dominium utile; sed meliores
Jurisconsulti, explosa Dominii distinctione quae non Juris sed Magistrorum est,
nullum utile Dominium admittunt; sed feudum usumfructum and Jus utendi fruendi
esse volunt Cujac. lib. 1. de Feudis. Duar. lib. 1. annivers. disp. Egumarius
Baro, lib. 4. de Beneficiis. Joannes Borcholt. in disp. De Jure Emphyteutico.
Et textu feudali expresso nituntur, qui definit Feudum Beneficii usumfructum,
lib. 3. tit. 1. de feud. and primo quidem precarium, vel annuum, vel ad summum
vitalem, lib. 1. tit. 1. postea, usu gliscente perennem, lib. 3. initio.
Sequitur igitur ex Jure feudali, feudum, ut omnem usumfructum, semel amissum
and peremptum, non posse acquiri vel transmitti; sed cum proprietate
consolidari; vel concinnius loquendo, dicendum usumfructum causalem, quem
dominus habet ex causa rei and jure Dominii. L Si cum argentum. penult. de
exceptionibus rei judicatae: and quasi Dominii partem L. 4. ff de Vsufructu;
and qui usufructu formali (ut loquuntur Doctores) impediebatur quo minus se
exsereret; eo repagulo per sententiam declaratoriam and privativam, secundum
Dominum latam, substracto, emicare quasi and emergere. Secundo, cum quis rem ob
causam aliquam datam causa non secuta, recuperat condictione causa dati ex Jure
Civili, connotat rem eo modo receptam cum omni causa and omnibus fructibus
redire, quasi nunquam data fuerit. L. qui se debere. Fandus ff. de conductione
causa data causa non secuta: Et consequenter, si quis fundum haereditarium
dotis nomine dederit, and nuptiis non secutis postea condixerit; post
condictionem, haereditarium esse nemo est qui diffiteatur? pari ratione, si
feudum hae editarium aliquis in feudum dederit, and fidelitate quam stipulatus
fuerat in perpetuum, vel nunquam secuta vel temerata; postea recuperarit
condictione causa dati quae adversus vasallum infidelem Jure feudali
intentatur, tit. 20. lib. 1. defeudis non dicitur de novo acquisiisse sed cum
pristino Jure and causa recuperasse, quod si in persona primi concedentis
feudum apertum non censetur conquestus, nulla est ratio diversitatis in persona
haeredis, aut alicujus descendentis.

Tertio loco, Decisionem hanc a Jure Civili and ratione non alienam esse,
abunde demonstrant trita illa Axiomata and Brocordica, Neminem sibi servire aut
in se agere posse, L. siquis aedes. ff. de servit. praed. urban: Omnem
obligationem per confusionem extingui and exinaniri, L. Vranius. ff. de
fidejussor. and Maximae Philosophicae, ex relatis uno sublato tolli alterum;
and idem agens and patiens in rerum natura concipi non posse: and consequenter
eundem Dominum and vasallum esse absurdum videri; and proinde feuda necessario
consolidari: praeterea, quamvis omnium doctorum calculo, Jus feudale Jure
civili posterius, eoque plerisque in locis exolescente quasi posthumum sit,
certum tamen est in Jure civili nonnullas quasi umbras and feudorum simulachra
reperiri; a quibus ad feuda non inepte ducitur consequentia; and ut omittam
praedia stipendiaria nec mancipi, de quibus mentio fit in per traditionem V.
instit. de rerum divisione; and militias, in L. omni modo. C. de inofficioso
Testamento; clientelas, de quibus passim toto Jure: and Jus (...) seu
Libellarium, cujus meminit, Just. novella septima. Jus Emphyteuticum omnium
judicio Juri feudali maxim affine est, and hoc ad ejus exemplum, and ideam
conditum videtur, Dominio utili seu usufructu in perpetuum elocato, and
condition servitii and (...) seu praestationum pro melioratione and canone
Emphyteutico subjecta; and in casu inofficiosae alienationis vel contumacis
cessationis feudi privatione irrogata: Unde frequentissima ultro citroque
argumentatio fit, and quod in uno statuitur, ad alterum a doctoribus
producitur, nisi express contrarium statuatur: Concludendum igitur, feuda
aperta extingui and consolidari, sicut Emphyteuses de quibus nunquam dubitatum
est a Juris interpretibus; praefertim cum verba Juris omnia negativa and
privativa sint, nullamque transmissionem aut ex part Domini acquisitionem
importent, L. 2. C. de Jure Emphyt.

Atque his argumentis, feuda commissa feudi Principalis Jure censeri evincitur
iis, incommoda quae contrariam sententiam gravant, quasi in subsidiis subtexere
non erit alienum: inter multa alia haec eminent, 1. quod posita subfeuda
recognita conquestus esse, sequitur pendente fundi Dominantis usufructu, aperta
usufructuario acquiri; ut omnes rei fructilis obventiones; idque non solum
quoad usumfructum sed etiam quoad proprietatem, per L. usufructu legate. 1. ff.
de usufructu. 2. indidem sequitur, feudo dominante sub pacto de retrovendendo
seu reversione alienato, and postea ex lege pacti redempto, subfeuda medio
tempore recognita fiant, reliqua commoda and fructus emptori non eripi; sed
utcunque ampla and opima latifundia cum pretio refuso penes eum remanere.
denique venditorem fundi dominantis, quamvis ipsum cum omnibus viribus and
pertinentiis alienet, subfeudum ante alienationem commissum, Domino seu Emptore
invito, posse recognoscere; nec Jus commissi, ut Revium, and alia ante
venditionem cessa and venditori adquisita, ad Emptorem pertinere: Quae
consequentiae quam cum ratione and praxi nostra congruant, judicandum relinquo.

Hactenus sententiam, quae tam in Jure quam praxi nostra potior videtur,
utcunque probavimus; supersunt argumenta, quae supra in contrarium proposuimus,
quorum solutionem, licet ex praedictis facile eliciatur, paucis persequemur.
primum and secundum facile concidunt, sicut enim non refert, quomodo aut qua
occasion usufructus finiatur, sive per se, morte usufructuarii naturali vel
civili; maxima and media capitis diminutionibus, an per accidens, cessione and
proprietatis consolidatione Inst. de usufructu: Sed quomodocunque finitus ad
proprietatem revertitur: ita feudum, Jure Vasalli quomodocunque extincto, sive
naturaliter ut in priori recognitionis specie; sive ex commisso; ad Dominum
redit, and primaevam suam naturam recuperat; nec obstat posterior pars secundi
argumenti, quae consolidationem fundorum dominantis and subalterni in casu
concursus in eodem supposito non necessariam esse concludit; quia vera est
tantum in casu transmissionis quae fit jure extraneo and heterogeneo, ex titulo
emptionis, legati, vel successionis si Dominus haeres sit vasalli, quo casu
feudum transmittitur cum onere a vasallo imposito; cum enim feudum sit jus
transmissibile, quin Dominus haeredibus suis qui forte a successione feudi
dominantis tallia aut alia provisione arcentur, consulere potest feudo
acquisito, and citra consolidationem ad ipsos transmittendo, dubium non est:
atque haec in feudo and Emphyteusi qui sunt usufructus perpetui recepta sunt,
contra Juris Dispositionem de temporali usufructu qui nec cedi nec transmitti
potest, L. si usuructus. ff. de Jure dotium, and Inst. de usufructu: quae tamen
illaesa and illabefacta manet in casu extinctionis and commissionis, qui
necessario consolidattonem and in pristinum statum sine onere redintegrationem
implicat. Ad postremum respondetur, cum Subfeudorum consolidatio luculenter
demonstrata sit; and subfeuda Domanio seu proprietati annexa consolidata,
ipsius naturam and qualitates and inalienabilitatem assumere; and doctorum, qui
contrarium tenent, authoritatem, quia ratione non fulcitur, authenticam non
esse: Et haec est Juris civilis dispositio, juxta L. inter socerum, ff. de
pacto dotali: sed praxis, quae plerumque a Jure recedit, and hic and in Gallia,
adversatur; and Rex subfeuda etiam domanio annexo subalternata, alienare
potest, nec requiritur dissolutio: Ratio praxeos hujus (...) haec obtenditur,
quod cum annexatio sit stricti Juris and odiosa, utpote quae absolutam, and ut
leges ipsae loquuntur, legibus solutam Principalis potestatis plenitutudinem
coarctat, nullam extensionem patitur; ideoque ea tantum, quae express annexa
sunt, Domanii annexi Jure censentur; non antem obventiones and quantumvis
haereditariae accessiones. In Gallia certe luculenta Caroli novi constitutio
definit, nil Domanio annexo comprehendi, nisi quod express and diserte
consecratum and coronae incorporatum est, vel saltem per december annos ab iis
quia rationibus Regiis sunt Domanio annexo accensitum est; dispar tamen ratio
est in Gallia and apud nos; ibi enim feuda a genuina feudorum puritate
disciverunt, and tantum non Alaudiorum and Patrimonalium Jure censentur, and
proinde ad Dominum cum onere commissa revertuntur: apud nos vero tantum abest
ut stricta illa feudalitatis tyrannis, quae rei suae dispositionem annihilet,
emolliatur, ut contra intendatur; adeo ut vasallus, Domino inconsulto ne finium
regundorum experiri posset, nedum de feudo transigere, quod tamen Jure feudali
licet, tit. 23. lib. 4. de feudis. Et feudum rescissum proditur, ob
deteriorationem and sylvarum stragem; cujus praxin refert doctiss. Cragius
inter Davidem Boner de Rossye and Joannem Chrichton de Ennernythie. Concludo
feuda subalterna ab antiqui seu haereditarii feudi Domino recognita,
haereditati non conquestibus accenseri, and feudo Dominanti consolidari.

Succesor Titulo lucrativo.
IF the Heir of a Successor titulo lucrativo, be liable as himself, to the
whole Debt contracted before, though exceeding the value of the Estate
disponed? Ratio Dubitandi, The Title of Successor is a penal and passive title,
and paena non transit in Haeredem. 2 do. The Heir of an Intrometter was found
only liable in quantum the intrometter was Locupletior, in the case of in
Lauder: And on the other part, a Successor Titulo praedicto, is haeres per
praeceptionem, and haeres quasi contrahit: So that he is not liable ex Delicto,
but ex quasi Contractu. 2 do. The Intrometter is liable ex culpa; For a
Stranger may be Intrometter, and culpa est immiscere se rei ad se non
pertinenti.

If a Defunct should Resign Lands formerly tailied, and infeft his only
Daughter in Fee: Will she be liable as Successor titulo Lucrativo? Vide
Intrometter, Quaestiones. 1 and 2. in Litera I.

If he should infeft in Fee his Appearand Heir of Tailie, having a Daughter who
succeeds to him in his other Estate: Will the Heir male be liable as
Successor titulo Lucrativo?

Quaeritur. If an Heir male being to succeed by a Right of Tailie, getting a
Right of a part of the said Lands; will be Successor titulo Lucrativo? Ratio
Dubitandi, The Heir male is not proprie haeres, being only a collateral; and
there being an Heir of Line.

If an appeirand Heir get a Right only of a Liferent of Lands, whereunto he was
to succeed: will he be Liable as Successor titulo Lucrativo?

A person being Liable to Creditors, and then having put his Appearand Heir in
Fee of his Estate; and thereafter being forefaulted: Quaeritur. If after his
decease his Appearand Heir will be liable titulo Lucrativo? Ratio Dubitandi, A
Person forefaulted is nullus, and cannot be represented.

A Tutor or Factor having accepted the office and Administration; and
thereafter having put his Son in the Fee of his Estate, before he can be
charged with any Malversation; Quaeritur, If his Son will be liable titulo
Lucrativo, for any malversation after his Fee? Answer, It is thought he will be
liable; seeing the accepting the office and obligement ex quasi Contractu, is
before the Fee.

A Father having given his Daughter an Estate in Land (or otherwise) in Tocher
to her Husband, and reserving his oun Liferent, would she be thought to be
Successor Titulo Lucrativo, if she be his Appearand Heir? Ratio Dubitandi, It
is given to the Husband and not titulo Lucrativo; In respect the Husband has
Right by a Contract, and in contemplation of Onera Matrimonii and the Ioynture
he gives his Wife.

If at least the Tocher in so far as it is immodica, may be questioned and
retrenched in favors of Creditors?

A Merchant in Edinburgh having married a third wife, and by Contract of
Marriage being obliged to employ Twenty two thousand merks upon a Right of
Lands, or Annualrent, to himself and his Spouse in Liferent and conjunct Fee,
and to the Heirs of the Marrage; which Failieing to his Heirs and assigneys:
And thereafter having Disponed certain Lands for implement of the said
Contract, to the eldest Son he had then of the said Marriage, which Failieing
to his oun Heirs and Assigneys. Quaeritur, If the eldest Son and his forsaids
will be liable to all precedent Debts as Successor titulo lucrativo? Ratio
Dubitandi. That he was only a Son of a third Marriage, and his Father had Sons
of a former Marriage. Answer. It is thought, he will, notwithstanding,
represent his Father; In respect the said Right is for implement of the said
Contract, as said is; and if the said Sum had been employed, conform to the
Contract, he would have represented his Father: And by the said Right he
represents him per praeceptionem: And that he would be liable suo ordine as
Heir of the Marriage, the Heir of Line being discust.

Quaeritur, In the case foresaid, if the said Son of the third Marriage will be
liable to Debts contracted after his Right by his Father? Seeing his Father is
obliged, that he should succeed him in the Right of the sa d Sum: And the
Creditors ought not to be in worse case, than if the said Sum had been
employed, and Successores titulo lucrativo are not liable to posterior Debts,
when the Right granted to them is mera Donatio: So that their Father was not
obliged that they should succeed: And the Father was a Merchant, and continued
his Trade thereafter, and became Bankrupt. vide Heirs. Quest. 3. in Litera H.

If a Gentleman, by his Son's Contract of Marriage dispone his Estate to him,
will he be liable to all the Debts, or only effeirand to the value of the Right?

An Uncle having Disponed to his Nephew his Lands or others, being for the time
his appearand Heir; and having Died without Children, Quaeritur, whether he be
liable as Successor Titulo Lucrativo? Ratio Dubitandi, he was only presumptive
Heir: And the Uncle might have had Children if he had married again: And upon
the reason forsaid, if the Lands had holden ward they would have recognized.

An Appearand Heir being Infeft in Liferent in Lands to which he might have
succeeded, Quaeritur, whether he will be Successor Titulo lucrativo, specially
if the Liferent be settled upon him, and the Fee upon his eldest Son?

Singular Successors.
QVaeritur, If the Act of Parliament anent Registration of Seasins, as to
singular Successors, should only be understood such as have acquired Right from
the common Author; and not Comprysers and such as succeed upon account of
Forefaulture?

Sums heretable and movable.
Lands being Disponed by a Contract; and the Buyer being obliged to pay the
Price, Quaeritur, whether the Seller's Heirs or Executors will have Right to
the said Price? Ratio Dubitandi, The Price comes in Place of the Lands, and
the Heir will be obliged to denude himself of the Right of the Lands; the
Disponer's obligement being only prestable by his Heirs: So that it seems the
Heirs should have Right to the Price. On the other part, the quality of
heretable or movable depends upon the arbitrium and Destination of the Creditor
himself; and it appears that the Disponer, having sold his Lands for a Price,
he intended in lieu of an heretable Estate, to have only a movable Estate in
Money; not to ly in the Buyers hands, but to be employed as the Disponer should
think fit, either for Tradeing or otherwise; So that the said sum should belong
to his Executors.

Quaeritur, If Sums consigned for Redemption of Land, be of that same nature?
Ratio Dubitandi, It appears there is a difference upon that consideration, that
a Person who has a Redeemable Right does not desire his Money, and the
Reversion is in Rem; so that the Sums due thereupon appear to be heretable
until they be uplifted, and surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati.

Sums movable.
A Sum being due upon a Wadset, with the ordinary clause, that by the
premonition, and charge that should follow, the Infeftment should not be loused
until payment. Quaeritur, If after Execution used the Sum becomes movable?
Ratio Dubitandi, It is yet due upon Infeftment, and it cannot be conceived that
the Executors or Donator should have Right to the Infeftment, being only in
favors of the Heirs.

Eldest superior.
WHen Lands are holden Ward of diverse Superiors, The eldest Superior and
antiquior, is preferrable, as to Marriage. Quaeritur, the forsaid quality of
antiquior, whether it is to be considered in relation to the Vassal, so that
the superior that he did first hold of is to be thought antiquor? Or if it be
to be considered in relation to the feudum it self; so that the feudum that was
first constitute by a grant from the King to the Vassals authors, should be
thought antiquius?

Quid Juris, If a Person be infeft as Heir to his Mother or her Father to be
holden Ward; and thereafter be infeft as Heir to his Father, the Lands also
holding Ward; whether of the Superiors will have Right to the Marriage?

A Person being infeft in Lands holding Ward; and thereafter being infeft upon
a Comprysing in Lands holding of the King, Quaeritur, If the Marriage through
his decease will fall to the King, or the other Superior during the legal?
Ratio Dubitandi, a Right by comprysing is only for security and Redeemable.

Superior mediat.
THe immediate Superior being found to have amitted his Superiority during
Life, because being charged he did not enter, Quaeritur, If the mediat may
infeft upon Resignation, being only Superior in that part and in subsidium,
that the Vassal should not have prejudice by his immediate Superiors nonentry;
but not ad alios effectus, which may prejudge the immediate Superior; and in
special that, by obtruding to him a singular Successor to be his Vassal? That
same question may be in the case of Ladies Liferenters, and Conjunctfiars of
Superiorities.

T.
Tack.
A Tack being set in April of certain Lands and Houses, whereof some were
possessed for the time by the Tacksman by a verbal tack or Tolerance; others set
to Tennants: and the Tack bearing the Entry to be after separation from the
ground in anno 1652. in which it was set, Quaeritur, A Compryser being
publictly infeft before separation, if the Tack will not militate against a
singular Successor, the Entry being indebito tempore after the Setter was
denuded? Answer. It appears that the Entry, as to the commencement of the Tack,
was presently the time of the date; Seeing as to the Houses and some of the
Lands the Tacksman was in natural possession: and as to the grass of the Lands
set to a tennant, the Entry though not expressed was at Whitesunday following;
and the entry mentioned in the Tack seems to be meant of the Tacksmans Entry
to Labor; and Interpretatio facienda ut actus valeat.

If at least the Tack should be invalid as to the Lands which were set to
tennants as being not public by possession? Answer. It is thought, that a Tack
being Jus indivisibile, possessio partis makes it public in Totum: And it
cannot be ex part public and ex part, non.

A Tack being set to a Tacks-woman during life, and after to her Heirs, until
payment of certain Sums, for Ten shillings yearly, Quaeritur, Will the Tack be
void as without Ish? Answer, It appears, that the Tack being set for security
of Payment of the Money, the Ish is not altogether uncertain; Certum est enim
quod fieri potest c^rtum, per relationem ad aliud; and the Rent being One
Thousand Pounds, it may be considered in what time that Rent may satisfy the
Sum mentioned in the Tack: and upon the matter, there is a Reversion to the
setter and his Successors, and they may determine the Ish of the Tack by
payment of the Debt: Lady Braid and her Son assigned the Tack, whereof a
Reduction was raised by Gorgymiln, having bought the Lands.

Neither Servitudes nor Tacks do affect Lands in prejudice of singular
Successors, unless they be real by Possession, Quaeritur, If such Rights may be
registrate in the Register of Reversions, albeit the Act of Parliament does not
mention the same? And if they be registrate, if they will be real as Reversions?

Locatio and conductio albeit they are not in Law inter Contractus qui re
fiunt, and by our Custom they are not effectual unless they be Re, and cled
with possession; before which they are personal as to the Contracters and their
Heirs; but after that, they become real Rights, and bind singular Successors,
Quaeritur therefore, if a Tack of Lands be set to a Person to enter at
Whitsunday thereafter? And thereafter another Tack be set to another Person
before that Term, so that neither can have Possession? What way the second
Tacksman may perfect his Right, so that he may be preferred? Answer, It is
thought, he may make intimation of his Right to the present Tennent, and
require him to remove at the Term, and protest for remeed of Law.

Quaeritur. Why Tacks without Possession do not prejudge singular Successors;
and yet Tacks do prejudge beneficed Persons? Answer. Beneficed Persons are not
singular Successors; which properly are such as do acquire and purchase:
Whereas Prelates or Beneficed Persons are Successores Titulo Universally; and are
considered as singular Incorporations, whose Deeds do bind their Successors.

When any Person is infeft in Teinds, Quaeritur, If he may set Tacks longer
than during his Right, in prejudice of the Buyers, or other singular Successors?

A Tack being set to a Person for fifteen Years, without mention of his Heirs
or Executors, Quaeritur, Whether it be merely personal? Or at least the Heir
(if the Tacksman decease before expireing of the Tack) should have Right during
the time foresaid? Answer, It is thought, that Tacks should be stricti Juris;
and there being no mention of Heirs, the said limitation of time imports only,
that the Tacksman should have right if he should live all the said time, and
not after: And in Tacks industria and conditio Personae is to be considered, if
the Tennent be a substantious and virtuous Person; whereas Heirs may be
Infants, and not succeed in the Conditions foresaid.

If a Tack be set by a Churchman to a Fever and his Heirs succeeding to him in
the right of the Feu; if the Teinds of the feued Lands may be assigned, there
being no mention of Assigneys? 2. If it may be Comprysed? 3. If it cannot be
assigned, Will the Tack fall by the Assignation? Tack of the Teinds of Paikie.

Back-Tacks and Prorogations.
WHat is the Reason that in Wadsets, Back-tacks are valid without a definite
Ish, viz. During not Redemption?

Item, In Prorogations, Tacks of Teinds to begin after the Ish of the former,
though the Titular be denuded in the interim? Answer, In Wadsets the Back-tack
is in corpore Juris and the Wadset is with the burden thereof; the Wadset and
Backtack being correspective Rights: So that who succeeds in the Right of the
Wadset, can have it no otherwise than cum causa: As to Prorogations, they are
granted in rem, and by the authority of the Judge.

Tack of Teinds.
A Tack of Teinds being set to a Person and his Heirs and Assigneys, for his
Lifetime, and four nineteen Years after, Quaeritur, If he be year and day at
the Horn, will the same fall under his Liferent Escheat; only as to His
Liferent, or entirely?

If after his decease it would fall under the Liferent or under the single
Escheat of his Heir?

If it be for many nineteen years, exceeding the longest Life of any man; Will
it fall notwithstanding under a single Escheat, seeing there is not a formal
Liferent constitute?

If a Tack for many nineteen years should be assigned; will the same fall under
the single escheat of the assigney; seeing there is no liferent as to him, and
the liferenters may all die in his lifetime?

Will not the Assigney have Right for the lifetimes of the Heirs, though they
be not served Heirs?

The Tack being for three Lifetimes, and certain nineteen Years after; Quid
Juris, Where the Tacksman has no Heirs, so that there is place to a Gift of
Bastardy or ultimus haeres?

Tacks of Lands being real by the Act of Parliament in favors of Tennents;
Quaeritur, Quid Juris, As to Tacks of Teinds?

Tailies.
WHen a person, having acquired Lands, provides the same to his Heirs Male,
Quaeritur, Whether the Maxim viz. Haereditas descendit and Conquestus ascendit
has place in Tailies?

If a Tutor, Intrometting with the Duties of Lands Entailed to the Heirs Male,
may not employ the same upon security to the Pupil and his Heirs Male; upon
pretense that it should be presumed, that it was in the Parents intention, as
appears by the Entail? Answer. It is affirmed, that it was so decided in the
case of the Heirs of Cockburns-path, which we have not seen: But it is thought,
that a Tailie being Institutio Haeredis; as a Tutor could not make a Testament
for his Pupil, nor name an Heir and Executor for his Pupil, so he could not
make a Tailie either in Land or Money.

There being a Tailie in these terms, that it should not be lawful to break the
same; and the Fee having descended to a Woman, by virtue thereof; who did
notwithstanding resign the Fee in favors of the Husband and the Heirs of the
Marriage, which Failieing to the other Heirs of the former Tailie; and
thereafter the said Heir of Tailie having obtained a Decree of Reduction of
the said Right Ex capite Minoritatis, for eviteing the hazard of the Clause
irritant in the first Tailie; albeit the Right granted to her Husband was
ratified in Parliament, with the clause that the Ratification should not be
Liable to the Act Salvo Jure: Quaeritur, If the Husband be Forefaulted and his
Posterity disabled, if the Heirs of Tailie having Right to succeed after the
Wife and her Children, may be prejudged by that Forefaulture? Answer. It is
thought, not; Seeing the Husband was not in the Fee, the time of the
Forefaulture, the same being taken away by a Reduction.

If the Woman should thereafter Marry, and have Children the time of her
decease but disabled. Quaeritur, If the Children of the Husband, who would
otherways succeed, if the Father were not Forefaulted; will Forefault the Right
of the said Estate to the King, and will be in the case of a person that is
Forefaulted, and has Right of Succession to the Estate as Appearand Heir?
Cogitandum.

Seeing there may be Quaestion, Quaeritur, what course shall be taken to prevent
it? Answer, It is thought, that a Gift may be procured from the King, making
mention of the Forefaulture and Dishabilitation; and notwithstanding, that His
Majesty is not willing that the persons who are to succeed, Failieing the Wife
of the Forefaulted person, and the Heirs of her Body, should be prejudged;
having been Faithful and Active in opposing the late Rebellion: Therefore, He
does ratify the said Tailie in so far as concerns them, and the Right of
Succession; Declaring that it shall not be prejudged by the Forefaulture and
Inability: And for their farther security, in case after the Decease of the
Wife, the Children of the Forefaulted Person be surviving, and that any Right
to the said Estate shall belong and accrue to His Majesty by their Inability,
then and in that case, now as then, and then as now, he is to dipone to the
Heirs of Tailie succeeding after the Wife, and her Children, the said Estate,
and any Right belonging to His Majesty, as being, or which shall then be in his
hands by the Forefaulture and Inabilty foresaid.

Quaeritur, If a Bond granted to a Man and his Wife, and longest liver of them
two in Conjunct-Fee, and to one of their Sons expressly named and the Heirs of
his Body, which Failieing to the Heirs to be procreat betwixt the Husband and
his Wife; which Failieing to the Wife her Heirs and Assigneys; be Heretable or
Moveable; Seeing there is neither Infeftment thereupon nor obligement to Infeft?
Answer. It is Heretable in respect of the Tailie foresaid; there being no
Tailie of Movables or Moveable Sums: And the provision in favors of Heirs
Male, with the Substitution foresaid, is equivalent as if Executors were
expressly excluded.

When a Person has settled his Estate upon a Friend, by a Disposition to him
and certain Heirs of Tailie therein mentioned; and thereafter for security of
the Tailie has taken a Bond from the person, in whose favors the Tailie was
made, that he should do no deed to disinherit the other Heirs of Tailie; and to
keep the Tailie inviolable; Quaeritur, If the said person shall, without any
Onerous Cause, Dispone the Lands or grant Bonds for great Sums equivalent to
the value of the Estate, if the said Deeds may be questioned by the next Heir
of Tailie? Ratio Dubitandi. The doer of the said Deeds was Fiar; and the Heir
of Tailie cannot come to the Estate, but as Heir to him, and is liable to his
Deeds. Answer. It is thought, in the said case, there is a Fideicommissum in
favors of the Heirs of Tailie: and though the Estate might be Disponed for
Onerous Causes, the Disponer being Fiar; yet he ought not to have violate the
said Fideicommissum by fraudulent and gratuitous Deeds. 2do. Besides the said
Fideicommissum, there is a supervenient obligement, whereby the Heir of Tailie
is Creditor; and therefore may question any deed without an Onerous Cause in
defraud of the said obligement: and an Heir, in whose favors there is
obligements qua Heirs, may Question any Deeds done by the person whom he
represents, contrare to the said obligement; As, V. G. when Deeds are done on
Deathbed, or contrare to a Tailie bearing Resolutive clauses, though for
Onerous Causes; and much more in such a case, where a Bond is granted to the
End foresaid, which ought to be effectual; and could operate nothing if the
Heir could not question the same. Earl of Calendar.

A Person having provided his Estate, failiening Heirs of his own Body, in
favors of a Relation, and the Heirs of his Body, etc. and having by the Write
bearing the said Tailie, and a Procuratory of Resignation, provided that he
should be Liable to satisfy all Bonds, Obligements, and Deeds done, or to be
done by him at any time during Life; Quaeritur, If these should be understood
civiliter, dureing his Liege poustie, or of his natural Life? Answer. That it
is thought, that it should be understood during his natural life; Seeing the
Entail being a free gift, any provisiones thereincontained in favors of the
granter ought to be construed favorably: and the word Lifetime is properly to
be understood of natural life.

If it be provided, that the said person should marry a Gentlewoman named in
the Writ, Quaeritur, if such a provision be lawful, Seeing it appears to be
contrary to the Liberty that ought to be in Marriage? Answer. The Right being
sub modo, he ought to fulfill the same: and there is no restraint as to his
Liberty; Seeing if he think fit, he may choose to accept the Right with that
quality, or not.

If the said Entail being made in Liege poustie, and resignation thereupon, the
Granter may thereafter upon Deathbed, by a paper apart, oblige his said Heir
of Tailie to marry as said is, or to fulfill any other provision? Answer. It is
thought, that seeing he is not so stated in the Right of Succession, that the
Granter cannot prejudge him, who has still voluntas ambulatoria, and may
evacuat the said Right being Master of it; and having it in his own hands and
power; as he may cancel it, so he may qualify it as he thinks fit; and qui
potest plus potest minus.

A person having, by an Infeftment holden of the King under the Great Seal,
taken the Right of his Lands to himself, which failiening to such a person as
he should name by Writ, and his Heirs; which failiening to certain other Heirs,
did thereafter Dispone his Estate, failiening Heirs of his own Body; to the
person thereinmentioned and the Heirs Male of his Body; which failiening to
certain other Heirs of Tailie; bearing a Procuratory of Resignation, and
reserving the Resigners Liferent, whereupon Infeftment followed; Quaeritur, If
thereafter the Disponer should have Children of his own Body, what way should
they be Infeft? Cogitandum.

If it should be thought, that the first Infeftment should stand in favors of
the Disponers Heirs, the said last Disposition with what has followed thereupon
being conditional, and the condition not having existed; Quaeritur, If the Heir
of the Disponers Body should thereafter decease, whether the said Right by
Disposition shall revive, at least that the person foresaid in whose favors
the Disposition is made, may be served Heir to the Disponers Heir of his Body,
by virtue of the said first Infeftment, and the said Nomination and
Disposition? Sir Robert Hepburn.

If the King grant a Charter, with the ordinary Clauses irritant for preserving
of Families; and with that in special to be added, that it should not be lawful
to any that should succeed to prejudge their Successors Delinquendo, even by
committing of Treason; and if they be guilty of such Crimes, that the Estate
shall be Forfault as to themselves, but not as to other Successors; whether
such a Clause will secure against Forefaulture? Ratio Dubitandi. That it would
be an encouragement to Disloyalty. 2do. It is against the common Law, and
pactis privatorum non derogatur Juri communi. 3tio. By the late Act of
Parliament anent Tailies, it is provided, that the King should not be prejudged
as to Fines nor Confiscations, nor Superiors of their Casualities: On the other
part it is thought, there should be a difference betwixt these who by their
virtue and purchase have founded a Family; and these who succeeded in the Right
of Estates acquired by Loyal and Virtuous Persons: In the first case, it is
just that the person who has purchased and Entailed his Estate with such
Clauses, if he commit Treason, should Forefault for himself and all his
Successors: In the other case, it is hard that a person descended of an ancient
and loyal Family, should Fotefault an Estate not acquired by himself in
prejudice of the Family; and that the personal delinquence of one should weigh
down the Merits of many Predecessors; A Family being like a Ship, out of which
the Jonas that has raised the Storm should be cast, and not the Ship and whole
Family perish: And upon the consideration foresaid, it has been provided for
the standing of Families, even by Divine Law, that it should not be in the
power of one to Ruin the Family, but the Successors Right should revive by the
Jubilee: And by the Feudal Law in the beginning, Feuda were not Haereditaria, so
as that the Heirs and Successors should be Forefaulted by the deed of their
Predecessors: And when Feuda came to be Haereditaria, there were some that were
ex pacto and providentia; so that the Succession was settled in such a manner,
that it could not be cut off by the deed or Forefaulture of any of the
Descendents, but as to their own interest; And there are yet Entails elsewhere,
and in England of the nature foresaid, as V. G. of the Lord Grayes Estate;
which was the occasion, that not only the Family, but himself was preserved; It
being thought fitter, that his Liferent should be confiscat dureing his Life,
than by his Death his Estate should go presently to his Brother. And as to that
pretense, that Disloyalty would be thereby encouraged, it is of no moment;
seeing qui suae vitae est prodigus will be prodigus as to all other interests:
And albeit by the common Law, where there is no provision to the contrary,
Estates are Forefaulted as to all intents; yet provisio hominis tollit
provisionem legis; and there is no Law nor Statute, with us, disabling the King
to give Rights with such provisions, as are consistent with, and suitable to
the Divine Law, and even the Civil Law ( Fideicommissa being in effect Entails)
and the Laws of other Nations, and of his other Kingdoms: and the Brocard,
pactis privatorum etc. does militate most, when the certain form and modus
habilis is prescribed by Law for conveyances or Testaments, which ought to be
precisely kept and observed without Derogation: In other cases Provisio
hominis, as said is, tollit legem: As, by our Law, a Relict has a Terce of
Lands, and a third of Movables: and Marriage being dissolved within Year and
Day the Tocher ought to return: and in case ward Lands, or the major part be
Disponed they are recognized: and if a Feu-duty be not paid in the space of
two Years, the Feu may be reduced; and yet as to these and many other cases
derogatur Juri communi pactis privatorum. And as to the Act of Parliament
concerning Tailies, it does militate only in the case of Tailies with the
ordinary Clauses irritant, anent the contracting of Debts, or doing other
Deeds; so that albeit by the said Clauses irritant, the Debts or Deeds of the
Contraveener are void, as to Tailied Estates, yet Confiscations and Fines in
favors of the King do affect the Estate: and it is not provided, by the said
Act of Parliament, that it should not be lawful for the King, upon the
considerations foresaid, to grant a Right Entailed with the said Clause, that
the Estate should not be forefault in prejudice of the Entail: and it cannot be
said, that the concession of a Prince qualifying his own Grant with such
Provisions as he think fit, is Pactum privatorum: and seeing, other Superiors
may so qualify the Infeftments and Rights granted by them to their Vassals,
that the Vassal should not forefault his Lands, for Feudal Crimes; for selling
the Lands holden Ward without the Superiors consent; or for being behind in
payment of Feu-duties; it is against Law and Reason to deny that power to the
King, to qualify the Vassalls Right; so that, when Lands otherways would
Forfault, they should not Forfault in prejudice of the Family and Successors.

The Lands of Artloch being by Alexander Keith of Artloch Heretor thereof,
Tailied to himself, and the Heirs Male of his Body, which failieing to the
Heirs Female of his Body without division; which Failieing to his Sister, etc.
And having secured the Tailie by Provision, that it should not be in the power
of any of the Heirs to alter the samen, with Clauses irritant and resolutive;
whereby the controveening of the Terms of the Tailie are declared to be a
ground of amitting the Estate; and devolving thereof upon the next Member of
the Tailie; All which Clauses are insert in the Bond of Tailie, Charter, and
Instrument of Seasin following thereupon.

Anna Keith, being the only Heir of the Marriage, and so Heretrix of the Lands;
she by Contract of Marriage with John Forbes of Assure is obliged to resign and
provide the said Lands of Artloch to him and her in Conjunct-Fee and Liferent,
and to the Heirs-Male to be procreat betwixt them; which failiening to the
Heirs-Male of her Body; which failiening to the Eldest Heir Female to be
procreat betwixt them; which failiening to the Eldest Heir Female of her Body;
which failiening to him and the Heirs Male of his Body; which failiening to the
Eldest Heir Female of his Body: Which failiening to him and his Heirs and
Assigneys whatsomever.

1. Quaeritur, Who is Fiar by the Conception of the Tailie, whether the Wife,
because she having been formerly Fiar, the Tailie was made upon her
Resignation, and so the Heirs of the Marriage must in dubio be Heirs to her? Or
whether the Husband, by the Prerogative of the Sex, and by the last termination
of the Tailie, which resolves on his Heirs (ut supra) will be Fiar? Or if the
foresaid destination, whereby the Wifes Heirs-Male or Female are preferred to
the Husbands in all the Branches of the Substitutions, will alter the case?

2. To whom the Heir of the Marriage could be served, whether to the Husband,
or to the Wife?

3. Hoc supposito, that the Husband be Fiar; whether or not the foresaid
Contract, whereby she puts the Husband and Heirs of the Marriage in Fee, will
be interpret in Law prejudical to the former Tailie as a wronging thereof;
Although the Husband was expressly obliged to assume the Name and Arms of the
Family, which compleats the design of all such Tailies? And whether the
Contract being in Minority will be reduceible upon that ground?

4. Although it might be reduceible, as debording from the first Tailie by making
him and his Heirs absolute Fiar; yet if it may not stand in so far as concerns
the Husband and the Heirs of his Body; and be only reduceible, in swa far as it
alters, and debords from the other Branches of the Tailie?

Tailie altered.
A Minor having, contrare to the Clause irritant contained in his Fathers
Tailie, altered the Succession, and being Infeft upon the Resignation: If the
said last Right should be reduced, (Vide Homologation Quaest. 2da. in litera
H.) Quaeritur, What way shall the Contraveener return to the former Right? And
whether by the Decree reductive, the former Right will revive, as if the
posterior had never been? Or if the said person upon a Bill to the Lords must
have a warrant to the Director of the Chancery for a New Seasin? Seeing by the
Resignation and Seasin following thereupon, there was de facto a Disscasin, and
quod factum est infectum fieri nequit? Countess of Buccleugh.

Teinds.
A Person having Right both to Lands and Teinds, disponeth the Lands without
mention or exception of Teinds; Quaeritur If the Teinds be disponed? Ratio
Dubitandi, That the Right of Teinds is an inferior interest; and upon the
matter a Servitude and burden upon the Lands; and is extinguished confusione
and consolidatione, as soon as it is in the Person of the Heretor; as in the
case of Servitudes, Right of Annualrents, etc. Ennerpeffer and Bonshuw.

A Person having acquired by Infeftment, a Right to the Teinds of his own
Lands, Quaeritur, If the Teinds be confounded with the Right of the Stock; that
the Lands being thereafter disponed or comprysed, without mention of Teinds;
The Buyer or compryser will have Right to the same; as in the case of a Right
of Annualrent?

Quaeritur, If a Person having a Right to Lands cum decimis inclusis, whether
in that case the Buyer or compryser, without mention of the Teinds, will have
Right to the same?

Seeing the Brieve bears only a warrant to Enquire, de Quibus terris and annuis
Reditibus the Defunct died vestitus, without mention of Teinds, Quaeritur, What
way a Person being only Infeft in Teinds, his Heir may be served special Heir
to him in the same?

When Teinds are in Non-entry, Quaeritur, If the Superior will have Right to
the haill profits before Declarator? Seeing Teinds are not retoured, and there
is neither an old nor new Extent of the same.

Teind of Fish.
BOats for taking of fish, lying upon the shore in one parish; and going thence
and returning thither for taking and unloading; but belonging to Persons
dwelling in another neighboring Parish, Quaeritur. If the Teind of the fish
should belong to the Minister of the Parish where they are taken, or where the
Owners and fishers dwell?

Proving the Tenor.
IF a Comprysing may be made up by proving the Tenor? Answer, It is thought,
not? In respect, By the act of Parliament, the Tenor of Letters of Horning and
Executions cannot be proven; and there is Eadem Ratio as to comprysings: And a
comprysing is not of the nature of Scripta and Instrumenta quae possunt refici,
being both of the nature of Executions and of a Decree of the Messenger as
Sheriff in that part: And neither Executions of Messengers, nor Decreets can be
made up by proving the Tenor: And it is not enough that Witnesses may remember,
and be positive that there was a Comprysing; seeing they cannot remember, at
least ought not to be trusted, whether the comprysing be formal; which being
Juris, they can neither be Judges nor Witnesses thereto.

Quaeritur, If a Decree for proving the Tenor can satisfy the Production in an
Improbation? Answer, It is thought, it should not; no more than a Transumpt:
seeing otherways the indirect manner may be cut off, which arises upon the
comparing of hand Write, and other Circumstances from the Principal; which is
not competent, when Extracts only of such Writs are produced: And the Style,
that such Decreets should make alse great faith, as if the Writs were produced,
is to be understood Civiliter, viz. Except in causa falsi.

If Sentences or Acts of Court being lost, the Tenor may be proven?

If Executions of Summons of Interruption being lost, may be made up by proving
the Tenor, after the decease of the Messenger? It is thought that they cannot;
Seeing by the act of Parliament, the Tenor of Letters of Horning and Executions
cannot be proven: And there is Eadem Ratio as to other executions made by
Messengers; which appears to be that, viz That they are Servi publici; and by
the Law only trusted and authorized as to such acts, and their relation of the
same.

If the Tenor of Bonds may be proven? Answer, There is a difference betwixt
Bonds and other Writs; in respect Bonds are granted, to the effect they may be
satisfied, and retired upon satisfaction; and Debitors think themselves secure,
when they retire and destroy their Bonds: And therefore when a Bond cannot be
produced; Instrumentum penes Debitorem, or which cannot be shown, Praesumitur
Liberatum; unless there be a clear Evidence that they could not be satisfied;
as that the term of Payment was not come, or such like; and Casus amissionis be
positively libelled and proven, as incendii, rapinae, or the like,

If a Comprysing may be made up by proving the Tenor? Answer, It is thought
not, for the Reasons foresaid, Viz. That it is both an Execution and Sentence;
and the Tenor is so long when it is of so many Baronies, and it contains so
many Essential Formalities, and Acts of Execution; and the Witnesses to many
several Executions, that no person can declare that the Tenor libelled is
exactly the true Tenor: and Comprysings are of that nature, that they may be
satisfied; and are deduced to the end they may be satisfied. Lauderdale.

Decreets for proving the Tenor.
THE Tenor of a Writ being made up, Quaeritur If it will satisfy the Production
in an Improbation, The Granter or his Representatives being called to the
making up of the Tenor and Compearing? Ratio Dubitandi, That as to a Third
Party who has interest to question the Writ being a Creditor, and having
Comprised before the Decree for proving, and there being a prior comprysing
upon the said bond; there is Eadem Ratio as in Extracts; Seeing the means of
Improbation in the indirect way is taken away. vide Transumpts, Quaest. 1.
hujus Literae.

Terce.
A Person having disponed Lands bona fide, but being prevented by death before
the Buyer was Infeft, Quaeritur, Whether the Relict will have right to a Terce?
Ratio Dubitandi. The Relict has a Terce of all Lands wherein her Husband died
infeft, and is not liable to personal Creditors: On the other Part, it seems
against Reason, That the Husband having bona fide disponed, and the Heir being
liable for the Implement, the Relict should be in better case than the Heir,
who has no part: and that the Relict should have only Right to a Terce of Lands
undisponed: and that there is a difference betwixt a Disposition, and other
Personal Debts; seeing a Disposition is Jus ad Rem, which cannot be said of
other Obligements: And these Words, That she should have Terce of all wherein
the Husband died infeft, ought to be understood Civiliter, Viz. undisponed.

Quaeritur (If Lands be redeemable) Will the Relict Tercer have any part of the
Money whereupon the Lands are redeemed, specially when the Husband died infeft
upon a Compriseing? Ratio Dubitandi, The Law gives unto Relicts only a Terce of
Lands, and not of Sums of Money: and there is a difference betwixt a Tercer,
and a Liferenter who is provided to a Liferent of Lands under Wadset

A Person being obliged for a most onerous cause to dispone his Lands and
deceasing before Infeftment or Resignation. Quaeritur, If his Relict will have
a Terce, notwithstanding of the Disposition? Ratio Dubitandi, That it is hard,
the Relict should be in better case than the Fiar and Heir from whom the Lands
may be evicted by a pursuit for implement: And though the Husband died Infeft
his Right was resolubile, and such as might have been evicted from him. 2do. A
Reversion is but pactum de retrovendendo, and in this case there is a full
Vendition; and yet an order may be used upon a Reversion, which will either
prevent the Terce or extinguish it.

Quaeritur, If a Reversion, though not Registrate, will militate against the
Relict, to prevent her Terce or to Redeem? Ratio Dubitandi, She is not to be
considered as a singular Successor, but as having a Right by virtue of, and as
depending upon her Husbands Right, yet standing in his Person; whereas he is
denuded in favors of a singular Successor.

It is Indubii Juris, That the Husbands Debts, that are only personal, do not
prejudge a Relict of her Terce: But, Quaeritur, whether a Comprysing before her
Husbands decease will militate against her? And if as to this point, there be a
Difference betwixt a comprysing whereupon the Superior is charged, and
whereupon there is no charge?

Quaeritur If a Disposition, whereupon there is Resignation, will prejudge a
Terce?

Lands being Wadset for a certain Sum, Quaeritur, If the Relict of the
Creditor, will have a Terce both of the Lands; and in case of Redemption of the
Sum of money?

If a Wadset be to a Husband only; and after his Decease to his Wife: And an
order be used and declared; Quaeritur, If she will get a Terce of the money?
And in that case, whether the Executors will not only have Right to the two
parts but to the third part of the Sums consigned, with the burden of the
Relicts Liferent? Cogitandum.

A Lady by her Contract of Marriage being provided to a Liferent; and infeft
base in satisfaction of her Terce, and what else she may pretend, Quaeritur, If
the Superior questioning her Right as base, she may have recourse to a Terce,
as renounced in behalf of the Husband and not of the Superior; and the
Renunciation being causa data intuitu of her Liferent, he cannot debar her from
the same; and take any advantage by the said Renunciation. The Lady
Ballencreiff.

Quid Juris as to a Tercer being Liferenter of a third part? Answer. The
difference betwixt the Liferent and Terce is, That the Liferenters Right is
anterior and certain, but the Terce is posterior and uncertain: So that the
Fiar may sell the Lands; in which case there would be no Terce. vide
Liferenter. qu: vltima.

Territorium.
TErritorium est universitas agrorum Jurisdictione munita, Jus Fluviat. p 42.
number: 513.

Testament.
IF a Testament may be Holograph?

If a Movable debt be due to an English Man who is deceast, must it be
confirmed in Scotland; and e Contra?

If a Nuncupative Testament in England, will have Right to a Debt due in
Scotland? Ratio Dubitandi, it is valid in England; and mobilia non habent
situm, and sequuntur personam: on the other part, corpora mobilia and nomina
though they have not situm, as Lands; yet they have it so far, as being res
Scoticae, they cannot be transmitted, but according to the Law of Scotland; Law
being rerum Domina.

Quid Juris, if it be offered to be proven by the oath of the nearest of kin,
that the Defunct did, before him, and other witnesses above exception, Name the
pursuer his Executor and universal Legatar; will a nuncupative Testament so
proven be sustained? Answer, It is thought, it will not; Seeing nuncupative
Testaments are not in our Law admitted: And it is de forma, that they should be
in Scriptis.

Quaeritur, If a Testament may be sustained by way of Instrument? Answer. an
Instrument under a Notars hand, being but the assertion of a Notar, is not
considered as Scriptum, which requires the Subscription of the party himself;
or in subsidium by Notars before Witnesses de ejus mandato.

Quaeritur, If one Notar subscribing for the Testator, be sufficient in
Testaments? Answer. Affirmative; in respect of the great favor of last wills;
and oftentimes there is not copia Notariorum.

Ministers by Act of Parliament cannot be Notars, but in the case of
Testaments; Quaeritur, If eo ipso that they are Ministers they may be Notars in
Testaments? Or if they must be admitted Notars? Answer. Cogitandum.

Quae Ratio, That a Testament made in France or Holland according to the custom
there, which is different from ours; should be sustained in Scotland, as to any
Scots interest falling under the same?

If a Minor having Curators may dispose of his Estate by Testament, without the
Curators consent?

A Minor of thirteen Years, or there about; having made a Testament, and named
the person, with whom he was boarded and bred in Family, his Executor and
universal Legatar; without the knowledge or consent of any of his Friends;
Quaeritur, whether the said Testament may be questioned upon Circumvention;
without qualifying any other circumstance, but that it is Dolus in re ipsa to
elicite from a person of that Age a Right to all his Moveable Estate in defraud
of his friends? Answer. It is Casus arbitrarius; and much will depend upon
circumstances, if the Defunct had no Relation to the Executor; and if the
Executor did suggest that the Defunct should make a Testament; and employed the
Writer, and did inform the Writer, what the Tenor should be, and such like.

A Testament being made by a Sickly Child being Pubes but in confinio and a
little time more; in favors of his Nurse, in whose house he had stayed for
diverse Years, and lay sick for the time, whereby she was named Executrix and
universal Legatrix; may be reduced as inofficiosum and dolosum; that being
dolus reipsa and machinatio fraudulenta to prejudge five of his Brethren and
Sisters, who were in a poor Condition; in respect the Child had but lately
passed Tutory and chosen Curators; and the said Testament was elicited from him
without the knowledge of his Curators and other Friends, and the Writer and
Witnesses were employed by the said Nurse; And the friends apprehending that
she might take advantage, dealt with her, that the Child might be suffered to
stay in another place; and she was not only satisfied for the time he had been
with her, but they offered a Sum of Money to her, that he might be at freedom:
And it is so incident to Minors to be influenced, that when they are to choose
Curators, the Council upon application will sequestrat them.

Testament Execute.
IT appears that the Testament is Executed as to Debitors, by sentence against
them; seeing after sentence an Executor may Assign: And therefore if the
Executor die the Debt may be confirmed, and pursued for, by his Executors.

Testament and the Wifes part.
A Wifes Testament being confirmed; and her Husband as best knowing having
given up the Inventar, both of Goods and Debts due to and by him; and amongst
the Goods, having given up the Wifes Jewels, and among the Debts due by him
having given up Debts either simply Heretable, being upon an Infeftment, or
Heretable quoad relictam, upon Bonds whereof the Term of payment is past; and
so the debita being found to exceed bona, Quaeritur, What in Law the Commissars
should do in such a case? Answer. The Wifes Jewels and Abuliements ought to be
considered as praecipua, and not in Communion; and which ought not to be
affected with the Debt: and it ought to be considered if any of the Debts be
Moveable quo ad Relictam, and these only ought to affect the Wifes part; so
that what is free of the Inventar of the Husbands Goods will divide, if there
were no Bairns in familia; and albeit there be Bairns but foris familiat, the
half of the Husbands free Moveable Estate would be the Wises part; and ought to
be confirmed as belonging to her, with her whole Jewels and Abuliements.
Lauderdale.

When the Husband survives the Wife, and her Testament is confirmed; whether
Moveable Heirship will be deduced, as when the Husbands Testament is confirmed?
Ratio Dubitandi, There can be no Heirship, the Husband living: and on the other
part, the Wifes Executry ought not to be in better case nor her self, if she
had survived: and there can be no Bairns part, until the Husbands decease actu,
albeit habitu: and there is eadem ratio as to Heirship.

Nihil magis deberi hominibus quam ut ultimae voluntatis sit liber stilus; and
licitum, quod non redit, arbitrium; Leg. 1. Cod. de sacros Eccles.

In Testamento Jure civili olim septem Testes requirebantur: Jure autem
Canonico duo sufficient.

Si unus ex testibus fuit servus; ex benignitate, and ut voluntates ultimae
exitum habeant, Testamentum haud corruit, si eo tempore habitus fuit liber.

De rebus suis testari erat tanti momenti, atque ut fraudibus obviam iretur,
ideo Jure veteri non nisi public testamentum fieri permissum; and vel callatis
Comitiis, quod semel in anno fiebat; vel si Testator erat mil^s in procinctu,
cum parati essent cum host confligere. Perez. lib. 2. tit. 10.

Legatarii aut fideicommissarii in re singulari and certa, possunt esse testes
in Testamento; quia negotium censetur principaliter agi inter Testatorem and
haeredem. Ibid.

Testamentum nuncupativum maxim in usu esse; and si in scripturam a notario
redigatur, esse tamen nuncupativum; quia scriptura ad memoriam non ad
solennitatem adhibetur. Ibidem.

Filius-familias Testamentum condere non potest, quia in aliena potestate est:
nec Testamentum ab eo conditum valet, si postea Pater-familias fuerit; quia
principium inspicitur; and quod initio vitiosum est tracto temporis non
convalescit. Idem. Institut. lib. 2. tit. 12.

Testamento novissimo rumpitur anterius, licet ex eo haeres non adeat, quia
aditio non pertinet ad perfectionem Testamenti, sed ad ejus exitum tantum and
effectum. Idem. lib. 2. tit. 17.

Si posteriore Testamento haeres institutus sit tantum ex part, prius tamen
rumpitur; and universitas haereditatis ad eum pertinet Jure accrescendi, ne
quis decedat partim testatus partim intestatus; perinde enim est, ac si partis
mentio haud facta sit.

Irritum fit Testamentum, si capitis dimunitionem Testator passus sit, non
solum maximam and mediam, sed etiam minimam, Arrogatus forte: si vero tempore
mortis sui Juris fuerit, convalescit Testamentum beneficio Praetoris; data
secundum tabulas bonorum possessione haeredi scripto: sufficit enim fuisse sui
Juris and Civem Romanum, tempore facti Testamenti and mortis. Ibid.

Si quis coeperit Testamentum facere nondum autem perfecerit morte praeventus,
non infirmatur prius Testamentum; quia unumquodque eodem modo dissolvitur quo
colligatum est. Ibid.

Quid si quis ista verba scripserit (addita etiam subscriptione) viz. se nolle
Testamentum quod fecerit valere; Quaeritur, an irritum fiat?

Testamentum Rescissum per Quaerelam inofficiosi olim penitus corruebat; Jure
vero novissimo tantum quoad institutionem; quia tantum peccatum est in liberis,
non autem in legatis aut fideicommissis, quibus nulla injuria illata est.
Perez. lib. 2. tit. 18.

Qui agnovit Testamentum quocunque modo, v. g. acceptando legatum suo nomine;
caret Quaerela: secus si Tutorio nomine aut alieno.

Testes.
THE Question being of the Jurisdiction of a Town; If the Burgesses may be
Witnesses? Hattoun contra Dundie.

Post didicita Testimonia alii Testes regulariter non recipiuntur; and si
recipiantur, purgatur suspicio subornationis Juramento ejus qui vult alios
producere; and ne claudicarent judicia, Idem conceditur adversario. Fritsch.
Exercit: 2da. Juris public. n. 86.

Third and Teind.
WHen Lands are set for Third and Teind, so that the Master is not to be paid
by the Hand of the Tennent, or by the product of the Corns when they are Reaped
and Threshen; but has an Interest in the Corns and Bodies of the same, as the
Tennent himself: Whether will his Executors have Right to the Third and Teind
entirely, the Defunct dying before separation; eodem modo, as if the Tennent
who is Partiarius as to two parts, should die before separation? Ratio
Dubitandi. That there is no Merces or duty payable by the Tennent: he sowes the
ground for his own use, and for the use of the Master.

If the Wife should decease after separation, whether in that case her Executor
will have Right entirely to the Third and Teind; seeing they are fructus
percepti and in Bonis Mariti?

Vide. Liferenter, Quaest. prima, in litera L. which Question may be proposed
as to Third and Teind.

Titles of Honor.
IF there be Feudum Comitatus aut Reguli, and the same descend to Heirs
Portioners; Quid Juris as to the Title?

When an Estate in Lands and Baronies, is erected in Comitatum, with the Title,
whereupon Infeftment follows; Quaeritur, If the Estate be Disponed or evicted
by expired Comprysings, Quid Juris as to the Title; seeing it is not given by
Patent, but by Infeftment as haereditamentum and accessory to the Lands?

A Patent of Honor being granted to a Person and his Heirs, Quaeritur, if any
of his Heirs may surrender the said Honor in the Kings Hands for a new Right
to himself, and other Heirs than is in the former Patent, albeit he was not
served Heir himself? Ratio Dubitandi. He may sit in Parliament though he be not
Heir: On the other part, though he be tolerate to sit in Parliament being Heir
of Blood, and no person being concerned to object; yet he cannot dispose of
such an Interest, unless he be served; seeing Titles and Patents of Honor, are
not ex pacto and providentia and Gentilia; but are Jura haereditaria, belonging
to these that first get them and their Heirs; and may be Forefaulted.

A Title of Honor and Jus Civitatis being granted to the Receivers and their
Heirs, Quaeritur, If their Heirs owning and making use of the same, and not
medleing or intending to meddle with bona Defuncti, will be Liable as behaveing?
Ratio Dubitandi. That such Interests and Capacities, are not in bonis nor
commercio, and are res inaestimabiles; and where persons are allowed beneficium
Inventarii they cannot come under Inventar and be valued; and therefore there
needs no other Aditio, but that they should own the same; and Creditors are
not prejudged, seeing they are not the subject of Execution and Diligence: and
yet they may be Forefault; these who have them for the time, being quasi Heirs
of Provision.

When Lands are Erected in Comitatum, with the Dignity and Vote in Parliament,
Quaeritur, If the whole Lands be Evicted or Disponed, what becomes of the
Dignity annexed to the same? Ratio Dubitandi. That Baronia is nomen dignitatis,
which is ever annexed to Lands; and that Comitatus, albeit a higher Dignity is
of the same nature: and therefore as a Barony being sold, the Disponer does not
retain the privileges of a Baron; so it ought to be in the case of Comitatus;
the Title being annexed to the Lands and given in consideration of the same,
and of the Estate sufficient to sustain the Title: and that there is a
difference betwixt a Title of Honor given by way of Patent, and that which is
annexed to Lands. Cogitandum.

Titular.
IF the Titular be in possession of Teinds, and die before Michaelmass; Quid
Juris?

Tocher.
IF either a Father or a Stranger be obliged to pay a Tocher, and Marriage do
not follow, or be dissolved within Year and Day, Quaeritur To whom will the
Tocher pertain? Ratio Dubitandi. All such Obligements are Conditional, and
causa data: On the other part, it may be pretended, that there is Fictio brevis
manus, and the same case as if the Tocher were given to the Woman, to the
effect that she may give it to the person whom she is to Marry: so that though
Causa cease as to him, it does not cease as to the Woman, which ordinarily is
Affection and Relation to her, and that she may be Dotata.

A Father having granted a Bond to his Daughter; and thereafter having by a
Contract of Marriage with her Husband, given him a Tocher, without mention that
it is in Satisfaction of that, or any other Provision; If notwithstanding it
will be thought to be in Satisfaction? Ratio Dubitandi, That either the Father
cogitavit, and remembered that he granted such a Bond, or did not remember; and
if he did not remember, that which was not thought upon cannot be said to be
intended to have been satisfied and taken away: and if he did remember, and yet
did not provide, that the Tocher should be in satisfaction, it cannot be
thought, that he intended that it should be so. Lady Yester.

Quaestiones de Tractatu Suedico, and Bonis prohibitis, Vulgo Counterband.
UBi exarsit bellum inter Reges Principes aut populos qui superiorem haud
agnoscunt, quae occasion belli (ut plerumque fit) exoriuntur controversiae and
quaestiones de navibus, rebus, aut hominibus in bello captis; Jure patrio,
statutis aut moribus ejus gentis, cui actor aut capiens subditus est, haud
judicandae aut dirimendae sunt; Reus enim, qui est extraneus, eas leges nec
noscere praesumitur nec agnoscere tenetur; cum legibus and moribus (qui eodem
Jure censentur) nulla sit nisi in subditos authoritas.

2. Juris quidem gentium, in disceptationibus frequens est mentio; verum in
libris nihil aut parum certi de eo proditum est; praeter generalia and remota
quaedam principia; cum nullum sit Systema aut liber, nec esse possit, in quem
omnes gentes consenserint; ut pro Jure gentium authentico, habendus sit.

3. Inter omnes convenit, ubi duo Principes aut Populi bello committuntur;
aliis Regibus, aut populis, qui isti bello haud implicantur and subditis suis,
haud interdici aut minui libertatem commercii, cum istis Regibus aut populis
inter quos bellum est; eo tamen temperamento and moderamine, ut neutri ex
Adversariis, vel prosit, vel obsit and noceat, in ordine ad bellum; quod
plerumque fit vel opem ferendo, vel advehendo bona prohibita and vetita, vulgo
Counterband dicta.

4. Vocabulum istud Counterband innuit praeviam prohibitionem: Bona igitur
Contraband sunt, quae contra Bannum seu Edictum advehuntur; and prohibita sunt
vel Jure gentium, communi and notorio, vel speciali Banno; seu declaratione
ejus principis qui bellum gerit,

5. Jure gentium and belli, extra aleam est, ea bona esse Contraband, quae per
se and immediate ad bellum spectant, and eo destinata sunt, ut in bello vel
offendant vel defendant; nec ullius aut exigui sunt in pace usus; ut Arma,
cujuscunque demum generis sint.

6 Quae autem usus sunt ancipitis, tum in bello tum extra bellum, ut pecunia,
commeatus and ejusmodi; Ita demum Contraband and vetita esse censentur, si
hostis ad incitas and angustias redactus, and conditio ejus advehenti comperta
sit, saltem eam scire potuerit; ut si oppidum sit obsessum; eo enim casu hostis
est, qui hosti necessaria subministrat.

7 Illa igitur bona, quae communis (ut ita dicam) aut promiscui usus sunt, Jure
gentium non sunt bona Contraband simpliciter, sed in casu praedicto tantum; sed
nonnunquam, commeatus and bona praedicta, Contraband and vetita fiunt, etiam
extra praedictum casum, and ab initio belli; si gerentes bellum, publica
significatione ad alios populos edita (quod in bello solenne est)
denunciaverint, se ejusmodi bona ad hosts advecta, pro vetitis and Contraband
bonis, habituros.

8 Verum eo casu distinguendum est, an cum populo aut principe, cujus subditi
ejusmodi bona advehunt, Tractatus aut conventio intercesserit, de commercio
etiam tempore belli: An vero nihil de commercio convenerit.

9 Priori casu, cum tractatus ejusmodi sint contractus inter principes
celebrati, religiose observandi sunt; and secundum eos judicandum, etiamsi
princeps qui bellum gerit, denunciavirit commeatus and ejusmodi bona pro
Contraband bonis habenda: Nec enim inconsulto aut Invito Rege aut principe, cum
quo tractatus intercessit, ab eo recedere potest.

10. Consequens est, licet ex stilo diplomatum seu Commissionum, quibus
Magistri and Navarchi navium privatarum (vulgo Capers) muniti sunt; Commeatus
and bona ejusmodi (moribus nostris) Contraband sint; Si tamen in nave Suedica
depraehendantur ejusmodi bona libera, nec vetita aut Contraband judicanda:
expresso enim articulo Tractatus inter Regem nostrum and Regem Sueciae,
commeatus and ejusmodi bona ut libera, impune ad hosts advehuntur.

11. Quod attinet ad subditos Principis aut Populi, cum quo Tractatus aut
Foedus de commercio non intervenit; Si bellum gerens, edicto solenni (ut moris
est) significaverit se ea bona pro vetitis habiturum; and non obstante dicto
Banno and edicto, subditi principis cum quo tractatus haud intercessit, ea bona
advehant; pro vetitis habenda sunt and Judicanda: Nec conqueri possunt, cum
sint moniti and Inhibiti.

12. Si vero in Edicto, seu declaratione (ut loquimur) nulla mentio fiat de
commeatu, aut ejusmodi bonis; libera censenda sunt; etiam ijs cum quibus
tractatus aut foedus haud intercessit: Licet ex stilo nostro (ut dictum est)
sint prohibita. Nec enim stilus nec mores nostri, exteris, quibus penitus
ignoti sunt, obtrudi possunt: and cum nulla praecesserit denunciatio aut
edictum publicum, ea bona prohibens; quod non prohibitum est permissum
censetur: Et ex Jure belli and gentium, ad quod in ejusmodi casibus recurrendum
est, libera esse Judicandum est.

13. Ex tractatu Suedico, variae oriuntur quaestiones quas perstringere haud
gravabimur. and

14. Quaeritur, Si in nave Suedica, depraehendantur bona vetita aut bona
hostium, an in commissum cadant and confiscentur, tum bona ista prohibita; tum
bona, si quae sint in nave, libera; and navis ipsa?

15. Nullus est, quantum memini, in isto tractatu articulus, ex quo ad
quaestionem istam responsio elici possit; Videtur tamen bona prohibita tantum
confiscanda, salvis nave and bonis liberis; ea ratione, Quia ultimo tractatu
inter Regem nostrum and Ordines provinciarum foederatarum cautum est;
istiusmodi casu eveniente bona Contraband confiscanda; Naves autem Batavorum
and alia bona libera dimittenda; Et alio articulo ejus tractatus cautum est,
Regem Sueciae and suos subditos, in eo Tractatu includi; In eo enim conciliando
and promovendo, impigre operam navaverat.

16. Nec obstat, quod tractatu isto nunc per bellum dissoluto, Articuli isti
quoad omnes inanes videantur, and sublato principali corruit accessorium; Cum
enim tractatus isti sint contractus inter Regem nostrum and Regem Sueciae and
Batavos; qui (quicquid fecerint Batavi) quoad nos and Suecos illibati manent;
nec subditis Regis Suecia, Batavorum culpa aut perfidia fraudi esse debet.

17. Nec obstat, quod praeter tractatum istum pacis inter Regem nostrum and
Ordines praedictos, eodem tempore articuli quidam commercii seorsum editi sunt;
and inter eos, articulus de bonis vetitis and eorum confiscatione; and licet
convenerit inter parts, Suecos tractatu pacis compraehendi, de ijs tamen in
articulo commercii nulla facta est mentio, Respondetur enim articulos istos
commercii eodem tempore additos, partem tractatus istius censendos esse.

18. Quaeritur, Cum tractatu Suedico cautum sit Naves Suedicas literis
Salvi-conductus muniendas, forma solenni in dicto tractatu praescripta; An eo
ipso quod literas salvi-conductus non exhibeant, capi and confiscari possint?

19. Quaestio ista nupero bello excitata and saepe agitata, nec tamen est
decisa; nec desunt pro utraque part argumenta: Cum enim isto tractatu libertas
commercii ultro citroque sit permissa, tempore belli, sed sub modo, viz. ut
fraudibus obviam eatur; si modus non observetur, libertas ista tollitur: ac cum
ijs agendum, ac si libertas commercii cum hostibus penitus esset interdicta:
Accedit, quod in tractatibus ejusmodi, omnes articuli cum effectu intelligendi
sint and ut aliquid operentur; nec ullus effectus erit articuli istius de
salvis-conductibus, and de formula eorum tanto studio and industria concinnata,
si naves ijs destitutae ad hosts libere and impune commeare possint.

20. Ex altera part arguitur, isto tractatu haud caveri naves vel bona,
periculo confiscationis subjacere, si literae salvi-conductus vel desint, vel a
formula ista recedant; pacta enim Commissoria esse stricti Juris, nec praesumi
aut implicari nisi exprimantur; Nec articulum Inanem aut sine effectu futurum,
eum enim effectum habere, viz. ubi navis munita est literis salvi-conductus
dimittendam esse, nec ulterius inquirendum: Si vero literis istis munita non
sit, in eam inquiri posse, an Bona vetita vel hostium in ea sint; quod non sine
gravi molestia and incommodo plerumque fit: Et si vel hosts, vel hostium bona,
vel bona vetita in ea depraehendantur, tum demum abduci and addici posse.

21. De quaestione ista, haud semel in foro ventilata, donec publicum per
sententiam innotescat judicium; meum sustineo.

22. Si aliae adsint praesumptiones and adminicula, Veluti, si contractus
nauticus (vulgo Charter-party) desideretur; si aliqui ex ministris nauticis,
Proreta (vulgo Boatswain) and alii Batavi sint; si gentem suam, ubi primum
navis obviam facta est, dissimularunt; and se Bremenses esse mentiti, sed
postea religione Juramenti coacti, sese Batavos esse confessi sunt; Quod in
facti specie evenisse compertum habeo; eo casu, si navis, literis
salvi-conductus non sit munita, haud leve argumentum est navem and bona haud
esse libera: Et adminicula ista, and similia cum eo concurrentia, in
praesumptionem gravissimam and aggregatam, and uti ita dicam praegnantem
assurgere videntur, nisi Rei luculentis probationibus and documentis
ostenderint navem and bona libera esse, Nec ad hosts pertinere.

23. Quoniam mentionem de Batavis, and hostium subditis fecimus, quaestio ista
suboritur; Cum declaratione belli a Serenissimo nostro Rege edita, novissimo
bello inter eum and Ordines praedictos, denunciatum sit; si in aliqua nave
subditi hostium depraehendantur, tam bona quam navem confiscanda; nec tractatu
Suedico ita cautum sit; In eo enim de Navarcho tantum cavetur, and permittitur
cujuscunque sit gentis, etiam hostilis, modo sit Incola and civis regni
Sueciae: Si igitur, praeter navarchum, nautae duo vel tres sint Batavi; quid eo
casu censendum, An navis and bona addicenda sunt?

24. Ex praedictis liquet, si vel bona vel subditi hostium in nave libera
deprehendantur; bona vetita and hostilia, and subditos hostium detineri posse;
navem autem and bona libera dimittenda.

25. Verum difficilior est quaestio, viz. Cum tractatu Suedico tum subditi tum
Inhabitants and Incolae Regni Sueciae includantur, and fruantur liberate
Commercii etiam cum hostibus Regis nostri; Si Batavus Inhabitans aut incola sit
Regni Sueciae, and vel ipse vel ipsius bona in nave Suedica deprehendantur, an
Jure detineri possit, and bonis suis excidat?

26. Cum Batavus, eo quod Incola est Regni Sueciae pro tempore Jura Originis
haud amittat, nec Batavus esse desinat. Qui Origin hostium est subditus pro
host videtur habendus; Et si extra Regnum and ditionem ubi Incola est, in alto
mari vel alibi deprehendatur, ut hostium subditus tractandus; praesertim si
ipse vel sua bona ad hosts and cives suos, and terram ubi subditus est,
advehantur.

27. Haec sententia istis rationibus videtur subnixa; una a tractatu Suedico,
quo cavetur adeo solicit de Navarcho licet sit hostium subditus, in favorem
Suecorum and eorum Commercii, ut scilicet Navarchum adsciscere and praeficere
possint etiam hostium subditum, quia magis idoneus and suis civibus forte
peritior est: Quod igitur, in uno articulo, nec sine cautela, ut Navarchus sit
civis and Incola, permittitur, in alio casu prohiberi videtur, a contrario
sensu: and quorsum tanta de Navarcho sollicitudo, si hostium subditus eo quod
Incola and civis sit Regni Suetiae pro tempore, liberate commercii cum civibus
suis, licet Regi nostro hostibus, frui possit.

28. Alia Argumenta sunt a gravissimo Incommodo: Quid enim si perduellis and
subditus Regis nostri, Majestatis Reus and damnatus, in Suecia larem figat, and
incola sit? An liberate commercii frui debeat, nec Regi aut subditis suis in
mari deprehendere and ad supplicium abducere licebit?

29. Quid si Batavus in Regno Sueciae civium suorum Institor sit? An tam sibi
quam constituentibus Regis nostri hostibus, ejus nomen and privilegium
praetexentibus, quod incola sit Regni Sueciae, libere and impune, etiam cum
hostibus negotiari licebit? An eo praetextu Batavis ad Regis nostri ditionem
and Regna aditus and occasio commorandi and explorandi, summo Regis and Regni
discrimine, permittetur?

30, Verum in quaestionibus de tractatibus and contractibus inter Reges and
populos, amicitia and foedere junctos, quarum occasion periculum est ne bello
committantur; tutius est Regem ipsum consulere, and inquirere quid ejusmodi
casu in Regno Angliae obtineat; ubi quaestiones istae frequentiores sunt; ne
eodem bello ejusdem Regis tribunalia inter se dissideant.

31. Quia in quaestionibus maritimis, de navibus and bonis bello captis,
Magister, nautae and vectores plerumque examinantur etiam Jurati: Quaeritur, An
eorum dictis standum sit? Et si quae sint contra reos praesumptiones, an eorum
Juramento and Testimonio diluantur? Et videtur Respondendum, cum Juramentum sit
finis omnis controversiae, si vel ut parts vel ut testes considerentur,
secundum eorum testimonia Judicandum, nisi vacillantia and suspecta sint, aut
vitio aliquo laborent.

32. Non pigebit attexere, Tractatibus praedictis non sine ratione cautum; cum
naves privatae bellicae, non tam belligerandi quam cauponandi animo (ut Ennius
dixit) instructae sint, nec tam ut hostem carpant quam sibi consulant, and sui
compendii causa; ideo cautionem praestandam certam summam continentem in
articulis expressam, ne foederati aut eorum subditi quid detrimenti capiant;
eam cautionem exigi debere, and quidem idoneam and summam istam continentem;
nec sufficere cautionem indefinitam nulla summa expressa.

33. Tractatu inter Regem nostrum and Ordines praedictos, quo Regem Sueciae and
ejus subditos includi dictum est, Cavetur lites and causas istas expedite
terminandas; and si pro Reis sententia absolutoria lata sit, ab ea haud
provocandum: Si vero secundum actorem Judicatum sit, Reis Provocationis
remedium indulgendum, haud ad Judicem Ordinarium, verum ad Concilium Regis, aut
ab eo delegatos: and Appellationis causam inter semestre tempus peragendam and
finiendam.

34. Quod iniqua and impar sit Rei and Actoris conditio; and huic denegetur,
illi autem competat appellationis remedium; Id ea ratione videtur introductum,
quod actori domi, and in suo foro de lucro certanti and agenti, haud metuendum
sit, ne gratia aut potentia adversarii opprimatur: Quod autem provocetur non ad
Judicem ordinarium sed ad Concilium aut delegatos; exteris and mercatoribus
consultum est, ne longo sufflamine litium, and formularum, quae in ordinariis
Judiciis solennes sunt, Anfractibus attriti haereant.

35. Quod ea, quae adeo pie consulta sunt, in usu haud sunt recepta; and ii
quorum interest tantopere sibi defuerint, iis non utendo remediis, mirum
videtur: Nec minus mirandum, consuetudinem a Jure and Ratione alienam tolerari;
Ea autem est, quod cum exteris, quorum naves deprehensae sunt, patronorum and
peritiorum copia haud deneganda sit, cujus consilio sese defendant, adeoque
Admiralitatis curia, penes quam de iis causis jurisdictio est, Lethae aut
Edinburgi teneri debeat; Nonnulli tamen a Thalassiarcha, ut praetendunt
delegati, in regionibus procul dissitis, in causis istis plerumque arduis and
gravissimis, per se and substitutos suos judicant; a quorum sententia,
aliquando ad supremam, quae Lethae habetur curiam provocatur. Et ab istius
curiae sententia appellationis, rursus ad supremum Senatum and Dominos
Sessionis (ut loquuntur) appellatur: Sic evenit, ut tot Judiciorum and curiarum
meandros, vix detur eluctari: Nec id sine magno tum temporis tum sumptuum
dispendio.

Posterity of Traitors.
IF, by our Law, the Posterity of Traitors be disabled ipso Jure, both Antenati
and Post-nati, as to any Estate pertaining to themselves, which is not
profectitious from the Father after Treason? Ratio Dubitandi. The Doom of
Forefaulture, bears only forefaulture of Life, Lands, and Goods; without
mention of the posterity; and noxa caput sequitur: and Lex Julia Majestatis is
but the municipal Law of the Romans, and is not authorized by any Act of
Parliament or custom of ours. To Consider the Act of Parliament K. Ja. 5. and
the Act of Dis-habilitation of the Posterity of the Earl of Bothwel, and
Rehabilitation of John Stewart.

Transumpts.
IF Transumpts under the Clerk Registers hand do Satisfy in Improbations? Ratio
Dubitandi, as in the case of the Question, Decreets for proving the Tenor in
hac Litera T.

If Transumpts of Seasins out of the books of Touns and Burghs upon process to
that effect, as use is, will satisfy the production? Answer. They will satisfy;
seeing the Prothocalls are Extant in the Touns Register: Cogitandum as to the
Transumpts of other seasins.

Trebellianica.
AN Executor nominate, after Confirmation deceasing before the Testament be
execute; Quaeritur, will he have Right to the Third and Trebellianica?

Trust.
WHether a bond in these terms, viz. bearing an obligment to denude and
declaring the Trust, be equivalent to an Assignation?

Trustees in Infeftments.
A Right being granted to one, his Heirs and Assigneys, for the use and behoof
of another person and his Heirs, Quaeritur, whether the casualities of Ward,
Marriage etc. do fall by the decease, and with respect to the person infeft, or
to the person to whose behoof the Right is granted?

May the person, to whose use the same is granted, compel the Vassal to denude
in his favors, without the Superiors consent?

Though the Superior may pretend, that when the Right is to the behoof of an
Incorporation, that he has prejudice: yet if it be to the behoof of a single
person, can he refuse to enter him, if the Vassal be content to denude in his
favors? Ratio Dubitandi. Though Vsuarius has an Interest, yet he is not
Vassal; and the Superior cannot be urged to receive a new Vassal: And on the
other part, the Right being in Trust and precarious, to the behoof of the
other; ex natura inest, that he may revock and urge the Vassal to denude, and a
Regress is employed, the Superior having granted the Right of the nature
foresaid.

A Trustee committing Treason.
A Person having committed Treason, and having in his person for the time a
Right to a bond by Assignation, but in trust to the use of an other, and upon a
back-bond declaring the Trust: Quaeritur, Whether or not the Sum due by bond
will belong to the King, and his Donator? Ratio Dubitandi, The Right of the Sum
is in the person of the Traitor; and by the Back-Bond he is only debtor, and
obliged to denude: And he to whose use it is entrusted has not Jus in re but ad
rem; and a personal action against the Trustee, whereunto the King is not
liable.

Tutors.
TVtela being munus publicum, at least authoritate though not utilitate; If by
our custom a Tutor may be urged to accept the office? Answer. Negative; and yet
he may be urged Causative, as v. g. If a legacy be left to a Tutor nominate, he
must either accept the office or want the legacy.

If a Tutor of Law, after the year, compear to oppose the giving of a Dative;
will he be heard to purge after Jus Devolutum?

As a Father has power to name Tutors; is he so Tutor of Law, that without any
authority of the Judge or Service, he may Administrate and grant Discharges?

A Tutor nominate by a Codicill, ought he not to be confirmed; and the
Nomination ly in the Commissars Register?

If where there is more Tutors, payment may be made securely to one?

Quid Juris as to Tutors, if they may be charged? and where there are Letters
of Horning granted against them for their interest, upon the debt of the pupil,
If their Escheat and Liferent will thereupon fall?

In what case Tutors may be charged, or pupils themselves? It is Thought, That
Cogitandum est, Whether there be a difference betwixt the case of a Tutor, when
there is a Decree against the pupil and against him for payment, and he has
not alleged nor made appear that he has nothing of the Pupils Estate in his
hands, and officium non debet esse damnosum: And when the Tutor is only charged
for his interest: Seeing in the first case there is a decree against him; and
in the other, not: Or if he ought to Suspend as being Debtor ex quasi
contractu; eo ipso that he is Tutor, and is liable either to the debt, or ought
to show that he cannot pay it.

Quaeritur, If a Woman may be Tutor dative, or Curator? It is thought, that
(though the Testators will, be most to be followed in Testaments) she cannot be
Tutor dative; because it is virile officium: And a Woman, though she will be
Heir failiening Children, and penes quem emolumentum penes eundem onus: yet she
cannot be served Tutor of Law: And the Law not trusting her, she should not be
Dative: And though the Exchequer gives such Tutories, it seems to be an Error
and abuse.

If Breives for serving Tutors of Law should be direct to any others, but the
Sheriffs? Or to other Judges, where the Defunct had his Domicile and his
Estate? Seeing Infants and Pupils have no Domicile: and Services are oftentimes
of purpose before the Baillies of the Canongate; and in other places, where
neither the Pupils parents did dwell, nor had they any interest or estate.

Diverse Tutors being named conjunctly, Quaeritur, if any of them decease, will
the Nomination be void? Answer, It is thought, that Tutors and Executors have
the Office singuli in solidum; So that any of them deceasing, the survivers
continue Jure non decrescendi. Montrose.

A Mid-brother having left Children, Quaeritur, Whether will his Elder Brother
or Younger be Tutor to them? Ratio Dubitandi, That the younger Brother will not
succeed, and penes quem onus, penes eundem emolumentum: Et e contra, if the
mid-Brothers Children should succeed to their Father, the younger Brother will
be Heir to them, though not to their Father.

Tutor and administrator of Law.
QVaeritur, If Debitors may pay the Father as Tutor of Law, sine inquisitione,
and without some authority of the Judge competent? Seeing there may be prejudice
to the Pupil, if the Father be prodigus, or otherwise unfit.

Tutor Ratione Rei.
QVaeritur, Whether a Person, Disponing his Estate to a Pupil or Minor, may
appoint Tutors and Curators for administration of it during Minority? Answer,
he may appoint Tutors or Curators to administrate: But the Question remains,
whether he may appoint a Tutor, not only rei suae but Personae; and to any
other Estate belonging to the Pupil.

Quaeritur, The Father being deceased, may the Grandfather name Tutors to his
Grandchildren?

There being no place to a Dative till after year and day, Quaeritur, If the
nearest Agnat may oppose the giving a Dative? Or if Jus be fully devolutum to
the King, as in other cases Juris devoluti?

Tutory.
FIve Persons being named Tutors, whereof two to be sine quibus non, viz. The
Defuncts Relict, and another; and the Relict being Married, and the other sine
quo non deceasing: Quaeritur, Whether the Tutory falls? And if it be void,
whether the nearest of kin of age may be Tutor in Law? Or if there should be
place to a Tutor Dative? And if in that case the surviving Tutors should be
preferred to all others? Ratio Dubitandi, 1mo. Though the defunct did express
his respect to the sine quibus non; so that during their being Tutors they
should be sine quibus non; he did also express his confidence in the other
Tutors above all others, by nameing them Tutors; so that, for the reason
soresaid, it may appear, That they should continue Tutors; at the least that
for avoiding of question, they should be preferred to be Datives. 2do. The next
nearest of Kin should not be Tutors, seeing the Defunct did not trust them. The
case of my Lord Montrose; his Father having named his Mother and the Earls of
Perth and Haddington, Drumelzior and Sir Willaim Bruce, to be his Tutors.

V.
Re-entering of Vassals.
WHen a Right holden of the Superior is reduced, whether the Superior be
obliged to Re-enter without a Composition?

Vectigalia and Pedagia.
VEctigalia and Pedagia sunt quasi stipendia Principum, pro protectione and
reparatione itinerum and pontium instituta. Jus Fluviat. Tom. 2. Consil. 8. p.
140. n. 23.

Licet per vadum quis transire possit, solvitur tamen pedagium de fluminibus;
etc. 24.

Vinco Vincentem.
QVaeritur, In what case the Brocard holds, Si vinco vincentem, vinco te?
Answer. ubi est eadem Ratio; as, v.g. If there be three comprysings, and the
last compryser be first infeft; and thereafter the first; and the second in the
last place; But there is an Inhibition at the instance of the second before the
Debt of the third Compryser: The second will be preferable to the third, who
will be preferable to the first; and yet the first will be preferred to the
second.

As in the case of Adjudication and Infeftment thereupon, the adjudger may
exclude the Superiors Ward falling by the Debtor, Quaeritur, If he may exclude
and be preferable to the Liferent, having the first Infeftment; Quia si vinco
vincentem, vinco te? Answer. he is not preferable to the Liferent: and the
Brocard does only militate ubi est eadem Ratio vincendi; and the adjudger
vincit the Superior, because he is infeft holden of him: so that there can be
no Ward: but cannot upon that ground vincere the Liferenter, because she is
also infeft, and has a prior Infeftment though base yet public; and which
therefore does exclude the adjudgers Infeftment being posterior; though it
would not exclude the Superior as to his casuality, because base and not
confirmed by him. Ballencrief. vide Debtor and Creditor, Quaest. 3. Litera D.

U.
Union.
THere being an Union in a Charter, of Lands in diverse Shires; so that one
Seasin may be taken for all: Quaeritur, If the Heir may be served in the Shire
where Seasin is to be taken, as to all the Lands? In respect the Lands in other
Shires are fictione juris, and by reason of the Union, thought to be there: Or
if there must be a Service by a Commission, or two Services in the several
Shires?

If notwithstanding of the Union, Seasin may be taken of both the Lands, seeing
the Charter bears that una sasina erit sufficiens, and not that it shall be
necessary? And if the Seasin may be quarrelled, as not being at the places
where Seasin is to be taken?

Item if the Taking two Seasins upon the Retour, will import a renunceing of
the Union; so that a seasin cannot be taken thereafter at the place of the
Union, upon Resignation or otherwise?

Vniversalia augmentum recipient.
TOtum est, vel Universal, vel Integrale: Universal ut haereditas, Dos, etc.
augmentum and Diminutionem recipit, and futurum includit; Ita grege legato,
quae postea accedunt ad Legatarium pertinent: Jus Fluviat p. 768, n. 12. and
sequent.

Quando Vniversitas delinquit?
UNiversitas dicitur delinquere, quando secundum consuetudinem loci per
praeconem vel sonum campanae, fuerit convocata, and in Concilio generali sponte
convenerit and deliquerit.

Si Decuriones consenserint tantum, non Vniversitas sed particulares deliquisse
dicuntur; quia aliud est Vniversitas, aliud singuli: and in generali potestate
Decurionibus data, non includitur potest as delinquendi. Fritschii Tom. 2.
exercit. 3. Juris publ. n. 73.

Licet ista solennitas contra civitatem sit probanda, tamen haud requiritur in
delictis tractum successivum habentibus; v. g. si non punitd elinquentes, quia
ibi praesumitur ratificatio, quae in paenalibus mandato quoque comparatur; and
consensus ipsius satis facto declaratur. ibid. n. 75.

Quomodo puniatur Vniversitas, vide ibid. n. 78. and sequent.

Punitur aliquando Banno, sumpto de authoribus supplicio; ut paena ad paucos,
metus ad omnes perveniat. ibid. n. 80.

W.
Wadsets. Vide De Hypothecis.
WHAT way shall a Creditor be secured as to a Wadset, or Money due thereupon?
Answer. He may compryse the Wadset-Right; and if he cannot compryse, the term
of payment of the Creditors Debt not being come, he may arrest the Sum due upon
the Wadset, to be forthcoming in case of redemption. vide Arrestment of
Conditional Debt in litera A.

If Another Creditor compryse the Wadset, will he be preferred to the Arrester
before the Order, though anterior? Answer. he will be preferred being in the
Right the time of the Redemption; And the Money being only due to these who
have Right to the Land, and must renounce and retrovendere.

The Wadsetter deceasing after an Order, and the Money being consigned
Quaeritur, Whether will it belong to his Heir or Executor? Ratio Dubitandi.
Money of it self is Moveable: And on the other part, surrogatum sapit naturam
surrogati; and it is due to be given ratione rei and a renunciation to be given
by the Heir.

Quid Juris in the case of a Contract, whereby Lands are sold and a price
payable; if the Buyer charge for implement and consign the price, and the
Disponer decease; whether will it belong to his Heirs or Executors?

After Redemption of a Wadset, or comprysing, the Wadsetter or compryser dying;
whether is it necessary that their Heirs be infeft and re-renounce, or if a
renunciation will be sufficient; the Wadset or comprysing being loused and
extinguished by Redemption?

Wadset Heretable or Moveable.
WHen there is a provision in a Wadset-Right, that requisition should not louse
the infeftment: Quaeritur, If after requisition the Sum be Heretable or
Moveable? Ratio Dubitandi. The Creditor declares his resolution to have the
Sum: And on the other part, a Sum due upon a real Right appears to be
Heretable. It is thought, that until it be actually uplifted, it should be
Heretable: sed Cogitandum.

If the Wadsetter be year and Day at the Horn; and thereafter the Wadset be
redeemed, Quaeritur, If the Superior will have the Wadsetters Liferent of the
Sum due upon the wadset.

If before Redemption, the Wadsetter Dispone the Lands, suppose they hold Ward,
will they recognize simply, or only as to the Wadsetters interest? Ratio
Dubitandi, The Wadset is, upon the matter, but a Hypotheck; and he can
forefault no more than he has: And on the other part, whatever paction be
betwixt the Creditor and Debtor; yet as to the Superior, the Wadsetter is
properly and formally his Vassal; so that ex ejus persona he has all the fruits
and casualities of Superiority.

If a Wadsetter holding of the King commit Treason, Whether or not he
forefaults the Lands or only his interest of Wadset? Ratio Dubitandi, As in the
former Querie: and that the King should have hominem vivum and mortalem
confiscantem; and all the casualities belonging to his Superiority, or to His
Majesty as King, ex morte vel delicto Vasalli: and albeit the Right be
redeemable, yet that is to be understood alse long as the Right is in the
person of the Wadsetter; but not after it is Extinct by Forefaulture.

Wadset Proper.
IF a Wadsetter of Ward-Lands die before Redemption, will the Marriage of his
Heir fall? And if it fall, will the Debtor, if he redeem, be liable to refound
the avail.

In Proper Wadsets a great part of the Sum being paid; will the Wadsetter be
comptable for the duties effeirand thereto?

Ward.
A Compryser of Lands holden Ward being infeft, Quaeritur, If these Lands will
Ward by the decease of the compryser, and if the Marriage of his appearand Heir
will fall? Ratio Dubitandi, a compryser is but an interim Vassal, for surety
of his Debt: And upon that consideration such a Right in England is considered
as a Chattel, and not Inheritance. vide Comprysing. quaest: 14. litera. C.

If the comprysing be Redeemed, will the Debtor be liable to refound the
damnage sustained by the Ward and Marriage?

Quaeritur, If the Ward of the comprysers Heir will determine and expire upon
the Redemption?

Quid Juris in the case of proper Wadsets; if the Debtor after Redemption,
will be liable to refound the foresaid Damnage? The difference being, that a
comprysing is an involuntar Right, and the Wadset voluntar; so that the
Creditor seems to take his hazard.

A Creditor being infeft in Ward Lands, upon a Wadset bearing backtack; will
they Ward upon his decease, and the Minority of his Heir?

If they Ward, will the Debtor have the benefit of the backtack, during the
Ward? The Superior having in effect consented thereto.

We have seen a Charter granted to the Earl of Home, viz. To George Earl of
Home and Mareon Halyburton, of the Earldome of Home, and other Lands
thereinmentioned; some of them holding Ward; Which Charter is granted to them
in Liferent and to their Son Alexander in Fee; dated in Anno 1538. which bears,
that though the said Alexander be infeft in Fee, yet if the time of the
Liferenters decease he be Minor, his Ward and Marriage shall fall to the King.

Item, It bears a reservation of Terce to the said Mareon, notwithstanding of
the said Fee.

If the Ward of a person who is Appearand Heir, as to a Wadset Right, do not
determine by a Redemption of the Wadset? And the same Question may be, as to
the Liferent of the person infeft upon the Wadset? Answer. It is thought, that
it will determine; his Right being Jus resolubile: And though the Ward be
considered as fructus Dominii directi; and being gifted, it may seem that the
Donator cannot be prejudged, yet that is to be understood when the Vassal has
an absolute Right; but not when the Right is qualified and resolubile.

If the Appearand Heir of Ward Lands being pubes and Doli capax commit
Treason, will his Ward be determined? vide Marriage. questiones 17. and 18. in
litera. M.

Lands holding Ward being full the time of the Vassals decease, by an
Infeftment upon a Comprysing; but the Comprysing being thereafter redeemed by
the Debitors general Heir being Minor; Quaeritur, If the Superior will have the
Ward? Answer. It is thought, not; seeing the Heir does not succed to the Lands
as Heir to his Father, who was not Vassal; but as general Heir has Right to the
Reversion, whereupon he has Redeemed: and Modus and Forma is much to be
considered.

If the Comprysing does extinguish, being satisfied by Intromission, Quaeritur,
If the Heir being Minor, there will be a Ward in that case? Answer. It is
thought, not; Seeing the Comprysing does extinguish not ab initio, but ex post
facto; and the Heir cannot be said to be the Appearand Heir of a Vassal; the
Lands being full, as said is the time of his Fathers decease: And albeit there
is not a formal and ordinar legal reversion, no Money being to be paid, yet
there is upon the matter Jus Retrahendi to the Appearand Heir. vide Comprysing.
Quaest. 37. litera C.

Ward Lands.
QVaeritur, A Superior of Ward Lands having confirmed a base Infeftment,
whether will the Subvassal be Liable to the Ward, or Non-entry falling by the
decease of the Vassal? Ratio Dubitandi. Hope gives only that reason in the
case of Lands holden of the King, that Confirmations bear a Salvo of all
Rights, Duties, and Services.

By the Act of Parliament (...) The Superior during the Non-entry and Ward, had
Right only to the Feu-duty due to the Vassal by the Subvassal; Quaeritur, If
the Superior be in the same case by the confirmation, as he was by the said Act
of Parliament; notwithstanding the Act of Parliament 1606, in favors of
Subjects Superiors of Ward Lands.

If the Appearand Heir of a Vassal of Ward Lands renounce to be Heir, will his
Marriage notwithstanding fall either single or double? Ratio Dubitandi, he was
never Vassal; and caelibatus is not delictum.

If Marriage be real and affects in prejudice of singular Successors? Ratio
Dubitandi, Hope is for the Affirmative, and alleges Decisions. To consider
Haltons case: On the other part, in Novodamuses, amongst incumberances that
affect, there is no mention of Marriage. 2do. The Marriage respects not the
Lands but the person, and his other Estate as to the value. 3tio. It may appear
to be a personal Prestation, whereto the person and his Right dureing his and
his Heirs time is Liable, but does not affect a singular Successor, as in the
case of Ward.

A Vassal of Lands holden Ward of the King did Feu the same before the Year
1633. when it was lawful to Feu Lands holden Ward of the King; and when the
said Feu was granted, the Disponer did grant a general Discharge of the
Feu-duty except dureing the Ward; and for securing the Fever having bought the
said Lands as optima maxima, at alse high a price as if the Lands had holden
otherwise, that he and his Successors should not be Liable to the Feu-duty
during the Ward; the Disponer was obliged to Infeft the Fever in an Annualrent
out of other Lands equivalent to the Feu-duty; suspending always the effect of
the said Right, except during the Ward. Quaeritur. 1mo. If the said general
Discharge, with an obligement to grant particular Discharges when required,
will militate against singular Successors, being in rem? Answer. Cogitandum:
But it is thought, that it will not; unless the same were by way of Provision
in the Charter and Seasin.

When Ward Lands were Feued which did hold of the King before the Year 1633.
The Fever during the Ward was only Liable to the Feu-duty by the old Act of
Parliament, allowing the Feuing of such Lands; but there is no mention of the
Marriage in the said Act of Parliament; Quaeritur therefore, Whether the
Marriage of the Disponer and his Successors will affect such Feues? It is
Answered, That it is thought, not; seeing the setting of Feus being allowed; it
appears, that Fevers should be only Liable to the Feu-duty.

The Fever having ever possessed since the granting of the said Right (mentioned
in the Querie abovewritten except one) but not being Infeft upon the said
obligement to Infeft in an Annualrent, for relief of the Feu-duty: Quaeritur,
If the Fever should pursue upon the said obligement, if it may be obtruded that
it is prescribed? Ratio Dubitandi, That the said obligement is a part of the
Fevers Right; and the Fever has been in possession by virtue of his Right all
the time: and if the Fever had not been Infeft upon the Feu-Charter, and had
been in possession by the space of Forty Years; and after the expireing of the
same should pursue the Disponer and his Representatives, to grant a new Charter
with a Precept to Infeft; it could not be pretended that the said Right was
prescribed.

If Lands holden Ward of the King be Feued after the Year 1633. and the King
should question the said Feu as null, being contrar to the Act of Parliament:
Quaeritur, If Prescription may be alleged and obtruded against the King? Ratio
Dubitandi, That the Right is null ab initio, and cannot be a warrant and ground
of Prescription; Et quod nullum est, nullum sortitur Juris effectum.

A Vassal of Ward Lands holden of the King, having Feued the same conform to
the Act of Parliament warranting such Feus: Quaritur, If the Vassal be
Forefault, whether such Feus will fall under the Forefaulture; if they be not
confirmed? Or if the Act of Parliament, warranting such Feus, be equivalent to
a confirmation? Answer. It is thought, the King for himself and his Successors,
by the said Act, did consent to all Feus that are to be granted by virtue
thereof: So that the same is equivalent to a Confirmation. Marquis of Huntlie.

Taxt Ward.
A Gift being granted of Wards simple or Taxt, falling within a certain time,
Quaeritur, if the Donator will have Right to the Taxt Ward for Terms
thereafter. Answer. He will have Right to the same; if the Taxt Ward has fallen
within the said time, as the whole time of the Ward; seeing Ward is to be
considered as Jus integrum; and Dies cedit when ever it falls, albeit non venit.

Warrandice.
A Bond being Assigned with absolute Warrandice: Quaeritur, What is the import
of the said Warrandice? And if the Cedent should be Liable, if the Debtor be,
or should become Insolvent? Answer. It will import only that the Debt is true,
and due by a valide Bond; but not that the Cedent should be obliged to warrant
the condition of the Debtor; the Law being express to that purpose, that he
should warrant deberi, but not Debitorem locupletum esse: As was found in the
case of Mr. Robert Barclay.

Quid Juris, If the Warrandice be in these Terms; that the Debtor is Locuples,
and he be truly so for the time, but he becomes Insolvent? Cogitandum.

Infeftment of Warrandice.
IF an Infeftment of Warrandice, being only base, will be construed to be
public by Possession; by reason of the Possession of the Principal Lands
Dunglas.

Waste.
WAste being committed by a Liferenter or Wadsetter; and the Heretor deceasing
or disponing the Lands; whether will the Action for the same be competent to
the Heir of the Heretor, or to his Executors, or Singular Successors? Answer.
It is thought, it will belong to the Heir, or Singular Successor, being Actio
in Rem: And so it is by the English Law.

Witnesses Remitted.
THE necessary Qualification of a Witness being Honesty and Integrity, which
though presumed in all Persons, yet cannot be thought to have been in these,
who by sentence on their own Confession, are evidently Criminosi, and guilty of
the highest Crimes: It would seem that a Remission may Free as to punishment,
and may Repone as to all other capacities, and as to the Kings own Interest;
But not as to that, which in behalf of the People, requires Integrity: And the
King by a Remission may free a Pain, but not a Guilt, and cannot repone to
Innocence.

Witnesses in case of Treason.
THE Law of the Majesty, and the Statutes of King William Chap. 11th. Of these
who are Infamous; and the Statutes of Robert the 1st. Cap. 34. of these who are
repelled from Testimony, are clear, that Socii Criminis cannot be Witnesses,
and convicti and redempti cannot be Witnesses: Quaeritur therefore, if a Person
convict of Treason and Remitted, that he may be Witness against others, can be
Witness? Especially, that Law bearing That conducti prece vel pretio cannot be
Witnesses; and there can be no greater pretium than a Man's Life, Skin for Skin
etc.

Women VVitnesses.
QVaeritur, If Women Witnesses may be admitted in the case of Divorce, to prove
Adultery? Answer. This Question is under debate, upon Advocation from the
Commissars of Edinburgh having admitted the same: And that they should not be
admitted. 1mo. That by our Law, Cap. 34. Stat. 2d. To. 1st. Women are not
Habile Witnesses: And by the Custom (except in casu puerperii to prove the
Birth of Children, to give the Husband the benefit of Courtesy) and by the
Canon Law Decretal: De verborum significatione Cap. 10. And on the other part,
it is urged, by the Civil Law, they may be Witnesses except in Testaments; and
by the Canon Law, they may be Witnesses in causa Matrimoniali, and by our
custom in Criminibus occultis and domesticis; and in atrocioribus, as Murder,
Treason, and Falsehood: And in Answer, It is urged, that where the Civil Law is
altered by the Canon, that is to be followed; and that Women cannot prove
Marriage, and ought not to prove the Dissolution; and in causa Matrimonii
Witnesses should be above all exception. Cap. 1. de Consanguinitate: And if any
of the Canonists were of another Opinion, it was because the effect of Divorce
was separatio mensae and Thori, non vinculi; and in Treason and such Crimes
much is indulged, ad vindictam publicam, but not ad vindictam privatam, when
such pursuites are only for private interest: And it is not presumed, that the
Kings Advocat will corrupt Witnesses: and in whatever case either by the Canon
Law or ours, Women are admitted, It is only ubi constat de corpore delicti,
which is not in Adultery, where there is not a Child: and in whatever case
(even when the public is concerned) Women are never admitted; but to
adminiculate; And Quando concurrit unus testis habilis, supplet inhabilitatem
alterius: And there being Forty or Fifty Processes of Adultery within this
Hundred Years, Women VVitnesses were never received: and they are not admitted
in causa scandali before the Commissars, to prove injuria verborum, much less
in Crimine Adulterii.

Obligements to employ Sums of Money, for Provision of Wives.
IF a Person be obliged by Contract of Marriage to employ a Sum of Money to
himself and his Wife the longest liver in Liferent, and to his Heirs Quaeritur,
If the said obligement be not performed, what course the Relict may take to
affect thereupon his Estate having no Heirs, Creditors being in competition of
Diligence? And if she may not pursue his Appearand Heir as lawfully charged,
making mention of the Obligement, and that the Heir will not perform the same,
and that loco facti succedit interesse; and therefore to hear and see him
decerned to pay and make forthcoming to her the said Sum, that it may be
employed conform to the said Obligement; and to hear and see it found and
declared, that the same Execution shall follow upon the Decree by Adjudication
or otherwise, as is competent to other Creditors?

If a Relict will be preferable to other Creditors?

A VVomans Jointure.
A Man getting a Tocher, and giving a Jointure in order to his Wife's Aliment;
and she having a Joint Right with him: If he become Bankrupt will it be
altogether ineffectual dureing Life? Ratio Dubitandi. It is Alimentary, and she
is a most favorable Creditor, and otherwise it should be Societas Leonina.

VVoods.
WHen a Liferenter is Infeft cum Nemoribus: Quaeritur, Quid Juris, When the
VVood falls to be cut dureing the Liferent?

VVrack.
IF Ships or Barges belonging to this Kingdom, do make Shipwreck within the
same: Quaeritur, Whether the Representatives of the owners may claim the Goods
and not the King? Or any Infeft cum Wrack? Ratio Dubitandi, That by the Act of
Parliament, Ja. 6. Par. 9. Cap. 124. Ships belonging to these Nations, where
that Law has not place, are to be in another case than the Ships belonging to
the Nations where the Law anent Shipwreck has place: and it seems reasonable,
that the King's own Subjects and their Ships should be in alse good case, as
the Ships of any Nation whatsoever; and that their Ships and Goods should not
be lost upon pretense of VVrack; unlese there were a positive Law to that
purpose: and the foresaid Act implies, that it is Triste Lucrum, and not to be
owned but Lege Talionis.

Z.
The case of the Admirality of Orknay and Zetland, Represented in behalf of the
King, in Answer to the Duke of Lennox's Claim thereto.
BY a Charter under the Great Seal in anno 1603. His Majesty's Grandfather did
give and grant to Lodovick Duke of Lennox the Office of Admirality, in these
terms, Totum and integrum Officium Admiralitatis nostri Regni, cum omnibus
privilegiis honoribus and Commoditatibus eidem spectantibus.

The said Charter is not only of the said Office, But of the Dukedom of
Lennox, and of the Lands therinmentiond belonging to the same: And as to the
said Lands and Dukedom, the said Charter is upon the Dukes Resignation, the
same having formerly pertained to him; But as to the said Office of Admirality,
the same is not given upon the Dukes Resignation, but is casten in in the
Novodamus; whereas the Clauses of Novodamus do not usually contain, as to the
Subject Disponed, more nor did formerly belong to the Resigner; seeing de novo
dare and renovare does suppose a former and preexistent Right. There are indeed
Ratifications in Parliament of Lodovick Duke of Lennox his Right of the Office
of the Admirality; But it is to be considered, that by ancient Laws and Acts of
Parliament, it is Statute that heretable Offices should not be given, or
Disponed in Fee or Heretage; and if they should de facto be disponed, they
should be given with great deliberation, and deliverance of the Parliament, s
appears by the Acts 43 and 44 King James 6th. his 11th. Parliament.

Ratifications do ordinarily pass in Parliament, of course without voting, the
very last hour of the Parliament when it is to dissolve; and how little weight
should be laid upon the same, it appears by the Ratification produced for his
Grace the Duke of Lennox dated 23 of October 1612, which does ratify the
Infeftment Granted to the said Lodovick Duke of Lennox of the Offices of Great
Admiral of Scotland, and of all the Isles and bounds thereof, with the Offices
of Lieutenendrie upon the seas, and Collonellship, and Justice General, and
Office of Judicatorie Criminal and Civil, with all the Privileges, Dignities,
and Casualities of the same set down in the said Infeftment; albeit no such
Infeftment, for any thing known, is or can be produced: and the foresaid
Infeftment in the year 1603 Granted to the Duke of Lennox is only simple, of
the Office of Admiralitie Regni nostri without any mention of the Isles, or of
the Office of Lieutenendrie upon the Seas or Collonellship, and Justice
General, and of the Office Judicatorie Criminal and Civil; And the said Act of
Parliament is blank as to the date of the Infeftment which is ratified; whereas
if there had been any such Infeftment of the Tenor and Extent foresaid, it
would have then been produced the time of the said ratification; And if it had
been then produced, the ratification would have expressed the date of the same.

It Appears by certain other papers now produced by the Duke for clearing his
interest, That the claim of that Honorable Family was only of the Office of
Admiralitie of the Kingdom, without any mention of the Isles, and much less of
Orknay and Zetland; in so far as his Majesty's Fathers letter 16 June 1628, of
which the extract is produced, does bear, That he had been pleased to sign a
signature, In favors of the Duke of Lennox of the Heretable Office of
Admiralitie of this his Kingdom: And in the Act of Parliament produced of the
date 28 June 1633, Mention is made, that the deceased James Duke Lennox stood
Infeft as Heir to the said Lodovick Duke of Lennox, in the Office of
Admiralitie of this Kingdom, without the least mention of Orknay and Zetland.

It appears by the Writs produced for the Duke, That until the Earl of Mortouns
Grandfather obtained a gift and Right of Orknay and Zetland from his Majesty's
Father; The Duke of Lennox's Right, as to the admiralitie of Orknay and
Zetland, was ever questioned and controverted by his Majesty's Officers; In so
far, that upon the last of March 1628, The King did set a Tack of the Earldome
of Orknay and Zetland To Archibal^ Lord Naper, Containing a Right likwayes of
the Admiralitie within the Bounds of Orknay and Zetland: And the Earl of
Linlithgow having appeared in behalf of the Deceased James Duke Lennox, The
said Lord Naper Declaired, that he should be ruled as to the said Right of
Admirality according as his Majesty should declare his will thereanent;
whereas if the Dukes Right had been clear and unquestionable, neither a Tack
would have been set of the Admiralitie of Orknay and Zetland, neither would
there have been any Reference made to his Majesty; But upon the Ear^ of
Linlithgowes appearing, and representation of the Dukes Right, the Clause of
the said Tack as to the Admiralitie of Orknay and Zetland, would have been
Delet.

As to Possession; the Earls of Mortoun have been in Possession of the
Admiralitie of Orknay, upon a Gift and Right from his Majesty, ever since the
Earl of Mortouns Grandfather obtained the Right of Orknay.

There is produced for the Duke, The double of a Gift granted to the Earl of
Linlithgow of the Admiralitie of the whole Kingdom of Scotland and Isles
thereof, and of the Lieutenendrie, Justiciarie and General of the Sea; with
consent of the Deceast James Duke of Lennox and of his Curatorsf the said Earl
being a Confident Person and Relation of the said Noble Family, And without
prejudice of the Dukes Right: But it is to be Considered, that the said Paper
is only a Double and not Authentic, And the said Right is only Granted dureing
the Minority of the said Duke of Lennox, and is given upon a Supposition and
Narrative of the Dukes Right; Whereas no Right has been, or for any thing that
can be seen, can be showen; That the Dukes of Lennox have Right expresely of
the Admirality of the Isles, and of the offices of Lieutenendrie and
Justiciarie.

As to the Privileges and Casualities belonging to the Admiralitie of Orknay
and Zetland; it is represented, that the Privileges and Casualities of the
Admiralitie are not specified nor defyned in any Charter or Record, for any
thing that does appear: the Charter foresaid granted to Lodovick Duke of Lennox
in Anno. 1603, bearing only (as said is) Cum Privilegijs and commoditatibus
eisdem Spectantibus: And the Charter granted to Adam Hepburn Earl of Bothwell
in the Year 1511 (which is the most ancient Record of Admiralitie that we have
seen) bearing only the said Office of Admiral Totius Regni, to be given to the
said Adam, Cum omnibus Libertatibus proficuis and eschetis ejusdem; without
mention of the Isles of Orknay or Zetland, or specifieing the Liberties and
Casualities belonging to the Admirality.

It Appears by an Act of Parliament Entitled concerning certain abuses of the
Admirals proceedings, being 156. Act of King James 6th. his 12. Parliament;
that upon pretense of an Infeftment granted to Francis Earl of Bothwell of the
Admiralitie of Scotland, containing greater Specialities and diverse Clauses
which were not in the former Infeftments of Admirality, The People being
oppressed did Complain, and by the said Act it is Statute, that the Admiral and
his Successors should exerce no Jurisdiction nor exact no Duty nor Casualitie,
But that which was in use to be exercised and taken by the Admiral for the
time, before the Death of King James 5th: And therefore it is humbly
conceived, that whosoever shall be found to have Right to the Admiralitie of
Orknay and Zetland, It is fit that the Privileges and Casualites of the same,
be so defyned and cleared, that the Fishing, Trade, and Trafficque be not
interrupted nor disturbed; And that his Majesty be not prejudged of his Rents
of Orknay.

It is humbly represented to his Majesty's Consideration, The Records being
for the most part lost, which might have cleared his Majesty's Interest; and
the Right of Admiralitie being Granted to the Dukes of Lennox in manner
foresaid; and neither the Dukes Right nor the Right of Admiralitie granted to
the preceding Admirals being special as to the Isles of Orknay and Zetland;
and the said Isles of Orknay being the Kings Property, and feued only to the
Earls of Orknay, and now Annexed to the Crown; and the said Isles being so
remote and of so vast an extent, and formerlie possessed by the King of
Denmark; and upon Transactions with the said King which are not very ancient,
being reunited to this Kingdom; Whether or not the Right of Admiralitie granted
to the Dukes of Lennox ought to be extended to the said Isles of Orknay and
Zetland?

FINIS.
THE DECISIONS OF THE LORDS OF COUNCIL and SESSION, IN Most Cases of
Importance, Debated, and brought before them; from December 1665, to June 1677.

OBSERVED By Sir JOHN NISBET of Dirleton, Advocate to King CHARLES II.

To which is Added, An INDEX, For finding the principal Matters in the said
Decisions; As also, A List of the Pursuers and Defenders Names.

printer's or publisher's device

EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Closs. Anno Dom. M.DC.XCVIII.

DECISIONS OF THE LORDS OF COUNCIL and SESSION, In some Weighty and Important
Affairs before them. Beginning the 7. of December 1665, and ending the 29. of
June 1677.
Decision 1st. Veatch contra Duncan, 7. December 1665.
THE Clause cum molendinis and multuris, imports freedom from astriction,
though it be only in the Tenendas. Me referente.

D. 2. Burnet contra Leys, 12. December. 1665.
THe said Mr Robert Burnet Son to Alexander Burnet of Leys being provided by
his Grandfather Sir Thomas Burnet of Leys (his Father having deceased before)
To the Sum of 10000. Merks, to be paid after his age of 25. Years; with
Annualrent after that time conform to a bond; pursued his Nephew Leys for the
Annualrent of that Sum; at least for an Aliment until he should attain to that
age: Upon that ground, That he could not starve; and that his Grandfather,
whom the Defender represents as Heir having provided him, as said is, to the
foresaid Sum to be paid at the time foresaid, did acknowledge that he was
obliged to provide him being his Grandchild: and that until the time his
provision should be payable, he and his Heirs were liable to his Entertainment
being Debitum Natural.

The Lords this day did Demurre: And the case being of consequence as to the
preparative, thought fit it should be further thought upon.

D. 3. Ferguson contra More. Eodem die.
IN the case Ferguson contra More, the Lords Found That Compensation should not
be granted against an Assigney upon a Debt of the cedent Assigned to the
Suspender; unless intimation had been made to the Cedent, before the Chargers
intimation of the Assignation made to him by the Cedent.

D. 4. Inter Eosdem, eod. die.
IN the same case, two Persons being obliged Conjunctly and severaly as
principal Debitors, to pay a Tocher, without a clause of relief pro rara, It
was found that de Jure inest.

D. 5. Pringle contra Cranston. eod. die.
IN the case Pringle of Greenknow contra Cranstoun, Found that a subvassal
being infeft by a Baron cum Curiis and Bloodwitis, may hold Courts and unlaw
for Blood.

D. 6. Eleis contra Keith and Wiseheart, 15. December. 1665.
IN the case betwixt Mr John Eleis and Mr Alexander Keith and Wiseheart, It was
Found That Elizabeth Keith Spouse to Mr William Wiseheart Minister at Leith,
having by Bond, granted by her Husband and her, obliged her self to pay to the
said Mr. John, the Sum of 6000. merks: and for his further surety to infeft
him in certain Lands pertaining to her; which bond contained a procuratory of
resignation: The said bond though null as to the obligement to pay the said
Sum, was valide as to the Right of the Lands: And that the said Elizabeth,
having thereafter disponed the said Lands in defraud and prejudice of the said
Mr John, was liable to the said Mr John, and upon that ground, The Lords found
the said Mr John as Creditor to the said Elizabeth, might question any
fraudulent Rights made by her to his prejudice.

D. 7. Grants and Row contra Visc. of Stormont, eod. die.
DAvid Viscount of Stormont having obtained a Decree of Reduction against
(...) Grants, of their Right of certain Lands, for not production. (...) Grants
and (...) Row, did reduce the said Decree against (...) now Viscont of
Stormont, upon production of the Rights called for in the first Decree: And in
this Reduction, The Lords did suffer and admit the said Viscount to insist in
the said first Reduction, he produceing the said David Viscount of Stormont his
Right and instructing that he represents him; Though the said first Process was
not transferred in the Person of the said Viscount active; and against the
Pursuers of this Reduction passive; and the summonds of Reduction, whereupon
the first Decree, proceeded was not produced: Which The Lords allowed to be
supplied by production of the Decree, and a paper containing such reasons of
Reduction, as Stormont thought fit to give in: And that in respect it was the
fault of the Defenders in the first Reduction, that the Writs were not then
produced: And they and these having Right from them being reponed, it was just
that Stormont and his Heirs should be likewise reponed.

D. 8. McLeod contra Young. 19. December. 1665.
WAlter Young, Harie Hope and (...) having Written to the Lord McDonald, that
they had commissionated (...) Donaldson to buy Cows for their use; and that for
such as should be bought from him they obliged themselves to pay all such Bills
as should be drawn upon them: and the said Donaldson having drawn a Bill upon
the said Persons and any of them: Found, that in respect they were partners
and socii as to the bargain, and the Lord McDonald had upon their letter
trusted and sold the Cows to the said Donaldson, they ought to be liable in
solidum conjunctly and severaly.

D. 9. Dickson contra Sandilands. 21. December. 1665.
IN the case betwixt (...) Dickson of Killoch and Sandilands his Mother and her
present Husband: It was Found, that a Husband being obliged by Contract of
Marriage, to provide the liferent of such Lands as he should acquire during the
Marriage, to his Wife in liferent; and to the Heirs of the Marriage: and his
Heir being pursued for implement, and for resigning certain Lands acquired by
the Husband for a liferent to the Relict; The Relict her liferent and Right
should be with the burden of a Sum of Money borrowed by the Husband, for making
the said purchass; as to the Annualrent of the said Debt during the Relicts
Lifetime.

The Lords considered, that though, in order to other ends and effects, and in
special to determine the Succession in favors of an Heir of conquest, whatever
Lands are acquired by any person titulo singulari are esteemed Conquest: yet in
Contracts of Marriage such obligements anent conquest, are to be understood of
what is acquired by the Husband with his own means and Moneys; seeing what is
acquired otherwise (the Price or a part of it being borrowed, and the Husband
being Debtor for the same) upon the matter, and in effect, is not conquest and
a free accession to the Husbands Estate; in so far as the Price is a burden
upon the Husbands Estate: and as the Husband, if he had been charged himself,
might have satisfied the obligement by giving an Infeftment with the foresaid
burden, so the Heir may do the same.

D. 10. Lepar contra Burnet. 23. December. 1665.
IN the case betwixt Lepar and Dam Rachel Burnet and the Lord of Prestoun her
present Husband; these questions were agitated and decided.

1. If a Husband get, in Tocher with his Wife being an Heretrix, more than an
ordinary and competent Tocher, which he might have gotten with another; The
Husband and his Heirs will be liable, after the Marriage is dissolved by the
Wifes decease, in quantum lucratus est, for the Wifes Debt: And the lucrum will
be considered, to be the benefit he has gotten above an ordinary Tocher.

2. The Lords inclined to think, That though a decree of registration was
obtained against the Wife and her Husband for his interest; The Husband will
not be liable, the Marriage and his interest ceasing: And that an ordinary
Tocher being ad sustinenda onera, is not lucrum.

3. Heirs portioners are liable for their own part; reserving action in case
any of them become irresponsal: and if the Creditor having done diligence
cannot recover their parts, he may have recourse against the rest.

4. It was moved (but not decided) whether the others being non solvent, The
responsal Heir should be liable for their proportion in solidum? Or only for
What he has gotten of the defuncts Estate?

D. 11. Bryand contra Grhame. 3. January 1666.
IN the case betwixt Mr Andrew Bryand and George Grhame, The said George being
constitute assigney to a Bond granted by the said Bryaend to Thomas Jack: And
having charged thereupon, The Suspender offered to improve the Bond; and urged
the charger to bide by the same, which he was content to do in these terms.
Viz. That he did abide by the said Bond as truly assigned and delivered to him
by the cedent: And that the cedent would compear and abide by the same as a
true Bond. The Suspender answered, that the cedent was lapsus, and had come out
of Prison upon a Bonorum; and therefore he ought to find Caution to compear all
the dyets of the Process. The Lords found, that the cedent should abide by the
said Bond; with certification, that if he should not appear when the Lords
should think fit, for clearing the question anent the falsehood of the Bond by
his oath or Examination; the Bond should be declared to be void; and to make no
faith both as to cedent and assigney.

D. 12. Falconer contra E. of Kinghorn. 4. January 1666.
THe Lord of Drum as Principal, and the Earl of Kinghorn and others as
Cautioners, being Debitors to Robert Falconar by a Bond granted in anno 1640;
And the said Robert having pursued this Earl of Kinghorn (as representing his
Father) upon the said Bond: It was alleged, the Bond was null as to the Earl
of Kinghorn, in respect there was no witness designed to his subscription: And
it being Replied, that two of the name of Lion were subscribing witnesses; and
tho they were neither designed witness to Kinghorn his subscription, but
subscribed witness indefinite; and albeit they were not otherwise designed, as
they ought to be conform to the Act of Parliament by their Dwelling or
otherwise; yet they were truly witnesses; and the pursuer may and does now
design them: and this Defender had no prejudice, one of the witnesses being yet
on life: So that if he thought fit to improve, the means and direct manner of
Improbation was yet competent.

The Lords allowed the Pursuer to design, which they would not have done, if
both the witnesses had been deceased.

D. 13. Lady Bute contra Sheriff of Bute. 5. January 1666.
THe Lady Bute Dam Grissel Campbel being Contracted and Proclaimed with Mr.
James Grahame; in the interim before her Marriage, was induced (and as she
pretended forced) to grant a Disposition, and Discharge of a part of her
Jointure in favors of her Son the Sherrif of Bute; he having, after the first
Proclamation of their Bannes, stopped any further proceeding until he extorted
the said deeds.

The Lords (in a Reduction of the said deeds at the instance of the Lady and
her Husband) found, that post Sponsalia and Banna, she was not sui juris; and
could do no deed in prejudice either of her Husband or her self without his
consent: And that she was in the same condition, as if she were Married. And
therefore the Lords found the reasons relevant, for reduceing the said Rights,
both as to her Husband and her self.

It was alleged, that the Husband had consented, in so far as after the said
deeds were done, he knew the same; and yet proceeded to Marry: The Lords
repelled the Alledgance.

D. 14. Oliphant contra Drummond. 6. January 1666.
IN a special Declarator, at the instance of Sir James Drummond of Machany
having Right by Assignation, to the Escheat of the Lord Rollo, and his Brother
Sir John Rollo of Bannockburn; from Walter Stuart Donatar to the same: Sir
Laurence Oliphant and Gavin Drummond, Who were also Donators to the Escheat and
liferent of the said Rebels, and had recovered a general Declarator; and had
intented a special; having compeared and desireing preference, alleging that
the pursuers gift was null and simulate; in respect by the Act of Parliament
1592. cap. 149. Praesumptio juris and de jure, is introduced: And it is
statute, that it shall be a relevant exception against any pretending Title by
Assignation or Gift of Escheat of the Rebel, to allege, that the Rebel his
Wife and Bairns remained in possession; and it was subsumed, that the Pursuer
and his Cedent had suffered the Rebel to continue in possession, since the date
of the Gift in Anno 1658.

The Lords found, that the Rebels having been in possession a considerable time
by the space of five years or thereabout; the Gift, by the Act of Parliament,
is presumed to be simulate.

2. That though the Donatar Walter Stuart was a Creditor, it does not alter the
case; Seeing he might be (and Law presumes he was) satisfied; and Gifts being
ordinarily affected with Back-bonds, it was his fault that he was not satisfied:
And that he should not by his negligence and collusion prejudge other
Creditors, who would have Right after he had been satisfied.

3. That the Pursuer having assigned his Right, the assigney is in no better
case, and utitur jure Authoris.

4. That the reply, that the Lands were comprysed, is not relevant; unless it
were alleged, that the Pursuer or his Cedent had done diligence to attain
possession, but was excluded by the compryser. Jo. Hay Clerk.

D. 15. Brown contra Veatch and Scot. 9. January 1666.
IN the case Broun contra Veatch and Scot, It was found, after contentious
debate in Praesentia, At the Bar, and betwixt the Lords; That an Infeftment of
Warrandice base, to be holden of the granter, should be preferable to a public
Infeftment of property granted thereafter holden of the Superior, and cled wih
possession diverse years: And that the possession of the Principal Lands should
be interpreted the possession of the Warrandice Lands. Some of the Lords were
of another Judgment upon these grounds. 1. By the Act of Parliament Ja. 5. par.
7. cap 150. (Entitled provision and pains of them committand fraud in
alienation and otherwise) a public Infeftment is preferable to a base not cled
with possession though anterior: And both the verba and Ratio Legis, do
militate in favors of the Heretor by a public Infeftment; The intention and
end of the Law being to obviat fraud and prejudice by latent Infeftments: And
it being all one, as to the interest and prejudice of the party who acquireth
Lands, whether the private and latent Infeftment be a Right of property or
Warrandice, Seeing an Infeftment of Warrandice, when the principal Lands are
evicted, becomes an Infeftment of Property.

2. The Act of Parliament foresaid of K. Ja. 5th. is not taken away by the Act
of Parliament K. James 6. Par. 17. anent Registration of Seasins; in respect,
an Infeftment of property being base, though Registrate and Anterior, will be
null in prejudice of a party, who has acquired a Right by a posterior public
Infeftment: And both the said Acts of Parliament, being remedia quae tendunt
ad eundem finem, though the hazard be not so great as to the prejudice by
latent and private Infeftments, since the Act of Parliament anent Registration
of Seasins: The said Act of Parliament 1617. does not derogate to the Act of
Parliament, K. Ja. 5.

3. As to that pretense, That the possession of the principal Lands is the
possession of the Warrandice fictione Juris, It was Answered, That there is no
such fictio warranted by any Law: and so it is Fictio, but not Juris.

2do. It is a Fictio contra Jus, and cui Jus resistit; in respect the Heretor
by the public Infeftment of property being in possession, no other person can
be said to be in possession, seeing there cannot be two Domini in solidum, nor
two Possessores by distinct Rights, having no subordination or dependence one
upon another, as Liferenter and Fiar, Superior and Vassal, Master and Tennent;
or such like.

4. It is clear, that the possession of the principal Lands cannot be thought
the possession of the Warrandice; Seeing if after Forty Years the principal
Lands should be evicted; and a pursuit for Warrandice and recourse should be in
ented upon the Right of Warrandice, though Prescription cannot be obtruded, yet
if there be any defect in the Infeftment of Warrandice, as v. g. The
Disposition is subscribed by one Notar, or such like; The same may be alleged:
Whereas, if that Infeftment were cled with Forty Years Possession, the Right
would be prescribed, and could not be questioned upon any Ground whatsoever,
but Falsehood.

In this Process, It was Questioned whether the Heretor, who had the public
Infeftment, having been in Possession above Seven Years, should have the
benefit of a possessory Judgment, until a Declarator and a Decree in
petitorio.

Some of the Lords thought, that in the case of Warrandice, the Heretor should
not have the benefit of a Possessory Judgment against the Pursuer upon an
Infeftment of Warrandice; quia non valebat agere: But the question was not
decided.

D. 16. Cranston contra Wilkison, 14 July 1666.
BEtwixt Cranston and Wilkison, It was Found (Newbyth Reporter) That a Person
being conveened as representing his Father, who was alleged to be vicious
Intrometter to the Pursuers Debtor; the Title being passive and penal could
not be a Ground of Action against the Defender to make him Liable to the whole
Debt; But only in so far as should be proven the Defunct did Intromet, and was
Locupletior: quia actio poenalis non transit inhaeredem: And the Defunct if he
had been pursued in his own Life, might have purged the said Title.

D. 17. Burnet contra Johnston 17. July 1666.
JOhnston of Frosterhil having Disponed his Lands with absolute Warrandice in
favors of Gordon of Birsemoir; Reserving his own and his Wifes Liferent: and
thereafter having Disponed the same Lands in favors of Mr. William Johnston;
who did obtain the first Infeftment: And being charged at the instance of
Alexander Burnet, having Rght by Assignation to the Disposition in favors of
Birsemoir; The Letters were found orderly proceeded; notwithstanding the
Suspender alleged the Charger had no interest dureing the Suspenders Life;
Seeing he never did nor could possess; by reason of the Reservation foresaid.
And the Lords found a difference, when Warrandice is craved upon a deed of the
Party obliged, and upon any other ground: And that as to his deed he may be
charged to purge it, without necessity to allege a Distress.

D. 18. Wedderburn contra Scrimzeour, 18. July. 1666.
A Father having left a Legacy, thinking his Wife was with Child; in these
terms, That if his Wife should have a Male Child the Legatar should have the
Sum of 4000 Merks: And that if she should have a Daughter, the Legatar should
have the Sum of 5000 Merks.

The Lords Found, That though she had no Child, the Legacy should be effectual
ex praesumpta voluntate Testatoris; seeing it cannot be thought, but that he
rather intended a Legacy for him, if he had no Child; Than in the case she
should bring forth a Child: Et in conditionibus primum locum obtinet voluntas
Defuncti, eaque regit conditiones. L. 19. ff. de conditionibus. Newbyth
Reporter.

D. 19. Steill contra Hay. Eeod. die.
A Tennent being Ejected, Ejection was sustained at the Masters instance;
though the Tennent did not concur: But it was not sustained quoad omnes
effectus, viz. As to violent profits, Juramentum in litem; but only that the
Master should be in the same condition he was before the Ejection; and should
have the same manner of possession as if the Land were not void; and to uplift
the duties; and to put in and remove Tennents. And for the Bygone ordinary
Duties, in the same Process, it was Found, that the pursuer, though he was not
Infeft, but only Appearand Heir to the Pursuer who was Infeft, might pursue the
said Action, to recover his Possession, having been in possession before.

D. 20. Hedderwick contra Wauch. Eod. die.
THE Commissioners for the Borders, upon the Verdict of the Inquest that the
Panel was guilty of Receipt of Theft, having ordained the Panel to pay 100
lib. Sterling. within a short time; and if he should faill to be sent to Barbados
and loss his Escheat. The Lords Found, That by that Verdict, there did arise to
his Majesty, the Casuality of his Escheat: Whereof there being Jus quaesitum;
The King and his Donator could not be prejudged by a Doom which is contrary to
Law: And that in such cases of Capital Crimes, the Law having determined the
pain, and especially the loss of the Escheat; no Judge (even the Justice
General) could moderate or lessen the samen.

D. 21. Bisset contra Broun. 19 July. 1666.
IT was Found nemine contradicente; That a Stranger residing in Holland, animo
morandi or elsewhere: Though by the Law of the place, his nearest of Kin,
without confirmation, has Right to all Goods or Debts belonging to him: Yet if
the Debt or Goods be due by Scots-men, or be in Scotland, they cannot pursue
for the same, unless the Right thereof be settled upon them, according to the
Law of Scotland, by confirmation if they be Movables: Or by a Service if they
be Heretable. Hay Clerk.

D. 22. Thomson contra McKitrick. Eod. die.
FOund, that a Comprysing may be deduced upon an Heretable Bond, whereupon
Infeftment had followed, the same being payable without requisition; albeit a
Charge of Horning do not preceed; seeing there may be poinding upon such a Bond:
And there is Eadem Ratio as to Comprysings; and the Denounciation is a
sufficient Intimation, that the Compryser intends to have his Money. Hay
Clerk.

In the same Cause, The Lords having sustained a Seasin of burgage Lands,
whereto the Sheriff-clerk was Notar, there being no Town Clerk for the time, by
reason in the time of the English Usurpation, The Magistrates and Clerk refused
the Tender. The Lords Found, That the said Seasin being within Burgh, though
not under the hand of the Clerk, was not null upon that Ground that it was not
Registrate; Because though the reason of the Act of Parliament for Registration
of Seasins, and the exception of Seasins within Burgh, be, that Seasins within
Burgh are in use to be Registrate by the Clerks in the Towns Books; yet the
said reason is not expressed in the Act of Parliament: and the Act of Parliament
excepting Burgal Seasins, the Party was in bona fide to think that there was no
necessit of Registration.

D. 23. Eleis contra Wiseheart Eod. die.
A Wife being obliged with her Husband to pay a Sum of Money, and to Infeft a
Creditor in her Land: Though the Bond was not sustained as to the personal
obligement to pay, yet it was found valid as to the obligement to Infeft, and
the Procuratorie of Resignation contained in the Bond: And the Wife
notwithstanding, having Disponed her Land, she was found Liable for the Sums as
Damnage and Interest.

This Decision seems hard, In respect albeit a Woman may Dispone her Land
with consent of her Husband; yet she cannot bind to pay a Sum of Money; And in
the case foresaid, non agebatur that she should Dispone her Lands; But that she
should be Liable to the Creditor, and for surety he should be secured in her
Land, And the principal obligation being void, the accessory of surety could
not subsist.

D. 24. Eodem Die.
IT was debated but not decided, whether the Tenor of a Comprysing may be
proven; there is an Act of Parliament. Ja. 6. Parl. 6. That the Tenor of
Letters of Horning should not be proven; and there is Eadem if not more Ratio
as to Comprysings, the Solemnities being greater and more: And if a Comprysing,
which is in effect the Execution of a Messenger, may be made up by a probation
of the Tenor; a paritate rationis, Poindings, and Interruptions of Prescription
by Citations, and Executions, and Intimations of Assignations, may be made up
by Witnesses; and Arrestments and Decreets.

D. 25. Minister of Moram contra Bairfoot. Eodem die.
THE Minister of Moram having pursued a Reduction of a Tack, set by his
predecessor; upon that Ground that it was above three years, without consent of
the Earl of Buccleugh Patron for the time: The Tack was sustained, in respect
Francis Stuart had consented, in whose Favors Buccleugh, by a Decree
Arbitral, was obliged to denude himself of the Patronage.

This Decision seems to be hard; seeing Buccleugh was full Patron, and was not
denuded by the said Decree: And the Right of the Patronage might either have
been Comprysed from him, or Disponed by him effectually, notwithstanding of the
said Decree, which did not settle the Right of the Patronage in the said
Francis his person; but was only the Ground of a personal Action against
Buccleugh, for denuding him of the Right of the Patronage: And as Francis could
not present, so he could not consent as Patron to Tacks: Upon these
considerations diverse of the Lords were of the contrair Opinion.

D. 26. McKene contra Fairholme 24. July. 1666.
IN the case of Mckenie against Mr. John Fairholme: Sir George Mckenzie, having
by way of Reduction questioned a Bond granted by his Father, and himself as
Cautioner, as null ipso facto: Upon that Ground that he was Minor when he
Signed the Bond: And his Father being Administrator of the Law, and in effect
Curator to him, had not Authorized him as Cautioner; and could not be author in
Rem suam, the Pursuer becoming Cautioner in Rem, and at the desire and in
behalf of his Father.

The Lords did not this day decide the Question; some being of Opinion, That a
Father, though if his Children be Impuberes and Pupils, be the Tutor and
Administrator of Law, ye he is not Curator to his Children being Puberes: Seeing
a Son if he should desire other Curators to be given him, his desire could not
be refused: Et habenti Curatorem Curator non datur. Vide infra 26. July 1666.
And 7. December. 1666.

D. 27. Petrie contra Richart. eod. die.
RIchart of Auchnacant having a Wadset of 12000. Merks from Buchan of
Portlethem; did thereafter enter in a second Contract with Buchans Son and Heir
who had Right to the reversion; and diverse years Back-tack-duties being
accumulated and made a Principal Sum, it was agreed that there should be no
Redemption but by payment of the Sum contained in the said second Contract,
made up as said is of the Sum contained in the said second Contract, and the
Back-tack-duties; and by payment of the Annualrents so accumulated: Mr Petrie
Provest of Aberdeen having acquired the Right of reversion, and having used an
Order of Redemption, and thereupon having intented Declarator, it was alleged,
that he should have consigned the Sum contained in the said second Contract,
which he could not misken, by reason as he not only knew of the said second
Contract before he acquired the said Right, but acted in relation to the said
Contract and in effect homologate the same: In so far as, 1. By the said second
Contract he and certain other persons being named and appointed to determine
the question, betwixt Richart and Buchan, what should be paid to Buchan for the
charges he had been at in prosecuting his Right against Richart, The said
Petrie had accepted a submission relating to the said second Contract,
whereupon a Decree arbitral did follow, ordaining 300 merks to be paid to
Buchan for his charges. 2. By the second Contract, Buchan was obliged to cause
Petrie (being his friend) to give bond that he should engage for Buchan's
performance of the said second Contract: and accordingly Buchan being charged
to fulfill that head of the said Contract, had procured a Bond from the said
Petrie and produced it in Judgment the time of the discussing of the
suspension. 3. Petrie had assigned the 300. Merks of charges modified by
himself; and the instrument of intimation of the Assignation mentioned the said
Sum to have been modified by the Decree arbitral; proceeding upon the said
Contract: From these Acts it was urged, that knowing and having homologate the
said Contract in manner foresaid, he was in pessima fide to take a Right in
prejudice of the Defenders, and to pretend to be in better case than his Author.

The Lords notwithstanding Found that the said second Contract not being
Registrat in the Register of Reversions, he was not obliged to take notice of
it; and might redeem by payment of the Sums contained in the first Contract. It
was acknowledged by some of these who were for the decision, that these Acts
imported an Homologation, But the second Contract though by our Law valid, was
not favorable, and was against the common Law; in so far as the accumulating
Annualrents to be a principal Sum, is usura usurarum (...). I have often urged
that favor is not nomen juris, and Law ought to be uniform, and not Lesbia
Regula pliable and variable upon pretenses of favorable or not favorable: Sed
nunquam credita Teucris Cassandra.

D. 28. Harper contra Hamilton. 25. July 1666.
IN the case Mr John Harper contra Hamilton his Vassal; It was decided, that
after the intenting a general Declarator of Non-entry, the Vassal should be
liable not only for the retoured duty, but for the ordinary mails and duties
of the Land: Though some were of the opinion, that before Sentence the Vassal
should only be liable for the retoured duty.

D. 29. Wilkie contra eod. die.
SIr John VVilkie of Foulden having intented a Reduction of a voluntar
Interdiction made by him to some of his friends.

The Lords appointed some of their number to conferr with him: and, upon their
Report that he was rational and intelligent; and, for any thing appeared by his
discourse and deportment, Rei suae providus; The Lords Reduced in absence;
there being no compearance or opposition for the Interdicters.

D. 30. The Lion contra 26 July 1666.
BY the Act of Parliament Ja. 6. Parl. 11. cap 46. It is ordained, that
Officers of Arms should find surety to the Lion, for observation of their
Injunctions, under the pain of 500. Merks, with the damnage and interest of the
party greived by the malversation, negligence, or informality of the Officer.

In a process betwixt the Lion and (...) It was controverted, whether the
Cautioner might be pursued before the Lion for payment of the Debt, as damnage
and interest, by reason of the malversation of the Officer of Arms in a
poynding. It was alleged, that the Lion was a criminal Judge, and most
competent as to the Question, whether the Messenger had committed iniquity, and
malversed in his Office, and whether he should be deprived; and he and his
Cautioner had incurred and should be liable to the pain aforesaid: But as to
the civil action against the Cautioner, there might be a good ground of action
against the Cautioner, upon the act of caution before the competent Judge; But
the Lion, being Judex pedaneus, was not Judge of actions of that nature and
consequence, In respect they may be of great difficulty and importance: For if
the Cautioner should be pursued for payment of the Debt, being supposed to be
1000 merks, upon pretense of the malversation of the Officer, and that he had
not done his duty in poynding and comprysing; It were hard and dangerous, that
the Lion and his Brethren should be Judges in a matter of that consequence:
And it will not follow, that because the Messenger had not done his duty in a
Caption or comprysing, that his Cautioner should be liable for the Debt as
damnage and interest; Seeing the Caption and Comprysing might have been
ineffectual, and the Creditor could not thereby have gotten payment: And it
appears by the said Act of Parliament, that the Lion is only Judge to the penal
Conclusion of deprivation of the Officer, and payment of the pain.

The Lords notwithstanding Found the Lion Judge competent to the action against
the Cautioner, for damnage and interest; Me inter minimos reclamante. Gibson
Clerk. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 31. McKenzie contra Fairholm. eod. die.
THe Lords Found in the case before mentioned, (24. July Mckenie contra
Fairholme) That a Father is loco Curatoris to his Son being in familia; and
that a bond granted by the Son without his consent is null ipso jure; as if it
had been granted by a Minor having Curators without their consent.

D. 32. Wedderburn contra Scrimzeour. ead. die.
IN the case Scrimzeour and VVedderburn of Kingennie (mentioned before 18.
July.) A legacy being to be effectualin that case only, If the Testators Wife
should not be brought to bed of a Man Child; It was Found, that a Male Child
should be understood a living Child: and that Homo Mortuus and a dead Child is
nullus in Law: And that the legacy should be effectual, though she had been
brought to bed of a Male Child, but dead.

D. 33. Menzeis contra Burnets. eod. die.
IN the case Menies contra Burnets, It was Found, that a Relict being provided
to a Liferent of all the Goods belonging to her Husband; ought to sell and make
Money of the Horse, Oxen, and such Goods as may perish; to the effect she may
Liferent the Money and make the Sum forthcoming after her decease; but cum
temperamento, That a competent time should be allowed to that effect: And if
the Goods should perish in the mean time, she should not be liable for the
same. In that same case it was Found, that a Relict should not have both a
Liferent and Third; but should have her choice or option of either. Some of us
were of the opinion, that seeing it appeared by the Contract, that the Goods
were not to be in Communion, but that she was to have a Liferent of the same,
she had not a choice to have a Third or Liferent. Hay Clerk. Lord Lie Reporter.

D. 34. contra Blantire. 27 July 1666.
(...) Having intented a Reduction of an Interdiction, upon that reason, that
Blantyre was rei suae providus; And that the Pursuer had lent him the Money due
to him, when he was in England, and in necessity; and being a stranger and a
Creditor, he ought not to be prejudged by such a voluntar Interdiction; being
upon a Bond granted by the Debtor without a previous Sentence, finding
Blantyre to be prodigus, or such a person as should be interdicted.

The Lords Thought The Case of that Consequence, that they would not decide
upon a Report, but Ordained it to be debated in praesentia. Lord Castlehill
Reporter.

D. 35. contra eod. die.
IT was decided, That an Executor Creditor was liable to do diligence as other
Executors; and tho there was a difference betwixt him and other Executors, upon
that account that he was confirmed in order to his own interest, and to the
effect he might be paid of his Debt, and had preference before other
Creditors; yet as to the Duty and Office of ane Executor there was no
Difference: And having accepted the Office which was Voluntatis, it became
Necessitatis, and he was obliged to Execute it. Reidie Reporter.

D. 36. L. Borthwick contra Ker. eod. die.
AN Inhibition being raised upon the dependence of a pursuit for maills and
duties, for three years preceding the Summonds and in time coming during the
defenders possession: It was Thought, that the inhibition relateing only to the
Summonds as to the three years preceding, without mention of the subsequent
years; could not be a ground of Reduction Ex capite Inhibitionis; in respect
the defender in that pursuit was assoiled as to the years before the Summonds,
as being bona fide Possessor: And albeit the Summonds was not only for these
years, but for the time to come as said is; and the Defender was decerned to
pay maills and duties for certain years after the Summonds, yet the Leidges
were not obliged to take notice of the Summonds, but as it was related in the
Inhibition.

The Lords were of this opinion: But the case was not decided, the Pursuer
having desired up his process that he might be better advised. Advocat,
Oliphant. and Sir Robert Sinclair.

D. 37. E. Newburgh contra Stuart. eod. die.
SIr William Stuart being Creditor to the Earl of Newburgh, in a great Sum,
upon an Infeftment in the said Earls Lands: after his Majesty's Restoration,
he was induced (tho there was no Question as to the Debt) to make a Reference
and Submission to the Lord of Cochran and Sir John Fletcher; upon no other
account, but that he apprehended that Newburgh might trouble him and cause him
be fined; which was the ordinary and Ignoble practice of Noblemen at that time
against their Creditors: These Arbiters did take from the said Sir William a
discharge of the Debt and renunciation of his Right, and from Newburgh a blank
bond as to the Sum; and the said Debt then amounting to 40000 merks, they did
give to the Earl of Newburgh the Renunciation; and to Sir William, Newburgh's
simple bond filled up with 6500. Merks only: Newburgh pretending that Sir
Alexander Durhame (then Lord Lion) was owing him Money, did by way of letter
give a precept to the Lord Lion in these terms, That he desired him to pay that
Sum to the bearer upon sight, and that he should retire his bond: This letter
being presented to the Lion, he in a scornful and jeering way subjoyned to the
letter, My Lord, I am your Humble Servant: the Earl of Newburgh, not satisfied
to have paid Sir William in manner foresaid as to 3400. Merks, did intent a
pursuit against Sir William, That he might be free of the Residue and get back
his Bond of 6500. Merks, upon that pretense that the said Sir William had got
from him a Bill of Exchange, which had been accepted by the deceast Sir
Alexander Durham; at the least in case of not accepting, he should have
protested and intimated to Newburgh, that it was not accepted nor satisfied,
that he might have recourse against the said Sir Alexander in his own time,
whereof he is now prejudged.

Upon a Debate in praesentia, It was Found, that the said letter was not a Bill
of Exchange but a precept; and that the receiving of such precepts upon
Chamberlanes and others, being for the Creditors further surety, do not oblige
them to the formalities of presenting, protesting, and intimating: which are in
use in the matter of Exchange and Trade betwixt Merchant and Merchant. Advocats
Lockhart, VVallace. contra VVedderburn and Chalmers.

D. 38. Crawfurd contra the Town of Edinburgh. last of July 1666.
A Donator, by a Gift of Vltimus Haeres, having Pursued for a movable Debt due
to the Defunct; The pursuit was not Sustained, because the Gift was not
declared.

D. 39. Gray contra Gordon. eod. die.
A Bond being granted to Sir Robert Farquhar, and bearing the term of payment
to be diverse years after the date of the same; and Annualrent to be paid in
the interim, termly and yearly: Was found to be Heretable quoad Fiscum, Though
Sir Robert Farquhar had deceast before the term of payment of Annualrent; And
the assigney was preferred to a Donatar.

D. 40. Halyburton contra Halyburton. eod. die.
A Son having intented a Reduction of a disposition made by his Father, for
provision of the rest of the Children, In lecto aegritudinis.

The Lords found the Defense relevant, that the Pursuer had consented; in so
far as the Son had Subscribed as Witness, and knew and heard the disposition;
so that he was not ignorant of the tenor of it: And it was remembered by the
Lords when they were voting, that they had found the alledgance relevant, That
a Son and appearand Heir that Subscribed as Witness to his Fathers deed in
lecto, without that addition, that he heard it read; in the case of Stuart of
Escog: It being to be presumed, that the appearand Heir being of age, would not
be Witness to such deeds, unless he inquired and knew what they were.

D. 41. Cuming contra Johnston. 7. November. 1666.
SOme Lands in Dumbar being disponed by one Adamson in favors of Johnstoun;
with a provision contained in the disposition and Infeftment, that a Sum of
Money should be paid by the receiver of the disposition, to him or any he
should name: And in case it should not be paid the Right should be void: And
the said Lands being thereafter apprysed, It was found, against the compryser,
that the said clause and provision was real: And that the person named, and
having Right to the Sum and benefit of the said clause, Though before
declarator he could not pursue a removing, yet he has good interest to pursue
for the mails and duties for payment of the said Sum; and being in possessorio,
to retain the mails and duties for payment of the said Sum pro tanto: And that
the said provision, and such like, are effectual against singular Successors.
It was urged by some, That all, that could be done upon that Clause, was, that
a Reduction of the Right might be pursued thereupon; But it was answered, that
it being actum, that the Lands should be burdened with that Sum, and if nothing
more had been expressed, but that it is provided that the said Sum should be
paid; the said provision being real, would have furnished the said action and
exception, for payment of the said Sum out of the maills and duties: And
therefore, the subjoyning the resolutive clause, being ad majorem Cautelam,
could not be prejudicial nor retorted in prejudice of the disponer nor his
Assigney. This Question was hinted at but not decided in the said Debate, viz.
If the Declarator should be pursued, upon the said clause for annulling the
Right, if it should operate in favors of the Assigney, the Lands not being
disponed to him in case of contraveening; being to appertain to the disponer
and his Heirs, in case the Right should be rescinded. Its thought, that the
provision being assigned, the whole benefit and consequence of the same are
disponed: and consequently the assigney, in the case foresaid of annulling the
Right, may pursue the Heirs of the Disponer and receiver of the Right, and his
Successor to denude themselves of the Right of the said Lands. Newbyth
Reporter.

D. 42. Hay contra Magistrates of Elgin. eod. die.
IN the case Colin Hay against the Magistrates of Elgin; Improbation being
proponed against the Executions of Messenger, bearing that he had intimated to
the Magistrates, that he had arrested a prisoner at the instance of the said
Colin: And the Magistrates and Witnesses compearing and urging to be examined,
It was alleged for Colin, that they should not be examined; Because the
Messenger who was also cited was not present; and that if he were present he
might condescend upon circumstances, and remember the Witnesses that they had
been Witnesses; it being otherewise incident to them to have forgotten, though
they had been truly Witnesses to the Execution. It was answered for the
Magistrates, that they had cited both Witnesses and Messenger; that they had
done all that was incumbent to them; and his not appearance, ought neither to
prejudge them nor the Witnesses: And that having come in obedience to the
citation, they should not be troubled to come here again, their Residence being
at such a distance.

The Lords indulged so far to Colin, as to delay the Examination of the
Witnesses until further diligence should be done to bring here the Messenger,
Me Refragante: but ordained Colin to pay the expenses: And if it had been
desired, that if the Witnesses should die, they should be holden as improving;
The Lords would have granted the desire.

D. 43. Carse contra Carse. 8. November. 1666.
DOctor Carse having taken a Right of Annualrent out of Sir David Cuninghams
Lands, in the name and persons of Mark Carse of Cockpen and Adam Watt Writer;
and a comprysing thereafter deduced in their name to the behoof of the Doctor,
for some arrears of the said Annualrent, not only out of the Lands out of which
the Annualrent was due, holding blench or feu; but of other Lands holding Ward.
Charles Carse Son and Heir to the said Doctor, pursued the said Mark Carse and
the Heir of Adam Watt, to denude themselves of the Right of the said Lands,
conform to a Backbond granted by the said Mark Carse, and the said Adam Watt,
declaring the trust: In that trust it was alleged for the Defenders, that they
were content to denude themselves, they being releeved of all hazard they might
incur upon occasion of the said Trust, and having that Right in their Person;
and to that purpose did offer a Disposition, bearing a provision that the Right
should be burdened with the relief of Wards, Marriages, and Ministers Stipends,
Cess, and other such hazards. It was Answered, that the said Disposition ought
not to be clogged with such a provision, which would fright Buyers from
purchasing the said Lands; and the pursuer was necessitat, and had presently
an occasion to sell the said Lands: And as to the incumberances, and hazards,
which the Defenders should condescend upon they should be purged: But as to the
Marriage of Adam Watts Heir (which was condescended upon) there could be no
hazard upon that account, In respect the comprysing at the instance of Mark
Carse and Adam Watt was the fourth comprysing, which did only import a Right of
reversion; The first comprysing, whereupon Infeftment had followed, carrying
the Right of property: It was Duplyed, that if it should appear that the former
apprysings are either null or informal or satisfied, the fourth Apprysing would
carry the Right of property, and consequently the Marriage.

The Lords Found, that the Pursuer should accept the Disposition with the
burden of the said relief: Or in his option should secure the Defenders by a
Bond with a Cautioner, to relieve them.

D. 44. Bowie contra Hamilton. 10. November. 1666.
HAmilton of Silvertounhill having Disponed to James Bowie certain Lands,
whereto he had Right by Comprysing; and the said James being removed at the
instance of a Wadsetter; and having Pursued upon the Warrandice contained in
the Disposition; It was alleged by Silvertounhill, that though the Disposition
did bear absolute Warrandice; yet by a Margin subcribed, it was restricted to
warrant only the formality of the Comprysing, and the truth of the Debt, and
the Executions. It was Answered, that the Warrandice being absolute in the Body
of the Disposition, was indeed qualified by the Margin, that it should only be
extended to the Warrandice of the Lands, in so far as concerns the Apprysing
and Sums thereinmentioned (which are the words of the Margin) and that the
said Warrandice imports that the Disponer should not warrant simply, but as to
the Sums contained in the Comprysing; so that in case of eviction
Silvertounhill should only refound the same; and the Pursuer was content to
restrict the Warrandice to the Sums paid by him: It was urged, that there
being Three kinds of Warrandice viz. Either absolute; or only that the
Comprysing was formal, and the Debt just; or a restricted Warrandice to refound
the price in case of eviction; the Last was Medium inter extrema, and most
equitable; and in obscuris magis aequa interpretatio, est contra Disponentem
facienda, qui potuit Legem apertius dicere: And if it had been intended, that
he should warrant only the formality, and validity of the Comprysing, and
reality of the Debt, it had been so expressed.

Yet The Lords, by plurality of Voices, Found, that the Warrandice should be
interpret, to warrant only the validity of the Comprysing, and the reality of
the Debt: That being the most ordinary in Rights of Comprysing. Sinclar, alteri
Harper.

D. 45. Cheine contra Christie. 15. November. 1666.
GEorge Cheine Pursued Adjudication against David Christie of a Right of
Annualrent, which pretained to James Christie the said David's Brother the
Pursuer's Debtor. James Cheislie Writer compeared and alleged he had Right to
the Lands (craved to be adjudged) by an expired Comprysing of the property of
the same against the said David Christie, who had Right to the said Lands; and
that the said James his Right of Annualrent was null, being base, and never
cled with Possession.

The Lords Found, that the alledgance was not competent hoc loco against the
Adjudication; and that the said debate would only be competent after the
Adjudication, when he should pursue a poynding of the ground. The Lords Found
the contrare before, in an Adjudication Pursued by Sornbeg contra the Lord
Forrester, which practique was obtruded and not respected; Because the Lord
Forresters Right in that Case was clear; And this the Lords thought hard,
Forrester being content to dispute his Right, that a Right to his Lands should
be established in the Person of another to trouble him. But it were fit our
Practiques were uniform: And it appears hard, that a Creditor who is a
stranger, and has not the papers in his hands, and is not in a Capacity to
pursue for them before he get a Title by Adjudication, should be forced to
Dispute his Debitors Right. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 46. Abercrombie contra eod. die.
FOund, that a Pursuit upon an Assignation after the Summonds execute; should
not be Sustained, though the Cedent concurred; the Pursuit not being at his
instance. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 47. Kennedy contra Hamilton. eod. die.
THe Lords Found a Comprysing upon a charge to enter Heir, null; Because the
person, at whose instance the charge was, had no Right to the Debt the time of
the Charge; the Assignation, whereby he had Right, being acquired thereafter;
so that the Charge was Inanis, and without ground. Me referente.

D. 48. Binning contra Farquhar. Eod. die.
A Disposition being made by a Father in favors of a Son; And thereafter the
same Lands being Disponed by the Son in favors of his Brother in Law: The said
Rights were questioned by a Creditor, as being fraudulent; being Disponed by
the Sons Contract of Marriage; which though Onerous, as to Provisions in
favors of the Wife, is not so as to the Son, whom the Father could not
advance, or provide in prejudice of the Creditors: But it was alleged, that
the Disposition made by the Son, was for an Onerous Cause; and by the Act of
Parliament, though a Right should be found fraudulent, yet a third party
acquiring bona fide, by the Act of Parliament is secured; and his Right cannot
be questioned, unless he be particeps fraudis, or acquire the same without an
Onerous Cause, which by the Act of Parliament, is only probable Scripto vel
Juramento.

Yet the Lords inclined to reduce the Right granted by the Son, unless it were
offered to be proven, that it was for an Onerous Cause; in respect of several
presumptions alleged and informed by the Pursuer: And before Answer, as to the
Relevancy ordained both Parties to condescend upon their presumptions hinc
inde; of Fraud or the Cause Onerous for the granting of the said Right, and to
prove the condescendence. I have ever thought, that the practice of the Lords
to ordain Parties to prove before Answer, as it is late, is accompanied with
many inconveniences; seeing by such Acts, which are not of Litiscontestation,
Processes are still kept loose; and after that irregular way of probation,
the debate of Relevaney is again resumed; to the great vexation, both of
Parties, and Lords: and after the Lords Interloquitor of Relevancy, there may
be again Litiscontestation; So that upon the matter there are two
Litiscontestations in one Cause. Newbyth Reporter.

It being again debated, What the Certification should be in such Acts. viz.
Whether the Alledgance should be holden as not proponed; or that the Lords
should advise: Which in effect is no certification.

The Lords were not clear to detetmine; which is a great Informality, and a
pressing reason against that anomolous way.

D. 49. Reid contra Tailzifer. 16. Novem. 1666.
IN the case, William Reid contra Tailzifer and Salmond. It was Found, That a
Testament is to be thought execute, so that, thereafter, there is no place to a
non Executa, when a Decree is recovered against the Debitors; though the
Executor decease before he get payment: Because the Right of the Debt is fully
established in his person by the Decree; and he having done diligence, it
ought not to be imputed to him, that the Debtor is in mora as to the payment
of the Debt: And there being Jus quaesitum by a Decree, and Execution having
followed thereupon by Horning; after which Annualrent, though not due ex pacto,
yet becomes due ex lege; or by Comprysing at the instance of the Executor, and
Infeftment thereupon; It were absurd, that all these Rights should evanish;
which would necessarly follow, if there were place to a non Executa: Seeing the
Decreets and Rights foresaid following thereupon, could not be transferred or
settled in the person of the Executor ad non Executa; who does represent the
Defunct only, and not the Executor, at whose instance the Decree is obtained
and Execute.

D. 50. Purves contra Blackwood. Eod. die.
ADam Purves having pursued Reduction and Improbation of a Comprysing, and the
Grounds and Warrands thereof, against Blackwood.

The Lords, In respect the Comprysing was deduced Twenty four Years before, did
refuse to grant Certification, against the Letters ad Executions; and against
one of the Bonds being Registrate when the principal Bonds were given in to the
Clerk Register to ly in publica custodia; In respect of the Troubles of the
Time, and the loss and disorder of the Registers; and that the Extract was
produced, and the Defender was content to abide at the Truth thereof. Hay
Clerk, And Newbyth Reporter.

D. 51. Govan contra Paip. 24. Novem. 1666.
IN the case, Govan contra Paip, The Lords Found, That an Assignation not being
intimated in the Cedents time (and consequently the Debt being in bonis
Defuncti) ought to be confirmed: But the Lords in consideration that the Debt
was small, Found Process at the Assigneys instance, he finding Caution for the
Quot effeirand thereto.

D. 52. contra Miln. Eod. die.
An Order being used for Redeeming a Wadset; the Executor Creditor of the
Wadsetter pursued the person in whose hands the Consignation was made for
payment of the Sum Consigned; And in the Process the user of the Order was
called, and Decree was obtained; but before it was Extracted he deceast; and
there was debate upon the Oath of the Consignator. The Lords Found, That the
user of the Order being a person having interest and called ab initio, nothing
could be done until the Process was transferred against some person
representing him.

In the same Process, it was argued amongst the Lords, whether a Sum being
consigned upon an Order of Redemption, the user of the Order may pass from it,
and lift the Sum without consent of the Wadsetter? And it was remembered by
some of the Lords, That upon an Instrument of Consignation Process was
sustained at the instance of the Wadsetter against the Depositar, in whose
hands the Sum due upon the Wadset was consigned, for making the Sum
forthcoming. But in this case nothing was done.

It appears, that after Consignation, Jus is Quaesitum to the Wadsetter; so
that the Sum, being consigned and sequestrate to his behoof, cannot be uplifted
without his consent.

D. 53. Lesly contra Bain. 6. December. 1666.
IN a pursuit to make forthcoming, after serious deliberation and debate
amongst the Lords as in a case daily occurring, and wherein the Decision would
be a preparative and practique,

It was Found, That a pursuit to make forthcoming a Sum of Money due to a
Debtor, is in effect Execution; and equivalent to a poinding: Seeing Money
being in nominibus, and not in specie, could not otherwise be affected and
poinded; and therefore could not follow, but upon a Decree, and not upon a
Bond not Registrate. 2. It was Found, that an Arrestment is but an Inchoat and
incomplete Diligence: and notwithstanding thereof the Sum Arrested remains in
bonis of the Debtor: Seeing notwithstanding thereof, Goods belonging to a
Debtor may be poinded: As also Arrestment being a Negative Diligence, whereby
a Sum Arrested is secured, so that the Debtor cannot uplift; and the person,
in whose hands the Arrestment is made, cannot pay or give away the same, in
prejudice of the Arrester; and as in immobilibus, Inhibition does not establish
a Right in the person of the Creditor; unless he deduce a Comprysing; but does
affect the same, so that the Debtor cannot prejudge the Creditor, and his
Diligence if he Compryse: There is Eadem Ratio in Arrestments in mobilibus.
Upon these Grounds it was Found, That the Debtor deceasing, the Sums Arrested
being in ejus bonis, ought to be confirmed; and that the Creditor could not
have Action against the person in whose hands the Arrestment was made; and the
Appearand Heir of the Debtor called for his interest; but should confirm
himself Executor Creditor.

D. 54. Monteith contra E. Calender and Gloret. 7. December. 1666.
THE Lord of Parkley Hamilton as principal, and Hamilton of Kinglassie and
certain others his Friends as Cautioners, being Debitors in Two Bonds;
Kinglassie, in consideration that Parkley had Disponed to him a Right of Wadset
which he had to the Lands of Touch, by a Contract did oblige himself to satisfy
and pay the Sums contained in the said Bonds; and to procure Discharges from
the Creditors to Parkley and his Cautioners: And nevertheless having paid the
said Sums, he did not take Discharges but Assignations to the said Bonds,
which he filled up in the name of Sir Mungo Stirling of Gloret his own
Creditor; who did thereupon Arrest a Sum due by the Earl of Callender to
Parkley: Thereafter Captain Monteith having Right to Callendars Debt by
Assignation from Parkley, obtained a Decree against the Earl; which being
Suspended upon double poinding, It was alleged for Gloret, that he ought to be
preferred, in respect of his Assignation and Arrestment; whereunto it was
Answered, that Kinglassie being obliged (as said is) to pay the said Sums had
paid them; and whereas he should have taken Discharges, he had taken an
Assignation Blank in the Assigneys Name, and had filled up Glorets Name in the
same; So that Assignation being procured by him, and lying by him, and he being
Master of it, it was in effect his; and he was in the same case, as if the
Assignation had been granted to himself, and he had made a Translation to
Gloret; in which the Exception upon the obligement foresaid to relieve Parkley;
as it would have been competent against Kinglassie, would have secluded also
Gloret his Assigney by Translation: In this Process Gloret his Oath being
taken; and he having declared, that the Assignation was procured by Kinglassie;
and by him delivered to Gloret, and that he paid nothing to the Cedent, but
that the Assignation was given to him by Kinglassie, that he might be satisfied
of certain Sums due to him be Kinglassie, which he was to Discharge if he
recovered payment, by virtue of the said Assignation.

The Lords upon a Debate in praesentia, preferred Monteith; and found the
Exception, which was competent against Kinglassie, if the Assignation had been
to him and transferred by him to Gloret, is competent against Gloret; and that
he is in the same case, as if he had Right by Translation from Kinglassie. This
is most just, and founded upon Law and Equity, seeing otherwise Fraud cannot be
obviate; And, in Law plus valet quod agitur, quam quod simulate concipitur aut
exprimitur: And, Fictione brevis manus, Though it appear that it is but one
Act, viz. The Assignation made to Gloret; yet in construction of Law, there is
two Acts, viz. The granting the Assignation blank to Kinglassie, which in the
interim before it was delivered to Gloret was his evident; and an Assignation
immediately made to himself, and thereafter the filling up Glorets Name, and the
delivery of the Assignation to him, which upon the matter is a Translation.
Spotswood for Monteith. Lockheart, Cuninghame, Maxwell, and Weir for Gloret.

D. 55. Mckenie contra Fairholm. Eod. die.
SIR George Mckenie having intented Declarator and Reduction of a Bond
Subscribed by him as Cautioner for his Father; Ex eo capite; that it was null
ipso jure; in respect he was Minor for the time, and his Father was loco
Curatoris to him, and had not Authorized him, at least could not be Author to
him in rem suam: It was alleged, that he had not intented Reduction within the
quadriennium utile: And as to the Declarator of Nullity, the reason was not
Relevant, In regard Bonds granted by Minors, having Curators, without their
consent are Null; they being interdicted eo ipso that they do choice Curators,
that they do nothing without them; But Bonds granted or other Deeds done by
Minors wanting Curators, are not Null in Law; but the Minors lesed by the same
may crave to be Reponed Debito tempore by way of Reduction: And that the
Father, though he be Tutor in Law for the Children being Pupils, he is not
Curator being puberes and of that Age that they may choice their their own
Curators.

The Lords notwithstanding Found the Reason relevant; and declared the Bond
Null as to the Pursuer: Quibusdam refragantibus, inter quos Ego; upon these
Grounds, that there is a great difference betwixt Tutors and Curators, Pupills,
and Puberes, the Father having by the Law power to name Tutors, and
consequently being Tutor of Law himself, and having that Authority which may be
derived, and given by him to others; whereas he has no power to name Curators
to his Children, when they are of that Age that they may choice themselves: And
though he should name Curators in a Testament, his Nomination could not bind
his Children. And 2. If Children being Puberes should choice any other persons
to be their Curators, they would exclude and be preferred in that Office to the
Father; Whereas habenti Curatorem Curator non datur. 3. If a Child should have
an Estate aliunde, and the Father (his Son being pubes) should cessare and be
negligent in the Administration of his Estate, there could be no Action against
him for his omission; which might be competent against him and his Heirs if he
were Curator. Gibson Clerk, Sinclair for Fairholme, the Defender; Wedderburn
and Lockheart for the Pursuer.

D. 56. Vrquhart contra Frazer. Eod. die.
A Wadset being granted by Sir Thomas Vrquhart Elder and Younger of the Lands
of Brae to Sir James Frazer, for 24000 Merks; and the Granters of the Wadset,
being obliged to warrant the Rental (besides Custumes) to be Twenty Chalders of
Ross bear; and to furnish Tennents, and to cause them pay the said Duty; and
for each Boll undelivered Ten Merks: Sir Alexander Vrquhart of Cromarty,
Donatar to the Escheat of the said Sir Thomas Elder and Younger, pursues the
Heir and Executor of the Wadsetter, for the superplus of the Rent of the said
Lands, exceeding the Rent of the foresaid Sum for diverse Years; In respect the
Contract was usurary: It was alleged, by the Act of Parliament 247. Anno 1597.
The Creditor cannot pursue for the superplus of the Annualrent but by way of
Reduction of the usurary Bond, or Contract, with Concourse of his Majesty's
Advocate. It was Replied, That Rei persecutoria he had interest to pursue for
what was indebite paid.

The Lords Found, That the Process could not be sustained, without concourse of
His Majesty's Advocate; The Act of Parliament being express, that the Creditor
cannot repeat the excrescence above the Annualrent; unless he concur with the
Advocate to reduce: which appears to be provided, of purpose to oblige the
Creditor to inform and concur with the Advocate, for reduceing so unlawful
pactions.

D. 57. Vrquhart contra Cheyne. December. 8. 1666.
SIR Thomas Vrquhart of Cromarty having disponed to Mr. William Lumisden a
Tenement of Land and Salmond-fishing, for Surety of 4000. Merks borrowed from
Lumisden; the abovementioned Sir Alexander Vrquhart having Right by Comprysing
to the said Lands and Fishing, and reversion of the said Wadset; pursued a
Count and Reckoning against Walter Cheyne having Right to the said Wadset, and
to hear and see it Found, that the Sum due upon the Wadset was satisfied and
paid by the said Walter and his Authors Intromissions: It was alleged, that
the Wadset being a proper Wadset without a Back-tack, the Defender was not
Liable to Count; and tho he were, he was not Liable to Count but since the date
of the Right, and for his own Intromission. It was Replied that it was a Right
granted for security, and that by the Contract of Wadset and the Eik to the
Reversion thereafter, the Right was redeemable upon payment of the principal
and Annualrents that should be unsatisfied; whereas in proper Wadsets, there is
an Antichresis, and the Rents of the Land belongs to the Wadsetter in lieu of
the Annualrents, whereto the Debtor is not Liable.

The Lords Found, That though the Right was not clear and express, that the
Wadsetter should have Right for surety, and until he be satisfied by
Intromission or otherwise; yet the Reversion being in the Terms foresaid, it
was Actum, and intended that the said Wadset should not be a proper Wadset, but
only for surety as said is.

D. 58. E. Cassils contra Whitefoord. Eod. die.
THe Lands of Damertoun being a part of the Barony of Cassils and formerly
holden Ward by the Lairds of Blairquhan Kennedies, of the Earl of Cassils; and
now being in Ward through the Minority of the present Heritor, who had
Succeeded in the Right of the said Lands being acquired from the Lord of
Blairquhan. The Tennents of the said Lands Pursued a multiple poynding against
the E. of Cassils and Whitefoord now of Blarquhan, and the Heretor of
Dalmertoun; all pretending Right to the multures of the said Lands. The E. of
Cassils alleged, that during the Ward they should bring their Corns to his
Miln of the Barrony of Cassils, there being no Milns upon the Lands of
Dalmertoun. The Lord of Blarquhan alleged, that he was infeft in the Lands of
Blarquhan and in the Miln of Dalhovan, upon a Right granted by Kennedy of
Blarquhan cum astrictis multuris and usitatis; at such a time as Blarquhan had
Right to Blarquhan and Dalhovan and to the Lands of Damertoun: And that before
the said Right granted by Kennedy of Blarquhan to John Whitefoord of Ballach
Author to this Lord of Blarquhan, the Tennants of Damertoun were in use to
come to the said Miln, and to pay the like multure and service as the Tennants
of Blarquhan did; and since the Right, have been in use to come constantly to
the said Miln. It was Answered for Cassils, that unless there were an express
Constitution of Thirlage, the said Lands of Dalmertoun (being a distinct
Tenement from the Lands of Blarquhan, which hold of the King) cannot be
alleged to be astricted to the said Miln of Blarquhan: And if it had been
intended that the Lands of Dalmertoun should have been astricted, It would have
been expressed: And when the same did belong to Kennedy of Blarquhan, it cannot
be said that it was astricted to his own Miln with the foresaid Servitude, quia
res sua nemini servit; and he having Disponed his Miln, it cannot be presumed
that he would have Burdened his own Lands with a Servitude: And though it were
clear Kennedy had astricted the said Lands of Dalmertoun, yet he could not
Constitute a Servitude without the Superiors consent in his prejudice, when the
Lands should Ward in his hands. It was replied by Whiteford of Blairquhan, that
the Superior had consented to the Thirlage, in so far as John Gilmor and one
Bonar, having Comprysed the said Lands of Dalmertoun from Kennedy of
Blarquhan, and having Assigned their said Comprysing to John VVhitefoord; the
said VVhitefoord by Contract did Assign the same to Kilkeren, with a
Reservation of the multures thereof to the Miln of Dalhovan: And the said E.
had granted a Charter to Kilkeren upon the foresaid Right.

The Lords thought, That these Words Cum multuris usitatis, do relate only to
the quantity of the multures as to such Lands, as can be shown to be astricted:
But before Answer to the Debate upon the said Charter and Reservation, They
ordained the Charter and Contract containing the Reservation to be produced,
That they might consider, Whether it be in the Charter, and how it is
conceived; and what it should operate if it were only in the Contract.

The Lords enclyned to think that a clear Reservation, though there were not a
preceding Thirlage, should import a Constitution, as to these who accept or
consent to such a Reservation.

D. 59. Leslie contra Leslie. eod. die.
PAtrick Leslie of Balquhoyn pursued a general Declarator of the Single and
Liferent Escheat of John Leslie of Balquhoyn, against James Leslie and his
Spouse as nearest of Kin to the said John. It was Alleged, that the Horning
was prescribed, the Declarator being raised forty years after the Horning. It
was Replied, That though Prescription should run against the King (which was
denied) yet in this case it could not; The King being Minor the time of the
Prescription diverse years, and the Government being interrupted; So that there
was not Tempus utile during the Usurpation: And the King is not in use to
dispose of Escheats, until application be made to his Majesty: And by the Act
of Parliament, it is provided, that the negligence of his Officers should not
prejudge him.

The Lords Found, That the Horning did not prescribe, in respect of the Kings
Minority, and Interruption foresaid.

It may be asked, If that reply of his Majesty's Minority and Interruption,
were not competent? And if the Escheat were gifted by a Lord of Regality, or a
Superior, Quid Juris? And it seems, that a Horning being poena, and once
execute, it does not prescribe; Seeing the Rebel, if he should survive forty
years, his Liferent would fall to the Superior; and there is no reason that he
should Lucrari, and be in better case ex culpa, and by the continuance of his
Rebellion for so long a time.

D. 60. Hume contra Creditors of Kello. 12. December. 1666.
IN a Process betwixt Hary Hume, and the Donator of the Forefaulture of John
Hume of Kello, and certain others his Creditors; It was Found, That a
Comprising being deduced before January 1652, and being the first effectual
Comprysing, ought to be preferred to the posterior Comprysings; so that they
should not come in together pari passu: In respect tho they were within year
and day of the completing, and the making effectual the first Comprysing by
Infeftment or Diligence, yet they were not within year and day of the deduceing
the said Comprysing: and the said Comprysing being before the year 1652. does
not fall under the compass of the Act of Parliament concerning Debtor and
Creditor; which brings in pari passu Comprysings led since January 1652; and
being Correctoria Juris Communis, ought not to be extended.

D. 61. Thomson contra Stevenson. eod. die.
IN a Reduction of a Right and Disposition of certain Houses; being pursued ex
capite minoris aetatis; It was alleged that the Disposition did bear 500
merks, to be paid, and the Defender was content to quite the right being paid
of the Sum.

It was Found, That the Alledgance was not relevant, unless he should offer to
prove it really paid, and profitably employed for the use of the Minor.

In this Process the Lords would not sustain the Reason per se, unless Lesion
were joined and libelled, viz. That the Lands were disponed sine Decreto
Judicis.

D. 62. Shaw contra 13. December. 1666.
SHaw being confirmed Executor to his Brother a Factor at London; and diverse
Decreets being recovered against him, at the instance of the Defuncts
Creditors; He desired a Suspension upon that Reason, That he had done Diligence
to recover the Defuncts Debts and Goods; and that he could not satisfy the
Decreets obtained against him, until he should recover the Defuncts Estate: and
that he was content it should be divided amongst the Defuncts Creditors,
according to their Diligences; and therefore craved a Suspension without
Caution; being content to make Faith that he could not get a Cautioner.

The Lords past a Suspension as to personal Execution only.

D. 63. Hamilton contra Brown. 15. December. 1666.
HAmilton of Grange being pursued as representing his Father, upon the Title of
Behaving and Gerens pro Haerede, for payment of a Debt of his Fathers: It was
alleged, that this Condescendence, viz. That he had behaved as Heir, in sua
far as he had granted Dispositions of Land belonging to his Father. And 2ly.
That he had consented as appearand Heir to some Right of Lands apprysed from
his Father, Is not relevant; unless it were said and alleged, that he had done
these Deeds before the expyring of the Comprysing; seeing he could have no Right
after the expyring of the same; and neither could be Heir, nor Gerens pro
Haerede as to such Lands: And as to his consent, it was not sufficient unless
he had disponed.

The Lords inclined to be of this Judgment, That his consent being as
appearand Heir, should import Behavior; and that though the Comprysings were
expyred, he might have an interest to question the same, as not formal or Null,
or satisfied by Intromission, or by some other Ground: and that by his consent
he was denuded of that Interest; and therefore such Dispositions should import
Behaving: Yet in respect the Writes which were to be used to prove the Passive
Title were not produced, and much may depend upon the wording and conception of
the same. The Lords thought fit to ordain before Answer, the Writes to be
produced, and assigned a Term to that effect: But declared, that their Act
should be Litiscontestation quoad hoc, That the Pursuer, after the Term is run
upon the said Act, should not get others, as if there were not
Litiscontestation, Lockhart for Grange, and Birnie for the Pursuer.

D. 64. Hartshaw contra Hartwoodburn. eod. die.
SCot of Hartshaw pursued a Declarator of Property within the Bounds libelled,
and that he had been in Possession by pasturing, and doing other Deeds of
Property, and debaring the Defender Hartwoodburn and his Predecessor: In this
Process there was an Act of Litiscontestation; whereof a Reduction was
intented, upon that Ground, that the Defender was absent, and was Minor and
indefensus, wanting Tutors and Curators for the time, his Tutor being dead: and
that he had a defense Minor non tenetur placitare.

The Lords Found, If the Summonds had concluded the possessorie of Molestation:
And if that had been lybelled, that the Pursuer, the time of the intenting the
Pursuit, was in Possession; would have repelled the Defense (that non Tenetur)
against the molestation: But because a Declarator of Right was only lybelled,
they reponed the Minor; And Found that non tenetur placitare. Longformacus for
Hartwoodburn, and Sir George McKene for Hartshaw.

D. 65. L. Colvil contra Feuars of Culross. eod. die.
THe Lotd Colvil being Baillie of the Regality of Culross, and liable to uplift
the Taxation of that Abbacy; And having charged certain of the Vassals to pay
their Taxation; They suspended upon that Reason, That a fifth Part more than
the Taxation was stented upon them, on pretense, and in consideration of
Charges.

The Lords Found, That they could not be stented to more than the Taxation; tho
the Sheriff and Baillies of Regality be liable to uplift the Taxation.

Yet it seems hard, that they should be at the Charges of raising of Letters,
and Registration of Hornings, and such like: And albeit the Vassals, who are
content to pay their Proportion, should not be liable to more; yet it may
appear, that it is reason, that when the Sheriffs or Baillies give in what they
have uplifted, their Charges should be allowed.

D. 66. Hay contra Littlejohn. 16. Deeemb. 1666.
LIttlejohn having comprised the Liferent Right of a Tenement in Leith; the
said Tenement became ruinous; and by the fall of a part of it, did crush a part
of the next house adjoining to it, belonging to (...) Hay of Knockondie. In a
Pursuit Knockondie against Littlejohn, for Damnage and Interest.

The Lords sustained Process; The Pursuer proving that the House was manifestly
ruinous; without necessity to lybel or reply that the Pursuer had required the
Defender to repair his House: It being sufficient that the case of the House
was such as did really require and call for Reparation, in order to his own
Interest, and for preventing his Neighbors: So that it being his Fault, that
he did not repair the same, he was liable to refound the Pursuers Damnage: And
albeit by the Act of Parliament, Liferenters may be urged to find Caution to
keep their Liferent Lands Sarta tecta, and in the condition they found them at
their Entry: And by the Civil Law, Neighbors may be urged to find Caution
Damni infecti: the said Remedies are not privative, in case any Prejudice be
done before they be taken.

D. 67. Allan contra Campbel. eod. die.
EDinample Campbel being pursued as representing his Father, upon the Title of
behaving as Heir: It was alleged, that he intrometted with the Duties of the
Lands condescended upon, by a Right to two Comprysings against his Father: It
was replied, The Comprysings were not expired the time of his Fathers Decease,
so that in effect he was Heretor.

The Lords Found, That Gestio being magis animi quam facti; The Defenders
Intromission by virtue of a Title, did not infer Behaving.

D. 68. Menies contra Burnet. December. 18. 1666.
A Relict being provided to the Liferent of the conquest dureing the Marriage,
and pursueing for the same; It was alleged, that the Money in question, which
the pursuer pretended to be conquest dureing the Marriage, did belong to the
Defunct before the Marriage; and that the Bond was renewed after it: The
Question was, what way the said Alledgance, tending to take from the Pursuer
the benefit introduced in her favors by Write, and by her Contract of
Marriage, could be proven? Yet the Lords inclined to find it probable by the
Debtor, and the Witnesses in the Bond; But before Answer, They Ordained the
Defender to use such Probation as he thought fit, for proving the Alledgance;
Reserving to themselves to determine what it should import.

D. 69. contra 18. December. 1666.
IN a Process against an Heir of Provision: It was Alleged, that the Heir of
Line ought to be first discust: It was Replied that the Heir of Line was
conveened and Renounced: And it being duplyed, That the Estate belonging to the
Heir of Line, and whereto he should have Right if he were served Heir, ought to
be discussed.

The Lords Found, No Process against the Heir of Provision, until the Heir of
Line was discussed; and that the Renounciation of the Heir of Line was not
sufficient; but that the Creditor behooved to proceed to Adjudication contra
haereditatem Jacentem, belonging to the Heir of Line.

D. 70. Deacon of the Weavers contra the Magistrates of Edinburgh. 1. June.
1667.
THE Deacon of the Weavers being imprisoned by the Magistrates of Edinburgh,
because he had disobeyed their Order, anent the putting in their Hand a Box for
the Poor of the Journey-men; until some Questions betwixt the Masters of the
Trade and the Journey-men of the same should be decided; did crave by a Bill to
be enlarged, upon that reason, that the Craft had intented a Reduction of the
Contract betwixt their Predecessors and their Journey-Men, concerning the
keeping and having a Box for the Poor of the Journey-men: And that until the
Decision of the Process, the Box ought to be kept by their Deacon.

The Lords Ordained the Complainer to be enlarged, by Consigning the Box in the
Clerks Hands. Upon occasion of the said Process, it was agitated amongst the
Lords, Whether there could be a Contract and Transaction betwixt the Craft and
Journey-men, who are not an Incorporation, and cannot oblige their Successors?
Seeing there can be no Successors but of a Person or Incorporation: But the
Lords, without giving Interloquitor upon that point, Ordained the Reduction to
be heard summarly. Gibson Clerk. Mckenie alter Lockheart.

D. 71. Young contra Young. 4. June. 1667.
IN the case Young contra Young; It was agitated, Whether a Husband be Liable
for his Wifes Debt before the Marriage, being proven no otherways but by her
Oath dureing the Marriage: If the Husband declare he does not distrust her, and
believes she has declared Truth.

The Lords did not decide the point; but some were of the opinion, That if the
Husband Declare upon Oath, that he believes she did Declare Truth, he will be
Liable; in respect that by the Law, the Husband is Liable for the Wifes Debt
being Legally proven: And the Question is only, whether the Wife may declare in
prejudice of her Husband; which she cannot do, because otherwise it may be in
the power of an untoward Wife to undo her Husband: which inconveniency cease
when the Husband declares, he has no reason to distrust the Wife, and that he
believes she has told Truth: The great Question will be, Whether the Husband
may be urged to give such an Oath of Credulity? Seeing whatever a Husband
thought, yet having an Imperious Woman, he should be forced to comply with her,
and to declare that he believes her, otherwise he would have a miserable
Life. Scot Clerk.

D. 72. Thomson contra Stevenson. Eod. die.
IN the case Thomson contra Stevenson, The Lords Found, that the Extract out of
the Kirk-Session Books, is not a sufficient Probation of Age to infer Reduction
Ex capite minoritatis: But the case being difficilis probationis after a
considerable time; They Found, that aliqualis probatio ought to be received,
with the Adminicle foresaid. Norvel. alt. Wallace, Hamilton Clerk.

D. 73. Zinzian contra Kinloch. Eod. die.
ZInzian having poinded; pursued a Spuilie against Kinloch, having meddled with
some of the poinded Goods: The time of the adviseing the Cause, the Defender
offered to improve the Poinding in data. The Lords Repelled the Defense in hoc
statu, Reserving Action: In respect the Poinding was produced ab initio;
notwithstanding it was alleged, that the Defense was noviter veniens ad
notitiam; which the Lords did not respect; because the Poinding being produced
ab initio (as said is) The Defender should have tried and might have had the
same Information, which he has now of the same: In the same Process, though the
prices of the Goods Spuilied were not proven, because it is to be presumed that
the prices contained in Poindings are not too high; And the Lords having
considered the poinding, Found the prices low. Haystoun Clerk.

D. 74. Mitchel contra Mitchel. 12. June. 1667.
THE Lords upon a Bill ordained Witnesses to be received before
Litiscontestation; and their Depositions to ly in Retentis; Because they were
in Town for the present; and were to go to Zetland and senes valetudinarii and
peregre profecturi: And upon such like considerations, others may be received
Witnesses in hoc statu. Scot Clerk.

D. 75. Lumisden contra Summers. Eod. die.
IN a Declarator of Escheat, it was alleged, that the Goods Lybelled were
Disponed to the Defender: It was Answered, that the Disposition was stante
Rebellione: It was Replied, That in Fortification of the Disposition, it was
offered to be proven, that the Disposition was made for the price of Corn, and
Straw, and other Goods disponed to the Rebel; and whereby His Majesty, and his
Donator had benefit; in respect the same was employed for the Entertainment of
the Beasts, and Sowing the Ground, whereof the Increase fell under Escheat.

The Lords Repelled the Defense: And Found that the Rebel being Liable only
personally, for the price of the Goods alleged Disponed; and the property of
the Goods in Question being his; the same belonged to the King: And the King
and his Donator was not obliged to debate upon what account and occasion the
Rebel was Debtor to the Defender: Or what use he made of the Goods Disponed to
him by the Excipient, And is in no worse case than a Creditor poinding, or
Arresting; or any other person acquiring Right to the property of Goods; who
would be preferred notwithstanding such pretenses; there being no such
Hypotheck that can be pretended by the Law of Scotland. Diverse instances were
adduced by me to this purpose; not only in behalf of the King, but of other
Superiors and Heretors, as V. G. If a Superior should pursue Declarator of a
Liferent, and it should be alleged that after Rebellion the Rebel had Disponed
a part of his Lands; And that it should be offered to be proven, that the Money
for which the Disposition was given, was lent, for acquiring the Right of the
Lands; So that thereby the Superior had benefit thereby: Or if the Master were
pursueing by virtue of the legal and tacit Hypotheck competent to him, and it
should be alleged that the Tennant was Debtor to another, for the price of
Corns furnished for Sowing the Ground; In which cases the Superior and Master
could not be frustrate upon any such pretenses. Birnie, alter Thoirs and
Frazer, Hamilton Clerk.

D. 76. Dalrymple contra Eod. die.
A Reduction of a Testament being pursued, Ex eo capite, that the Defunct was
fatuus and incompos mentis: And the Relevancy being questioned; because no Act
or Circumstance, or qualification was Libelled, inferring the Defunct to be in
that condition.

The Lords Ordained the Pursuer to condescend. Wallace alt. Hog.

D. 77. Harroway contra Haitly. 14. June. 1667.
JAnet Harroway pursued the Heirs of Alexander Haitly her Husband, to hear and
see the Tenor of her Contract of Marriage with her said Husband proven, being
lost, as was pretended, the time of the Troubles: It was alleged, that no
Adminicle in Write was Lybelled or produced; And whereas it was Lybelled, that
John Nicol was employed as Writer for drawing of the Contract, the double of it
was insert and extant in his Servants Stile-Book; The said Stile-Book being
neither a Write under the Defuncts hand, nor a Minute nor a Record Extant in
any Register, could not be sustained as any Adminicle.

The Lords, Albeit it was offered to be proven by the persons alleged to be
Writer and Witnesses to the Contract; that it was subscribed, and of the Tenor
Lybelled, and other probabilities were urged; Yet they did not sustain the
Summonds without an Adminicle, upon that consideration in special, that our
Law, ob Lubricam fidem of ordinary Witnesses, against whom there is possible no
legal exception, deferring so little to their Testimony, That Transactions,
Agreements, or Promises above the value of 100 pounds cannot be proven by
Witnesses; If such pursuites should be sustained, without Adminicles of Writ;
Contracts of greatest importance might be made up, and proven by Witnesses; It
was remembered by some of the Lords, that in the Process, Corsar contra Durie,
The Lords were so tender, that upon a contentious debate, a Seasin was found
not to be an Adminicle.

D. 78. Antrobus contra Anderson. Eod. die.
GEorge Antrobus Englishman, pursues William Anderson Provost of Glasgow for
234 lib. 13. shillings Sterling, due by John Herbertson, sometimes Baillie of
Glasgow; upon that ground, that being charged to take the Debtor upon Letters
of Caption, he had refused to concur with the Messenger: It was alleged, that
the Defender was not in sight of the Rebel; and though it be pretended, that it
was shown to the Defender, that the Rebel was in the same House, in another
Room for the time, yet the Defender being chief Magistrate and Provost of the
Town, he was not obliged to go himself to seek the Rebel; and it was sufficient
he was willing to send his Officers; and did send them to that effect:
Especially it being considered, that the Provost was charged about Nine of the
Clock under Night; and the Army having come that same Night to Glasgow, he was
the very time that the Messenger charged, with the Quartermaster, and other
Officers, about the business of quartering the Forces: All which amounts to a
Relevant Defense to free the Defender of an odious pursuit; the pursuer having
no prejudice; in respect the Rebel was, and is notourly Bankrupt, and was
imprisoned a few days after, and continued a long time Prisoner in Glasgow.

The Lords Found the Alledgance Relevant.

The Lords are in use to sustain such Actions in subsidium against Magistrates
for payment of the Debt, when they suffer the Debtor to escape out of Prison;
But when a Magistrate is charged with Letters of Caption, bearing no
Certification, but Horning, it appears hard to me, that the Law having defined
and prescribed the pain and certification, that the Lords should sustain any
other penal Action without the warrant of an Act of Parliament; And that the
Magistrates for a Culpa or neglect, should be Liable to the whole Debt, which
may be a great Sum. If the Action be considered, not as a penal Action, but for
Damnage and Interest, it should be only sustained, in so far as the Creditor is
prejudged; so that the Debt being either recoverable, and the Debtor in alse
good case as before, or being Bankrupt the time of the Charge, the Magistrates
may be denounced upon the Caption, or censured for their Contempt, but ought
not to be Liable for the Debt in solidum. Scot Clerk.

D. 79. Davidson contra the Town of Inverness. Eod. die.
THere being a Decree of the Dean of Gild of Innerness against an Unfreeman,
Unlawing him in Three Hundred Pounds, for Trading: and a Suspension and
Reduction being raised of the same, upon that reason. viz. That the Suspender
dwelt without the Towns Jurisdiction: And that by the Acts of Parliament,
Unfree-Traders may be charged to desist, and to find Caution to that effect;
But the Town or Dean of Gild cannot proceed to process or unlaw them; there
being no such Act of Parliament to warrant it; but only to Charge (as said is)
and to confiscate the Goods.

D. 80. Forbes contra Blair. Eod. die.
DOctor Forbes and his Spouse, having recovered a Decree against David Edgar;
The said David did grant a Disposition in favors of his Mother; whereof the
Doctor and his Spouse did intent Improbation and Reduction; and after long
dependence, Certification was granted and Extracted; But the Defender having
given in a Bill, craved to be Reponed, pretending that the Certification was
granted in Winter, when the Defender being an Aged Woman, and attending one of
her Children being Distracted, could not come in the time of a Storm; and
within five or six days after the Certification was granted, she came and
produced the Disposition;

The Lords before Answer, whether they would repone against the Certification,
Ordained them to dispute upon the Reasons of Reduction. viz. That the
Disposition was inter conjunctas personas, without an Onerous Cause; and that
the Condescendence was not relevant, viz. That the Disponer had granted Bond
for Aliment and Entertainment of him and the other Children to his Mother, and
for her Terce; In respect the said Pretenses were only patched up to color the
said fraudulent Disposition: And that the said Disponer, pendente lite and
after Sentence, could not in prejudice of the Pursuer give a Bond, to be the
ground of the said Disposition; But if there were any ground of the said
pretended Debts, the Defender should have recovered Decree for the same: and
though the Debt were without question, the common Debtor, contrare to the Act
of Parliament, could not make a voluntar Disposition, in prejudice of the
Pursuers Diligence; to gratify and prefer another Creditor. It was Answered,
That by the Act of Parliament, the Reason, ( viz. That the Right was granted
without an Onerous Cause) is only probable Scripto vel Juramento: and that the
Disponer not being inhibited, the Defender might lawfully sibi vigilare, and
take a Right for a just Debt: And by the Act of Parliament, the Diligence, that
disableth a Debtor to give, and a Creditor to take a voluntar Right, is not a
Dependence or a Decree, but Inhibitions and Hornings, which are so public,
that the Leidges may and ought to take notice of them.

The Lords were tender to repone against the Certification: and yet they
thought not good to take away the Disposition upon the Certification; seeing the
Write was produced, and not suspected nor questioned to be false; and the
Defender did excuse and purge her negligence (as said is:) and the Disposition
being in her favors, who was sub potestate Mariti, and should be defended by
him, having her self in Law neither velle nor nolle, his negligence should not
undo her: And therefore the Lords having considered also the Difficulties in
the Debate, upon the Reason, they reduced the Disposition in manner
aftermentioned, by reserving to the Defender to pursue for the said pretended
Debts: and declared, that if she recovered Decree, (the Pursuer always being
called, that there be no collusion) the Defender shall come in pari passu with
the Pursuer: and that the Disposition shall stand to that effect only: Both the
Parties acquiesced to the Decision.

D. 81. Cheap contra Philp. eod. die.
MR. Cheap pursued a Reduction of a Disposition made by (...) Philp, in favors
of Mr. John Philp, upon these Reasons; That it was subscribed by two Notars,
and their Subscriptions did not bear de Mandato; and because one of the Notars
was known to be of so great Age, that he had not been for a long time employed
as a Notar, and that he had only subscribed his Name; The rest of the Solemn
Words used by Notars when they subscribe in subsidium, being written by the
other Notar; Therefore another Notar had been also used, besides the two
Notars; And that no respect ought to be given to his Subscription, by reason it
was ex Intervallo, and not uno contextu. 2. That the Disposition was in lecto.

The Lords, When the case was reported, debated upon the first Reason, and in
special upon these Points. 1. Whether in Subscriptions in subsidium by Notars,
it be essential it should be expressed, That they subscribed ex mandato; and if
that solemnity may be supplied, by offering to prove that the Notars were
Rogati: It was urged, that Minutes and Abbreviations of Seasins might be
extended and transumed, though none of the ordinary Solemnities be expressed, and
therefore such Defects and Omissions may be supplied: It was Answered, That in
Abbreviations, Omnia praesumuntur solenniter acta; But when an Instrument is
complete, or any other Write, if it want the Ordinary Solemnities, they cannot
be supplied; and solennitas non praesumitur; And being only probable by the
Write it self, it cannot be made up by Witnesses. 2. It was debated, Whether a
Father or Grandfather could be Notar, in a Write or Right in favors of the Son
or Grandchild.

The Lords did demurr upon these Points, and thought fit, that before Answer as
to these, the Reason founded on Lecto should be discussed.

D. 82. Watt contra Halyburton. eod. die.
JAmes Halyburton being infeft upon a Comprysing, in some Acres in Dirleton,
did grant a Disposition of the same to Adam Watt, whereby he was obliged to
infeft him by two Infeftments; whereupon the said Adam Watt his Son, having
Right by Assignation from his Father, pursued William Halyburton as Heir to the
Disponer, for implement and obtaining himself infeft, and thereafter to infeft
the Pursuer: It was Answered, That the Disposition was in the hands of Adam
Watt by the space of twenty years, and that he had made no use thereof: and
that the Defenders Father had done all that he could, for denuding himself of
the said Right, the said Disposition bearing a procuratory of Resignation: and
that the Lands holding Ward, if the Defender should enter, his Ward and
Marriage would fall; so that unless the Pursuer would warrant him as to that
hazard, he cannot be obliged to infeft himself.

The Lords decerned, reserving Action to the Defender for Damnage and Interest
as accords.

D. 83. Key contra Fleming. 15. June 1667.
GEorge Fleming, having an Infeftment of Annualrent out of the Lands of Cambo,
and thereafter having comprysed for his Principal Sum: It was Found, in a
double Poinding and Competition betwixt the said George and Gilbert Key another
Creditor of Cambo, that the said Gilbert should be preferred; in respect of the
said Gilbert his Infeftment in an Annualrent: That Decree being suspended,
Fleming craved to be preferred, in respect his Right of Annualrent was before
Key's Right: It was Answered, That this Infeftment was extinct and taken away
by the Comprysing; and that he could not now have recourse to it, after a
Decree of Preference in foro contradictorio: It was Replied, That Decreets of
double poinding preclude as to bygones; but as to the future, all are
qualified, for any thing that was then seen.

The Lords were clear, that notwithstanding of the Comprysing, he might have
recourse to his former Right: But the great Question was, Whether Decreets of
Poinding the Ground, against a Party compearing, did include him, so that he
could not be heard against Competent and Omitted? which the Lords did not
decide; but recommended to the Reporter to settle the Parties. Gibson Clerk.

D. 84. Home contra the Countess of Murray. 18. June. 1667.
JAmes Home of Beaprie having Assigned to the Countess of Murray the Gift of
Escheat of Sir John Kininmouth, and certain Debts due by the said Sir John; The
Lady, by her Bond, granted that she had got the said Right, and obliged her
self either to make payment to the said James of the foresaid Sums, or to
Repone him to his own place: The Lady being pursued upon the said Bond,
alleged that it was null, being granted by her during her Marriage without her
Husbands consent: It was Answered, that the desire of the Summonds was
alternative; either to pay or Repone the Pursuer; Et deceptis non decipientibus
succuritur. The Lords having debated amongst themselves upon the reason of the
Law annulling Deeds, stante Matrimonio done by Wives; and some argued, that
Women Married are not in the condition of Pupils who have not judicium, nor
Minors who have not Judicium firmum; and that they are Liable Ex delicto vel
quasi, and ex dolo. The Lords, before Answer to the Debate, whether her
Assertion in the Bond, viz. That she had received the Writs mentioned in the
same, should be Obligatory, at least so far as to Repone the Pursuer; They
Ordained her to be Examined anent the cause of granting the Bond. Gibson Clerk.

D. 85. Johnstoun contra Cuninghame. 19. June. 1667.
A Bond being granted to a Husband and his Wife, and the Heirs of the Marriage;
which failiening their Heirs; was Found to pertain to the Husband after the
Death of the Wife in solidum: And that these words (their Heirs) ought to be
understood Civiliter of the Heirs of the Husband, as being persona dignior.

D. 86. Watson of Dunnykier contra his Vassals. 21. June. 1667
THE said Watson having Feued certain Crofts; with a servitude in his Muir of
Path-head to Winn Divots and Clay, for Building and Repairing the Houses Built,
and to be Built by the Vassals; pursued Declarator that it should be lawful to
him to improve the Muir, leaving alse much as would be sufficient for the use
foresaid: It was Alleged, that the Servitude did affect the haill Muir; and
that their Right flowing from himself could not be restrained; and sibi imputet
who did grant it in the Terms of the said Latitude.

The Lords considering that it was intended that the said Servitude should only
be for the end foresaid, and it would be a prejudice both to the public
interest which is concerned, that the Country should be improven, and waste
unprofitable Grounds Labored; and to the pursuer also; without the least
advantage to the Defenders: They therefore Ordained alse much Ground to be set
apart, as might more nor sufficiently serve for the use foresaid; and allowed
the pursuer to labor and improve the rest, without prejudice to the Defenders
to make use even of the rest dureing the time it continues in the present
condition and not labored; And it case it should happen upon any occasion,
that what should be set apart for the Fevers use foresaid, should prove short
and not sufficient for that use, they reserved Liberty to them, to have
recourse to the residue; and granted visitation to the effect foresaid. In
praesentia, Lockheart and Cheap alter Mckenie.

D. 87. Hay of Stravan contra Oliphant. 22. June. 1667.
IT was Found, That a Miln-dam could not be drawn from one side of a Burn to
another, without a Servitude or consent of the Heretor having Lands on the
other side; and that the Heretor is not obliged to debate, whether he had
prejudice or not; The Lands on the other side being hisand the Burn
medio-tenus. 2. It was also Found, that he might lawfully demolish the Dam;
unless it were alleged, that the Miln had gone the space of Forty eight
Hours; So that it might have come to his knowledge that it was a going Miln.
Haystoun Clerk.

D. 88. L. Blantyre contra Walkinshaw. 2. July. 1667.
IN a Reduction the Lord Blantyre contra Walkingshaw, Ex capite minoritatis; It
was Found that the granting of a Bond though with consent of Curators, being
persons above all exceptions, was Lesion; and that it was not sufficient to
allege that the Money was actually delivered to the Curators; or to the Minor
in their presence; unless it were also alleged that it were converted to his
use.

This seems hard, for the borrowing of Money by the Minor whose Affairs may
require the same, was not Lesion; but the misemploying of it, which is the
fault of the Curators.

D. 89. contra Eod. die.
AN Assignation being made to Mails and Duties of a Tenement of Land, for the
Year in which it was granted, and in time coming without Limitation: The Lords
Found, That the Heir of the Cedent ought to have a formal and valid Disposition
of the Land, whereupon the Assigney may be Infeft; Seeing otherwise he could not
be secure as to a perpetual Right to Maills and Duties against a Singular
Successor: Et concesso Jure conceduntur omnia sine quibus explicari non potest.

D. 90. Mebrae contra Melaine. 8. July. 1667.
IN the Process Mcbrae contra Melaine, being for removing a Tutor suspect; upon
many Grounds, and in special, that the Tutors Father had been Tutor to the
Pupils Father and had not compted; and that the Tutor and his near Relations
had Questions and Actions of great importance with and against the Pupil.

The Lords inclined, That another Friend should be joined to the Tutor; But no
Answer was given by the Lords to the Dispute: only the pursuers Procurators got
a time to condescend upon a person fit to be joined.

D. 91. Cry contra E. Finlator. 9. July. 1667.
A Creditor having obtained a Decree in subsidium, for payment of his Debts,
against the Magistrates of Dundee; and having Assigned the Bond whereupon the
Debt was due to the Magistrates, they pursued the Cautioners in the Bond; who
alleged, that the Debt and Bond being satisfied by the principal or Town of
Dundee, who was Liable loco Rei ex delicto, the Cautioners were liberate.

The Lords did demurr and delay to give Answer. Vide infra 24. January. 1668.

D. 92. Grange Hamilton contra Smith. Eod. die.
THe Lords Found, That as the payment of Annualrents, so the payment of
Feu-duties may be proven prout de Jure. Hay Clerk.

D. 93. Watson contra Law. 15. July. 1667.
IN the Process Watson contra Law, It was Found, That Kirklands being Disponed
with absolute Warrandice; The Disponers are obliged to warrant from the
Designation of a Gleib: Though it was alleged, that ex natura rei, and not ex
defectu Juris, The said Gleib was evicted.

Thereafter it was Found in the same Cause; That the Designation being as to
Cows, and Horse grass; and upon a Law supervenient after the Disposition: viz.
An Act in the late Parliament; The Disponer ought not to warrant from a
Supervient Law.

D. 94. contra Eod. die.
EXhibition being pursued by an Appearand Heir, to the end he may advise, not
only as to the Writes in favors of the Defunct, but such as were granted by
him.

The Lords superceeded to give Answer as to the last Member, until they should
consider the Act of Sederunt: It being alleged, by some of the Lords, That by
an Act of Sederunt it was ordained, that no person should be forced to exhibit
Writes granted by Defuncts, in favors of himself or his Authors, Except Writes
granted by Parents; Or Husbands in favors of Wives and Children.

D. 95. Hamilton contra Symenton. 16. July 1667.
IT was Found, That the Mother, being Liferenter of all that could belong to
the Daughter as Fiar and Heir to her Father, was obliged to entertain her; and
de facto having entertained her, could crave nothing for her aliment, though
the time she was entertained, she was only appearand Heir, and thereafter was
about to renounce to be Heir. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 96. Elleis contra Keith. eod. die.
THE Lords, upon debate and deliberation, Found, That a Person addebted in
payment of a Sum upon a Wadset, may pay his Debt, and take a Renunciation, tho
the Creditor granter be inhibited; and that Inhibitions do not affect
Renunciations.

The Reasons that moved these that were for the Decision, are. 1. That
Inhibitions do hinder the Liedges to purchass from Persons inhibited, but not
to borrow Money from them; and as they may lawfully pay the Sums they borrow,
so they may take Discharges and Renunciations. 2. When a Person does grant a
Renunciation of a Wadset, he does not grant a Voluntar Right, but only a
Discharge upon the matter, which in Law he might be forced to give, upon an
Order of Redemption. 3. A Person inhibite might take Payment and grant
Discharge of an heretable Bond, even before Sums due upon such Bonds became
arrestable. 4. If Inhibitions should affect Renunciations of Wadsets, then they
could not be granted without consent of the Creditor who had inhibited, even
after an order of Redemption. 5. The Inhibition, where it mentions and
prohibiteth Renunciations, is to be understood of Voluntar Renunciations, which
the Party inhibite is not obliged to grant; As v. g. An Heretor having a Base
Right irredeemable, should after Inhibition renounce the same. 6. If a Wadset
had been granted before the Inhibition, the Creditor may renounce, because in
Law, and by the Contract he is obliged upon payment to renounce, so that it is
not a voluntar Deed; And there is eadem Ratio in Wadsets after Inhibition;
seeing the Right is granted with that condition that upon payment the Creditor
should renounce; And as I may grant a Right to a Person inhibited, so I may
grant it with that Quality, that he should be obliged to re-dispone, in which
case he may lawfully dispone back again, notwithstanding of the Inhibition.

D. 97. Ker contra Ker. eod. die.
THe Lords Found, That an Executor, notwithstanding of the Oath given upon the
Inventar, the time of the Confirmation, may be urged to declare upon Oath,
whether since the Confirmation, it is come to his Knowledge, That some Goods
and Debts were omitted, which he did not know the time of the Confirmation, and
whether he has gotten greater Pryces than are contained in the Inventar. Gibson
Clerk.

D. 98. Sir James Keith contra Lundie. eod. die.
A Decree being obtained against Sir James, as charged to enter Heir of Tailie
to his Brother Alexander, in foro, for payment of a Debt due to Lundy; Two
Exceptions being proponed and admitted, and the Term circumduced; he craved to
be reponed against the said Decree, Alledgeing that the Procurator, who
pretended to compear for him in the Decree, had no Warrant, and was sick for
the time.

The Lords inclined to repone him as to personal, but not as to real Execution:
and desired the Reporter to deal with the Party to consent. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 99. Hermiston contra L. Sinclair. 17. July 1667.
HErmiston being bound to pay to the Lord Sinclair his Brother, out of the
first and readiest of the Rents of the Estate of Sinclair, a certain Annuity.

The Lords Found, That he ought to pay the said Annuity entire; tho he
pretended he was not obliged simply, but out of the Rents; and that the said
Rents, in respect of the real burdens upon the Estate, and the low Rates of
Victual, would not extend to satisfy the same: Seeing he was obliged to pay out
of the first and readiest.

D. 100. Lady Burgie contra Strachan. eod. die.
A Base Infeftment given by a Husband to a Wife, was sustained after the
Husbands decease, as public and cled with Possession, albeit the Husband was
not in Possession the time of granting the Right: In respect, either he, or
others by redeemable Rights and Tacks given by him, came in Possession
thereafter.

D. 101. Fyffe contra Daw in Perth. 6. November. 1667.
A Burgess in Perth, having put his Son with a Neighbor to be his Prentice,
and the Boy having diverted from his Service, the Father was pursued for
Damnage and Interest sustained by the Master, who did referr to the Fathers
Oath his absence and diverting: In which Process, the Father having declared
with a Quality, That the Master had beaten and put away his Son.

The Lords Found, The Quality being super facto alieno, did resolve in an
Exception, which he should have proponed, and cannot be proven by his own Oath:
And yet though the Process was a Suspension, wherein there had been
Litiscontestation, as said is; The Lords, did give a Term to prove the said
Quality. Procurators Fyffe alter Chambers.

D. 102. Duke and Duchess of Monmouth contra Scot of Clarkingtoun. 12. November.
1667.
REquisition being made by the Duke of Monmouth and his Lady, to Sir Laurence
Scot of Clarkingtoun, for a Sum of Money; But the Notar having deceased before
his Instrument of Requisition was extended* and there being only a Minut of the
same unsubscribed, the said Duke and Duchess pursued Clerkingtoun for
extending and making up the Instrument; and craved that Clerkingtoun and the
Witnesses might be examined to that purpose: and that upon Probation, that the
Requisition had been made conform to the said Minut, an Instrument under the
Clerk Registers hand should be equivalent to an Instrument.

The Lords Refused the said Desire, in respect the said Minute was neither
subscribed by the Notar, nor in his protocal. Lockheart alter Spotswood.

And that Requisition and such Actus Legitimi cannot be proven but by
Instruments perfected as to all necessary Solemnities, at least the Minutes of
the same under the Notars hand. And tho the Debitors or Party concerned may
know such Deeds were done de facto; they may be ignorant and are not obliged to
declare, whether they were Legally done or not.

D. 103. Allanus Henderson contra 14. Nov. 1667.
QUia facti species (quae sequitur) dubia and perplexa, and de ea disceptatio
in apicibus Juris est, eam and argumenta ultro citroque adducta ex Jure Civili,
Juris istius Idiomate, Latin visum est subjicere. Sequitur species facti.

Ninianus Henderson nauta and incola villae, quae vulgo nuncupatur Salinae
Praestonianae, peregre profecturus; nec immemor periculorum, quibus nautae and
navigantes obnoxii sunt; de rebus suis and patrimonio (quod exile satis erat)
in praediis urbanis, and quibusdam tenementis in villa ista sitis, disponere
statuit: quod fecit Chirographo seu Instrumento, sed adeo informi and Styli
ancipitis and dubii, ut acerrimae Disputationi ansam praebuerit, utrum
Testamenti and Donationis mortis causa, an inter vivos Jure censeri debeat:
Ejus Clausulas and tenorem breviter perstringam: Cum esset coelebs, nec
liberos, nec fratres haberet, sed sororem unicam, eam praeteriit nulla de ea
mentione facta: and praefatus de profectione sua and de morte; quod haud
Ignarus esset ea nihil esse certius; nec minus hora and tempore quo esset
obeunda nihil esse incertius: Ideo amore and gratia ductus, quo prosequitur
Allanum Henderson Nimani Patrui sui filium, nominat (ipsa verba) and constituit
dictum Allanum haeredes Executores and Assignatos suos, ejus haeredes and
Successores and Donatarios in rem suam irrevocabiliter; In and ad sua Tenementa
domos et terras arabiles jacentes in villa dicta; and ad omnes alias terras
haereditates and bona quae in posterum ad sese pertinere contigerint; cum plena
potestate dicto Allano suisque praedictis, si ipsum mori nec in patriam redire
contigerit, intrare and confirmationem obtinere a Domino directo and superiore,
in and ad dictas terras and Tenementa, iisque frui and possidere; Transferendo
in dictum Allanum ejusque praedictos, omne jus suum tam proprietatis quam
possessionis; and excludendo agnatos and necessarios suos, and proximos
cognatos quoscunque; cum cessione omnium Instrumentorum and Evidentiarum dicta
Tenementa and Terras concernentium: Reservando tamen (ipsissima verba, quae
notanda) sibi ipsi tantummodo, post suum in patriam reditum, revocare,
rescindere, irritare, and annullare praesentes literas tanquam nunquam
fuissent; and dictis Terris aliisque uti and pro arbitrio and libitu suo de iis
disponere: cum Clausula Registrationis. Ninianus ex profectione Redux in
patriam, diem obiit. Ex eo Instrumento egit ad implementum praedictus Allanus,
adversus sororem and haeredem dicti Niniani; Excipiebat Soror, and pro ea
Advocati arguebant, eam non teneri sed absolvendam his argumentis; Testamentis,
Legatis, and mortis causa Donationibus, res mobiles tantum disponuntur, nec eae
omnes sed quae Executoribus Relictae and liberis cedunt; libata and subducta ea
part mobilium, quae Jure haereditatis haeredi, moribus nostris, relinquitur:
Nec satis esse aliquem tum velle tum posse de rebus suis disponere, nisi
accedat modus habilis; forma enim in civilibus and concessionibus dat esse rei:
cum igitur tenore Instrumenti perpenso; in comperto sit, Testamentum, saltem ei
affinem donationem mortis causa esse; sequitur eo Testamento de praediis suis
frustra nec modo habili disposuisse, and donationem inanem and inefficacem
esse: Quod autem Instrumentum and Donatio in eo contenta, Testamenti and
Donationis mortis causa Jure censeri debeat, facile evinci, tum ex praefatione
and verbis narrativis; tum ex clausula dispositiva, nec non and ex clausula and
verbis Executionis: Ex praefatione liquet, donationem concessam non tantum
contemplatione verum etiam commemoratione mortis, and verbis in Testamentis and
ejusmodi donationibus Testamentariis solennibus; nec non ex ipsis concessionis
verbis constare, donatorem voluisse testari vel mortis causa donare; nominat
siquidem dictum Allanum ejusque praedictos, suos haeredes and successores;
nominare autem and constituere haeredes and Successores sunt verba penitus
Testamentaria; Et in Donationibus inter vivos nec apta nec usurpata: Accedit,
quod cum definitio Donationis mortis causa sit, Cum aliquis vult se magis quam
Donatarium, eumque potius quam haeredem rem suam habere; eam disponentis
voluntatem fuisse certum est ex clausula executiva, and potestate dictis bonis
and terris fruendi post mortem suam; aliis cognatis and proximioribus submotis
and exclusis: Cum Donatio aliqua conceditur metu and intuitu periculi
imminentis, eo cessante, and donante incolumi and superstite, cessat and
evanescit donatio; Donatio autem, de qua agitur, facta est metu periculi ex
navigatione periculosa, imo sub condition si Disponentem mori contigerit; cum
igitur in patriam redierit, nec conditio exstiterit, consequens est Donationem
inanem and irritam esse. Dato Donationem inter vivos, and puram esse ab omni
condition suspensiva; extra omnem Quaestionis aleam est, eam factam sub
condition Resolutiva; Siquidem potestate concessa ex donatione, Terris
aliisque donatis fruendi and possidendi, si Donantem sine reditu in patriam
mori contigerit; a contrario sensu sequitur, sin in patriam incolumis redeat,
rebus donatis nec frai nec possidere licere; sed donationem nullam, existente
condition sub qua resolvitur Donatio ista: Et si supponatur inter vivos nec
sub condition suspensa nec resoluta; sine dubio a Donatore revocari potuit;
and Revocata est post reditum; and probaturos recipiebant Rei, Instrumentum
donationis penes donantem repertum fuisse: Instrumentum autem penes Debitorem
aut concedentem repertum, censetur liberatum aut revocatum.

Quod nunc sit penes actorem, non sequi, ei rursus a donante traditum, and
iterata Traditione donationem Reviviscere; nisi doceatur quando and quommodo ad
eum pervenerit; fieri enim potest ut tempore mortis penes donantem fuerit, and
actoris dolo substractum.

Pro Actore Replicabatur, Instrumentum dispositionis and donationis, inter
vivos Jure censendum; and actionem ex eo efficacem esse; mentem donantis fuisse
donationem concedere irrevocabilem si peregre mori contigisset; sin rediisset
revocabilem; hoc casu potestatem revocandi retinuisse, sed ea haud usum; nec
enim Instrumentum aut scriptum exstare quo Testatus sit donationem revocari:
menti exprimendae verba haud defuisse satis apta, and dispositioni inter vivos
idonea; donasse sc: irrevocabiliter and Jus suum omne tam possessionis quam
proprietatis transtulisse, cum potestate fruendi and possidendi: and cessio
evidentiarum, and Registrationis clausula sunt naturae penitus Heterogeneae and
a Testamentis alienae. Si Donator revocatione facta peregre decessisset
revocationem Actori minime obfuturam; Si Actor superstite donatore mortuus
fuisset donationem haud inanem, sed haeredibus Actoris efficacem fore: Ea
argumenta concludere donationem, Testamenti naturam haud sapere; cum in
Testamentis ambulatoria sit voluntas and praemoriente donatario aut legatario
evanescunt Legata and Donationes: haud diffiteri donationem istam quibusdam
clausulis, donationi mortis causa affinem videri: Sed quod de Hermophrodito
Jure cautum est, haud inepte and hic accomodari, and quod praevalet
inspiciendum.

Ad argumenta pro Reo Respondebatur: Ad primum, haud incongruum esse mentis and
valetudinis compotem, and in legitima potestate constitutum, uno and eodem
Instrumento, de rebus suis tam mobilibus quam immobilibus disponere posse; si
quis enim peregre profecturus Testamentum condat, and Executores instituat, et
eodem Testamento de terris suis disponat per verba formalia and idonea, addito
mandato de Resignatione facienda, and Sasinae praecepto: Sasina and
Resignatione secuta, eo casu, si dicas nec Testamentum nec Dispositionem
valere, absurdum erit quae seorsim licitae sunt rerum suarum donationes,
illicitas fieri, quod simul uno Instrumento celebratae sunt: Si dicas
Testamentum tantum valere, ratio reddi non potest, cur Testamentum and mobilium
donatio magis valeat, quam Dispositio and rerum immobilium Donatio, cum in hac
non minus concurrant potestas and voluntas, and modus and conceptio, idonea and
solennis: Superest igitur utrumque valere. Praeterea respondetur, falsum esse
quod asseritur, donationibus mortis causa de terris and rebus immobilibus
disponere haud licere; cum nihil frequentius sit contractibus and donationibus,
quibus, proximioribus exclusis, haeredes alii (and ut loqui solemus) Taliae and
Provisionis instituuntur.

Accedit, quod Donator Actorem Donatarium constituerit; and verbum istud
proprium sit donationis inter vivos; nec officit quod etiam haeredem and
successorem nominarit, cum utile per inutile non vitietur. Ad Secundum
Respondetur; Dato, Donationem esse mortis causa, non sequitur invalidam esse;
superius enim dictum est in contractibus and obligationibus de successione
Talliata, de rebus immobilibus and praediis nos quotidie disponere: eas autem
donationes esse mortis causa, patet ex praedicta Definitione mortis causa
donationis; and quod omnes de successione contractus, mortis contemplatione and
plerumque non sine mortis commemoratione fiant, and effectum post mortem
sortiantur, and in iis ambulatoria sit voluntas, nisi accedat pactum de non
revocando. Ad Tertium Respondetur, falsam esse Propositionem; nec enim cessante
causa impulsiva cessat effectus; nec qui periculo imminente mortalitatis
admonitus, Testamentum condidit; si periculum effugerit aut eluctatus fuerit,
eo minus in voluntate eadem perseverasse censebitur; and testatus discedit nisi
revocasse constiterit. Ad Quartum Respondetur, Dispositionem reditu eveniente,
haud nullam aut irritam esse, sed revocabilem, id ex eo demonstrari; Quod sibi
soli and tantummodo reservarit, si domum rediret, potestatem revocandi; si enim
inanis and caduca fieret Donatio, in casu reditus, quorsum ista potestas and
sibi soli reservata, revocandi donationem, quoad omnes, ipso conditionis eventu
extinctam and revocatam. Ad Quintum and Sextum Respondetur, and Negatur,
instrumentum post Donatoris reditum penes eum esse; and penitus supervacuum
disceptare an penes eum fuerit, cum nunc penes actorem sit, and sibi a donatore
traditum, nec necesse est docere quomodo and quando ad se pervenerit.

Senatus Interlocutus est, Donationem istam Testamenti naturam haud sapere, sed
validam and efficacem esse: Sed si constiterit and probatum fuerit, penes
donantem instrumentum post ejus reditum fuisse, tuno revocatum and irritum
esse.

An autem, eo quod penes actorem nunc sit, a revocatione discessum sit and
reviviscat Donatio, interloqui sustinuit: and ulterius inquirendum censuit
quando and quomodo ad actorem pervenerit.

D. 124. Whitehead contra Straiton. 14. November. 1667.
RObert Whitehead of Park pursued John Straiton Tacksman of the Park of
Holy-rood-house, for the price of a Horse put in the said Park, to be pastured
for 4. shil. per night; which after search cannot be found:

It was Alleged, That by a Placad affixed upon the Gate of the Park, It was
intimated, that the Keeper of the Park would not be answerable for any Horses
put therein, although they should be stolen, or break their Neck, or any other
Mischief or Hazard should overtake them. It was Replied, That by the Law
Nautae, Caupones, etc. the Keeper ex conducto is liable; unless it were
alleged, That it had been expressly agreed, that he should not be liable; or at
the least, that it was known to the Pursuer, that such a Placad was affixed,
when he put in his Horse.

The Lords, Before answer, ordained the Reporter to enquire, and hear the
parties upon the terms of the Agreement, when the horse was put in: whether it
was told or known to the pursuer, that the keeper would not be answerable.
Castlehill Reporter.

D. 105. Gardener contra Colvil. 16. November. 1667.
IN an action Gardener contra Colvil; the pursuer being ejected during her
Husbands absence out of the country, and when it was supposed he was dead.

The Lords sustained the pursuit; Though the time of the adviseing the
probation, It was offered to be proven that he was living: and did declare,
that albeit the Husband were at the Bar, they would give the Wife the benefit
of Juramentum in litem, in respect of the wrong done by the Defender, and the
particulars and quantities could not otherwise be proven. Actor Longformacus
alter Wallace. Castlehill Reporter.

D. 106. Trotters contra Lundy. 20. November. 1667.
THE Children of George Trotter in Fogorig being confirmed Executors to their
Sister Isobel Trotter, pursued James Lundie Cautioner in a Bond for James
Trotter of the East End of Fogo, for the Sum thereinconteined: It was Alleged,
that the said James being Heir to his Grandfather Alexander Trotter in the
East End of Fogo, and the said George Son to the said Alexander and Executor to
him, they did transact together that the Movables belonging to the said George
as Executor should remain with the Heir; and the said James and the Defender as
Cautioner did for the cause foresaid grant the said Bond blank in the Creditors
name wherein the said George filled up the name of John Trotter in Chester his
Brother; and procured from him an Assignation for the said Isobel his Daughter;
And that thereafter upon a Submission betwixt the said George and Alexander
Trotter Son to the said James granter and principal Debtor in the said Bond,
The Arbiters ordained the said George to give back to the said Alexander the
said Bond, and Assignation, with a Discharge thereof; and therefore the said
Isobel being in familia paterna, and the said Bond and Assignation being taken
and procured as said is, by the said George the Father in favors of the
Daughter who has no visible Estate or means to acquire any such Right, he was
still master of the same: And it being ordained to be Discharged (as said is)
the said Debt is Extinct. It was Answered, that the Bond being filled up and
Registrat in the name of the said John Trotter, and the samen being Assigned,
and the Assignation in favors of the said Isobel intimat; and after her
decease, her Executors having confirmed the said Debt; all before the said
Submission; her Father could not by the Submission or any other deed of his,
Evacuat the said Right Established in the person of the said Isobel and her
Executors: And as to the Practique betwixt Monimusk and Pittarro, whereupon the
Defenders allege; it does not quadrate to the Bond in question, it being never
delivered but depositat in the Uncles hand, Mother Brother to the Child; and in
the same case It was Found, That the Father could not retract a real Right
made in favors of his Child and Heir: And here there is Eadem Ratio.

The Lords Found, That the Father being Master of a Bond or Right, whereupon
nothing followed, being granted by himself; may throw it in the fire, and may
consequently Discharge it: But the said Right being made public, and
completed by the delivery, and which is equivalent, by some public deed, by
Infeftment if it be Heretable; or by Assignation intimated, or confirmed
Testament, if it be Movable; he could not thereafter Retreat or prejudge the
same: And repelled the Defense in Respect of the Answer. Hackertoun Lord
Reporter. Mr Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 107. Pollock contra Pollock. eod. die.
JOhn Pollock having granted a Bond of 5000 Merks to James his second Son of
the first Marriage; The said James intented and pursued for payment both Robert
eldest Son of the same Marriage, Heir of Line, and John eldest Son of the
second Marriage, and Heir of Provision, as charged to Enter Heir respective: It
was alledeged for the Heir of the first marriage, that he offered to renunce:
And for the Heir of Provision, that the Heir of Line ought to be first
discussed by adjudication; and condescended upon movable Heirship, which might
be adjudged: It was Answered for the Heir of Line, that his Father, having
provided him, had taken from him a Renunciation of all that could belong to him
as Heir, So that he could have no Right to the movable Heirship, which, in
respect of his Renunciation, would be considered as other movables and fall
under Executrie: It was Replied for the Heir of provision, that by the
Renunciation, the Heir of Line had renunced his kindness, to the effect his
Father might have power to dispose of the Heirship; but his Father not having
disposed thereof, the Right returned to the Heir of Line again, the
Renounciation being in favors of him and his Heirs; as in Renounciations of
that nature as to Lands, if the Father does not dispose of the same, they will
notwithstanding belong to the Heir. Some of the Lords thought, there should be
a difference betwixt Lands and Movable Heirship; In respect the Right of Lands,
whereof the Father died infeft, cannot be Settled in the person of any other but
the Heir, who therefore ought to have Right notwithstanding of the
Renunciation: But the Movables which should fall under Heirship by the
Renunciation of the Heir, cease to be Heirship; and may be confirmed as other
Movables: Others Thought, that the Effect of such Renunciations should be the
same as to Movables and Lands; the Fathers intention being one and the same for
both; and therefore, as the Right in the construction of the Law returns to
the Heir of the Father, who does not otherwise dispose of his Lands; there is
the same reason as to movable Heirships: And as to the pretense foresaid, it is
of no weight, seeing if it were the Intention of the Father, that by such
Renunciations the Son should be denuded, without Return, though the Father
should not dispose of his Lands; the Son may be pursued and forced to denude
himself, that his Renunciation may be effectual, in favors of the nearest of
Kin.

The Lords before answer ordained the Renunciation to be produced, that they
might consider the Tenor of it.

D. 108. Tacksmen of the Custumes contra Greenhead. Eod. die.
THe Custums of the Borders being set in Subtack to Greenhead and others, by
the Tacksmen of the haill custumes of the Kingdom: Greenhead is pursued as
representing his Father one of the Subtacksmen, for the duty the year 1650. It
was alleged, That the Subtack was altogether unprofitable, upon the occasion
of the English Invasion; so that Beasts and other Goods were not imported, nor
Exported that year, as they had been in use formerly: It was Answered, that
albeit in praediis Rusticis, in case of Sterilitie, Vastation, and such other
Calamities that cannot be avoided, There may be abatement craved and Remissio
Canonis; yet in this case the Subject being conductio rei periculosae and
Jactus Retis, the Subtacksmen ought to have no abatement, and are in the same
case as Tacksmen of Salmond fishing, who will be liable for the duty, albeit no
profit arise to them.

The Lords Found, That Subtacksmen should have abatement: But the Question
being most, Quatenus, and concerning the proportion; because, though the
Subtacksmen had undoubtedly loss, yet it was not Total; there being some
Commerce betwixt the Kingdoms for that year, some Months. It was Found in end,
upon hearing of Parties, that the half of the Duty should be abated. Actores
Lockhart and Cuninghame Alteri Sinclair. Mr Thomas Hay Clerk:

The Law is very clear ff Locati; and the Doctors upon that Title; not only in
praediis but in conductione vectigalium, and the like; in case of an
insuperable Calamity, remittitur Canon and merces; but they are not so clear as
to the Quatenus and proportion of the abatement, when the detriment is not
Total: But it is just, the abatement should be proportionable to the loss: And
accordingly The Lords decided.

D. 109. Justice Clerk contra Lambertoun 23. Nov. 1667.
IN the case, the Justice Clerk contra Lambertoun, the probation anent the
value and worth of the Woods pertaining to the Justice Clerk, and cut and
intrometted with by Lambertoun, being advised; It was considered and
represented by some of the Lords, that had been Commissionated to examine the
Witnesses adduced by both parties, being allowed to have a joint probation,
that the probation was dubious; the Witnesses for the Pursuer declaring too
highly, and the Witnesses for the Defender too low as appeared: And that the
Subject of the Question not being de re which is the proper Object of Sense,
but de rei valor qui cadit sub Judicium and Intellectum; The Testimonies of
the Witnesses are not de rei veritate but de credulitate and opinione; and
therefore are not numeranda sed ponderanda, according to the circumstances both
of their oun quality and the quality of the Declaration, whether they have
declared verisimilia, and whether animose and such like; and whether they have
given a probable reason of their knowledge: That in this case, the Witnesses
that have deponed most to the advantage of the Pursuer are his own Tennants;
and one of them a Smith and his Officer: that they give the reason of their
Knowledge, that they dwelt in the bounds, which is not sufficient, unless they
had been periti and Conversant about the matter of Woods, and the Buying and
the Selling and the valuing of the same: That some Witnesses for the Defender
had given their Judgment upon oath as strongly and pregnantly as they, though
they be not so many: So that the probation at best is but dubious, and in
dubiis minimum sequendum; at the least the Lords have a latitude to found their
Judgment upon the Testimonies of both cum temperamento, and without adhering
percisely to either.

The Lords Found nevertheless by plurality, That they should have respect to
what had been proven by the most part: And accordingly Decerned.

D. 110. Rankin contra Skelmorlie and Dunlop. eod. die.
IN a double poinding at the instance of the Lord Melvil; there being a
Competition betwixt two Creditors of Antonia Broun Daughter and Heir to Sir
John Broun:

The Lords preferred Skelmorly the first Arrester, Though Rankin had obtained a
Decree to make forthcoming, and had completed his Diligence; and alleged,
that an Arrestment is but an inchoate Diligence, and does not hinder any other
Creditor to complete, and do more exact diligence by poinding, or by a Decree
to make forthcoming, which in Debts, and in nominibus are equivalent. The
reason of the Decision was, that Skelmorly had not only Arrested but had
intented a pursuit before the Lords to make forthcoming before Rankin; But
Processes before the Lords being more tedious, and the Pursuer not Master of
Calling, Rankin had taken advantage by obtaining a Decree before the Sheriff,
in the interim.

D. 111. Hay contra Drummond. 26. Novem. 1667.
IN a Reduction Hay of Haystoun contra Drummond and Hepburn; A Seasin being
called for; The Defenders having alleged, that the same being Registrate, and
they condescending upon the Registration, the pursuer should Extract it himself.

The Lords did debate amongst themselves, whether the Defender should be
obliged to Extract and produce the Seasin: Some were of the opinion, that there
is a difference betwixt Decreets and Registrate Bonds and such like; and
betwixt Seasins and Charters, which being the Defenders own Evidents and the
principals not being in the Registers, they are presumed to have them; and if
they have them not, ought to Extract them: Others thought, that seeing Extracts
do satisfy the Production in Reductions; If the Defenders have neither
Principals nor Extracts, and be content to make Faith thereupon, it were hard
they should be at the Charge to Extract them, in order to a Process against
themselves. The Lords did nothing upon the Debate.

The Lords did resolve, and caused intimate to the Advocates, That hereafter
they would only give two Terms in Reductions, and three Terms in Improbations.

D. 112. Daliel contra eod. die.
THE Minister of Prestonhaugh, Mr. John Daliel, pursued for the Teinds of
Lanton, upon his presentation to the said Kirk and Teinds Parsonage and
Viccarage: It was Alleged, no process, unless he were presented to be
Prebendar, seeing the said Kirk is a Member of the Collegiate Kirk of Dumbar;
and cannot be made appear to be dissolved, and Erected in a several Rectory.

The Lords Found, That being presented to be Minister at the said Kirk, and to
the Teinds, which are the patrimony of the Prebendar; it is equivalent, as if
he were presented Prebendar: As when there is a presentation to a Kirk, which
is a Parsonage, and to the Teinds, the Minister will have Right, though he be
not presented to be Rector or Parson.

D. 113. E. of Lauderdale contra Vassals of Musselburgh. 5. December. 1667.
IN a Reduction and Improbation at the instance of the Earl of Lauderdale,
against the Vassals of Musselburgh, and in special Major Biggar and others
Heretors, and possessors of the Lands of Hill.

The Lords Found, That the Major having produced a more eminent progress, and
which he alleged would exclude the pursuer; no Certification could be granted
contra non producta; The Defender not being obliged to show any other Writes,
until these which are produced be discussed. The Lords Found also, That the
Defenders are not obliged to declare, that they will use no other Writes than
these which are produced: The only difficulty being, that the reason of
Reduction could not be disputed, until the Production be closed; and if the
Writes produced should be improven or reduced, the Pursuer would be put to a
new process of Improbation; or return and crave Certification after Dispute in
Causa, which is incongruous in Form.

The Lords were of Opinion, that in the same Process the Pursuer after the
discussing of the Writs produced, might thereafter crave Certification contra
non producta.

D. 114. Fountain contra Maxuel. eod. die.
ALbeit the Lords are tender in Exhibition of Writs; unless it be proven, that
the Defenders had the same the time of the intenting of the Cause; or had
fraudfully put the samen away before; which is difficilis probationis; Yet in
an Exhibition at the instance of (...) Fountain against Maxuel of Nethergate,
they decerned to exhibit, albeit it was not proven that the Defenders had the
Writes, at, or since the intenting of the Cause: In respect it was proven, the
Defender had meddled with the Writs being in a Charter Chest; and had offered to
Transact concerning the same; and so was presumed to have put them away
fraudulently: There being a great difference betwixt a transient having of
Writes, and a down right medleing and Intromission; which, being proven, though
it be before the intenting of the Exhibition, does oblige the Intrometter to be
answerable for the same.

D. 115. Collector of the Taxation contra the Parson of Oldhamstocks. 6. December.
1667.
IN the Case, The Collector of the Taxation contra the Parson of Oldhamstocks;
a Question was moved, whether the Successor in the benefice be Liable for the
Taxation due by his Predecessors, his Patrimony consisting most of Teinds: But
was not decided at this time.

D. 116. Mr. Rodger Hog contra The Countess of Home. 11. December. 1667.
AN Inhibition being served upon an Obligement to warrant; A Reduction was
thereupon sustained, though it was alleged there was neither Decree of
Eviction, nor Liquidation of distress; the pursuit being only a Declarator, and
the Decree being only effectual after Eviction and Liquidation; which
accordingly was declared by the Lords.

D. 117. Inter Eosdem. eod. die.
BEtwixt the same Parties: It was alleged, that the Defenders Right was
ratified by a Creditor, who had a Comprysing expired; so that the pursuer had
no interest to question the Defenders Right: It was Answered, That the pursuer
desired only such Right as was after the Inhibition to be reduced, without
prejudice of any other, which he could not nor was obliged to debate hoc loco.

The Lords, notwithstanding Found the Alledgance Relevant.

D. 118. Hamilton contra Lord Belhaven. 13. December. 1667.
RObert Hamilton Clerk, pursued the Lord and Lady Belhaven to hear and see it
declared, that a Minute betwixt him and them concerning the Tenor and Articles
Lybelled, is null; the clause irritant therein mentioned being committed.

The Lords refused to sustain the pursuit; unless the Minute were produced:
Albeit it was alleged there could be no prejudice, in respect a Minute of
another Tenor could not be prejudged: and a Minute of that Tenor Lybelled,
should be declared void upon the reason Lybelled.

D. 119. Rioch contra Eod. die.
AFter Litiscontestation upon an Exception of payment; the Defender, who was
pursued as Lawfully charged to enter Heir, Desired to be admitted to renunce;
which was refused; because by the proponing the Defense, Gesserat se pro
haerede: And Litiscontestation is a judicial Contract.

D. 120. Rannolph Davidson contra Richardson Eod. die.
A Ship being declared pryse, Because the Loadning of Salt belonged to a
Frenchman; the Skipper and Steersman having declared upon oath that the
Loadning was taken in at the Rotchel upon the account of the said Person. The
adjudication was quarrelled by a Reduction, upon diverse reasons; and in
special these, that the Deposition of the Skipper and Steersman were forced and
extorted from them; and that it was offered to be proven and that it did appear
by diverse Letters, Certificats, and Documents produced, that the Loadning did
belong to the Owners of the Ship who were Citizens of Dantzick and Hamburg, and
were not the Kings Enemies.

The Lords in this Process Found, that the Owners may be heard to reduce the
Sentence upon reasons omitted by the Skipper. 2. It being debated amongst the
Lords whether the Skippers Declaration should so prejudge and conclude the
Owners, that they should not be heard thereafter to prove that the Loadning
belonged to them: Some thought it hard, that the Skippers fraud or mistake
should prejudge the Owners: But because in the case, there was no ground to
persume that the Skipper and Steersman did intend to prejudge or wrong the
Owners; and the Writs and Certificats produced were all after the Seizure; and
the Letters, which were of anterior dates might have been made up, and were all
from Persons concerned; and there were Documents found in the Ship that could
clear that the Loadning did belong to the Owners.

The Lords Sustained the Sentence, unless the Pursuer would qualify Foroe and
Violence, and that the Depositions were Extorted. Hay Clerk.

D. 121. Homes contra Paterson 17. Dec. 1667.
IT was Found, that the Attester of the sufficiency of a Cautioner, being
pursued for the Debt, the Cautioner being distressed and discust and not Solvent;
and the Attester having alleged that he offered to prove that the Cautioner
was then the time he became Cautioner, habitus and reputatus Responsal and
idoneus as to the Debt: The alledgance is relevant, and the Attester no further
liable.

D. 122. Sir Thamas Nicolson contra the Lord of Philorth. 18. Dec. 1667.
PHilorth elder, being pursued as representing his Grandfather for payment of
a Debt due upon Bond granted by the Earl Marischal and his Grandfather as
Cautioner: It was Alleged, that the Bond being Dated above forty years ago
was perscribed: It was Replied, that interruption had been made by payment of
the Annualrents by the principal Debtor: It was Answered it was prescryved as
to the Cautioner, there being no interruption by any Document or pursuit
against him, or payment by him.

The Lords repelled the Defense in respect of the Reply: and Found that the
ground of prescription as to personal actions being odium and negligentia non
petentis, that it does not militate in this case, the Creditor having gotten
Annualrent; so that he cannot be said to be negligent. Lockhart, alter
Cuninghame.

D. 123. Gilespie contra Auchinleck. Eod. die.
MAry Williamson Lady Cumblidge, having Right not only of Liferent but also to
the Fee of the said Estate by Comprysing; and being about to Marry with Patrick
Gilespie her second Husband: for settling and preventing Questions betwixt her
Children and her Husband, she did Dispone the Fee of the Lands to her eldest
Son with the burden of 5000. Merks to be paid to her second Son at his age of
Twenty one years; and to Entertain him in the Interim: And at the same time
her eldest Son did grant and set a Tack to the said Patrick, for a year after
his Mothers decease if he should survive her, of her Liferent Lands reserved in
the Disposition, mentioning their purpose of Marriage, And that he was to stock
the said Lands, and that his Wife might die before him; upon which
considerations the said Tack is set: At the same time, the said Mary did
privately dispone her Liferent in favors of her second Son John Auchinleck, who
intented a pursuit against her and her said Husband for the Maills and Duties
of the Lands for diverse years: It was Alleged; that the said Right being a
private latent Right, the Defender ought to be free of bygones as being bona
fide Possessor, by virtue of his Wife's Infeftment, and his Jus mariti: It was
Answered, That he and his Wife are Eadem persona, and she being his author,
cannot pretend that they possessed bona fide in prejudice of a Right made by
her self.

The Lords Found the alledgances relevant.

It was further alleged, that the Disposition made to the Pursuer was most
fraudfully granted in prejudice of the Defender after Treaty of the Marriage,
and the said public Transactions in order thereto; Which were Equivalent to,
and to in lieu of a Contract of Marriage; the Wife having no other thing
besides to dispose of besides her Liferent, to which the Husband has Right Jure
mariti; so that a Contract was not necessary as to that: And that the said
Right was retained by the Mother, and not delivered until she was Married; at
which time she could not prejudge her Husband, and that the Defender had a
Reduction depending upon the reasons foresaid.

The Lords Found the alledgance relevant: And found that an Assignation not
intimat and not being made for an onerous Cause, could not prejudge the
Husband, having by his Marriage a public Right Equivalent to an Assignation,
and therefore assoiled.

It was not considered whether the Right was delivered or not, being found
latent as said is.

D. 124. Wilson contra the Magistrates of Queensferry 2. January. 1668.
ARchibald Wilson being charged to accept the Office of a Baillie of the Town
of Queensferry, Suspended upon the Act of Parliament, Jam. 3. Parl. 5. Chap.
29. whereby it is statute, that Magistrates within Burghs should not be
continued longer than a Year; and subsumed that he had served the preceding
two Years.

This case being Reported, The Lords Found, the Reason Relevant.

And albeit the Act of Parliament be not in observance, specially in Edinburgh,
The present Provost having been in that place diverse years, yet the Ambition
and unwarrantable practice of those who violate the said Act, and others made
to that purpose; ought not to prejudge others who are most sober, and claim the
benefit of the same,

D. 125. contra 3. January. 1668.
A Wife provided to an Annualrent in Victual out of certain Lands by her
Contract of Marriage, did renounce the same; and thereafter was Infeft in an
Annualrent out of other Lands: And upon the said last Infeftment a Process
being intented for poinding of the Ground: It was Alleged, that the Seasin was
null being alleged to be given by a Husband propriis manibus, and the
Assertion of a Notar without any precept or warrant in Writ: It was Answered,
That the Marriage with the Relicts Renounciation of her former Right, and her
Contract of Marriage, being all produced, are sufficient Adminicles to sustain
the same.

The Lords inclined to favor the Relict, yet they found it of a dangerous
consequence, that a real Right should depend upon the Assertion of Notars and
witnesses: And the Question not being whether the Husband might or ought to
have given his Wife the said Right, in recompense of of her former; But whether
de facto he did the same, Seeing the foresaid Writes having no relation to the
Seasin, either as given or to be given, could not be Adminicles to warrant or
sustain the same: And therefore before Answer, it was thought fit to enquire,
if there had been any Decision in the like case; as was informed.

D. 126. Sir John Home contra The Feuars of Coldinghame. 7. January. 1668.
IN a Process at the instance of Sir John Home of Rentoun Justice Clerk contra
The Feuars of Coldingham: The Defenders offered to improve the Executions: It
was Answered, They could not be heard, unless they would propone the said
Alledgance peremptory; but that the same should be reserved by way of Action.

The Lords for avoiding the multiplying of Processes, obliged them to propone
the exception of Improbation peremptory: But the same being prior natura, and
competent to be proponed before any other in meritis causae; And yet being now
proponed peremptory in form of Process, being the last of Exceptions:

The Lords admitted the Defenders to propone their other Exceptions, and
reserved that to the last place.

D. 127. Eodem die.
THE Lords upon debate amongst themselves, Thought that the Abbay being His
Majesty's House, should not Exempt or protect any person against His Majesty's
Laws, and the Execution of Letters of Caption, and therefore Recommended to the
Keeper of the Abbay, to put him out and not to shelter him there.

D. 128. Forbes contra Innes. 8. January 1668.
IN the Case, Forbes contra Innes and Dalgarno; The Lords Found, That a Wife
having no Right for the time to Lands Disponed by her Husband; and having at
the desire of the Buyer consented and sold her Right; if she thereafter acquire
from another person a Right to the said Lands, is not by her consent
concluded, but may pursue and evict the Lands upon her Right; Her consent
operating only, that upon any Right from her Husband, or then in her person,
she cannot question the Right whereto she has consented; And the Brocara that
Jus superveniens accrescit, being to be understood of Jus superveniens Authori;
whereas a Consenter is not Author. Lockheart alteri Wedderburn and Thoirs.

D. 129. Lord of Glencorse contra his Brethren and Sisters. 9. January 1668.
ALexander Bothwel of Glencorse, having Disponed his Lands to his Eldest Son by
Contract of Marriage betwixt his Son and his Wife, with absolute warrandice;
And by the Contract the Tocher being payable to the Father, he did
notwithstanding deliver Bonds of Provision to his other Children, which were of
a date before the Contract, but not delivered diverse years after his Sons
Marriage: The Eldest Son pursued a Reduction of the said Bonds, in so far as
they may affect his Estate, or be the ground of a pursuit against him, as
Successor Titulo lucrativo post contractum debitum: The Reasons of Reduction
were, that the Bonds were not delivered the time of the Right granted to the
Son; and that he could not thereafter do any Deed in his prejudice, and
consequently, could not deliver the said Bonds, the delivery and not the
granting being that which does animate, and make the same effectual: It was
Answered, That the Father being Tutor of Law to his Children, he having ^he
Bonds for their use, is equivalent as if the Children had them, or that they
had been delivered to them: And whatever may be as to a Singular Successor,
they ought to be effectual against his Eldest Son, who is universal successor.
It was Answered, That Contracts of Marriage, being not only in favors of the
Son, but in the behalf of the Wife and Children, and with the Friends, are most
solemn and favorable Transactions; Et bona fides is in them exuberant; so that
upon no pretense, no Deed ought to be done by any of the Contracters in
fraudem; And that the Father, if he had intended to have burdened the said
Lands, should have burdened the Fee expressly with the same; that Provisions
granted by Parents to their Children before they be delivered may be revocked;
and that the Father by granting the Disposition in favors of his Son, had
revocked the Bonds in question, in so far as they may trouble him.

The Lords, in respect it was proven, That the Bonds were not delivered till
after the Contract, Found they could not be effectual against the Son, and
Reduced. Sinclair and Wallace, alteri Wedderburn and Lockheart.

D. 130. Earl of Kinghorn contra The Lord of Vdney. 14 January. 1668.
THE Earl of Kinghorn did Wadset to the deceast Lord of Vdney the Barony of
Balhaves, and the Sum due upon the Wadset being paid to Vdney, he did by his
Letter to the said Earl promise a Renounciation of the said Wadset to be
granted by him: The Earl of Kinghorn as Heir to his Father having pursued the
now Lord of Vdney as representing his Father upon the passive Titles, and
especially upon that, as Successor Titulo Lucrativo; in so far as he was Infeft
in the Lands condescended upon acquired by his Father to himself in Liferent,
and to the Defender in Fee; with power to the Father or his Assigney to redeem
the same upon payment of three Pounds; And to Set, Wadset and dispone without
his consent. It was Alleged, the Sons Right was prior to the said Letter, and
that the Father did not make use of the said power: It was Replied, That the
Wadset was prior to the Defenders Right; yet this Right being qualified (as
said is) the Father might have contracted Debts, and granted obligements after
the said Right; and the Defender would be liable to the same; seeing the Lands
and the Fathers interest in the same being upon the matter a Fee and power to
redeem and dispone, might have been comprysed for his Debt contracted after the
said Right.

There being two questions in the case viz. Whether the Defender be liable as
Successor Titulo lucrativo, If it should be found that the Wadset was Anterior?
2ly. If the obligement shall be found to be after the Defenders Right, whether
he would be notwithstanding Successor Titulo lucrativo, in respect of the
quality and condition foresaid of the said Right.

The Lords repelled the alledgance, and Found, the Defender would be liable as
Sucessor, the pursuer proving that the Wadset was Anterior: As to the second
question, the Lords thought it not necessar to decide, being of very great
consequence, and deserving hearing In praesentia, seeing it was notour that the
Wadset was before the Defenders Right: Yet we inclined for the most part to
think, that when such Rights are granted or Purchased by Parents to their
appearand Heirs, they should be liable to all the Debts due and contracted
thereafter; at least secundum vires and in quantum Lucrantur: And beside the
abovementioned reasons, these may be urged 1. the Father having by such a
reservation, not only a reversion but in effect a Right of property, In so far
as he has power to Dispone and wadset as if he were Fiar; if he should
discharge the said Reservation his Discharge would infer against his Son the
passive title of Successor titulo lucrativo; having gotten thereby an absolute
and irredeemable Right which he had not before; And therefore he not useing the
power competent to him by the said Reservation, being equivalent as if he had
discharged the same, ought to operate the same effect. 2. Such a Right is in
effect Praeceptio Haereditatis cum of effectu only the time of the Fathers
decease, seeing before that time it is in his power to Evacuat the same; and
therefore the time of the Fathers decease is to be considercd so as the Son
cannot be said to have Right or to Succeed effectualy before that time, and so
ought likewise to be liable to the Debts contracted at any time before his
Fathers decease.

D. 131. Balmedie contra the Baillies of Abernethie. 15. Jan. 1668.
A Decree at the Procurator Fiscal's Instance of the Regality of Abernethie
before the Baillie of the Regality, against the Weavers in the Town of
Abernethie, for contraveening the Act of Parliament 1661 Anent the breadth and
bleetching of Linen Cloth; was suspended upon that reason, that the Bailies
within the Town of Abernethie, were only Judges competent to the Inhabitants
within the Burgh.

The Lords Found, that the Town being only a Burgh of Regality had jurisdiction
within the same: And the Baillies jurisdiction is Cumulative and not Privative;
unless they had it expressly by their Infeftment Privative, and that in such
cases Locus est Praeventioni.

D. 132. Parkman contra Allan. Eod. die
IN the late War betwixt his Majesty and Holland and Denmark, a Swedish Ship
being taken by a Scots Caper and adjudged Pryze: A Reduction of the Admirals
Decree was pursued, upon diverse reasons; and in special this, That by the
Treaty betwixt his Majesty and the Crown of Sweden, the Subjects of Sweden
may traffic with their Alleys, though Enemies to h s Majesty with freedom;
and carry in their Ships Counterband Goods, Except such as are contained in an
Article of the said Treaty, being for the most part Arms, and Instrument a
Bellica; and that the Goods in question which they had carried in their Ships
to Holland, viz. Tarr and stock fish were not of that nature. 2. That when the
said Ship was taken, there was none of the said Goods aboard; and that it
could not be declared Pryze upon pretense That immediately before they had
carried the said Goods to Holland; seeing it is not unlawful not a breach of
Treaty betwixt his Majesty and Sweden, that the Subjects of Sweden should
continue the same intercourse and freedom of Trade they had formerly with their
friends, though now the Kings Enemies: and if they carry counterband Goods,
the only hazard is that if they be deprehended carrying the same, They may be
confiscat; conform to the Treaty with Sweden, bearing si Deprehendantur; which
is Consonant to the custom of all Nations, and of the Admirality of England. It
was Alleged, that the Ship in Question should not have the benefit of the
Treaty, having Served the Danes the Kings Enemies, and being fraughted and
loaded with Tarr from Noraway upon the account of Danish Merchants, and with
stock Fish which they had carried to Amsterdam: That it was expressly provided
by the Treaty with Sweden, that they should not carry bona hostium; and that
tho the Danes were not the Kings Enemies, yet Tarr and Stock Fish are
Counterband, Tarr being a Material so useful and necessary for a Naval War;
and that by the Treaty, Commeatus is counterband and Stock Fish falls under
the notion of Commeatus: and that by the Commission given by the Admiral to the
Capers, they are empowered expressly to seize on Ships, not only while they have
counterband Goods caryeing to his Majesty's Enemies, but upon the return having
sold and disponed upon the same. It was Replied, 1. That by the Law of Nations
(which is clear from Grotius de Jure Belli) Goods that are usus promiscui both
in War and Peace are not vetita and counterband; and two Nations being engaged
in War with others that are at friendship with both are allowed liberty of
Trade with either as to such Goods: And that Tarr is of that same nature, and
Commeatus, except in the case of portus clausus, or Civitas obsessa, and from
which deditio may be expected if not supplied. 2. His Majesty's Declaration of
War with Holland, bears, that Ships carrying counterband to Holland, if they
be met with carrying the same, may be seized; and that his Majesty's
Declaration, Emitted of purpose in relation to other Nations, should be
considered as lex Belli, and not a private and unwarantable style of a
commission given periculo petentis.

In this, many Points being debated, It was Found by the Lords, that Tarr is
Counterband. 2. As to that Point, whether a Ship having carried counterband
Goods to Enemies, may be seized upon in her return home-ward, having sold and
vented the same to the Enemies and not deprehended carrying the same; They
thought fit to know his Majesty's pleasure, and the custom of England; and a
Letter was written to my Lord Secretary to that purpose. 3. The Ship in
question, having carried counterband Goods to Holland, and having thereafter
made a Voyage to France; and there having taking a new Loading of Salt upon the
account of the Owners; and being taken upon her comeing from France, If it
should be found that she might have been seized upon pretense that they had
carried the said Goods to Holland; It was Debated whether the Return should be
understood of the immediate Voyage from Holland to France; or until they should
return to Sweden? And as to this part, the Lords thought good to take advice of
Merchants: In praesentia, Lockhart and Wedderburn, alt. Wallace. vide, feb. 4.
1668.

D. 133. Mckitrick contra (...) Eod. die.
THE Prescriptions of Reversions and Expiring of Legals, and the taking
advantage of the same are so odious; That the Lords inclined to find, that
necessary Depursments upon reparation of Houses should not be allowed to a
Compryser; in a Declarator to hear and see it found, that he was satisfied by
intrommission; reserving action to him for the same: But before answer, they
ordained the Reporter to consider the Depursments; and to Report whether they
were absolutely necessary. This is hard in the point of Law; intromission being
to be understood civiliter and cum effectu of that which is free, all charges
deduced. Hay Clerk.

D. 134. Trotter contra Trotter Eod. die.
THE Lords Found, that a Wadsetter having comprised for his principal Sum; may,
in competition with another Compryser, pass from his Comprysing, and return to
his former Right of Wadset. Gibson Clerk.

D. 135. Anderson dean of Guild of St. Andrews contra James Tarbat. 16.
January. 1668.
WIlliam Tarbat having granted Bond for 300 pounds to his Son James and other
Children; the said Bond was Reduced at the instance of a Creditor, Because it
was subscribed only by one Notar, being a matter of importance: Though it was
alleged, that it resolved in three several Bonds; and it was Equivalent as if
the three Bonds had been granted for 100 pounds respective. For the Lords
considered, that the Bond being one and individual; the importance, as to the
interest of the debtor, is the same whether it be granted to one or to diverse
Persons.

D. 136. Binnie contra Binnie. 17. January 1668.
MArgaret Binnie being induced to grant a Bond obliging her to resign some
Tenements of Land in favors of herself and the Heirs of her Body; which
Failieing, in favors of her Brother Alexander Binnie; and to do no deed in
prejudice of his Succession; She did thereafter Marry and Dispone to her
Husband the said Tenements. In a pursuit at the instance of her Brother against
her and her Husband for his Interest, upon the said Bond and for implement
thereof,

The Lords Found, that she with consent of her Husband ought to Resign. Some of
the Lords thought, that the import of such obligments is only, that the Granter
should not alter such Tailies in favors of other Heirs: And that they are not
restrained to sell or Dispone for onerous Causes if they should have occasion;
otherwise they should cease to be Fiars: The very Essence of Fee and Property
consisting in a liberty to Dispone. It may be questioned, how far the Husband
may be liable to his Wifes obligments before the Marriage? For there being a
Communion betwixt them only as to mobilia, it may appear that he should only be
liable to Movable and Personal Debts: Seeing penes quem Emolumentum, penes
eundem Onus; but this point was not Debated.

D. 137. Straquhan contra Morison. Eod. die.
A pursuit for Spuilie being restricted to wrongous Intromission: It was
Alleged, that the Defenders are only liable for their intromission respective;
in so far as it should be proven that each of them had intromitted at least pro
virili and conjunctly: It was Replied, that the Defenders being conveened Ex
delicto, they are liable in solidum as Correi; being all accessorie to the
wrong: And the pursuit, as it is Restricted, is not for Intromission simply,
but wrongous Intromission: And though the Pursuer, by restricting the Pursuit,
as said is, has precluded himself as to violent profits and juramentum in
litem, and other consequences of spuilie; he has not prejudged himself as to
that benefit, that all who are accessory to the wrong should be liable in
solidum, which the Law has introduced upon just ground; seeing it is impossible,
in such cases, where diverse Persons do intromett, to distinguish and prove
their intromissions.

The Lords Found, the Defenders liable Conjunctly. Wedderburn, Sinclair and
Straquhan. Alteri Lockhart and Thoirs.

D. 138. Pollock contra Pollock. Eod. die.
THe Lords having considered the Renunciation mentioned above. 20 of Novem.
1667; Found, that it being in favors of the second Marriage and in Effect an
Assignation, could not accresce to the Granter.

D. 139. Birnie contra (...) Eod. die.
MR Andrew Birnie having granted a Bond blank in the Creditors name to his
Good-brother Short; the Creditors name being thereafter filled up, Mr Andrew
Birnie suspended upon double poynding against him and another Creditor of
Shorts, who had thereafter arrested.

The Lords preferred the Person whose name was filled up; In respect he had
shown Mr. Andrew the Bond before the arrestment, and desired him to satisfy
the same, though he had not made intimation by way of Instrument. This Decision
seems to justle with that of the 9. November 1665. Jamison contra Tealzifer.

D. 140. (...) and the Lord of Innes her Husband, (...) contra (...) 21. Jan.
1668
THE Lord of Rosyth having provided his Daughter of the first Marriage with
the Lord of Innes, to 10000. Pounds, at her age of Twenty years; and there
being no obligement for Annualrent

The Lords, in a Process at her instance for her aliment, modified 600. Merks
yearly: Some were of opinion that the said sum being payable at the foresaid
Term, the Annualrent of the same should not have been modified for the time
thereafter, and that she should be in no worse case than if it had been paid.

D. 141. Shaw contra (...) Eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Wife being provided in Lecto by her Husband, her
provision should be restricted and Sustained as to a Terce; she being no
otherwise provided before.

D. 142. Home contra Tailzifer Eod. die.
AN Exception of Improbation being proponed against a Writ; and thereafter,
Tailzifer of Harycleugh being desired to abide at it, he declared, that he had
gotten it as a true Evident, and condescended upon the way he had gotten it;
and it being alleged, that he ought to be positive, Whether he would abide at
it, or not?

The Lords declared, That after probation they would consider how far his using
and abiding at the said Write should import against him; and if he be in bona
fide to use the same.

D. 143. Douglas contra Lady Wamphray. 22. Janu. 1668.
THE Lady Wamphray being provided in an Annualrent out of Lands without respect
to a Sors or Stock, and being infeft: It was Found, that she ought to be liable
to Taxations and public burdens, being onera patrimonialia, though the said
Annualrent was payable to her alswel infeft as not infeft.

D. 144. Justice contra Stirling 23. Janu. 1668.
IN the Case, Justice and his Tutors, contra Stirling and Cockburne her
Husband: a Bond being granted to a Husband and his Wife the longest liver, and
the Heirs betwixt them; which Failieng to the Heirs of the longest liver: And
the wife having survived, there being only one Child of the Marriage;

The Lords Found, that the Fee of the said Bond belonged to the Husband as
dignior persona: And that the Child had Right thereto as Heir to him; and that
the Heirs of the Wife could have no Right after the Child's decease as Heirs of
provision to the Child: And that the Wife had not the Right of Fee, which she
pretended to be in suspense, until it should be determined by the death of
either who should be the last liver.

D. 145. The Town of Glasglow contra (...) Eod. die.
THE Town of Glasgow having a Right from the Bishop to the parsonage Teynds;
pursued a Spuilie: It was Alleged, for some of the Defenders, that they
possessed by Subtacks from Blantyre Tacksman: It was Answered, that
Certification was granted against the principal Tack, and that the Subtacks
were void in consequence: It was Replied, that the Defenders were not called to
the Improbation; and that they being in possession, the Collusion or negligence
of their Author cannot prejudge them.

The Lords, upon a debate amongst themselves, Thought, that Sub-vassalls being
in possession ought to be called in an Improbation against the Vassal their
Author; because they could not be miskenned being Heretable possessors: But as
to the Tennants bruiking Lands by tacks, or Heretors bruiking by Subtacks their
own Teynds; They thought, that it could not so well be known that they had
Right; and so were not parties necessary to be called: And therefore, before
Answer, they ordained to condescend upon the manner and quality of their
possession, and whether it was such as the Bishop could not but know. Sinclair
and Lockhart. alter Cuninghame.

D. 146. Simpson contra Adamson. 24. January. 1668.
UPon Report it was Debated among the Lords, whether a Decree of poinding the
Ground should interrupt prescription of an Annualrent right, being only against
the Tennants, the Heretor not called: Some were of the opinion, that the
Decree being null, nullum sortitur effectum: Others thought, that
Prescriptions being odious, talis qualis and any Act of Interruption was
sufficient: And as Prescription may be interrupted by any Deed of Molestation
of Tennants, being a natural Interruption, so it may be interrupted civilly by
a pursuit against the Tennents.

The Lords did not decide the Question, but thought fit to advise further.

D. 147. Town of Dundee contra E. of Finlater. eod. die.
THE Town of Dundee being pursued in subsidium for payment of a Debt due by a
Rebel, whom they had suffered to escape out of Prison; after Decree satisfied
the Creditor, and took Assignation to the Debt and Bond; whereupon they pursued
the Earl of Finlater one of the Cautioners: It was Alleged, That the Town ex
delicto had come in the place of the principal Debtor; and payment made by
them did liberate the Cautioners, as if payment had been made by the Principal:
It was Replied, That the Town was only Liable to the Creditor, who might pass
from his Decree against the Town; and as he might have Assigned the Debt to
any other person, The Town as quilibet might have a Right from him.

The Lords Found, That the Town is not in the case of Cautioners, or
Expromissores ex pacto, but of Correi, being liable in Law ex delicto for, and
in place of the Principal. Vide 9. July 1667.

D. 148. (...) contra (...) 25. January 1668.
THE Lords upon debate amongst themselves, in the case concerning Viccarage;
Thought that Yards, for which Viccarage was in use to be paid, being turned
into Infield Land and Labored, The Vicar has no Right to the Teinds of Corns
growing thereupon, but the same belongs to the Parson: But they did not decide
this point, being only debated incidenter.

D. 149. Keith contra Grahame. eod. die.
IN the case of Keith of Craigie, contra Grahame of Creichie, The Lords, upon
probation in mutual Declarators anent a Moss, Found, That the Barony of Craigie
having pertained to Straiton of Lauristoun; and thereafter a part of the same
being Disponed to Keith and his predecessors; and another part to the Authors
and Predecessors of Grahame of Creichie, extending the said Two Parts to the
whole Barony; That both the said Parties had Interest and Right to the Moss in
Question, as to Community and Pasture, and casting Peats and Turff: But as to
the property of the Moss, they Thought that it should belong to that parcel
which was last disponed by the Common Author; seeing he disponed the other part
only cum moris and maresus in the Tenendas and Executive Clause; no mention of
the Moss being in the dispositive part: So that the property of the Moss
remained with himself annexed to the other parcel.

D. 150. Lady Traquair contra E. of Winton. 1 Feb. 1668.
THE Earl of Winton, having Right by Assignation to a Bond granted by the Lord
Sempil, did grant a Translation in favors of the Lady Traquair, and the Lady
Jean another of his Daughters, bearing warrandice from his own Deed; and
thereafter uplifted the Debt. The said Ladies pursued the Earl of Winton, as
representing his Grandfather for payment of the Sum; because the Earl his
Grandfather had uplifted it: The Defender alleged, that the Translation being
a Donation of the Fathers in favors of his Children, whereof he was Master,
was revocable; and that he had revocked the same, in so far as he had uplifted
the said Sum: It was Answered, That the said Translation was out of his hands,
having delivered the same to the Pursuers Mother for their use, and that he was
obliged to warrant the same.

The Lords thought, that the Translation being in the Lady Winton's hands being
in Law Eadem persona with the Earl, it was equivalent as if it had been in his
own hands; and that he might destroy or revock the same: But the Parties being
of quality and of near Relation, they did not decide this case; but recommended
to some of their number to endeavor an accommodation.

D. 151. (...) contra Scot and Muirhead her Husband. eod. die.
MR. Hary Scot's Daughter and her Husband Mr. John Muirhead for his Interest,
being pursued as representing the said Mr. Hary for a Debt due by him; The
pursuer insisted on the Title of behaving as Heir by Intromission with his,
Moveable Heirship: It was Alleged, That he could not have an Heirship, being
neither Prelate, Baron, nor Burgess: It was Answered, That he had acquired the
Land condescended upon to himself in Liferent, and to his Daughter in Fee;
which was equivalent as if she had succeeded to him in the said Lands.

The Lords Assoilied from that Title; In respect he had no Right in his Person,
in which she could have succeeded: Some were of the opinion, That if the Right
had born the ordinary Clauses, and a Power to dispone and Wadset,
notwitstanding the Fee in the person of the Daughter, that in Law he ought to
be considered and looked upon as a Baron; being in effect, and upon the matter
a Fiar. Hay. Clerk.

D. 152. Paplay contra The Magistrates of Edinburgh. eod. die.
JOhn Paplay pursued The Magistrates of Edinburgh for payment of a Sum of
Money; Because his Debtor Hendry Henderson had escaped out of their prison: It
was Alleged, After six years silence such a pursuit could not be sustained
against the Town; and that these who were Magistrates for the time ought to be
pursued and discussed in the first place.

The Lords sustained the Process, and Found, that the Incorporation being
persona quae non moritur; The present Magistrates may be pursued for payment of
the Debt out of the Patrimony of the Town; without citeing these Magistrates
for the time when the Debtor escaped; Reserving Action against the Delinquent,
who suffered the Rebel to escape.

D. 153. Parkman contra Allan. 4. Feb. 1668.
THE Lords Found, that in the case mentioned 15. January. 1668. until the Ship
should return to Sweden, it should be esteemed a Voyage, quoad the Effect and
point in question.

D. 154. Ker contra Ker. 5. February. 1668.
RObert Ker of Graden having Infeft his second Son Robert Ker in an Annualrent
out of his Lands of Graden and others; upon a Contract betwixt them, whereby
Graden for the Sum of 6000 Merks addebted by him to his Son. viz. 3000 Merks of
borrowed Money, and 3000 Merks for his Portion (accumulatory, and extending
together as said is) was obliged to Infeft the said Robert in 360 Merks, as the
Annualrent of the said Sum of 6000 Merks; beginning the first Terms payment of
the half of the said Annualrent being for borrowed Money, at the first Term
after the Contract: And of the other half being for his Patrimony, after his
Fathers decease: The said Robert the Son pursued a poinding of the Ground for
bygones, and in Time coming, the Terms of payment being past: Henry Ker the
Pursuers Eldest Brother, compeared and alleged, his Ground could not be
poinded, and that he was Infeft therein by a public Infeftment; at least that
his Infeftment was public by possession; and that the Pursuers Infeftment is
base. It was Replied. 1. That the said Hary his Infeftment of the Lands was
posterior to the Pursuers Infeftment, and granted not only by a Father to a Son
a conjunct person; who by the foresaid Right praecepit haereditatem; and though
he cannot be pursued upon the passive Title of Titulus Lucrativus dureing his
Fathers Lifetime; yet his Mouth is stoped, so that he cannot question any Deed
of his Father preceding his Right; and that he is in the same case, as if his
Infeftment had been given with the burden of prior Rights. It was further urged
by the Pursuer, That the Defender condescending upon his Entry and Initium
possessionis, he offered to prove that his Right was cled with possession
before that time. It was Duplyed, That his Infeftment could not be cled with
possession, but as to the Annualrent of the 3000 Merks of borrowed Money; so
that it is base as to the other 3000 Merks of his portion. It was Triplyed,
that the Infeftment was of an entire Annualrent of 360 Merks, as appears by the
Contract and Seasin: And that the Right being of an Annualrent, though payment
of the half of the same be Suspended, the Right being a joint and indivisible
Right could not be ex part private, and ex part public.

The Lords Found, That the Infeftment of Annualrent, if it should be proven to
be clothed with possession as to the half, is public in solidum; and admitted
the Reply of possession: But as to the second Reply, viz. That the Defender was
haeres per praeceptionem, and could not question any prior Right granted by his
Father. The Lords Found it of difficulty and consequence; and reserved the
Debate and Decision, until the end of the Process. Hamilton Clerk. Mr. Thomas
Lermont. alter Sinclair.

D. 155. Mr. George Johnston contra Sir Charles Erskine. February 6. 1668.
THE Lands of Knockhil being a part of the Lands of Hodam, did belong to
Richard Irvine, and were comprysed from Robert Irvin Great Grandchild to the
said Richard as charged to enter Heir to the said Richard, at the instance of
Mr. John Alexander Minister at Hodam: But no Infeftment nor Diligence against
the Superior having followed upon the said Comprysing, dureing the said Robert
his Life; The Lord Lion Sir Charles Erskine comprysed from Mr. James Alexander
Son to the said Mr. John, the Right of his Comprysing, and obtained Infeftment
upon the said Comprysing in August 1666. The said Robert's Two Sisters and his
Sisters Children, obtained themselves Infeft as Heirs to the said Richard their
Grandsire and Fore-grandsire in June 1666. And upon a Right from them, and
their Resignation, Mr. John Johnston being Infeft in October 1666. pursued for
Maills and Duties: The Lord Lion compeared and alleged, that he and the
Tennents ought to be Assoilied in this possessory Judgment, Because he and his
Authors had been in possession by virtue of the Comprysing at the instance of
Mr. John Alexander, by the space of seven years, whereupon Infeftment has
followed. It was Answered, That the Alledgance is not Relevant, unless he had
said that he was in possession seven years by virtue of a real Right, which
cannot be said, the Infeftment being late and of the date foresaid. It was
further Alleged by the Lord Lion, that he ought to be preferred, because he
was Infeft upon the said Comprysing at Mr. John Alexander's instance against
the said Robert, as charged to enter Heir to the said Richard; and his
Infeftment was anterior to the said Mr. George's Infeftment upon the
Resignation foresaid of the said Robert's Sister and Nephews retoured and
Infeft as Heirs to the said Richard. It was Replied, That no Infeftment or
Diligence having followed upon the said Comprysing against Robert in his
Lifetime; his Sisters and Nephews might have served themselves Heirs to the
said Richard who was last Infeft; and de facto was Infeft as Heir to the said
Richard, before any Infeftment upon Alexander's Comprysing; so that his Authors
Infeftment being prior to the Lord Lyon's Infeftment, the Pursuer ought to be
preferred: and as Robert if he had been served special Heir to his Grandsire,
if he had not been infeft, the next Heir might have been Infeft as Heir to
Richard; and an Infeftment upon a Right from them would have been preferable to
a Comprysing against Robert; so in this case Mr. George ought to be preferred;
the special charge against Robert being only equivalent to a special Service;
and no Infeftment having followed in the person of the said Robert or the
Compryser. It was Duplyed, That by the Act of Parliament Ja. 5. Chapter 106. Par.
7. It is declared that Execution against the Appearand Heir being charged to
enter Heir should be equivalent as if he were entered; which is the
Certification in the special Charge; and upon a Comprysing, if Robert had been
Infeft, Infeftment being taken quocunque tempore even after his decease, before
any other person had been Infeft upon a Comprysing or Right from a next Heir;
The Comprysing against Robert would have been preferable.

The Lords Found, That the benefit of a possessory Judgment is only competent
by virtue of a real Right; and that a Compryser cannot claim the same, without
an Infeftment or Charge against the Superior; and repelled the first Alledgance.

The Lords Found The second Alledgance Relevant, and preferred the Comprysing
in respect of the Infeftment thereupon, before the Infeftment upon the Right
from the Heirs of the said Richard.

D. 156. Halyburtoun contra Scott 17. December. 1671
A Provision granted by a Father to a Daughter for love and favor, being
quarrelled by a Creditor upon the Act of Parliament 1621. It was Answered, that
the Father the time of the granting of the said Right had an opulent Estate
beside, out of which the Creditor might have been satisfied: and the Lords
before Answer, having ordained that a trial should be taken of the Defuncts
Estate, and Witnesses being adduced to that purpose: It was Found, that the
Defense was not proven. It appears that the Defense was not relevant; and that
a Creditor is not holden to Debate whether his Debtor had a competent Estate
to satisfy his Debt aliunde; and that Debitors can grant noe Right without an
onerous cause, until the Debt be satisfied. Haystoun Clerk.

D. 157. Paton contra Stirling of Ardoch. 20. Dec. 1671.
SIR Henry Stirling of Ardoch did grant a Back-bond in savours of (...) Paton
his Sisters Son; whereby he obliged himself, that being satisfied of the Debts
due to him, he should denude himself of the Right of the Lands of Panholls
which pertained to the said Patons Father: Whereupon a pursuit being intented
against Ardoch's Sone, as Heir and Executor to his Father: It was Alleged,
that the Bond was granted in Lecto; and could not prejudge the Heir; and that
he had a Reduction depending upon that reason: And as Executor he could not be
liable, the Bond being anent the Right of Lands, and in effect a reversion
which is not prestable by Executors: It was Answered, that the said Bond tho on
deathbed may and ought to affect the Executry; seeing in Lecto the Defunct might
do any deed to burden his Executry: And his obligements at that time are
effectual as to his Executry: And Loco facti imprestabilis succedit interesse,
which is prestable by Executors: And if he had in liege poustie granted a
Disposition of Lands, and thereafter having Infeft ane other in the same; he
had become incapable to fulfill the obligements thereof, both his Heir and
Executor would be liable for damnage and interest; and there is the same reason
in this case, the Defunct as to burdening and disposeing of his Executry, being
in the same condition as if he were in liege poustie. The Lords before Answer
thought fit to try, if the Right was in trust, and if there had been a former
Back-bond, which the Pursuers Stepmother had destroyed as was informed, and
certain other circumstances. Gibson Clerk.

D. 158. Lord Maxwel contra Tennents of Duncow. 16. Feb. 1672
FOund that the Defense upon the Acts (...) against these, who, during the
dependence of Process, invade or wound the adverse party, who by the said Acts
tyne the cause and forfault their interest in question; being in effect penance
and founded upon delinquency, may be proven even before the Lords prout de
Jure, as to Order and Ratihabition: which was alleged could not be proven by
Witnesses to import the loss of Heretage.

D. 159. Commissaries of Edinburgh contra the Commissaries of Breichen 17. Feb.
1672.
THere being a competition betwixt the Commissars of Edinburgh and the
Commissars of Breichen, to which of them the confirmation of the Earl of
Panmures Testament should belong: the said Earl having taken a House and stayed
a whole Session in Edinburgh with his Lady Children and Family, in order to
the breeding of his Children and other occasiones; and having died there:

The Lords preferred the Commissars of Breichen, being Commissars of the place
where the said Earl had his principal dwelling and his interest and Estate.

D. 160. Lady Milnetoun contra Sir John Whytfurd. 20. Feb. 1672.
IN the Process at the instance of the Lady Milnetoun against Sir John
Whytfurd; the said Sir John, after the Process had depended long and all
endeavors to delay and prevent a Decision, having insisted upon a Reprobator,
upon that head, that the Ladies Witnesses were corrupted: It was Alleged and
urged by many arguments, that a reprobator upon the ground foresaid after
sentence in foro contradictorio, which is the great security of the People,
could not be proven but scripto vel Juramento: And accordingly the Lords Found
that it was only probable that way; and yet this day the Lords having again
ordained the cause to be Debated, as to the point foresaid anent the probation
of corruption after sentence obtained; they retracted their former
Interloquitor; and Found, that Reprobators upon the head foresaid are
receiveable; and probable prout de Jure, after Sentence.

These arguments were urged both at the Bar, and in the Debate among the
Lords, viz. That Sentences in foro are the great Security of the People; and if
these should be convelled, upon pretense of such personal exceptions against
Witnesses, there should not be a period of Pleas and Process.

2. Upon the consideration foresaid many exceptiones, which are admitted before
sentence even after Litiscontestation, are not recieved after sentence; v. g.
exceptiones noviter venientes ad notitiam; and ex instrumentis noviter repertis.

3. Prescription being the great security of the People, ne dominia sint
incerta, should be weakened; if after Decreets in foro founded upon 40. years
purchase; the same should be convelled upon probation by Witnesses; that the
Witnesses upon whose Testimony the Decreets proceeded were corrupted.

4. There should be progressus in infinitum if the Testimonies of Witnesses
should after sentence be reprobated by other Witnesses: and after sentence in
the Reprobator, the Testimony of the reprobatorie Witnesses should be
reprobated by others; and sic in infinitum.

5. Reprobatores were only in use, when the Designation of Witnesses, before
they declare, from their duelling and vocation and other circumstances was
questioned as false; which being obvious and easy to be known, It is not to
be presumed that the reprobatorie Witnesses will declare falsely, anent such
points which may be easily tried: But the Corruption of Witnesses being ane
occult and unwarrantable practice, it is not to be presumed that witnesses were
present and conscious: and the reprobatorie Witnesses may be suborned and
declare falsely impune.

6. Our Law is Jealous of Probation by Witnesses, they being for the most part
viles personae and yet habiles: and Writes cannot be taken away by such
probation; and Sentences in foro are scriptura publica and solennis.

7. By our practique dicta testium cannot be questioned post sententiam, tho by
the common Law and the Law of other Nations they may: and there is less reason
to admit personal exceptions contra testes to be proven by Witnesses:

8. As to the Incommodum, That a Door should be opened to Corruption, if the
Testimonies of Witnesses after Sentence, should not be questionable upon that
head; It is easily Answered: Seeing Witnesses may be pursued Criminallie and
severely Punished, if they may be discovered to have been Corruped or false.
Actores Cuninghame and Lermonth alteri Mckenie and Harper.

D. 161. Mr. James Reid contra the Lady Dundie. Feb. 21. 1672.
AN Infeftment granted to the Lady Dundie by her Husband, in recompense of a
former provision she had by her Contract of Marriage and which she had
renounced; was questioned by a Creditor who also was Infeft: upon that ground,
that the Ladies Right was base: and tho Rights granted to Wives upon their
Contract of Marriage, or after Marriage when they have no provision, or in
recompense of former provisiones; are sustained albeit base; because the
Husbands possession is the Wifes possession; yet the Right in question ought
not to be sustained upon that ground; In respect the Husband was not in natural
possession; the Lands being lyferented by his Mother; and by the Act of
Parliament, the possession whereupon base Rights are sustained is only to be
understood of natural possession: The Lords preferred the Lady, and repelled
the said Defense; upon these considerations, that Infeftments given to Wives in
the cases abovementioned are construed to be public and are not persumed to be
fraudulent: And Wives are not in the condition of other Creditors who may
perfect and make their Rights publict; whereas Wives can do nothing themselves;
and it is to be presumed that Wives are provided by their Husbands: So that
these who are to acquire Rights from them ought to enquire if their Wives be
Infeft; specially seeing, since the Act of Parliament 1617 anent registration of
seasings, they may easily know the same. Cuninghame etc. and for the Lady,
Lockhart and Lermonth.

D. 162. Lord Hattoun contra Paterson. 22. Feb. 1672.
THE Lords of Exchequer having given the Escheat of the Lord of Craigie
Carnagie, to Andrew Paterson: and the Gift being assigned to the Lord of
Aytoun by the said Andrew; a decree was thereupon obtained against the
Representatives of the Earl of Dundie, for his intromission with the Goods
belonging to the Rebel, whereupon Adjudication or Comprysing followed of the
said Earls Estate in Argyle, which was Disponed by the said Lord of Aytoun to
the Earl of Argyle: Thereafter my Lord Hattoun Thesaurer-depute having gotten a
second Gift; pursued the the said Andrew Paterson before the Exchequer upon
that ground, That by Acts of Exchequer it was ordained that no Gifts of Escheat
should pass without Back-bonds, and the Clerks are Discharged to give out the
same otherwise; and nevertheless viis and modis, the said Andrew had
surreptitiously gotten out the said Gift; and ought to give a Bond that being
satisfied of what he can pretend to be due to him by the Rebel, and of the
Expenses in passing the Gift; he should denude himself in favors of the second
Donator: And that it should be declared that the said Gift should be affected
with the said Bond, as if it had been given ab initio: And accordingly the
Exchequer did decern and declared: Whereupon the Thesaurer deput pursued a
Reduction of the said Apprysing against Aytoun and the Earl of Argyl, upon that
reason viz. That the said Gift, which is the ground thereof, is restricted and
qualified, and that the said Andrew Paterson is fully satisfied of what is due
to him.

It was Alleged for the Defenders, that the Gift was pure and simple without
any Back-bond; and therefore the Assigney finding it was such, and there being
no Back-bond upon record, was in bona fide to take a Right to the same: And the
said Decree of Exchequer being supervenient, and res inter alios acta, could
not be obtruded against a singular Successor, but the Pursuer may have action
against the Cedent: The Lords Repelled the Alledgnce, and Found that the
Decree and Back-bond do qualify the Gift both as to the Donator and to his
Assigney.

The said Decision appears very hard upon the grounds abovementioned, and
because Back-bonds are only personal obligements upon the Granters and do not
qualify Rights, being extra Corpus Juris: And his Majesty, in granting Gifts
of Escheat single or Liferent, is in no other case than other Superiors; as
Lords of Regality having Right to single Escheats, whose Gifts cannot be
qualified in prejudice of a singular Successor; but by provisions contained in
the Body of the Right: and the import of Back-bonds is only, that the Granters
being satisfied should be comptable for the superplus; but there is not thereby
any tie upon them not to dispose upon the same, being comptable for the price
or value of that which they dispone. Colingtoun Reporter: Having heard the
cause at the side Bar.

D. 163. Blair contra Blair. 23. Feb. 1672.
WItnesses being examined before Answer ex Officio: It was desired that seeing
ex facto oritur Jus, and the Lords being unclear to decide in Jure before the
point of fact were cleared by probation; and the point of Law and ground of
their Decision is to arise out of the probation; and therefore they may see and
debate upon the same: which was refused; seeing publicatio Testimoniorum by our
Law is allowed in no case but in Improbations ex quaestione falsi. Mckenie
alteri Lockhart etc.

D. 164. Neilson contra Elizabeth Arthur. Eod. die.
ELizabeth Arthur being charged upon a Bond granted by her self; suspended upon
that reason, that she was cled with a Husband the time of the granting thereof:
It was Answered, she had a peculium and Estate settled upon her by her Father in
these Terms, that her Husband should have no interest therein; but that it
should be manadged by advice of the Friends named by him for the behoof of her
and her Children: And that the Sum charged for was borrowed and employed for
her use.

The Lords Found the Letters orderly proceeded.

D. 165. Lady Lugton contra Hepburn and Creichton. 13. June. 1672.
A Decree being recovered before the Commissars of Edinburgh, at the instance
of the Lady Lugtoun, against her Grandchild (...) Hepburne Daughter to the
deceast Lord of Aderstoun; Modifying 400. Merks Yearly, for Aliment of the
said (...) Hepburne, by the space of 13. Years since her Birth: The Lords in a
Reduction and Suspension of the said Decree, modified the Sum thereincontained
being 3500 Merks to the Tenth part of the Sum of 30000 Merks; which was
mentioned in the said Decree, and considered by the Commissars as the Estate
belonging to the said Hepburne: So that in respect and upon supposition of the
same, they modified the said Aliment: And by reason the said Estate was
intricate and litigious, and possibly could not be recovered: The Lords
ordained the Pursuer to Assign the Tenth part of the said Estate; not exceeding
3000 Merks; which was done upon that consideration, that the Aliment was
modified in respect of the said interest: And if ex eventu it should be Found,
that it could not be recovered, and that she had no Estate; it were unjust,
that she should be Liable personally; her Grandmother being obliged, at least
presumed to entertain her ex pietate materna, if she had no Estate of her own.
Monro Clerk.

D. 166. Grott contra Sutherland. 14. June. 1672.
TWo Owners of a Ship being obliged by a Contract to Transport Goods to a
certain part: The Lords sustained Action against one of them in solidum, for
implement of the Obligements in the Contract being facti which is indivisible;
and they being socii and exercitores, so that the Fraught might have been paid
to one of them; and eadem ratione any one of them is Liable, and may be pursued
in solidum. Gibson Clerk.

D. 167. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Declarator of Right, which ought to be upon 21 Days,
being privileged by a Bill which is periculo petentis, should not be sustained
being execute upon a shorter time: And Ordained that the Writers to the Signet
should nor insert in Bills and Summonds a privilege dispenceing with the Law,
and the solennes induciae thereby introduced in favors of Defenders, under the
pain of 100 Merks for the first fault; and deprivation for the second; except
in cases which by the Law are privileged and named: The President, Advocate,
and others of their number, to meet and consider what these should be.

D. 168. Henderson contra Henderson. 20. June. 1672.
A Bond being produced to satisfy the production in an Improbation: The Lords
without further probation did Improve and Decern quoad the Defender; in respect
he refused to abide by the Truth of the same. Gibson Clerk.

D. 169. Gray of Haystoun contra Forbes and Lindsay. eod. die.
WIlliam Gray of Haystoun having granted Bond to Lindsay; and the said Lindsay
having Assigned the same to his Daughter; The said William Gray Suspended upon
a double poinding, against the said Assigney and a Creditor who had arrested:
It was Alleged for the Creditor, that the Assignation was made by a Father to
a Daughter, to defraud Creditors: It was Answered, That the Father by Contract
of Marriage was obliged, in case there should be no Heirs Male betwixt him and
the Assigneys Mother, to pay to the Heir or Bairn Female at her age of 14.
years. 4000. Merks; and until then to entertain her: And that the Assigney
being the sole Bairn of the Marriage, her Father had given the Assignation
foresaid for implement of the said obligement.

The Lords, have ng considered that the provision by the Contract of Marriage in
favors of the Daughters is only in case there should be no Heirs Male of the
Marriage, and that the Father should have other Heirs Male of his Body; so that
the Daughter should not succeed to the Estate; and that both the Father and
Mother are yet living, and of that age that it was not to be expected that the
Father would have other Heirs Male of his Body by an other Marriage; and his
Daughter was his Appearand Heir whatsomever: Therefore they Found, that the
case of the provision in favors of the Heirs Female did not exist, and
preferred the Creditor. Lock-heart and Bannerman for Lindsay. Bernie etc. for
Forbes. Gibson Cl.

D. 170. Fergusson contra (...) 21. June. 1672.
THE Lords Found, That a Party being within the Country, the time of the
citation upon the first Summonds, and some time thereafter; and goeing out of
the Country before the second Summonds, could not be cited at the Pear and
Shore of Leith upon the second Summonds; without a warrant in the said Summonds
to that effect.

D. 171. The Lord of Hermiestoun contra Cockburn. Eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That in the case, and in all time coming, where Witnesses are
adduced before Answer, they will only allow one Term: so that upon any
Diligence, they will admit no Witnesses, but those who are cited by the first
Diligence. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 172. Ramsay contra Carstairs. eod. die.
A Father, in his Contract of Marriage, being obliged to provide the Heir
Female of the Marriage, and to pay to her 20000 lib. at her age of 15 years:
and until then to entertain her: there being only one Child and Daughter of the
Marriage, she and her Husband pursued the Father and his Curators, he being
furious, to pay the said Sum. It was Answered, That the said Provision being
only payable to the Heir Female, the Pursuer neither had nor could pursue upon
that Quality and Interest dureing the Father's Life; specially seeing both he
and his Wife the Pursuers Mother, were living, and of that age, that they may
have Heirs Male of the Marriage, or other Daughters: And if they should have
Male Children, the Case and Condition of the Provision would deficere, and not
exist; and if they should have more Daughters, the Pursuer could not have Right
to the whole Sum acclaimed It was Replied, That the Father was in effect
civiliter mortuus; and the Pursuers would find Caution to refound, in either of
the said Cases.

The Lords Found the Defense relevant, and that such Provisions being settled
upon Heirs Female, by reason, and in case of exclusion of the Heirs Female of
the Marriage, when Lands are entailed to Heirs Male, and there are no Heirs
Male of the Marriage; The Term of Payment could not be understood to be during
the Marriage. Strathurd Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 173. William Sandilands contra The Earl of Hadington. Eod. die.
THomas the first Earl of Hadington having Disponed certain Lands, with
absolute warrandice, in anno 1610: The now Earl of Hadington was pursued as
representing his Great Grandfather, to warrant the said Lands from Astriction
to the Miln whereunto they were astricted, before the Earl of Hadington
Disponed the same: It was Alleged, That the Warrandice does not extend to the
case of Servitudes, such as Common Pasturage, Thirlage, and such like, which
are not latent; and may, and are presumed to be known by Purchassers, who
ought, and do ordinarily enquire and inform themselves concerning the condition
and burdens of the Lands they intend to purchase: specially in the case in
question, the multure being not exorbitant: It was Replied, That in Law where
praedia, either rustica, or urbana, ut optima maxima, are Disponed, they are
Disponed as Libera: And that the Lands in question are so Disponed, it is
evident, in respect the Warrandice is absolute, and they are Disponed cum
molendinis and multuris. It was Duplyed, That the Romans were in use to Dispone
either simply, or cum ista adjectione, praedia ut optima maxima, the import
whereof was, servitutem non deberi: But where Lands are Disponed simply, it is
construed and presumed in Law, that they are Disponed talia, and such as they
are; And with such accessories, either as to burden or advantage as tacit
veniunt; albeit these be not expressed; as Servitudes either Active or Passive:
and as to the Warrandice, it is of the ordinary Style without mention of
Servitudes; and it appears from the style and conception of the ordinary clause
of Warrandice, and the speciality thereinmentioned, viz. Wards, Non-entries,
Inhibitions, Apprysings, etc. That such Incumberances are only intended,
whereby the Right or Possession of Lands, or the Mails and Duties, or any part
of them are evicted: Whereas in the case of Astriction the Heretor does enjoy
his Lands and Duties of the same entire; and seeing his Corns must be grinded,
it is not a material prejudice, that they should be grinded rather at one Miln
than an other: and it appears by the Disposition, that it was not actum and
treated, that the said Lands should be Disponed ut optima maxima; the
Warrandice being in the ordinary terms without mention of Servitudes: And the
Clause cum molendinis is only in the Charter and Tenendas, and is ex stilo, and
imports only freedom of Thirlage as to the Disponer.

The Lords upon the foresaid Debate, And that the said Miln was a Miln of the
Barony of Torphichen, whereof the Lands astricted are a part; and that the same
were astricted before the Earl of Hadington acquired the same; they Found the
Defense Relevant and Assoilied.

D. 174. Creditors of Tarsappie contra Kilfanes. 23. July. 1673.
THE Lords upon Debate among themselves, were of the opinion, that a confident
person having got a Disposition from a Debtor; may at the Debitors desire
satisfy such Creditors as he thought fit, there being no Diligence done by
other Creditors: And as the Debtor might have done so himself, so the Trustee
may do: And that it is provided so by the Act of Parliament. 1621.

They Found that the Trustee, if he got any Ease by composition, should apply
the benefit thereof, for satisfaction of the other Creditors.

Item. That he cannot make voluntar payment in prejudice of a Creditor who has
done Diligence. Gibson Clerk.

D. 175. Kilbirny contra Cuninghame. 24. July. 1673.
IN an Adjudication upon the late Act of Parliament: The Lords modified the
price to be 18. years purchase, as to the certain and constant Rent; and 9.
years as to casual Rent of Coal. Gibson Clerk.

D. 176. Murray contra The Tutor of Stormount. 25. July. 1673.
BY a Contract of Wadset, the Wadsetter being liable to count for the
excrescence of the Duties more than should satisfy the Annualrent; The Lords,
in a Process for Maills and Duties, Found the Exception Relevant, that the
Pursuer was satisfied of the Sum upon the Wadset, by his Intromission, without
Declarator.

D. 177. Ker contra Ruthven. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That the Estate of the Earl of Bramford being settled upon
the Lord Forresters Son by Act of Parliament, he could not have it but cum sua
causa, and the burden of his Debts.

Item, They Found, That the Earl, having entertained his Grandchild the
Pursuer, was to be presumed to have done it ex pietate avita; the Earl being a
generous person, and having an opulent Estate; and his Grandchild having
nothing for the time, but the Debt in question, whereof the Annualrent was
provided and belonged to his Brother. Monro Clerk.

D. 178. Creditors of Hugh Sinclair contra Annandale. 26. July. 1673.
THE Lords Found, That a Compryser upon Debts anterior to the Debitor's
Rebellion, being Infeft before Year and Day, is preferable to the Donator of
the Liferent Escheat. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 179. Mr. John Bayn contra Caivie. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Tack being questioned as antedated to obviate an
Inhibition, was suspect being rased in the Date; So that the same seemed to be
vitiate, and an other year superinduced: And therefore was not a valide and
probative Writ in prejudice of the Inhibition: unless it could be adminiculate
by some Adminicle before the Inhibition. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 180. 2. June 1674.
THE Kings Majesty, having by two Letters to the Lords of Session, presented
Mr. David Balfour of Forret, and Mr. Thomas Murray both Advocates, to be Lords
of the Session: It was moved by one of the Lords, that seeing by the Law and
Acts of Parliament, these who are to be admitted to be Lords of Session, should
be tried; Therefore the Trial should be such as is intended by the Law; the
very Notion of Trial importing, at least a serious, if not a strict and exact
way of Trial.

This was moved, because the way of Trial had become of late so perfunctorious,
and dicis causa, that it was ridiculous, and in effect a Mock-Tryal: Some of
the Lords being appointed to examine these who were named by the King, and
after they had asked some trivial Questions, having made Report, That they
found them qualified; albeit it was not only known to the Examinators, but to
all the Lords, and notour to the World, that they were altogether Ignorant both
of Law and Practique; and did acknowledge it themselves, not dareing to expose
themselves to sit in the Outer house as Ordinaries; they prevailing with others
of the Lords to go out and officiate for them as Curats.

1. It was urged, that the Estates had considered the Interest of the Kingdom;
all Estates being concerned in that Judicatory, that the Lords should be
Persons of great Ability and Integrity, seeing their Lands and Fortunes and
greatest Interests, are the Subject of their Jurisdiction and Decisions: and
therefore it was provided by diverse Statutes and Acts of Parliament, they
should be qualified Persons, and found upon Trial to be such.

2. His Majesty's Letter required, that the Persons now named, should be
examined effectually.

3. By diverse Acts of Sederunt, and in special one upon the Kings Letter, for
the time, the way of Trial is prescribed, which is most exact.

4. The Oath of Admission, that the Lords should be faithful, has and ought to
have Influence upon all their Actions, as Lords of the Session, that they
should be done faithfully; and the Trial of Lords for the Reasons foresaid,
being an important Act of Duty, ought to be done faithfully and sincerely, and
cannot be done otherways without breach of Oath.

5. To pretend to obey the Law, and the Kings Letter (which requires an
effectual Trial) in a way which is superficiary, and evidently ineffectual; it
is a Cheat, and Circumventio Legis; which in others is hateful; but in Judges,
who are Antistites Juris, is abominable, and inconsistent with the Honor and
Integrity that should be expected from the Judicatory.

6. If there were no Trial at all, the Lords would be passive, if Persons not
qualified should be named; but being enjoined to try effectually, if they
receive them without an effectual trial, they are not free of blame; and are
accomptable to God, and his Majesty, and to the Parliament.

To all these Reasons, It was Answered, That at this time the way of Trial that
had been for a long time, should be continued at this time; and that the Motion
was upon some design.

The Mover did purge himself upon Oath, that he had no Design, but to do duty;
and did attest the President, that before this occasion they had spoken often
to that purpose: and did represent, that this is the fit time to put the Law
and Statutes in execution; The Persons named being Advocats, and Persons
presumed to be able to undergo the Trial; so that it cannot be thought that
there is any thing of Design against their Persons: That it cannot be denied,
but the late way is abusive; and antiquitas erroris, or abusus, cannot be
thought and pleaded to be custom: That in the Year 1629. the Lords by an Act of
Sederunt, had renewed and ratified all the former Statutes anent the Trial and
Admission of the Lords; and ordained them to be observed; That since that time
the Troubles interveened and continued long, so that Prescription cannot be
pretended for an abuse which had occasioned so great prejudice and clamor.

It was Carried, That the Examination should be as it has been of late: and
upon the Report of Gosford and Craigie, (appointed to examine them) they were
admitted: Gosford was of Opinion that there should be another way of Trial.

D. 181. Bogie contra The Executors of the Lady Oxenford. 4. June 1674.
THE Executors of the Lady Oxenford, being pursued at the instance of a
Legatar, did in the Count before the Auditor, give in an Article of Discharge,
viz. That the Expenses of a Process at the Executors instance should be
allowed: It was Answered, That if the Executor had not pursued that Process,
there was as much free Gear as would have satisfied the Legacy, and the
Executor had not prevailed: and if they had prevailed, the benefit would only
have accresced to the Executor, and not to the Legatars: and therefore penes
quem emolumentum, etc. and seeing they would have had no benefit, they should
have no loss by the event of that Process.

The Lords Found, That the Executors, having prosecuted a Process intented by
the Defunct, did their duty; and officium should not be damnosum: and therefore
the Charges of that Process should not be upon their own account, but should be
defrayed out of the Executry: but so, that where Executors have no benefit by
the Confirmation, but are either simple Executors, or universal Legators, as to
the superplus, particular Legacies being paid, if there be as much Executrie
as will satisfy such Expenses, and the Legacies; the Legacies ought to be
paid entirely, before the Executors have any benefit; but if the Executrie
will not amount to satisfy the Charges, and particular Legacies, the Charges
are to be satisfied, and the Legacies to be abated proportionally, and the
Executor is to have no benefit: but if he be a particular Legatar, he is to be
considered with the rest of the Legatars, and to share with them
proportionally. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk. Concluded cause.

D. 182. Helen Mure contra John Law. 6. June 1674.
A Relict being pursued, as Executor to her Husband, for a Debt: alleged, she
was only Executor Creditor for payment of 2400. merks, provided to her by
Contract of Marriage: It was Answered, That the Debt was satisfied, at least
compensed; in sua far as she was obliged by the same Contract to give to the
Defunct Goods and Gear, to the value of 2400. merks, which she declared she had
in penny and penny worth, and was worth the same; (which are the Words) and
obliged her self to put him in Possession thereof.

The Lords Found, That the Husband having lived only 9. years after the
Marriage; because of the presumption that he had been silent all the time, and
had not craved nor declared the said Sum to be resting; It was therefore to be
thought, that he had gotten the Goods, and that the Obligement was satisfied:
and yet they thought, that there being so much confidence betwixt Husband and
Wife, it were hard to put her to a full Probation: They therefore Ordained her
to give her Oath of Calumny, that she had satisfied the Obligement; and to
adduce some Probation and Adminicles to prove aliqualiter. Mr. Thomas Hay
Clerk. Concluded Cause. Mr. Rodger Hog alteri.

In the same cause, it being further alleged, that the Huband had paid for
his Wife as much Debt as would exhaust that which she had brought with her; and
so that she had not paid it effectually.

The Lords Found, That if she had put him in Possession of the Goods conform to
the Obligement; and that they were her own, at least that she had a Right or
colored Title thereto, that she was neither liable to warrant, either as to
the eviction of the Goods, or from any Debts; seeing the Husband takes his
hazard, and in Law is liable to the payment of the same.

Some of the Lords thought, That albeit the Husband be liable to the Creditors
of the Wife, whether she perform her part of the Contract of Marriage or not,
or whether he got any thing with her effectually or not; yet it were very fit
to consider the quality of the Debts of the Wife, alleged paid by the
Husband; for if they were such as the Wife could not but know, when she
contracted Goods of the value foresaid, and yet she did conceal them; it were a
Fraud and Cheat to oblige her self to be worth and give to her Husband, Goods
extending to 2400. merks, when she knew she was not worth a Groat, her Debts
being so great as to evict the same.

They considered, that in this case she did not dispone any Goods in
particular, but was obliged to a generality, viz. That she was worth Goods of
that value; and she cannot be said to be worth in Goods the said Sum, her Debt
being equivalent: Seeing Bona are understood debitis deductis.

D. 183. Act of Sederunt. eod. die.
THE Lords thought fit to make an Act of Sede^unt, and to intimate it to the
Advocats; to the purpose following, viz. That when an Alledgance is not
admitted, but a joint Probation is allowed before Answer; if there be any other
Alledgance found relevant, and admitted to either, Litiscontestation should be
understood to be made as to that Alledgance. 2. And likeways as to that effect,
that the Parties are concluded, and cannot be heard thereafter to propone any
other Alledgance. 3. The Terms being run as to Alledgance not discust, they are
concluded as to the Probation of it, as if the relevancy had been discust by a
formal Act of Litiscontestation, whereas it is remitted to be considered after
Probation, seeing often ex facto oritur Jus; and upon consideration of the
circumstances after Probation, the Lords have more clearness to determine
Relevancy.

D. (...) 184. contra Hepburn. 7. June 1674.
THE Apothecary Patrick Hepburn his Son, being pursued as Successor Titulo
Lucrativo, for a debt of his Fathers, upon that Ground, that tho the Right of
Lands granted to him by his Father, was before the Debt; yet it was revocable,
and under Reversion to the Father, upon a Rose noble, when he contracted the
Debt lybelled.

The Lords assoilied from the Passive Title foresaid; but reserved Reduction.
It appears that the case was not without difficulty; and that albeit future
Creditors in some case may reduce Anterior Rights ex capite fraudis; yet this
is difficult and unusual: and therefore it had been fit to determine that
Point, viz. Whether an appearand Heir, getting a Right revocable, and of the
nature foresaid, should be liable at the least in quantum; seeing if the Father
had discharged the reversion, he would have been Successor, in respect of the
Discharge after the Debt; and the Son was a Child, and the Father reserved and
retained Possession, and upon the Matter the Father's not redeeming was a
Discharge of the Reversion. Actor. (...) alteri Hog. Concluded Cause.

D. 185. Cuningham contra Lees. 9. June 1674.
THE Relict of James Deans, alleging that her Husband had violently torn her
Contract of Marriage; pursued his Heir to hear and see the Tenor of it proven,
and offered to prove casum amissionis, as said is.

The Lords, albeit there was no Adminicle in write, sustained the Summonds; in
respect there is a praesumptio Juris, that there are Contracts of Marriage
betwixt Persons of any consideration, so that the Marriage was an Adminicle:
and the effect being merely Civil and not Penal, they had no respect to that
Alledgance, that the Process was after the Husbands decease, and some 7 or 8
years after the deed.

D. 186. Paton contra Stirling. eod. die.
SIR Hary Stirling of Ardoch, on Deathbed, did by a Write acknowledge, that
the Right he had acquired from Doctor Paton of certain Lands, was under Trust,
and for surety of Sums, which he had paid for the Doctor; whereupon Doctor
Paton's Son intented a pursuit against Ardoch's Heir to declare the Trust, and
for Count and Reckoning: And before Answer, The Lords having ordained Witnesses
to be Examined for clearing the Trust; They Found, That by the Probation the
Trust did not appear, and that the said Declaration in Lecto could not prejudge
his Heir, unless there had been some further evidence, that the Declaration was
emitted by the Doctor of his own accord, and upon conviction and for Exonering
his Conscience; which did not appear by the Probation. Lockheart and Falconer.
alteri Long formacus and Cuninghame. Gibson Clerk. Concluded Cause.

D. 187. Lady Spencerfield contra Hamilton. 10. June 1674.
IN the case of the Lady Spencerfield contra Robert Hamilton of Kilbrakmount,
The Lords Found, that the Alledgeance, viz. That the Defender could not be
Liable as Intrometter, because there was a Gift given of the Defuncts Escheat
being Rebel, is not Relevant; unless the Gift were either declared, or were to
the Defender himself, or that he had Right from the Donator: For in the first
case, he is in condition parallel with an Intrometter, in the case of an
Executor confirmed; and cannot be said to be intrometter with the Goods of a
Defunct, and bona vacantia, the Right of the same being in a living person per
aditionem, and by confirmation; and a third person Intrometting where there is
no Declarator, who has not the Gift himself, nor a Right from the Donator, is
not in a better case than an Executor decerned: And in the case of a Donator
Intrometting, or the intromission of any other having Right from him, there is
the pretense and color of a Right in the person of the Intrometter, which is
sufficient to purge vicious Intromission.

They Found in the same case, that a person entering to the possession of the
Defuncts House, by warrant of the Lords: Their possession of the Goods in the
House does not infer Intromission, unless they make use of such Goods as usu
consumuntur, or dispose of such Goods, as are not of that nature; as Beds,
Tables, and such like. Robert Hamilton Clerk.

D. 188. Freeholders of Linlithgow contra The Commissioners to the Parliament.
12. June 1674.
IN a Suspension at the instance of the Freeholders of Linlithgow-shire,
against their Commissioners to the Parliament. The Lords Found, that if the
Prorogationes and Recesses of Parliament be for a considerable time, so that
the Commissioners do or may go home, the Commissioners should not have their
Fies, or Charges dureing the same. 2. That if the prorogation be for a short
time, and the Commissioners having their Residence at a little distance, in
Edinburgh, or Linlithgow shire, do or may go home; they ought not to have Fees
dureing that time. 3. If there be Articles sitting, dureing that time, and they
do not go home, tho they be not upon the Articles; they should have their Fees:
Because they are concerned to know, and inform themselves, what is in Agitation
in the Articles. Newbyth Reporter. Monro Clerk.

D. 189. Bailly Boid contra Store. November 7. 1674.
THE Lords sustained a Discharge granted by a Master to his Tennent upon
payment of his Duty, tho it was neither Holograph, nor Subscribed before
Witnesses; but pretended to be subscribed by the Granter: Which the Lords did
in respect of the Custom; and that Masters and Tennents are in use to give and
take Discharges without Witnesses. And that in the case of Writes, Letters, and
Bills betwixt Merchants, the Lords are in use to sustain them, tho they want
Witnesses; and there is the same, if not more reason in the case of Tennents;
by reason of the great and exuberant confidence betwixt them and their Masters.
Some of the Lords thought it hard to recede from the Law, there being no
limitation or exception in behalf of Tennents; and ubi Lex non distinguit nec
nos: And that there is a great disparity betwixt Merchants and Tennents,
Compts, Letters, and Bills of Exchange, and other Writs of that nature; being
secret Transactions betwixt Merchants and their correspondents; whereunto
Witnesses and other persons, neither are in use to be, nor is fit they should
be privy: Whereas Discharges by Masters to Tennents are in use to be, and there
is no inconveniency that they should be subscribed before Witnesses; and there
is no difficulty to get Witnesses to them; and if they want Witnesses, and be
not Holograph, Masters may be prejudged; It being easy to imitate and forge a
single subscription, and there being no means of improbation of the same.

D. 190. The Town of Innerness contra Forbes of Colloden, and Robertson of
Inches and others. eod. die.
THis case having been Agitated, not without some heat, amongst the Lords
themselves; I thought fit to give an account thereof, at greater length, than I
have used in other Cases and Decisions.

The Town of Inverness having Charged the said (...) Robertson of Inches, and
Colloden and other Feuars, who hold the Forest of Drakies, and other Lands and
Milns, and Fishings of the said Burgh; for payment of their proportions of a
Stent imposed upon them, for the use of the Town. And they having Suspended,
upon that reason, that the said Stent was unequal as to their proportions, and
that the Town had not an Arbitrary Power to impose Stents upon their
Neighbors, and Feuars, unless there were an unavoidable, at least a pressing
necessity and occasion relateing to the good and interest of the Burgh; and in
that case, the Neighbors and Feuars were to be Liable only in subsidium; In so
far as the Patrimony of the Town and Common Good should be short, and not
extend to defray the same.

The Lords (Sir John Gilmour being President for the time) did by their Decree
of Suspension, Find the Letters orderly proceeded: But withal, did regulate
the way of stenting to be according to the method and Rules set down by the
Lords as to the future, which are contained in the said Decree, and acquiesced
to by the Suspenders; the Decree bearing to be of consent; and containing only
a Protestation, that the Suspenders should not be Liable to any Stent, for
maintaining and prosecuting Pleas against themselves.

Thereafter, the Feuars being charged upon another Stent, did Suspend upon that
reason only, that the Regulation and Method appointed by the Lords had not been
observed: and did intent a Declarator, that they should not be Liable to
Stents, but such as should be imposed, in the way and according to the method
foresaid.

Tho there was no other reason in the said Suspension, nor conclusion in the
said Declarator, but as is immediately related; yet, another reason was
thereafter insisted upon, both in the Suspension and Declarator; and they did
plead, that they were exempted, and ought not to be Liable to any Stent upon
any account or method whatsomever; by reason, that their Lands, and in special
the Forest of Drakies, were Feued to them for a Reddendo and Feu-duty
contained in their Infeftments pro omni alio onere.

The Case not being fully debated at the Bar, Some of the Lords conceiving,
that the Lands of Drakies were not a part of the Original and Ancient Patrimony
of the Town, but that the same had been acquired by the Town; and thereafter
had been Feued out by them in the Terms foresaid for payment of a Feu-duty pro
omni alio onere; they were of the opinion, that they could not be Liable to a
Servitude, unless the same had been constitute, either by their Infeftments or
otherwise; But specially in this case, they being free by their Infeftment,
and express Clause therein, of all burden or Servitude, but their Feu-duty: And
that they could be in no other case, than if the Town of Edinburgh should Feu
any of the Lands lately acquired by them, for payment of a Duty pro omni alio
onere: And yet the plurality of the Lords were of the opinion, that if the Town
could prove and make appear, that they have been in use, by the space of 40
years or above, to Stent their Feuars for defraying their Affairs, and Burdens,
and Works of the Town, that they ought to be Liable, notwithstanding of the
said Clause pro omni alio onere. And accordingly before Answer a Term is
Assigned, for proving the Towns Possession.

In the interim, The most Eminent of the Advocates, and in special such as were
for the Town; being discharged pleading, upon occasion of the Appeals; this
case came in Agitation the last Session; and some of the Lords, even these that
were of the opinion formerly that the Feuars should not be Liable to be
stented, upon the ground and mistake foresaid that the said Lands of Drakes was
not a part of the Ancient Patrimony of the Town; they were convinced, upon the
production of the Towns Evidents, that the said Lands were a part of the
Ancient Patrimony of the Town, being Incorporate and contained in their
Infeftments with the Burgh it self, bearing one individual holding and
Reddendo: And therefore conceiving, that est Judicis supplere quae desunt
Advocatis in Jure, and which arises upon production of the Papers; they did
argue, that the Feuars ought to be Liable for these Reasons.

1: That there is a difference betwixt the Original Patrimony of the Town,
which is profectitious, and flows from the Bounty of Princes, and is given to
Burghs Royal, for sustaining and defraying their necessary burdens and
occasions; and betwixt that, which is adventitious, and acquired by Burghs
themselves, by their own Moyen and Means.

As to the first, The same being given eo intuitu, and to the end, that it
should be a Stock for doing and defraying the Common Affairs and burdens, and
Charges of the Town, it cannot be given away, nor Feued, but cum sua causa; and
so that they should be Liable to Stents and Impositions upon occasions
requireing the same: Whereas the other is acquired by Towns as quilibet, and
the Feuars ought to be considered as quilibet, and as in the case of other
Feuars.

2. Upon the consideration foresaid, it is statute by diverse Acts of
Parliament, and in special by the 36. Act. K. Ja. 4. Parl. 3. And the 181. Act.
K. Ja. 6. Parl. 13. That the Common Good of Burrows should be observed and
kept to the common profit of the Town: And the said Act of K. Ja. 4th.
bears, That Lands, Fishings, Milns, and others belonging to the Burrows, should
not be set but for 3. Years allenarly; and if any be set otherways that they be
of none avail: And as this is Law, so it is just, otherwise, those who have
Tenements within Burgh, and who upon occasions are Liable to be Stented, should
be unjustly and heavily prejudged, if the Lands and Fishings which, being in
the Towns hands, would be liable in the first place to such Burdens, may be
given away; so that the whole burden should be rolled over upon them.

3. The foresaid pretense, That the Feuars were Liable only to the Feu-duty pro
omni alio onere; was Answered, viz. That omne aliud onus was to be understood,
of any other ordinar duty payable to the Town as Superiors; but does not exempt
the Feuars from these munera extraordinaria Patrimonialia, for the necessar use
and preservation of the Town: As in the case of Lands disponed to be holden of
the Disponer, for payment of a Blensh or other Duty pro omni alio onere, The
Clause foresaid will not exempt the Vasal from Taxations, and the Superiors
relief of the same against his Vasal:

4. It appears by a Ratification of Queen Mary, produced for the Town, That the
Town of Innerness had made diverse Acts concerning the setting the Lands,
Milns, and Fishings, which are ratified by the said Queen; And which, if they
were observed, would oblige the Feuars to be liable to to be Stented.

The said Lords, Who were of the said opinion, thought, That upon the Grounds
and Production foresaid, the Feuars of Drakies ought to be liable without any
farther probation, to Stents imposed for the use and interest of the Town; the
same being imposed necessarly and equally according to the method
abovementioned: And yet the Town having adduced probation by production of the
Records out of their Books and Witnesses; they considered and thought, that the
possession of the Town, by imposing their Stents by the space of 40. years, was
proven: In respect, it appeared by the Extracts out of their Books, That from
the year 1624. until 1664. they have been in use to impose Stents in case of
Exigency, for the private use and concerns of the Town; Notwithstanding of what
was alleged at the Bar, against the said probation, and in special, that the
Books themselves ought to be produced; whereas there was nothing produced but
Extracts of Acts, and that the probation, that the Town has been in use to
Stent for repairing their Bridge, did not quadrate to the case and point in
question; seeing it was to be proven that Stents were imposed for the private
use and concerns of the Town, and the Bridge and repairing of the same is of
public concern and interest, relating not only to the good of the Town, but of
the whole Shire: And the Record, anent Stent in relation to the Bridge being
out of the way, and not considered as a probation; It was not proven, that the
Town had been in Possession 40. Years.

Nevertheless, The plurality of the Lords did Find the Alledgeance foresaid of
Possession, by the time foresaid, not proven; upon that ground that the Bridge
was not to be considered as the proper concern of the Town: And did suspend and
declare in favors of Inches and other Feuars: Diverse of the said Lords
dissenting upon the Grounds foresaid; and that it appears to them, that the
Feuars, upon the account of their Lands, were Liable to be Stented, being the
ancient and proper Burgal Patrimony of the Town: And albeit a continued tract
of Possession by the space of 40. years, which hardly is to be expected in
servitutibus, or impositions that are discontinue, could not be made out, as
they conceive it was; yet the Feuars having homologate and consented, and
submitted to the said Impositions without repineing, until after the Year 1664.
That they did not so much question the Town's Right to impose upon them the
said Stents, as the exorbitancy, and frequency, and inequality of the same as
to their proportions; they could not be heard now to plead and pretend
exemption from the said Stents.

The Lords having Found as said is, That the Lands of Drakies were not liable
to the said Stents: The said (...) Roberson of Inches in behalf of himself and
some other Feuars, having only appeared in the debate, and Forbes of Colloden,
who thought himself concluded by the above-written Decree of Suspension, and
has consented to the same; did notwithstanding desire, that he might have the
benefit of the said Interloquitor, and that the parcel of Land, which he had
in the Forest of Drakies, might also be declared free of Stents; seeing there
was eadem ratio, and so there ought to be idem Jus, as to him and the said
other Feuars.

It was Answered for the Town of Innerness, That he could not be heard, in
respect of the said Decree of Suspension in foro, and of his express consent
therein contained. Whereunto it being Replied, that the consent was only as to
the individual Stent thereinquestioned, and did not conclude him as to other
Stents; and that notwithstanding thereof, it being now Found, that the Forest
of Drakies, whereof his was a part, was free; the immunity foresaid could not
be denied to him. It was Answered, and the said dissenting Lords were of the
opinion, that a Decree in foro did bind him whatever others could pretend: And
it was evident by the said Decree, that it was then the Lords meaning (Sir
John Gilmour a person of great Parts and Integrity being then President) that
all the said Lands of the Forest of Drakies should be liable in all time
coming; and his consent is most positive and express to the Regulation of
Stenting as to the future: And the said Consent being premitted to the whole
decerniture of the said Decree, does influence and affect all the Articles and
Heads of the same, unless it had been limited and special as to an or more, and
not all: And it was so far from being limited to the Stent then in question,
that there is a Protestation subjoined to the decerniture in these Terms, That
Colloden and the Suspenders do protest, that they should not be liable to such
Stents as should be imposed, for maintaining the Plea against themselves; And
exceptio and protestatio firmat Regulam and Sententiam in non exceptis, and
iis, contra quae non emissa est protestatio.

The Lords notwithstanding Found, That Colloden should be free of Stents, as to
such Parcels as he had of the Lands of Drakies.

Thereafter the Town of Innerness did allege, that the Suspenders ought to be
liable as to the Milns and Fishings, that they held in Feu of the Town, seeing
they are undoubtedly the ancient Patrimony of the Town: and they offer them to
prove, that they have been in use, past memory, to stent the same with the
Burgal Lands when occasion required, not only for Taxations, imposed by
Parliament, but for the private use of the Town.

It was Answered, That the said Alledgance was not now competent; seeing the
Debate, whereupon the Interloquitor proceeded, was concerning the Suspenders
Feues, which they hold of the Town, which comprehend both Lands, Milns, and
Fishings: and there is no reason of difference, why the Milns and Fishings
should be in an other case than the Lands.

It was Answered for the Town, That in all the Debate, there had been no
mention of Milns and Fishings; and they were content to make Faith, that they
did not understand the Debate to be concerning the Milns and Fishings, but only
the Lands of Drakies; And if they had thought that they had been concerned to
prove their Possession as to the Milns and Fishings there was that speciality
that they might have proven more clearly their Possession, as to the Milns and
Fishings, than as to the Lands: and now they are able to prove the same.

Some of the Lords thought, That the Question being of that Importance to an
Incorporation, and they wanting the Assistance of their most able Advocats,
upon the occasion abovementioned; and the exception being undoubtedly relevant
to infer their Right, and the conclusion of their Declarator, as to the Milns
and Fishings, that they should be liable to be stented if it were proven; It
were hard, that their Right should be taken from them upon a quirck, and
pretense of Omission, being upon a mistake, as said is. In end, the Plurality
of the Lords did Declare, by their Interloquitor, That if in November the Town
should be able to make appear by ancient Records, that they had been in
Possession of stenting the Milns and Fishings, with the Tenements of the Town,
when Impositions and Stents were laid on by the Town only (and not by the
Parliament) for their private use, that the same should be liable as other
Burgal Lands.

D. 191. Hamilton contra the Earl of Kinghorn. 11. November 1674.
JAmes Mauld of Melgum, having assigned to James Hamilton two Bonds, and he
having intimate his Assignation to the E. of Kinghorn granter of the same, did
thereafter write to the said Earl, showing him that he had use for the Sums
contained in the said Bonds; and that he desired a course might be taken to pay
the same: And in Answer to his Letter, the said Earl did Write and subscribe a
Postscript upon a Letter written to him by the said James Mauld, to that
purpose, that the said James Mauld had assured him, that he had made the
Assignation foresaid upon assurance that my Lord should not be troubled to pay
the said Debt, and that he was about to take a course to that effect: but that
notwithstanding, if he must be his Debtor, he should take a course to pay the
Annualrent; but as for the Principal Sum, it was not foreseen by him, that he
should be put to pay it at that time, and he desired forbearance. And
thereafter being charged, the said Earl suspended upon that reason, that the
said Bonds were granted by him to Melgum for the price of Lands Disponed by him
to the Earl; and by a Back-bond of the date of the said Bands, Melgum was
obliged to Warrant the Rental of the said Lands for two years: and quatenus the
Tennents should be short in payment of their duties, the time forsaid, he
should pay wherein they should be wanting, and that the Earl might retain in the
first end of the foresaid Sums: And that the said Earl had got a Decree
against the Tennents of the said Lands, for payment of the Sums therein
contained; and therefore that he had ground of retention and compensation upon
the foresaid Bond granted by Melgum effeirand to the Sums restand by the said
Tennents. Whereunto It was Answered, that tho Compensation competent against
the Cedent is competent against the Assigney, yet where there is not only an
Assignation which is the deed of the Cedent; but a delegation, and the Debtor
does accept and consent and becomes Debtor, as in this case, as appears be the
foresaid Letter written to the charger; compensation is not receivable. It was
Replied for the Suspender, that the Letter is not positive that the Suspender
should become Debtor, but only in these terms if he must be Debtor to the
charger; and that upon the matter he is not Debtor to him, in so far as he has
a ground of compensation. Whereunto It was Answered, That these Words, If he
should be Debtor are to be understood only, in Relation to the Complement and
Assurance contained in Melgum's Letter, viz. If he should not take course
himself with the said Debt; and that the Letter is positive, that the Earl
should pay the Annualrent, and also the Principal Sum, which he could not do
presently: and if the Earl had intended to compense, he should have told the
Charger, that he had a Ground of Compensation, in which the Charger would have
had recourse against the Cedent, and would not have relied upon the Suspenders
Letter.

The Lords Found the Letters orderly proceeded, in respect of the said Answer
and Letter.

D. 192. Gordon contra Pitsligo. 12. November. 1674.
MR. Thomas Gordon and his Father pursued the Lord Pitsligo, upon a Promise to
enter them to certain Lands, which they had acquired, holden of him.

It was Alleged, That if there was any such Promise, it was to be performed in
write, by a Charter to be granted by the Defender; and there is locus
Poenitentiae until the Charter be subscribed. It was Answered, That the Promise
was referred to the Defenders Oath: and albeit there is locus poenitentiae in
Synalagmis, and Contracts; yet where there is a positive Promise to give or do
any thing, the same being verified, ought to be fulfilled; and there is no
locus poenitentiae upon pretense that it should be fulfilled in Write.

The Lords repelled the Alledgance, in respect of the Answer foresaid. Monro
Clerk. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 193. Paton contra Ardoch. eod. die.
WIlliam Paton Son to the deceast Dr. Paton, pursued

Stirling, and Sir Harie Stirling of Ardoch, as representing his Father, for
Implement of a Write, granted by his Father on Deathbed; whereby he was
obliged to denude himself of the Lands of Panholls, being satisfied of such
Sums of Money as should be found to be due to him by the said William and his
Father, after Count and Reckoning.

It was Alleged for the Defender, That his Father had acquired a Right to the
said Lands, from the said Dr. Paton, being his Brother in Law, having married
the said Sir Henrie's Sister, upon a Back-bond, containing a Reversion in
favors of the said William, the said Sir Harie's Nevoy: and that thereafter
the said William being Major, had discharged the Reversion; so that the
Defunct, and now his Heir has an irredeemable Right to the said Lands: and that
the same pretended Deed on Deathbed, could not take away the same.

It was Replied, That the Defunct on Deathbed did, and might exoner his
Conscience, by a Declaration, that the Discharge of the Reversion was on Trust:
And there were other Adminicles and Presumptions concurring, to evince that it
was a Trust; viz. The near Relation of the Parties; the Defunct being the
Pursuers Uncle, and that the Bonds granted by the Doctor, either to the Defunct
himself, or to other Persons from whom Ardoch had Right, were not retired;
which would have been, if the Right in Ardoch's Person had not been on Trust:
It being against Reason, that Ardoch should have both Right to the Lands, and
to the Debts, for which the said Right was granted. It was Duplyed, That the
Defender being an Infant, neither does, nor is obliged to know what was betwixt
his Father and the Pursuer, unless there were a Write to clear the same; and
his irredeemable Right by the Discharge of the Reversion, cannot be taken away
by Presumptions: and that a Write on Deathbed, upon what pretense soever,
cannot prejudge the Heir: And it cannot be thought, but that if a Trust had
been intended, the Pursuer would have taken a Back-bond as he had done
formerly; and the Defenders Father might have given a Discharge of the said
Bonds as to personal Execution.

The Lords Found, That the Trust was not proven: and that the Declaration on
Deathbed could not prejudge the Heir. Thereafter it was urged for the Pursuer,
That at least he should have Action against the Defenders as Executors, for
affecting the moveable Estate belonging to the Defunct, and in Implement of the
said Write, at least in subsidium, as to Damnage and Interest.

Upon a Debate amongst the Lords themselves, It was urged, That the said Writ,
being in effect a Reversion, was only prestable by the Heir, who only could
denude himself of the Right of the said Lands: And persons on Deathbed, ipso
momento that they become Sick, they lose their legitima potestas, either as to
prejudging their Heirs, or their Bairns and Relicts: And they cannot dispose of
their Deads Part, but by a Nomination, or Legacy, and a Reversion could not be
given, by way of Legacy.

The Lords Found, That the said Write could not affect the Executry. Gibson
Clerk.

D. 194. The Executors of the late Bishop of Edinburgh contra the present
Bishop. eod. die.
THE Executors of the late Bishop of Edinburgh, Pursued the Commissars and
Procurator Fiscal, and the now Bishop of Edinburgh for the Quots of Testaments,
that were either confirmed, or had fallen by the decease of Defunct persons;
and were confirmable before the said late Bishops Death, and fell under his
Executry: And also for the Quots of all Testaments confirmed, or confirmable
for the half year, after the said Bishops decease, and falling under the Ann.

The Lords Found, That the Quots of Testaments, that were not confirmed, did
neither fall under the Bishops Executry, nor the Ann; But only the Quots of
such Testaments as were confirmed, either in the Bishops Lifetime, or during
the Ann: Upon these Grounds, which were debated at the Bar, but more at length
among the Lords themselves; viz. 1. The Quots of Testaments do not belong to
Bishops, as having a share and interest in the Moveable Estates of Defunct
Persons after their decease; which are only divided betwixt their Executors,
and Bairns, and Relict; but the said Quots, are in effect Sentence, or
Confirmation Silver, which is given to the Bishops upon that account and
consideration, That by their Sentence or Confirmation (which is instar
Sententiae being actus voluntariae jurisdictionis) The Defuncts Estate is
secured to be forthcoming to all persons concerned, both Creditors, Relict,
Bairns and others: And therefore, until that be done, there is no Quot, nor
confirmation-silver due. 2. The Lords of Session had, by Act of Parliament, as
a part of their Sallary, Sentence-Silver, viz. Twelve pennies of the pound,
until the same was taken from them by Act of Parliament their Sallary being
enlarged, and settled upon them otherwise: And, if during the time, the said
Lords had their Sentence Silver, any of them had deceased before Sentence, tho
the Process had been commenced and advanced beyond Litiscontestation; it cannot
be said, that the Executors, of a Lord deceasing before the Sentence, could
claim any part of the Sentence Money, where the Sentence is pronounced after
his decease. 3. By the 28. Act of his Majesty's Parl. 1661. the Quots of
Testaments are discharged; and yet the Bishops being restored to the Right of
Quots, the same will be due for any Testament confirmed thereafter,
notwithstanding of the said Act of Parliament; whereas, if Quots were due from
the time they became confirmable, they could not be claimed, tho confirmed,
since the Bishops were restored as said is, to their Quots, as being discharged
by the said Act of Parliament.

The Lords did also Find, That the Bishops Relict and nearest of Kin had Right
to an Ann, even before the late Act of Parliament (being the 13. Act of the 3.
Session of His Majesty's second Parliament, concerning the Ann, due to the
Executors of Bishops and Ministers) In respect by a Letter of His Majesty's
Grandfather in anno 1613. and Act of the Bishops thereupon, an Ann was Found
to be due to the nearest of Kin of Bishops: But in regard by the said Letter
and Custom, before the said late Act of Parliament, the Ann in relation to
Bishops, was, if the Bishop deceased before Michaelmass, after the Month of
(...) his Executors had the half of that year, as belonging to the Bishops
Incumbent Jure proprio; and the half of the next year as Ann; the half of the
Rent of his Benefice for the half year preceding Michaelmass, the other half
being due to him as Incumbent, and fallen under his Executry: Whereas by the
late Act, the said Ann is so ordered, that the Bishop or Minister surviveing
White-sunday, the half of that year does belong to him and his Executors upon
account of his Incumbency; and the other half for the Ann: And the Incumbent
surviving Michaelmass, he is to have the whole Year as Incumbent, and the half
of the next year is to be Ann: Therefore the Lords Found, That the late Bishop
having deceased before Michaelmass, and before the said late Act of Parliament,
the Ann should be as it was formerly.

In the same Process, It was debated among the Lords more fully than at the
Bar, whether the Quots of Testaments should fall under the Ann? And it was
urged by some, that the Quots of Testaments are but casual Obventions; and that
they are due as said is, upon the account foresaid. viz. That Testaments are
confirmed by the Bishop, or his Officials, and ratione operae, and as
Sentence-Silver; so that they cannot be due, but to the present Incumbent, who
does a duty; and that Compositions for entering of Vasals and Liferent Escheats
and Non-entrys, and such like casualities do not fall under Ann. Whereunto It
was Answered, That by the Kings Letter, by the Act of Parliament, and by the
Canon Law, the half of the Rent of the Benefice, Stipend, and Living fall under
the Ann; and the Quots of Testaments are a considerable part of the Bishops
Rent, especially in Edinburgh; and undoubtedly is a part of his Living and
Benefice: And the Rent of Milns which is casual, and depends, where there is no
astriction, upon the arbitrary will of Parties to come, or not to come to the
same, and is likewayes due ratione operae; does fall under Ann: As also the
Rent of Fishings, and such like which are casual: And there is a great
difference betwixt Quots, which is an ordinary yearly Rent, and cannot fail so,
but there will be still Testaments confirmed; and the casualities of
Superiority as Liferents etc. which are so uncertain; as that it cannot be
said, they are the Bishops Living: And the Argument, that Quots are due ratione
operae, and by reason of actual confirmation, which cannot be due by the
Executors or Relict, is of no weight; seeing the other constant Rent of Stipends
and Benefices is due ratione operae, and because the Bishop or Minister
serves, which is not prestable by Executors or Relicts.

The Lords, notwithstanding, inclined to Find, That the Quots do not fall under
the Ann: but upon the motion of some of their Number, that the Interloquitor,
being to be a preparative, should be further considered, they thought fit not
to proceed to the Voting. Gibson Clerk. Forret Reporter.

D. 195. Craig contra Edger. 20. November. 1674.
THE Lords Found, That a Bond bearing Annualrent, being Assigned by a Woman, to
her former Husband by her Contract of Marriage; and the Assignation not being
intimate, a Retrocession did settle again the Right of the said Bond in the
Person of the Wife; Quia unumquodque dissolvitur, eo modo quo contrahitur: And
the said Bond being thereafter assigned in favors of the second Husband, he
and his Executors had Right to the same; and that it was not in bonis of the
first Husband, though the Retrocession was not intimate until after his
decease. Lord Glendoick Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 196. Thoirs contra Tolquhon. eod. die.
MR. David Thoirs, in an Improbation at his Instance, against Tolquhon, of a
Bond, did crave Certification, because the Principal was not produced, but an
Extract out of the Commissars Books of Aberdeen.

The Lords, upon a Report, having debated amongst themselves, what was fit to
be done in the said Case, seeing it appeared that the said Pursuit was
intented, not of design to question the Bond, upon evident and probable Grounds
of Falsehood, but only to have it produced; and it appeared by many
Presumptions, that the Bond was a true Deed, and never questioned by the
granter ex capite falsi, tho he had suspended upon other Reasons; And there had
been much diligence by Decreets, Horning and Comprysing upon the same; and yet
the Bond being of an ancient Date, beyond 40 years, there was no person living
that could prove the Tenor thereof, and declare that they knew the same to be a
true Deed: And on the other part, the Lords could not refuse to grant
Certification, seeing an Extract does not satisfy in an Improbation, where the
Principal was not produced.

It was moved by some of the Lords, That if the Pursuit was not intented
within the years of Prescription, that it should not be sustained; seeing albeit
causa falsi does not prescrive, where the Paper or Subject craved to be
improven is produced; and the Pursuer offers to improve and make it appear that
the same is false; yet when the Improbation is only to try the condition of the
Defenders Right, and in order to a Certification, if the Principal cannot be
exhibit, it is not properly causa falsi: And the effect of the Certification is
only that the Write for not production should be holden as false praesumptive,
and fictione Juris: And upon the matter it is but a Reduction for not
Production.

The said Point being of great Concernment, and the Debate being upon a Bill,
and the Process not produced, that it might appear whether it was intented
within the 40 years or not, it was not decided.

D. 197. Cranston contra Brown. 21. November. 1674.
A Testator having left by Testament a Sum of Money, due upon an Heretable
Surety; and having named his Sister as Executor and universal Legator, she was
pursued for payment of the said Legacy; at the least, that being likeways Heir,
she should denude her self of the Right of the said Sum.

It was Alleged for her, That the Subject being Heretable, the Defunct could
not bequeath the same in Testament.

It was Replied, That when res aliena is left in Legacy, the Executor in Law
tenetur luere, and ought to redeem the same, or pay the value; and multo magis
in this case, the Testator having in effect left res sua, though upon the
matter res aliena as to the power of disposing of the same on Deathbed, or by
Testament: And therefore the Executrix, if she be Heir, (as she is in this
Case) ought to give the same: and if she were not Heir, ought to redeem the
same, as said is.

The Lords, upon the debate amongst themselves, considered, that in Law,
legatum rei alienae is effectual if the Testator sciebat rem alienam; whereas
si nesciebat, it is to be persumed he would not have left that which was not
his own; and tho the Testator upon mistake was ignorant that it was res aliena,
yet if the Legator was of so near Relation that it was probable he should have
left the legacy, at least the value, if he had known it was res aliena, the
Legacy was effectual: And that in the case in question, the Legator was the
Defuncts Nevoy by his Brother, and the Sum that was left was his own, tho
Heretable as said is; and the Testator either knew that he could not dispose of
the same being Heretable, and was presumed and obliged to know the Law; and if
he was ignorant in point of Law, ignorantia Juris nocet: and therefore the
Lords inclined to sustain the Legacy. But one of their Number having desired,
that the Decision might be delayed while the next day, that he might have his
thoughts upon the Case, the same was delayed. Strathurd Reporter. Mr. John Hay
Clerk.

D. 198. Pilton contra the Creditors of the Lord Sinclair. 30. November 1674.
THE deceast Lord Sinclair, having married his Daughter with John Sinclair
younger of Hermiston, did dispone to him his Estate, with the Burden of his own
proper Debts, mentioned in the Right; and took a Bond for an Annuity of 8000
merks, first in the name of John Watt, and thereafter the said Bond being given
back, he did take another Bond, for the said Annuity during his Lifetime, in
the Name of George Cockburn of Pilton: Whereupon the said George did diligence
by Comprysing and otherways, against the said John Sinclair of Herdmanston; and
did also take the said John Sinclair's Liferent Escheat. And upon the Grounds
foresaid, and a Suspension of double Poinding against him, diverse Creditors of
the Lord Sinclair did question Pilton's Interest upon the foresaid Bond, as
being fraudulent, and a contrivance to frustrate Creditors, and to secure so
considerable an Interest for the use of the Debtor, contrare to the Act of
Parliament, 1621.

The Lords, notwithstanding, preferred the said George Cockburn, as having
Right to the Duties of Herdmanston's Estate, by virtue of the said Gift of
Escheat; reserving to the Creditors their Declarator of Trust, or Reduction
upon the said Act of Parliament: And accordingly the whole Estate of
Herdmanston being set in Tack thereafter, the Tack-duty is payable to Pilton,
and the other Creditors in order, conform to the said Decree.

The Tacks-men being charged at the instance of Pilton, Did Suspend upon double
poinding, pretending they were troubled by other Creditors of the Lord
Sinclair: And the said Creditors compearing, did allege, that they ought to be
preferred to Pilton, in respect his interest ab initio by the said Bond for the
Annuity foresaid of 8000 Merks, was a fraudulent contrivance, in prejudice of
the Lord Sinclair's Creditors; that the foresaid Annuity might be secured to
him in the Person of Pilton his Friend and Relation; and thereupon might live
plentifully, his Creditors being defrauded, and suffering in the mean time: And
that the Gift of Escheat of Herdmanstons's Liferent, being granted intuitu, and
upon account of the said interest; laborat eodem vitio, and was in effect to
the behoof of the Lord Sinclair.

It was Answered for Pilton, That tho the said Bond was granted to him, without
an Onerous Cause; yet intuitu of the same, and thinking that he was thereby
secured, he had bona fide alimented my Lord Sinclair, and had paid to himself,
and had engaged to others for him, to pay diverse Sums of Money, before any
interruption made by the Creditors; So that before any Diligence done by them,
his Right became Onerous, and the Gift of Escheat of Herdmanston's Estate was
taken by him, to secure himself as to his relief: And that the King and
Exchequer did, and might give the said Gift to him upon the consideration
foresaid; and thereupon, in the former Decree of multiple poinding, he was
preferred to all other Creditors: And that his Majesty had also gifted the
Liferent Escheat of the said Lord Sinclair, to Mr. George Gibson, upon a
Back-bond, that thereby he and the other Creditors thereinmentioned being
satisfied, the superplus and benefit of the said Escheat should be applied for
the Aliment of the said Lord Sinclair: And therefore, tho Pilton should not
have Right as he had to the said Tack-duty, the foresaid Annuity and Gift of
Escheat of Herdmanston's Liferent would accrue to Mr. George Gibson Donator, to
the uses foresaid; and fall under his Gift.

It was Answered for the Creditors, That they were content the Lords should
modify an Aliment for the Lord Sinclair: And that Pilton's interest should be
sustained effeirand thereto; the Superplus being applied, as it ought to be,
for their satisfaction.

The Lords, for the most part inclined to Find, that George Cockburn's Right to
the said Annuity was Onerous, In sua far as he could instruct, that he had
paid to, or for the use of my Lord Sinclair, any Sums of Money before the
Creditors Diligence.

Yet some were of the opinion, That the Lord of Hermanston having Married my
Lord Sinclair's Daughter, and having given the said Bond for the Annuity,
dureing my Lord Sinclair's Lifetime, was a downright contrivance, contrare to
the Act of Parliament 1621. to the end that the Right to the said Annuity,
which if it had been taken in the person of my Lord Sinclair himself would have
been liable to his Creditors, might be so conveyed in the person of another,
that it should not be liable to the said Lord Sinclair's Debts; and being ab
initio fraudulent, it continued still: And Pilton's applying any part of the
same, for the use of my Lord Sinclair, was so far from purgeing the Fraud, that
by the Act of Parliament, it was a clear evidence and probation of the same.

And yet they thought, That Pilton having out of respect to his Friend lent his
name inconsideratly, he might thereafter for his security take, and the
Exchequer might give Herdmanston's Liferent Escheat, upon the account foresaid;
and the same cannot be thought to be to the behoof of my Lord Sinclair, unless
it had been either procured by my Lord Sinclair, or granted expressly for his
use: And as to my Lord Sinclair's own Liferent, His Majesty and Exchequer might
qualify the Gift as they they thought fit; and His Majesty might have been
concerned upon many considerations, that my Lord Sinclair should not want an
Aliment; and might either have detained his Liferent in his own hands, in order
to his Aliment, or given the same sub modo, and with the Burden thereof: And
the said Gift was given as to the Superplus foresaid, for the Lord Sinclair's
Aliment, not to be modifyed by any other, but by the Exchequer, and at their
sight and direction, as the said Gift bears.

Upon the Grounds foresaid the Lords did prefer Pilton conform to the former
Decree. Sir David Falconer and others for the Creditors alteri Dalrymple.

D. 199. Auchintoul contra Innes. 10. December. 1674.
THE Lords Found, That a person being pursued as representing his Father or
other Predecessors, and denying the passive Titles, the same ought to be
proven; and that the Defender, by proponing a Defense in Jure, as in the case
in question, that Annuities were discharged by the late Proclamation, does not
confess the passive Titles: But if he should propone a defense founded upon a
Right in the person of his Predecessor, it would conclude him; so that he could
not pretend that the passive Titles should be proven. Newbyth Reporter. Vide
20. January 1675. Carfrae contra Talzifer.

D. 200. Stuart contra McDuff. 11. December. 1674.
IN a pursuit for payment of a Sum of Money, It being Alleged, That the
Pursuer had intrometted with Movables and Goods, to the value of the Debt
Lybelled pertaining to the Defenders Father, for whose Debt he was pursued; and
that it was to be presumed, that he had got the said Goods in satisfaction of
the same Debt, unless he should allege and prove an other Cause.

The Lords Found, That if the Defense should be proponed in these Terms, that
the Pursuer had got the said Goods in satisfaction, and that they were data in
solutum; the Defense ought to be positive, and that the delivery of the Goods
was probable by Witnesses; but the quality foresaid could not be proven
otherwise, but by the Pursuers Oath: But if the Exception was proponed, so as
to infer compensation, viz. That the Pursuer had Intrometted with the said
Goods to the value of the Debt; that it ought to be verifyed instanter by Write
or Oath. Castlehil Reporter. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 201. Home and Elphingston contra Murray of Stenhop. eod. die.
IN a Competition betwixt an Assigney and an Arrester; It was Alleged, That
the Assigney should be preferred, because the Assignation was anterior to the
Arrestment; and tho it was not intimate, yet the equivalent was done, in sua
far as, the Debtor being desired to make payment to the Assigney, and showing
his Assignation, did promise to pay the same, which upon the Matter, was like a
Bond of Corroboration, which certainly would prefer the Assigney,
notwithstanding he had not intimate his Assignation.

The Lords Found, That if the said Promise were verifyed by Writ, it should
exclude the Arrester; but that it could not be proven by the Debitors Oath, in
prejudice of the Arrester: And even as to the Debtor, the said promise could
not bind him, being made in contemplation of a Right supposed to be in the
person of the Assigney; Which being Found, not to be a valid Right, there were
no reason that the Debtor should pay twice.

And whereas it was pretended, That if the Debtor had not accepted the Debt,
and promised payment, the Assigney would have done Diligence, so that he would
have been preferable to the Arrester; The Lords thought, that sibi imputet that
he had not perfited his Right, as was Found before in the case of Pitfoddels
contra Donaldson. Forret Reporter, Gibson Clerk.

D. 202. Moubray contra Arbuthnet. 12. December. 1674.
IN a Process for the single avail of a Marriage; The Lords modifyed 9000
Merks, the Rent of the Lands being proven to be 3000 Merks: and it was thought,
that the avail of the Marriage should be in all cases of that nature, 3. Years
Rent.

D. 203. Lord Balmerinoch contra The Tennents of Northberwick. 13. December. 1674.
THE deceast Sir William Dick having charged the Lord Balmerinoch for payment
of a great Sum of Money due by a Bond, granted by his Father, and diverse other
Noblemen, who were Actors in the late times; and did borrow the said Sums for
the use of the public (as they called it) and the said Lord Balmerinoch having
Suspended upon diverse Reasons, and also upon a Reason of Compensation Founded
upon a Bond granted by the said Sir William to Sir John Smith; whereupon the
said Sir John had a Right to the Lands of Northberwick; and had Assigned and
Disponed the said Debt and Right in favors of the Lord Balmerinoch, by a
Disposition and Assignation Blank in the name of the Assigney; and no Decree
being Extracted upon the said Process; and the Act of Parliament anent public
Debts, that no Execution should be for the same, having interveened;

The Lord Balmerinoch having filled up the said Assignation, in the name of
James Gilmour, did intent in his Name, a Process for Mails and Duties, against
the Tennents of Northberwick.

The Creditors of the said Sir William Dick pretending Right to the said Lands
by diverse Infeftments, did compear in the said Process, and alleged, that the
said Right, whereupon the pursuit was Founded, was extinct and satisfied, In
sua far as, the said Lord Balmerinoch had Founded a Reason of Compensation upon
the same, against Sir William Dick, which was sustained; and whereupon there
was a Minut of a Decree Suspending the Letters against Sir William Dick for
the Debt abovementioned: And that the said Assignation granted by Sir John
Smith had been given up to Sir William Dick, or his Son Sir Andrew, as their
Evident; for Exonering the said Sir William of the Debt compensed upon.

It was Answered, That there was no Decree in that Process of Suspension,
against Sir William Dick: And as to the said pretended Minute it was not
produced: And whereas it was desired, that William Dounie, who was Clerk for
the time, should be examined upon Oath concerning the said Minut; and the
giving up the said Assignation to Sir William Dick or his Sons; It was urged,
that the Minutes and Acts of Process could not be made up by Witnesses, Et non
creditur Clerico nisi quatenus constat ex Actis. And 2. That there neither was,
nor could be a Decree in the said Process, In respect, the said Suspension was
upon other reasons that were Relevant; and compensation being in effect
satisfaction, and the last exception, the said Reasons ought to have been first
discust. viz. That there were diverse Arrestments at the instance of Creditors,
which should have been purged; and that Sir William had Assigned the Debt
whereupon he had charged, and the Assignation was intimate; So that the
Suspender could not be in tuto to pay; unless the consent of the Assigney were
obtained, and that the said Sir William was at the Horn and his Escheat gifted,
and that the Donator did not concur nor consent. 3. Though there could have been
a Decree, and the Arrestments had been purged, and the Assigney and Donator
consented; yet the samen not being Extracted, the Suspender might pass from his
Reason of compensation, seeing res was integra before Extracting; and the
Suspender may eike and verify any other reason that is emergent: And there had
arisen a most relevant Reason and Defense to him upon the said Act of
Parliament anent public Debts; of which he ought to have, and may plead the
benefit, in regard Acts of Litiscontestation and Decreets are Judicial
Transactions and Contracts: and as in other Contracts there is locus
poenitentiae before they be perfited in Write, so in Acts and Decreets, before
they be Extracted, Parties are not concluded: as verb. g. even after
Litiscontestation before the same be Extracted, a Defense may be proponed; and
in Declarators concerning Clauses irritant, tho Parties will not be admitted to
purge after Sentence, yet before Extracting they will be heard: And even by the
Common Law, albeit ubi res transit in rem Judicatam, sententia non retractatur
ex Instrumentis noviter repertis; yet before Extracting of the same, if Writes
be Found which will elide the Pursuers Lybel, they will be received.

It was Answered for the Creditors, That in this case res was not integra,
because the Suspender had so far acquiesced, that in effect he had paid the
Debt, Compensation being equivalent; And if before extracting, he had made
actual payment, there would have been no necessity of extracting the same; and
in this case not only there was solutio ipso Jure, in respect of the said
Compensation sustained; but de facto the Lord Balmerinoch had paid 3 or 4000
merks in satisfaction of the Debt charged for; the Compensation being so far
short: and the Creditors had intented exhibition of a Discharge granted by Sir
William Dick to the said Lord Balmerinoch, of the foresaid Sum of 4000 merks;
and a Declarator, that in respect of the said Compensation, the said Right
granted by the said Sir John Smith was extinct.

The Lords, at the desire of the said Creditors, having examined diverse
persons anent the said Minut, and the giving up of the said Assignation, and
anent the having of the said Discharge, granted by Sir William Dick to
Balmerinoch, the Creditors at length did pass from their Compearance. And now
the Cause being again advised, the Lords did adhere to their former
Interloquitor in Anno 1664. And did Find, That before extracting, Balmerinoch
might pass from his Reason of Compensation: and decerned in the said Process at
Balmerinoch's instance, against the Tennents of Northberwick; Reserving to the
Creditors their Action of Exhibition and Declarator as accords.

D. 204. Kinloch contra Rate. 15. December. 1674.
THE deceast Mr. Robert Kinloch Portioner of Luthrie, having granted, after he
was married, a Liferent Right to his Wife, by Infeftment in some of his Lands;
in satisfaction of any further Provision: did thereafter give her an additional
Jointure and Infeftment in other Lands; after which he did give a Right of
Annualrent, forth of the Additional Lands, to his Daughter Janet Kinloch.

The Daughter and her Husband Mr. John Dickson, did intent a Poinding of the
Ground, upon the said Right of Annualrent; in which Process Jean Rate Relict of
the said Mr. Robert compeared, and defended upon her foresaid Rights, being
anterior to the said Infeftment of Annualrent.

It was Replied for the Pursuer, That as to the first Right for Provision of
the Wife, she did not make question, but that being in Satisfaction of any
other Provision, as said is; the additional Right granted thereafter was for
Love and Favor, and Donatio inter virum and uxorem; and revocked tacitly by
the Pursuers Infeftment of Annualrent.

The Lords Found accordingly, That the said posterior Right was revocked by the
Right of Annualrent pro tanto; without prejudice to the Relict of the Superplus
if any be, the Annualrent being satisfied. Newbyth Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 205. George Drummond contra Menies of Rotwell. 16. December 1674.
IN the Process at the instance of George Drummond for payment of a Sum due by
Alexander Menies of Rotwel, as intrometter with the Debitors Goods: It was
Found (as in diverse Cases before) That the pretense, that the Defunct was
Rebel, and his Escheat gifted; does not purge vicious Intromission; unless it
be alleged, that the Defuncts Escheat was gifted and declared before intention
of the cause; or that the Defender did intromet, either by virtue of a Gift to
himself, or by Warrant and Right from the Donator for the Defenders
Intromission, tho the Gift was not declared before the intention of the Cause;
In respect if there was a Gift declared before the intention of the Cause, the
Defender is in the same case, as if there were an Executor confirmed, before
the intenting of the Cause; and if he had either the Gift himself, or a Right
from the Donator before he did intromet, his Possession ab initio, being by
virtue of a Title, tho not perfected, cannot be said to be vicious; and quivis
Titulus etiam coloratus, purges the vitiousness of the intromission. Strathurd
Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 206. Kelhead contra Irving and Borthwick. eod. die.
JOhn Irving Merchant in Drumfries, having furnished Mournings, Winding Sheet
and others necessary for the Funerals of the deceast Earl of Queensberry; did
take a Bond for the Sum of 1424 merks from the Countess Dowager, Relict of the
said Earl; which, tho it did bear only that Narrative, that the Lady was
addebted to the said John, without relation to the Cause foresaid, yet it
appeared it was for that Cause; In swa far as, the said Countess, being
confirmed Executrix to her Husband, had obtained an Exoneration; and the
foresaid Debt, contracted for the Funerals, was one of the Articles of the same.

The said Countess having deceased, the Earl of Queensberry her Son was
confirmed Executor to her; and a Decree being obtained against him at the
instance of the said John Irving, for the foresaid Debt, he suspended upon
multiple Poinding against the said John Irving, and the Lord of Kelhead, and
James Borthwick, and certain other Creditors.

The said Lord of Kelhead alleged, that he ought to be preferred as to the
Goods confirmed by the said Earl, as Executor to the said Countess, because the
said Countess was his Debtor in the Sum of 5000 merks; and to the effect he
might be satisfied of the said Debt, had disponed to him her Movables if he
should not be satisfied in her own Lifetime; and that he had done Diligence
upon the Disposition of the said Movables by arrestment, and by taking
Possession after the Ladies decease; and thereby had right to the Movables
confirmed by the Earl, and thereupon ought to be preferred.

Whereunto It was Answered, That the said Disposition did not give Right to
Kelhead, unless Tradition had followed upon the same in the Ladies lifetime:
and the Lady had not only retained Possession, but by the Conception and Nature
of the Right, Kelhead could not have Possession, seeing he was to have Right to
the Movables after the Ladies decease, if he were not satisfied dureing her
lifetime; so that he was in the case only of other Personal Creditors, and must
come in according to his Diligence: and Irving and Borthwick were not only
prior in Diligence, having obtained Decreets, but were privileged and
preferable before all other Creditors, in respect the said Irving's Debt was of
the Nature foresaid, for the defraying of the Funerals, and James Borthwick's
Debt was for Drugs.

It was Duplyed for Kelhead, as to Irving, that any Privilege he pretended to,
did cease; In sua far as the Debt was innovat, and was not a Debt upon the
Executry of the Earl of Queensberry, but became a Debt of the Countess her
self, who had given Bond (as said is) without any Relation to the Cause
foresaid: And as to James Borthwick, there being two Debts due to him, one by
Bond, and the other by an Account, the Bond did bear borrowed Money and
Annualrent, and was not a privileged Debt.

The Lords Found, That Kelhead had no Right to the Movables, by the
Disposition foresaid, and was only a Personal Creditor: whereupon They Found
also, that Debts of the nature foresaid, upon the account of Funerals, and of
Drugs furnished the time of the Defuncts sickness, are privileged; so that the
Creditors, tho they be not Creditores Hypothecarii, are Privilegiati, and
preferable to other Personal Creditors.

They Found also, That Irving's Debt was still Privileged, notwithstanding
that the Countess had given Bond for the same; seeing it did not bear borrowed
Money, but only that she was addebted; and it appears by the Testament and
Exoneration, that she was addebted upon no other account, but for the Cause
foresaid.

They also did Find, That the foresaids Debts being Privileged, as to the
Countess, they are Privileged also as to her Executor: and that James
Borthwick should come in with the said Irving, as to his Account; but not as to
his Bond: and as to it, was to come in with the rest of the Creditors. Craigie
Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 207. Captain Gordon and Ludquharne contra 17. December 1674.
CAptain Gordon a Privateer, having taken a Ship, named the Wine-Grape, and
brought the same to Leith; It was found a free Ship, and not a Prize, by a
Decree absolvitor of the Admiral; in respect it appeared by the Pass, and
other Documents, and the Declaration of the Company and Skipper, that it was a
Sweddish Ship: And albeit the Skipper was a Hollander, yet he was received
Burgess of Stockholme, and since the War he had transported his Domicile there:
This Decree being questioned by a Reduction before the Lords, upon that
Reason, that the Admiral had committed Iniquity in giving the said Absolvitor,
in regard the said ship was not a free ship; And it did appear from the
Declarations of the Skipper and Company, that the Skipper was a Hollander; and
a Partner of an eight part of the said ship: And after a long Debate, The Lords
granted a Commission to the magistrates of Stockholme in Sweden, to examine
such witnesses as either Party should desire, for clearing the point of Fact;
and to examine the Sweds that were alleged to have interest in the said Ship
and Loadning; and the Skippers wife who was then at Stockholme: And diverse
persons and Witnesses being examined upon the said Commission, at the Instance
of the Skipper and Defenders in the Reduction; and a Report being returned and
advised: The Lords, in July last, did Find, That the said Report was a
sufficient presumptive Probation, that the Skipper had fixed his Domicile at
Stockholme, and that the Ship and Goods were free and did not belong to the
Kings Enemies; The Swedes by the Treaty betwixt Sweden and our King being
allowed to make use of Hollanders to be Naucleri and Skippers, dummodo sint
Cives and Incolae: and therefore decerned; superseeding the extracting of the
Decree until September: and if the Pursuers should show, that they had done
Diligence upon the said Commission, the Lords declared they would grant a new
Commission.

And thereafter an Agent Matthew Colvil, having gone to Stockholme, in behalf
of, and for the Pursuer the Privateer; and having urged, that some Witnesses
should be examined by the Magistrates there, upon the Points contained in the
former Commission; upon that consideration, that no person was present for the
Privateer, when the Witnesses were examined at the instance of the Defenders;
and it was not the Pursuers fault, that he was not there himself or his
Procurator, seeing the said Mr. Colvil going there, and pursueing the said
Commission, had made Shipwreck by the way, and was forced to return back.

The said Magistrates did refuse to proceed upon the said Commission to
examine the said Witnesses, that had been formerly examined, or others
pretending that the Commission was execute, and that they had examined both
Parties and Witnesses upon the same: and did write a Letter to the Lords,
showing the Reasons whereupon they had refused.

This Session, the Cause being called in praesentia; the Pursuers did object
against the said Report, whereupon the foresaid Interloquitor had proceeded;
and in special, that the Depositions of the Witnesses examined at Stockholm
were not transmitted; and that they were not so much as named in the Report:
and that the Owners had refused to declare upon that Interrogator, viz. whether
their Name was only borrowed for the use of the Kings Enemies, to color and
continue their Trade; pretending that they had given their Oaths already to
that purpose, upon their obtaining of the Pass: and it was desired for the
Pursuers that the Lords would proceed, without respect to the Report and
Interloquitor foresaid; and advise and give their Sentence, whether, upon what
was before them, the Reason of Reduction was proven.

Upon Debate among the Lords, It was urged, that they had given a Decree
already, but the Extracting was superseeded (as said is) conditionally, in
order to the granting a new Commission: And the most that the Pursuer could
desire in reason, was, that a New Commission should be granted: And all that
was before the Lords being formerly advised, and a Decree given thereupon, and
the same standing, there was nothing now to be advised; but the Decree ought
to be Extracted, or at the most a new Commission should be given to the Pursuer.

The Lords notwithstanding, without respect to the said former Decree, did
proceed to advise and Vote, whether there was alse much proven, as to condemn
the said Ship.

It was urged by some of the Lords, That tho res were integra, and there were
no Decree; there is no Ground to adjudge the said Ship upon the pretenses
foresaid, seeing the Skippers Oath being a Party had been taken upon the same;
and he had declared upon Oath, that he had changed his domicile, and his
Residence was at Stockholme; and his Oath being taken, they needed no other
Probation, specially seeing his Oath is adminiculate with the Depositions of his
Wife, and others taken upon the Commission foresaid at Stockholme; being
positive, that he had Transported his Domicile there; and no other Probation
was adduced to the contrary.

It was farther urged, That the Skipper being a Burgess, and being for the time
in Sueden with his Wife and his Child; The Suedish Owners were in bona fide to
think, that he was such a person, as by the Treaty they might make use of as
Skipper: And what ever could be pretended against him for his own interest,
ought not to militate against them.

It was also urged, That His Majesty had written a Letter in favors of the
Strangers, recommending them to the Lords Favor and Justice; and it would be
thought a strange Return, that the Lords should condemn both the said Ship, and
the Admirals Decree absolvitor, and their own former Decree.

It was nevertheless Voted and Found by plurality, that the Ship ought to be
adjudged upon the said pretenses, that the Kings Enemy had the interest
foresaid, both as Skipper and as Owner: diverse of the Lords dissenting.

D. 208. 23. December. 1674. inter easdem.
THE Sueds having given in a Bill, desireing that seeing they offered to prove
positive, that the Skipper had changed his Domicile, they might have a
Commission to what Judges the Lords pleased, for proving the said Alledgance;
Some of the Lords were of Opinion, That the Alledgance being unquestionably
Relevant was yet competent, In respect the Lords had by their Interloquitor
Found, that they had already proven presumptively, that the Ship in question
did not belong to the Kings Enemies; and alse long as that Interloquitor stood,
they needed not prove any farther; the onus probandi of the contrair lying upon
the Caper: And the said Interloquitor being since reversed and taken away (as
said is) It was neither needful nor competent until now, to offer to prove
positive the said Alledgance.

The Lords notwithstanding, Found by plurality, and by one Vote only, that the
Alledgance was not now competent; the President being of a contrair opinion;
but being carried by one Vote before it came to him, he could not Vote.

Je me suis estendu trop sur cet Arrest, a cause que les plus habiles and
scavans des Senateurs opinoyent pour les Estrangers, and Maistre du Navire: and
aucuns des ceux qui estoyent de l' autre cost, estoyent parens ou aliez de
Luthquharne, qui estoyt Party; and gagnoit par l' Arrest 2000 Livres Sterling: ou
environ: and l' emportoit par une voix seulement.

D. 209. Pitmedden contra Seatones. eod. die.
IT was Found in the case Sir Alexander Seaton of Pitmedden, contra Seaton of
Blair, That Pitmeddens Brother, tho he was Appearand Heir to a Baron, he could
not have a Moveable Heirship; because he was not actual Baro. Some were of
opinion, that as to that Advantage and privilege of having a Moveable
Heirship, it was sufficient that the Defunct was of that quality, that he was
one of these Estates; seeing a person once Baro, tho he be denuded is semper
Baro as to the effect and interest foresaid: And a Prelate, tho for Age he
should become unable to serve, and dimit, yet is still a Prelate as to that
effect: And the Appearand Heir of a Baron, who has Right and in potentia
proxima to be a Baron, and is Peer to Barons, and may be upon the Assize of
Noblemen and Barons; if he should be prevented with Death before he be Infeft,
it were hard to deny him the privilege foresaid, that his Heir should have his
Movable Heirship: And if his Heir would have the benefit as to a Moveable
Heirship, his Intromission with the same ought to import a Behavior. Lord
Forret Reporter.

D. 210. Mr. David Thoirs contra Tolquhon. 2. Jan. 1675.
MR. David Thoirs, having acquired from John Forbes the Lands of Craigfintry,
did pursue an improbation against the Lord of Tolquhon of a Bond and
Comprysing deduced thereupon of the said Lands against John Forbes of Gask, the
said John Mr. David Thoirs's Authors Great Grandfather: And Certification being
granted, and being urged that it should be Extracted; It was Alleged, that it
could not be Extracted, but ought to be stopped; because the said Bond, whereupon
the Comprysing was deduced, and whereunto, and to the Comprysing thereupon,
Tolquhon has Right by progress, was granted to the deceast Mr. William Forbes
Advocate, and Registrate in the Commissar Books of Aberdeen in Anno 1632; And
the Extract was now produced; which after so long time, and the time of
Troubles, the Registers being all in such disorder, ought to satisfy the
production; being not only adminiculate, but also homologate in manner
aftermentioned, by Patrick Forbes Grandchild and Successor to the Granter, and
the said John Forbes the said Patrick's Son; In sua far as the said Bond was
granted to the said Mr. William Forbes a person above all exception; and all
possible Diligence, both real and personal had been used thereupon by Horning,
Comprysing, and Caption: and that the Granter had Suspended the said Bond upon
diverse Reasons, and did never question the truth of the same; and Disponed his
Estate to Patrick Forbes his Appearand Heir, with the burden of his Debts; and
it cannot be thought, but that he understood the Debt in question, to have been
comprehended under the general of Debts, having been so much distressed for the
same: And that the said Patrick did homologate the truth of the said Bond; In
sua far as by a Minute of Contract betwixt him and Tolquhon, he had taken a
Right from Tolquhon to the said Bond and Comprysing; and was obliged to pay for
the same the Sum thereinmentioned: And the said Patrick having Disponed to his
Eldest Son William his Estate, the said John was served Heir to the said
William his Brother; and had homologat also the said Bond by Contract betwixt
him and Tolquhon, whereby he dispones the Lands Comprysed of new again to
Tolquhone, and ratifies the said Apprysing and Grounds thereof: Which Contract,
albeit when the said John was Minor, was made with consent of his Friends and
Lawyers most deliberately; the said Mr. David Thoirs being one of his Lawyers;
And therefore, tho it might be questioned upon Minority, as to any prejudice or
disadvantage the Minor may pretend to have by the same, yet it will stand as an
Homologation of the said Bond as to the truth of the same; unless it were
offered to be improven, by a positive qualification of Falsehood.

The Lords having considered the Inconvenients on either side, if
certifications for not production of principals should be loosed, being the
great surety of the People: And on the other part, if they should be Snares,
and Parties should pursue maliciously Improbation, having viis and modis got
the principal Writes out of the Register, or known they had miscarryed: They
Found, In respect that Mr. David Thoirs having taken a Right, after the matter
was litigious by a Charge and Suspension of the Minute, betwixt Tolquhone and
the said John Forbes the Great Grandchild; so that the said Mr. David was in
the same case, as if the said John were Pursuer, and was content to state
himself in that case; And in respect of the Specialities of this Cause, and
Adminicles and Homologations foresaid, that therefore the said Extract ought to
satisfy the Production, and the Certification ought not to be Extracted.

D. 211. Pittarro contra E. Northesk. 5. January 1675.
THE Earl of Northesk having taken an Assignation to a Bond, granted by the
deceast Lord of Craige and Earl of Dundee to Margaret Carnagie, and her
Children for 1000 Merks, and having Comprysed thereupon Craigs Estate; he did
after the Comprysing give a Bond to the said Margaret Carnagie and her
Children, that in case he should recover payment, he should make payment to
them of the foresaid Sum: Sir David Carnagie of Pittarro, being Debtor to the
said Earl in the Sum of 2000 Merks, Suspended upon that Reason, that the said
Margaret and her Children had Assigned to him the said Back-bond granted by
Northesk; and that the said Earl had Disponed the Right of the said Apprysing
to the Lord Hattoun; And therefore became Liable to pay the said Sum to the
Suspenders Cedent, and the Suspender may and does compense upon the said Bond
pro tanto.

It was Answered by the Charger, That the Comprysing did neither belong to the
Suspenders Cedent, nor was to their behoof; the said Bond granted by the Lord
of Craig being Assigned ab initio, without any Back-bond: And the Comprysing
being deduced before Northesk granted the said Bond: And by the said Back-bond
he was obliged only to pay the said Sum in case he should get payment, and he
was so far from getting payment of the said Sum, that having comprysed not only
upon the said Bond granted to Margaret Carnagie, but for other Debts exceeding
far the said Debt due to her; yet got payment of neither.

It was Replied by the Suspender, That he was not concerned to Dispute, whether
he got payment or not; but the Charger having Disponed the Comprysing as to the
said Sum, without the consent of the said (...) Carnagie and her Children; and
without the Burden of the said Back-bond, it was equivalent as if he had got
payment; it being all one upon the matter as to the interest of (...) Carnagie,
whether Northesk had got payment of the said Sum, or had disponed the
Comprysing in sua far as concerns the same.

The Lords, In Respect of the conception of the Bond granted by Northesk,
Found, That either he should procure a Retrocession of the said Bond and
Comprysing thereupon pro tanto; or that he should pay the Damnage and Interest
sustained by the Suspenders Cedent, through Northesks granting of the Right of
the said Bond and Comprysing to Hattoun: And in that case, that the Damnage and
Interest should be presently liquidate; and being liquidate should be a ground
of compensation. Glendoich Reporter. Monro Clerk.

D. 212. Eod die.
IT was debated this day among the Lords, whether a Bond being granted by a
principal and two Cautioners bound conjunctly and severally; and the Cautioners
not bound to relieve one another; if one of the Cautioners should take
Assignation to the Bond and should pursue the other, the said other Cautioner
will have a defense upon that Ground, That albeit they be not oblidged to
relieve one another pro rata, yet that the said obligement inest, in sua far
as, they are bound conjunctly and severally: Most of the Lords inclined to
find, that the pursuer ought to relieve the Cocautioner pro rata, and had not
action but for his own part. But some of the Lords were of another opinion;
that there being no obligement upon any of the Cocautioners to relieve one
another; one of the Cautioners paying entirely and getting an Assignation, in
effect emit nomen: And tho both the Cautioners be oblidged conjunctly and
severally in relation to the Creditor, yet there is no Transaction or
obligement betwixt the Cautioners themselves; every one having actio mandati as
to the principal for their relief, which inest, tho the principal were not
bound to relieve them expressly: but ought to be considered as quilibet, and
Strangers one to another.

But because the Lords were divided, and it was alleged on either hand, the
case was formerly decided; the Decision was delayed this day; Vide infra 28.
January 1675.

D. 213. Lord of Hempsfield contra Bannantine. eod. die.
THE Lord of Hempsfield with certain Cautioners for him, having granted a Bond
of 6000 Merks to the deceast James Bannantine and his Wife, the longest liver
of them two; and after their decease to John Bannatine their Son; whereupon
Inhibition was execute against the principal and Cautioners: And the said John
Bannantine did pursue a Reduction and Improbation against these who had
acquired Rights, after the Inhibition.

It was Alleged, That the Pursuer had no interest, because the said Bond was
Blank in the name of the substitute, and the pursuer could not be understood to
be the Bairn to whom the Sum is to be payable after the decease of his Father
and Mother, seeing he was not born the time of the granting of the Bond: And as
to the Inhibition it was not at the instance of the Pursuer, but of his Father
and Mother.

It was Answered, That the Bond was opponed, bearing the Pursuers Name; and tho
the Bond had been Blank, and the Pursuer not born when it was granted, the
Father might have filled up any of his Bairns Names as he thought fit: And as
to the Inhibition, it was at the instance of the Father James Bannantine who
was Fiar; and did accresce to the Pursuer, being substitute in the Fee after
his decease.

The Lords Repelled the Alledgance.

It was thereafter Alleged, That the Pursuer was satisfied of the Debt, in sua
far as either the Debtor or Cautioners had paid the same, at least a part
thereof, and did satisfy pro tanto; or some other persons, having acquired
their Lands after the Inhibition, had given Money to the Pursuer or his Father,
to pass from the Inhibition as to them, which ought to be allowed as payment
pro tanto.

It was Answered, That the Alledgance is not Relevant, unless it were in these
Terms, that the Pursuer or his Father had accepted what was paid by the said
persons in satisfaction of the Debt pro tanto; otherwise, that there is no
solutio, but only a Transaction betwixt the persons foresaid, and the Pursuer,
to free themselves from Trouble and of a Plea; and what was given, was not in
satisfaction of the Debt in whole or in part, but upon the account foresaid:
And seeing the Creditor having inhibite; so that his Inhibition did affect
diverse Lands, or having diverse persons bound to him as Cautioners, might
warrantably pass from his Inhibition as to some of the Lands, and discharge
such of the Cautioners as he thought fit; he might also take a consideration
for doing the favor foresaid.

The Lords thought, That if it should be allowed to Creditors to make such
Transactions; and what they should get upon account of the same should not be
allowed in payment, they might get more nor the double of their Debt; at least
more than Principal and Annualrent; and that it would be the occasion of usury.
They Found the Defense Relevant, that what should be proven to be given eo
nomine should be imputed in satisfaction. Gibson Clerk.

D. 214. Innes contra Innes. 7. January. 1675.
BY a Contract of Marriage a Sum being provided to the Husband and his Wife,
and to the Heirs Male of the Marriage; whilks Failieing to the Fathers Heirs
Male whatsomever: An Inhibition upon the said Contract, at the instance of the
Eldest Son of the Marriage, and Reduction thereupon was not sustained; because
the Father was living, and the Son neither was, nor could be Heir to him, In
respect the Father was living: And tho he were dead the Son could have no
Right, unless he were Heir, in which case he would be obliged to warrant.
Glendoich Reporter.

D. 215. Lord of Luss contra E. of Nithsdale. eod. die.
A Bond being alleged to be granted by the Earl of Nithsdale, in anno 1621, to
one Colquhone and his Wife, for 6000 Merks: And a pursuit being intented
thereupon; It was Alleged, That the Bond was most suspicious, being so Ancient
and nothing done thereupon; and in respect of other great presumptions, viz.
the quality and condition of the said Adam when the said Bond was granted,
being designed the Earl's Servant: And that it was improbable, he could have so
much Money to lend his Master, or that he and his Heirs should have so long
wanted the same: And that it appears, that the Bond has been Blank ab initio,
the Creditors Name being filled up with another Ink: And the said Adam being
designed to have been the Writer of the Bond; and yet where it bears that he is
Writer, it does not bear the said Adam, which it would have born if his name
had been filled up from the beginning: And it appears, that the Earl being
known to be a person negligent, and being at London for the time, and having to
do with Money, might have given the Bond to the said Adam his Servant for
raising of Money, and that he forgot to call for it.

The Lords Found, That the said Bond could not be taken away upon the
presumptions foresaid; unless it were either prescrived, or the Defenders would
offer to improve it. Gibson Clerk.

D. 216. Mcintoish contra Frazer. 9. January. 1675.
McIntoish pursued Frazer of Streichen, for payment of a Sum due upon Bond; In
which Pursuit two Defenses being proponed, viz. Prescription and Payment; and
a Reply made to the first, viz. Interruption by a pursuit; and
Litiscontestation being made upon the Defense of payment and the said Reply; It
was Alleged, when the Cause was to be advised contra producta, viz. That the
Summonds and Execution thereupon produced, for proving Interruption, did not
prove the same; In respect the Summonds were never called, nor any Document
taken in Judgment thereupon. And as to the Discharge produced, It was Alleged,
That it was granted by the persons thereinmentioned as Curators to the Pursuer,
and was not subscribed by the Pursuer himself as it ought to have been; there
being a great difference betwixt Tutors and Curators; In respect Tutors must
act for the Minor, and are Authors as to all deeds done by them; but Curators
do only concur and ought to advise and consent to the deeds of their Minor,
which otherwise are not valid.

The Lords did Find the Discharge did not prove; and it could not be obtruded
to the Pursuer who had not subscribed the same; and did also Find that the
Summonds and Execution did sufficiently interrupt. Concluded cause. Actor
Falconer alteri Seaton. Monro Clerk.

D. 217. Town of Edinburgh contra Earl of Loudoune. eod. die.
THE Lady Yester having Mortified a certain Sum of Money for the Poor in
certain Paroches in the South; and having employed to the End foresaid the
foresaid Sum upon Bond or Contract, granted by the Town of Edinburgh: The
Ministers of the said Paroches did pursue the Town of Edinburgh, to hear and
see the Tenor of the said Write to be proven; and that being done, that they
should be decerned to pay: And did sufficiently prove the Tenor of the same.

In the Process against the Town, There was a Defense proponed, viz. That my
Lord Loudoune, who had Interest in the said Mortification, had got payment of
the said Sum from the Town of Edinburgh, which they offered to prove by his
Oath.

The Lords having Ordained his Oath to be taken before Answer; And he being
Summonded to that effect, he was holden as confessed: And having thereafter upon
a Bill, Desired to be Reponed to give his Oath, and being Reponed, he was
holden as confessed the second time: And in respect that the said Defense was not
proven by his Oath, The Lords proceeded and decerned against the Town.

The Town of Edinburgh having intented Process against the Earl of Loudoune,
for refounding the said Sum; upon that medium, that the same was formerly paid
to him; and that he had confessed, at least was holden as Confessed, which is
equivalent as to the payment of the said Sum.

It was Alleged, That his being holden as Confessed, in the Process foresaid did
operate only that the Defense referred to his Oath was not proven, but could
not be a Ground of pursuit against himself, unless it were proven by his Oath,
that the said Sum was paid to him; and he desired to be Reponed to his Oath;
It was Answered, That he being twice holden as Confessed, there was no reason to
Repone him, and his being holden as Confessed does operate in Law alsemuch, as if
he had confessed the said Sum; Seeing through his Contumacy the Pursuers are
prejudged: And he cannot pretend, that he was not a Party in that Process,
seeing he was holden as Confessed, and in the same Process craved to be Reponed,
and was Reponed as said is: And tho he had not been called ab initio in that
Process, yet being called incidenter for proving of an Alledgance; by the
certification foresaid he became Party therein: And as when an incident
Diligence is raised against a haver of Writes, for proving of an Alledgance;
and the having thereof is referred to the Oath of the Defender in the incident;
if he be holden as confessed, tho the Alledgance be not proven, the Pursuer of
the Incident will have Execution against him as Haver; and for the Damnage and
Interest sustained through his Contumacy; so it ought to be in this case.

The Lords, Tho the Earl of Loudoun's presumptive Confession (being holden as
confessed as said is) be a convinceing evidence, that the said Money was paid to
him; yet they had that respect to him both as to his quality and integrity,
that they would have Reponed him, if he had compeared himself; or had written
to the Lords, that he desired to be Reponed; and did intimate alse much to his
Procurators: and to that effect did give some time, but no Return being made,
they proceeded, and sustained the pursuit at the instance of the Town of
Edinburgh, upon the medium foresaid. Monro Clerk.

D. 218. Letter by the Lords of Session to the King. 12. January. 1675.
MY Lord Lauderdale His Majesty's Secretary, having written to the President,
concerning the abovementioned Process betwixt Captain Gordon and the Suedes,
anent the Ship called the Wine Grape, That the Suedish Envoy had made
Application to his Majesty, and had represented, That the Decree against the
Strangers, was carried but by two Votes; and had given in a List to his Majesty,
of those that were for, and against the said Decree, with diverse Reasons
against the same. It was thought fit, that a Letter should be drawn to His
Majesty, containing the Grounds, whereupon the said Decree proceeded; which
being done by those who were appointed by the Lords; some of the Lords did
object against the same, That they did mention the Lords indefinitly to have
given the said Decree; Whereas His Majesty was informed of the contrary, and
the Information was true; and therefore it was desired it should bear, That,
upon the Votes of the major part, which is usual in all Cases, the Decree was
pronounced: Specially, seeing the said Letter did contain the Grounds of, and
did assert the Justice of the said Decree: So that these, who had voted
against the same, could not belie themselves, and put under their hand the
contrary of what they had voted. And albeit in all Judicatories, even in
Parliament, what is done by the plurality does overrule and conclude the
Dissenters, so as to submitt to the same: Yet they are not obliged to maintain
or assert the Justice of a Sentence and Act, that they had been against in
their Judgment and vote.

It was, notwithstanding, carried by plurality, That without the amendment
foresaid the Letter should be subscribed by all the Lords; the President having
promised to write to my Lord Lauderdale, what was truly res gesta, when the
said Decree was given: And upon that assureance, some of the Lords declared
when they subscribed, that they subscribed not their oun sense, but the sense
of the Court: And though they were concluded, as said is, yet they were not
convinced.

D. 219. Glendyning contra the Earl of Nithsdale. 13. January. 1675.
WIlliam Glendining having pursued the now Earl of Nithsdale as Heir to Robert
the late Earl of Nithsdale his Father, for fulfilling a Minute betwixt the said
Robert Earl of Nithsdale and William Glendinning of Lagan, from whom the
Pursuer had Right: and for payment of the half of the duty of the Lands of
Douphingstoun, conform to the said Minut: and Litiscontestation was made in the
cause: and for proving the rent of the said Lands of Douphinstoun, It was
craved, that the Depositions of witnesses, that had been adduced in the like
process, intented against the said Earl, as representing his Father for
implement of the said Minute, should be received in this Process: But the Lords
having considered, that the said Earl did not represent his Father active, but
was pursued only upon the passive Titles; and that this process against the now
Earl, is not against him as representing the last Earl; neither was it alleged
that he represents him; Therefore they Found; that the said Depositions could not
be repeated in this process; Seeing res was inter alios acta; and acta in uno
judicio non probant in alio, nisi inter easdem personas; or these who represent
him.

D. 220. Edmiston contra Mr. John Preston. eod. die.
WAuchope of Edmiston and his Lady, as Executors to the deceast James Raith of
Edmiston, pursued Mr. John Preston lately of Haltrie Advocate, for payment of
the Tack duty for a Seam of Coal, belonging to Edmiston, and set to him for
certain Years.

It was alleged for the Defender, That he ought not to be liable for the Years
in question; because, having entered to the Possession of the said Coal, and
having paid the Duty for the time he possessed; he was forced to cease from
working, in respect the said Coal came to be in that condition, that it could
not be wrought, partly by reason of the defect of Roof, so that the Coaliers
neither would nor could work without hazard; and partly by reason of bad Air It
was Replied, That the Defender having accepted a Tack of a Subject, liable to
such hazards, eo ipso he had taken his hazard; and was in the case, as if he
had acquired a Right to jactus retis.

It was Duplyed, That alea and jactus retis, and spes in venditione, may be,
and is understood to be sold; but in Locatione, spes and alea is not thought to
be set, unless it appear by the Contract, that the Conductor should take the
hazard; seeing it is de natura of Contracts of Location, that fruitio is
understood to be given and set; and that merces should be paid ex fructibus.
And where the Conductor cannot frui, upon occasion of an insuperable
impediment, which does not arise, either from his dole, or culpa, or
negligence, as in this case; remittitur merces: as is clear, not only when the
thing that is set is a subject, not liable to so much hazard, but when it is
contingent, as when Gabells or Custums are set, or Fishings, or Milns, or
Coals, if there fall out such an impediment, as does interrupt the fruition and
perceptionem fructuum, as if there be Pest and War in the case of Custums; or
if Herring should not be got at all; or if upon occasion of inundation, Milns
should be unprofitable; or Coalheughs should be drowned or burnt.

The Lords, before Answer, Thought fit, that there should be conjunct Probation
allowed to both Parties, anent the condition of the Coal; and the Defenders
desisting and ceasing from working thereof, and the Occasion of his desisting:
and if the impediment was insuperable. Craigy Reporter.

D. 221. eod. die.
APPlication being made to the Lords by a Bill given in by a Widow, Desireing,
that she may be allowed to intromet with the Cropped and Goods pertaining to the
Defunct, without hazard of vicious Intromission:

The Lords thought, That such Warrands being Voluntariae Jurisdictionis, and
the Commissaries being entrusted, for securing the Estate of Defunct persons to
the nearest of Kin, and Creditors, and other persons having interest; did Remit
the Petitioner to the Commissars of the place. Sir David Falconer Younger was
for the Petitioner and subscribed the Bill.

D. 222. Meldrum contra Tolquhone. 20. January 1675.
IN a Declarator of Escheat at the instance of Meldrum contra Tolquhone: It was
Alleged, That the Horning was Null, because the Party was Charged only upon
six days, albeit he dwelt benorth the Water of Dee: And by the Act of
Parliament 1600. cap. 25. All Charges of Horning against persons dwell and
benorth Dee, should be upon 15. days at the least: And by the 138 Act Parl.
12. K. Ja. 6. It is statute, that in case any Denounciations of Hornings should
be at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, upon Charges, upon unlawful and impossible
Conditions; the same, and Horning thereupon should be Null: And that there was
a Decision in Duries Book in Anno 1625, that Hornings even upon Bonds against
persons benorth Dee were Null.

It was Answered, That the Act of Parliament in Anno 1600, was only in the case
of Hornings upon Citations or Charges to find Law borrowes, or for compearing
before the Council, as appears by the narrative of the said Act which does
interpret and regulate the dispositive Words of the Act.

And that the Act of Parliament in Anno 1592. does not militate in the case of
Hornings upon a Clause of Registration, seeing after that Act until the said Act
1606, such Clauses that Hornings should be upon 6 days, were not thought, and
de facto are not impossible.

And as to the practique, It was Answered, that there was a late practique in
Anno 1664, upon a Debate in the Innerhouse, in the case of Philorth contra
Frazer; Whereby it was Found, That the Act of Parliament 1600. is to be
understood, in the case foresaid, where Hornings are upon Charges of the nature
foresaid, for appearing before the Council, and such like; but not in the case
in question and others of that nature, where Hornings are upon Bonds, and
Clauses of Registration therein contained, which do bind, and cannot be
questioned by those who do oblidge themselves.

The Lords considered, that the narrative of the said Act does clear the
meaning of the dispositive words; and there needed not to be a Law and remedy
as to Hornings upon Clauses of Registration, seeing Parties could not help
themselves as to Charges to compear before the Council, and others of that
nature without a Law: But they were Arbiters, and could make a Law to
themselves, as to Clauses contained in Contracts or Writes, if they thought
them grievous or impossible: And that there appeared to be a singularity in
the case mentioned by Durie, seeing the Charge was given in Orkney upon 6 days,
which could not well be satisfied: And therefore the Lords, for the reasons
foresaid, did sustain the Horning. Actor Hog and Thoirs: alteri Falconer and
Forbes. In praesentia.

D. 223. Carfrae contra Telzifer. eod. die.
A Person being pursued as representing a Debtor, upon that passive Title,
that he had behaved himself as Heir to the Defunct; In sua far as being
conveened at the instance of another Party, he had proponed a peremptor
Defense: The Lords Found, That the proponing of a Defense upon payment or such
like, was not such a Deed as could infer the Passive Title of Behaving; unless
it were adminicled with Intromission or otherwise. Nevoy Reporter. Hamiltoun
Clerk. Vide 10 December 1674.

D. 224. Chalmers contra Ferquharson and Gordon. 22. January 1675.
THE Lords Found, That a Person being Pursued as Intrometter; and having
Alleged, that before the intention of the cause she had obtained a Gift of her
Husbands Escheat, the said Defense is Relevant: And that after Intromission,
there being a Donator confirmed before intention of the Cause, or the
Intrometter obtaining a Gift tho not declared, there being no necessity to
declare the same against her self; that the same does purge even Intromission
before the Gift. Some of the Lords were of another opinion, upon that Ground,
that ipso momento that the parties intromet, there is a Passive Title
introduced against them; which does not arise upon the intention of the Cause,
but upon their own Act of behaving; and Jus being semel quaesitum to Creditors
cannot be taken from them, except in the case of an Executor confirmed before
the intention of the Cause; against whom the Creditor may have Action: And that
there is a difference betwixt a Donator having declared, and an Executor having
confirmed; In respect the Executor is liable to Creditors but not a Donator;
and an Appearand Heir having become liable by intrometting with Moveable
Heirship, and behaving as Heir, his Intromission is not purged by a
supervenient Gift; seeing his immixing is Aditio facto; and there is eadem ratio
as to Intrometters, who are Executors a tort (as the English Lawyers speak) and
wrongously: And in effect, by their Intromission adeunt passive, and are liable
to Creditors. Strathurd Reporter.

D. 225. Jean Maxuel contra Mr. William Maxuel. eod. die.
MR. William Maxuel Advocate, being pursued at the instance of Jean Maxuel
natural Daughter to Sprinkel, for 5000 Merks Alleged due to her by Bond,
granted by the said Mr. William, which she did refer to his Oath; did give in a
qualified Oath, Declaring that he had granted a Bond to the Pursuer at the
desire of her said Father, but the same was never delivered; and was so far
from being effectual, that by the express order of Sprinkel, he was not to
deliver the same to the Pursuer without his warrant; and that he had given him
order to destroy the said Bond, in consideration that he was not satisfied with
the Pursuers carriage; and that he had left her a Legacy, which the Defender
had paid. This quality was thought to be so intrinsic, that his Declaration
could not be divided, so as to prove the granting of the Bond, and not the
Quality; Specially seeing the said Quality was adminiculate with Letters, which
the said Mr. William did produce, which were written by Sprinkel to the same
purpose: Yet by plurality, It was Found, that his Oath proved the Lybel; and
Decree was given against him. Thereafter the said Mr. William obtained a
Suspension upon that Reason, that the Decree was Extracted by favor of the
Clerks, not without precipitation; after that he had applied to the Lords, and
desired that the case might be reconsidered: And that the Lords had Ordained
the Decree to be brought back; and because the party refused, they past a
Suspension.

The case being debated in praesentia; The Decree in foro was obtruded, and
that it was just upon the matter; seeing as to not delivery, It appeared by his
Oath, that he was trusted to the behoof of the Pursuer, and was in effect a
Depositar, so that he could not cancel the said Bond without consent of the
Pursuer: To which It was Answered, That the Decree was Extracted as said is,
and that immediately upon the pronounceing of the same, he had applied to the
Lords to the effect foresaid; And it cannot be said, that he had any Trust from
the Pursuer, but only from her Father: And tho he could be thought to be a
Depositar; the manner and quality and terms of the Depositation, could not be
proven otherwise, but Scripto or Juramento.

The Lords notwithstanding, Thought they were concerned to adhere to the
Decree being in foro; least their Decreets should be obnoxious to that
prejudice that even when they are in foro, they may be questioned and altered;
Some of the Lords were of the opinion, that the great consideration the Lords
should have, is to do Justice, and that the party having omitted nothing upon
his part, neither before nor after pronounceing of the same; and upon the
matter the reason of Suspension as to the point of Justice and Law being
unanswerably Relevant, It was hard that a Party should be grieved upon a
pretense of form; there being a singularity in this case upon which the Honor
of the Lords may be salved, viz. That the said Decree was Extracted with too
much precipitation.

D. 226. Joint Petition of the Advocates, 26. January 1675.
A Joint Petition was presented by the Advocates that had withdrawn; whereby
they did not expressly desire, that they should be readmitted, but did hold
forth that they were free of, and hated the very thought of Sedition, and that
the Lords who did best know the Reasons of their withdrawing would vindicate
them to His Majesty; and that they were willing to serve with that freedom
which their predecessors had formerly, and which they conceived was no more
than was necessary for these of their station, in order to the interest of the
People, that they acknowledge and were willing to submit to the just Power of
the Lords, as their predecessors had enjoyed the same, and desired that the
Petition should be transmitted to His Majesty as satisfactory. Some of the
Lords thought, that the Petition was altogether dissatisfactory, and should be
thrown over the Bar, being as to the manner, in a joint and Factious way; And
as to the matter, no ways satisfactory, insinuating a qualification of the
Lords Power, and their Submission; and that the Lords pretended to a Power
which their Predecessors had not, and that was not just.

Others of the Lords were of the opinion, That whatever mistakes there might be
as to the manner, It was hard upon that account to reject it: and that if the
time was not so pressing (that which was appointed for Addresses being to
Elapse the very next day) it might have been helped as to the manner, by giving
Intimation to the Advocates, that it would not satisfy; But there being no time
for that, and the certification being so high and heavy, viz. utter and
perpetual incapacity; it might be justly said, as it is Reported, a Judge in
England had said in the case of a person accused of Theft, whom he inclined to
favor by reason of the meanness of the value of the thing that was stolen,
being a Watch of Brass only, and the matter of the Watch being beneath that
value which the Law of England requires for punishing Theives Capitally; And it
being Alleged, that the Fashion with the Matter did exceed the value foresaid,
It is said, that he Answered, That he would take no Man's Life for the Fashion,
and it were hard, for the Fashion and modus, and the way of Address to take
from so many persons their Livelihood, and from the Country their Service,
that was so necessary to them. And that the Advocates fault being a
Joint-withdrawing, they might conceive that the expiation of the same should be
by a joint Address; And yet the Petition was not joint as to all the Advocates
concerned, many having given in and being to give in several Petitions: And as
to the matter it was Represented, that though the Petition is general, yet the
generals therein contained do imply the particulars that would be satisfactory,
seeing the Lords did not pretend to any power, but that which was just, and no
violation was intended of their Liberties, neither was any innovation
introduced or obtruded upon them or their carriage in their station. Upon all
which, It was thought, that the Petition should be transmitted simply, to the
effect it might import Interruption of the Prescription and Certification; any
Acts of Interruption even quales quales being sufficient: And the more short
that the Prescription be, and the higher the Certification and prejudice of
Prescription, as in this case; the Interruption being the more favorable.

The Lords notwithstanding, Found, that the Petition not being satisfactory,
could not be transmitted to any effect. And yet did declare, that albeit the
Proclamation was conceived in these terms, viz. That if the Advocates should
not give satisfaction betwixt and the 28. day; if they should apply upon the
28. day, their Application should be thought to be within the time contained in
the Act: And that in style of Law, these words, betwixt and a certain Term,
does not exclude the day of the Term.

They declared also, That the Petition being dissatisfactory upon that account
amongst others, viz. That they did not offer satisfaction, nor desire to be
readmitted, That Petitions being given in severally, and bearing that they
desired to Re-enter, and were willing to give satisfaction conform to the Kings
Letter and Proclamation, should be received and transmitted as satisfactory.

D. 227. Eod. die.
UPon a Bill, the Lords Found, That Parties having a joint and equal Interest
in Lands and Tenements; both, as to the Right it self, being disponed to them
jointly, and as to the respective Proportion and Parts of the said Tenements;
the principal Writes should be kept by such as offered Caution to the other
Portioners; and that Transumpts should be given to the other Persons concerned
upon the Common Charges of them all.

D. 228. 27. January 1675.
IN the case abovementioned, 5. January instant, concerning Con-cautioners
obliged conjunctly and severally for the Principal, without a clause of mutual
Relief: The Lords Found, That one of the Cautioners having paid and taken
Assignation, the others had a good Defense against him for his own part,
notwithstanding of the Reasons there abovementioned; and that it was urged,
that the Co-cautioner could not be forced to relieve the Defender if he had
paid the whole; seeing he had neither actio mandati, there being none given by
either of the Cautioners to others; nor was obliged to relieve the other
Cautioners by an express Clause, which is ever insert, when mutual relief is
intended: And that this is clear Law, it appears from the Title of the Civil
Law de Fidejussoribus ff. lib. 46. Tit. 1. leg. 39. Et leg. 36. ibid. Et. Leg.
11. Cod. eod. Tit.

The Lords Decided, as said is, In respect of a Practique produced betwixt
(...) in anno (...) relating to a former Practique in anno (...)

D. 229. The Minister of Tulliallane contra Colvill of Larg and Kincardne. 28.
January 1675.
IT was Found by the Lords Commissioners for Teinds, That the Heretors of
Lands, having Right cum decimis inclusis were not liable to the Augmentations
of Ministers Stipends; and that no Locality could be given out of their Teinds,
the said Infeftments being before the Year 1587. And that the Feu-duty payable
to Churchmen for Stock and Teind in Victual, was not liable thereto; because
the Teinds not being separate from the Stock, and the Heretors having Right to
the Lands free of Teinds, in effect there were not decimae: And by the Acts of
Parliament, and the Kings Decree Arbitral, Teinds are liable to Ministers
Feu-duties, in consideration that the Lords of Erection and Titulars, had Right
thereto from the King since the Act of Annexation: And that the King, who might
have questioned their Rights, was pleased by the said Acts of Parliament, and
Decree Arbitral, to affect them with the burden of Ministers Stipends; whereas
such Rights cum decimis, were granted by Churchmen, and did not flow from the
King, but from them, at such time as by the Law then standing, they might have
granted the same.

D. 230. Doctor Hay contra Jamieson and Alexander. eod. die.
GEorge Steuart Advocate, having comprised from (...) Con, the Lands of
Artrochie and others; did dispone the said Lands and his Right of Compriseing
to (...) Neilson: and thereafter the said Neilson failing in payment of the
price, the said George Steuart did Comprise back from the said Neilson the said
Lands: and Andrew Alexander did also comprise from the said Neilson the said
Lands, and his Right foresaid.

Doctor Hay, Having also comprised from (...) Con the foresaid Lands, pursued
an Improbation of the said first Comprysing, at George Steuart's Instance; and
having called thereto the said George Steuart and Neilson, and Marjorie
Jamison, who pretended Right to the said Lands; he did obtain a Certification
against two Bonds, which were the Ground of the said Comprising; upon
Compearance, and a long Dependence, and long Terms assigned for produceing the
said Bonds: And thereafter the Doctor pursued a Removing from the said Lands,
against the said Andrew Alexander and others: And it was Alleged for the said
Alexander, That he had Right to the said Lands, and was in Possession upon a
Right from George Steuart, who had Right thereto, (as said is) by a Comprising
against (...) Con the common Debtor: Whereunto It was Answered, That the
Defenders could not found a Defense upon George Steuart's Comprising, Because
the said Bonds, being the Grounds thereof, were false and improven: To which
It was Duplyed, That the Certification against the said Bonds, was only granted
against George Steuart; and that the said Andrew Alexander was not called, and
that now there is produced the foresaids Bonds; And that the Extracts of the
same out of the Register of the Commissariot of Aberdene had been formerly
produced; but the Principals, which were in publica custodia, as the warrands
of the same, could not be then found by reason of the disorder of that and many
other Registers, upon occasion of the late Troubles; and the same being now
found aught to be received and sustained as the Grounds of the said Comprysing;
Seeing they are not improven and found false by a Decree of Improbation upon
trial of the Falsehood; But a Certification is only given against the same for
not production; which at the most does amount only to a presumptive Falsehood,
which is now taken away (as said is) by production of the said Bonds: seeing
praesumptio cedit veritati.

It was Answered for the Pursuer, That all Persons, whom he was obliged to take
Notice of, and to call to the Improbation of the first Apprysing, were called;
viz. The said George Steuart, at whose Instance the said Comprising was
deduced; and who had also Comprised from Neilson the Right thereof, as said is;
and Neilson himself: and that he needed not call the said Alexander, who had
only a subaltern Right, and was not infeft: and albeit he had comprised from
Neilson, yet by that Comprising he had not such an interest as the Pursuer was
obliged to know; in sua far as, the Right of the Lands in question, was settled
in the Person of the said George Steuart, by the Comprising against Neilson:
after which Neilson had only a Reversion: and the said Neilson was called
himself, as said is: And the said Alexander's Right by his Comprising against
Neilson, being only a Right of the Legal of George Steuart's Comprising against
Neilson, the Pursuer was not holden to take notice of the said Right: and the
said Reversion is not only now expired, but was expired the time of the
obtaining of the said Certification, no Order being used thereupon: And albeit
the said Andrew Alexander was not called, yet he did compear in the said
Improbation; and albeit he pretends, that his right was reserved, the said
pretense is of no weight; seeing it was reserved only as accords: And
Certifications being the great Security of the People, and specially where the
same are obtained upon compearance, and after diverse terms are assigned; and
after Certification granted, the samen stopped for a long time, upon expectation
that the Writes may be got, as in this Case; the samen cannot be canvelled and
loosed, praetextu Instrumentorum noviter repertorum.

The Lords, For the Reason foresaid, thought hard to loose the said
Certification; but specially in this case, seeing the said Alexander will have
and take the advantage of Stuarts expired Comprysing; and exclude the Doctor
who was a true and real Creditor, to whose prejudice the said George Stuart and
the other Defenders had patched up, not only the said Comprysing for small
Sums, but other Rights; which the Donator had been forced, after he had
Comprysed, to question by a Reduction, and had prevailed after a long
dependence, and after they had possessed the Lands for a long time: And on the
other hand, the said principal Bonds being now produced; they thought it hard,
that the Doctor should take advantage of the same, to exclude the Defenders
altogether; and therefore they proposed to the Doctor, that he should grant a
Reversion to the said Alexander, upon payment of what was justly due to him,
within the space of two Years: And the Doctor acquiesceing, they decerned in
the Removing with the quality foresaid, Lord Glendoick Reporter. Gibson Clerk.
Actor Chalmers alteri Thoirs. Vide 17. February 1676. inter eosdem.

D. 231. contra Maxuel. 29. January. 1675.
A Bill of Exchange being drawn upon three Merchants, without mentioning that
it was drawn upon them, either severally or conjunctly; and one of the persons
upon whom it was drawn, being pursued for the whole Sum in the said Bill, being
accepted by them all simply, without mentioning that they had accepted the same
only for their own Parts; It was Alleged, That they were only liable for their
own Parts, being correi debendi; which is understood in Law, that they should
not be liable in solidum, unless it were so expressed, especially seeing the
Pursuer cannot say, that they were either Partners, or that each of them had
provision extending to the whole Sum.

The Lords, having thought fit to try the custom of Merchants, and to take the
opinion thereupon of certain Merchants in Edinburgh; and the Report being
positive, that it was the custom of Merchants, both in the place where the Bill
was drawn and here, that there should be Action in solidum upon such Bills,
when they are drawn and accepted simply in manner foresaid; Found the Defenders
liable in solidum.

D. 232. McKintoish contra McKene. 29. January. 1675
A Decree, against a person holden as Confessed before the Lords of Session
about 20 Years ago, was questioned as null; upon that pretense, that it did
not bear, that the Party, against whom it was given, was personally
apprehended, but only that he was lawfully cited.

The Lords Found, That after so long time, the said Decree could not be
declared null and void, upon pretense of an intrinsic Nullity; In regard the
said Decree did bear, that the Defender was lawfully cited to give his Oath;
and he could not be thought to be lawfully cited, unless he had been personally
apprehended; and praesumitur pro sententia, and that omnia are solenniter acta;
unless it were made appear by production of the Execution, that the Defender
was not personally apprehended: And therefore the said Reason of Nullity was
Repelled; Reserving Action of Reduction as Accords. Monro Clerk.

D. 233. Scrimzeor contra Kingheny. 2. February. 1675.
MAjor Scrimzeour having named in his Testament in Anno 1650. Sir John
Carnagie, and the Tutor of Purie Fodringhame and Alexander Wedderburne of
Kinghenie to be Tutors to his two Daughters: Margaret Scrimzeour one of the
said Daughters pursued the said Alexander Wedderburne for Count and Reckoning
and Payment; and an Auditor being appointed, and that Question being started
before him, viz. Whether the Tutor should be Liable for Negligence, from the
time that he accepted; or before, after he knew that he was named Tutor: And
upon the Auditors Report, It was Found by the Lords, that he should be liable
only from the time of his accepting; and yet the Pursuer having desired and got
a Hearing in the Innerhouse, It was again urged for her, that the Tutor should
be liable, after he knew that he was named, and did cease to do that Diligence
that was incumbent to him; and diverse Citations were adduced from the Civil
Law, and the Titles of the ff. and Cod. De Tutela and Tutoribus; And De
Administratione and periculo Tutorum; which ought to militate in this case,
especially in respect the said Defender was not only named Tutor, but was a
Legator; a considerable Sum being left to him by the said Testament, which Law
presumes was left to him in contemplation of the burden of Tutory put upon him;
so that having accepted the said Legacy, and having confirmed himself Executor
Legator, he could not decline the Office, not to be Liable as Tutor or ut
Protutor. And it was farther urged, that as Executor Legator, he was liable to
do Diligence: To which It was Answered, That the former Interloquitor was
opponed being just, and upon Relevant Grounds of Law, in respect the Civil Law
is not received by us altogether in the case of Tutors; the Office of Tutorie
by the Civil Civil Law being munus publicum and necessarium, which no person
can decline, unless he have and allege a just Ground of Excuse, within the
time limited by that Law; whereas by our Law and Custom, when any person or
persons are named Tutors, they are at liberty to accept the said Office or not;
so that a person named Tutor until he accept, neither is, nor is obliged to do
the Duty of a Tutor: And albeit by the Civil Law, a Legacy being left to a
Tutor, is presumed to be left eo intuitu and upon condition, that he should
accept to be Tutor, yet by the Civil Law, if the person named Tutor do not
actually get the said Legacy, nisi consecutus sit, which are the words of the
said Law, he is not obliged to accept the said Office; and it is not, nor can
it be said, that the Defender got the said Legacy before he did accept: And as
to that other Ground, that the Defender being Executor Legator was obliged to
do Diligence; It was Answered, That by late Decisions, an Executor Creditor is
only liable to intromet, in order to his own satisfaction; and an Executor qua
Legator is in the same case as an Executor Creditor; seeing a Legacy is a Debt
payable out of the Executry; and the Legator has no interest to confirm, but to
the effect he may be paid of the same.

The Lords Found, That a Tutor is liable only from the time that he did accept:
and that the leaving to him, and his accepting of a Legacy did not alter the
Case; unless before his accepting of the said Office, he not only had owned,
but got the said Legacy: And this Pursuit being only actio Tutelae, and for
Count and Reckoning against the Defender as Tutor, they did not determine the
said Question, How far an Executor Legator should be liable? but reserved the
same, until the Defender should be pursued as Executor.

The Lords, in the Debate amongst themselves, some of them did urge these
Arguments; That a Tutor being liable only ratione Officii, he cannot be liable
before he accept the said Office; it being inconsistent with Law, that he
should be liable to the Duty of an Office before he have it, which would be
Filius ante Patrem. 2. In Law, a Tutorie is quasi Contractus; and as in all
Contracts, it is required that there should be the mutual Deeds of both Parties
contracters; and the Nomination (which is the Deed of the Defunct) did not bind
the Tutor, until he bind himself by accepting, which is his own Deed. 3. That a
Tutor, having a Legacy, should be obliged to accept it, is only provided by the
Civil Law; which is the Municipal Law of the Romans; and is not of force with
us, until it become our Law, either by a Statute, or Custom authorizing the
same; and even by the Civil Law, praesumitur only that the Legacy left to the
Tutor is upon the account foresaid, but that Presumption is only in the case,
where it cannot be thought, that the Defunct would have left the Legacy upon
another account, viz. of Relation or any other Consideration; Whereas, in this
case, it cannot be thought, that the said Legacy was left to the Defender, upon
the account that he was Tutor, in respect he being the last named of the three
Tutors, there were no Legacy left to them; and he was Nephew to the Defunct,
who had a great kindness for him: and the said Legacy was not left to him
simply, but in case his Wife, whom he thought to be with Child, should not be
brought to bed of a Son. 4. The Defender could not accept the said Office of
Tutor Testamentar, Because he and the other two Tutors were named conjunctly,
and the other two living, he could not be Tutor alone. Actor Dalrymple, alteri
Falconer. Monro Clerk.

D. 234. 3. February 1675.
A Removing being pursued from some Lands of the Estate of Collarnie; the Lady
Collarnie compeared, and alleged, that the Tennent could not be removed
without her consent, seeing the had right to a Terce by the Law, and was not
excluded by her Contract of Marriage, tho she was provided thereby to a
Jointure, but not in satisfaction of her Terce, or what else she could pretend:
Whereunto It was Answered, That she was not served nor kenned to a Terce; and
until then, she had no interest to compear to stop the Removing.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Found she had no Interest: Reserving her
Right of Terce, when she should be served and kend, as accords. Craigie
Reporter.

D. 235. Oliphant of Provostmains contra (...) eod. die.
A Bill was given in, desiring, that a Comprising being deduced, and the
Messenger having deceased in the interim, before he subscried the same;
Therefore an other Messenger who was his Colleague might be allowed and
Warranted to subscribe the said Comprising.

The Lords considered, That the Messenger that was on life, tho he had been
employed to execute the Letters of the Comprising, by denounceing and citeing,
yet he did not sit and was Colleague to the deceast Messenger and was Judge with
him, the day and time of the deduceing of the said Comprising: and that a
Comprising being Processus Executivus, consisting of the Executions, and of the
Process and Sentence of Comprising, upon the day that the Debtor was cited
thereto; tho diverse Messengers may act severally as to Citation and
Denunciation, yet none of them could be looked upon as the Judge and the
Pronouncer of the Sentence, who ought to subscribe the same, but the Messenger
that did actually sit as Judge, and upon the verdict of the Inquest, did Decern
and Adjudge.

D. 236. Cranston contra Mr. Mark Ker of Moriston. 4. February, 1675.
UPon a Bill, it was desired, that Witnesses should be examined in relation to
a Process, that their Depositions should lie in retentis: But The Lords Found,
That tho Summons were raised, that the samen not being execute, there was not a
Dependence: and that it was a streatch great enough, to receive Witnesses
before Litiscontestation in a depending Process, which the Lords are sometimes
in use to do: but that Witnesses should be received upon a Bill, without the
Foundation of a Process, it is inconsistent with Form.

It is to be Regrated, That of late, the time of the English, that Abuse having
creept in, that there are so many Bills given in, and sometimes past through
inadvertencie in a hurrie; the said custom should be yet retained; so that
Bills do justle out Process and the hearing of Causes; Especially it being
considered, that they are often times offered in the very time, when after
pleading in other Causes, Parties and Advocates are removing; which is the
Occasion that often times most of the Lords are not advertent when the same are
offered: And it is a Practice not suitable to the gravity of the Court, and not
without a dangerous Consequence; seeing Bills may be anent Matters of great
importance, which ought to be offered to the Lords in a decent way, and should
be considered by them deliberatly.

D. 237. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Ship called the Wine-Grape, mentioned in the Case aboverelated Number. 207;
Being Found by a Decree of the Admiral not to be a Prize: and thereafter the
said Decree being reduced upon a contentious Debate in foro: A Bill of
Suspension was given in, making mention, that the Lords having thought fit,
during the dependence, the Value of the Ship being liquidate, the Price thereof
should be sequestrate in the Complainers hands, upon a Bond to pay the Sum
therein contained to the Caper and his Owners, if they should prevail in the
Reduction foresaid: And that he was charged to pay the said Sum, the Process
being now at a period by the said Decree Reductive, at the instance of an
Assigney: And that he could not pay the same until an Arrestment made in his
Hands, at the instance of the Swedes the former Owners of the said Ship, should
be purged; which Arrestment was upon the Dependence of a Reduction, intented at
the Strangers instance, for reduceing of the said Decree Reductive: It was
debated upon the Bill, and amongst the Lords, that the said Decree being in
foro contradictorio, was of that nature, that it could not be reduced: and it
were of a dangerous Consequence, that after Decreets in foro, the People should
not be secure, but upon pretense of the dependence of Reductions of the same,
that which was found to belong to them by such Decreets, should be again liable
to Arrestment and to questioning: And upon the other hand, It was considered
and alleged, That there being Arrestment and Warrant for the same upon the
dependence, the Debtor was not concerned to dispute what the Issue of the same
may be, but there being de facto an Arrestment, the same ought to be purged;
which could not be in form, but either by lousing the Arrestment, or by
refusing the Bill upon the reason of Arrestment; the Defender in this Reduction
finding Caution to make forthcoming, if the Pursuer should prevail.

The Lords, notwithstanding Found, That in respect the matter was already
decided by a Decree in foro, that the Bill should be refused, notwithstanding
of the said Arrestment upon the dependence foresaid; which was hard as to the
Debtor, who could not be formally secured, but in manner foresaid: And
likeways hard as to the Strangers, seeing by the said Deliverance, the Lords did
in effect predetermine the Reduction now depending; and upon the matter did
Find, That the Pursuer could not have Interest to pursue, before the Pursuer
was heard in the said Reduction.

D. 238. Vanse Jailer of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, 5. February 1675.
MR. Vanse Jailer of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, did give in a Bill, complaining
that the Jailer of the Canongate was in use to enlarge Prisoners being put in
for debt, upon the Warrant and consent of the Creditor at whose instance they
were imprisoned; whereas the Complainer did not enlarge any such Prisoners,
without Warrant of the Lords Letters: and therefore desired, that either he
should be allowed to have the same liberty, or that it should be denied to
other Jaylors.

The Lords did consider what was fit to be done in all such like Cases; and in
end, the plurality did resolve, that where the Sums were small, not exceeding
200. merks, the Jailer might enlarge Prisoners for debt, without any other
Warrant but the consent of the Parties, at whose instance they were imprisoned;
which they did upon that consideration, that Poor People, if they should be
forced to suspend and relax, with a Warrant to put them out, would be sometime
put to more Charges, than the Debt does amount to. Five of the Lords did
dissent, being of the Opinion, That the Prison being His Majesty's Prison, no
person could be put in upon Letters of Caption, unless the same were under the
Signet; and no person put in by Warrant of the said Letters, could be enlarged
without Letters to that effect; nam unumquodque dissolvitur, eo modo quo
contrahitur: And the Prisoner being put in for his Rebellion, could not be
enlarged, unless he were relaxed: And if Parties did suffer themselves to be
taken and incarcerat for small Sums, it was their own fault, and more
unexcusable the less the Sum be; and majus and minus non variant speciem: And
it being acknowledged by the Law, they being Prisoners for greater Sums, they
could not be enlarged, without a Warrant to put them to liberty; and the Law
making no distinction of greater and less Sums, the Lords had not a Legislative
Power to alter or qualify the same, without an Act of Parliament.

D. 239. Burnet contra Lutgrue. eod. die.
A Commission being directed for taking the Oath of a Stranger residing in
Holland; the Report was questioned upon that pretense, that the Strangers
Deposition was not subscribed, albeit the Commission did bear, that he should
subscribe the same: and yet it was sustained, because of the Custom of Holland,
that the Judges only subscribe, and the same was subscribed by them; And it was
adminiculate with a Letter from him, bearing, that he had declared before the
Commissioners, and that he would adhere to what he had declared. Gibson Clerk.

D. 240. Marion Binnie contra Gilbert Scot, eod. die.
THE deceast William Scot of Bonington having three Sons, William the eldest,
and Robert, and Gilbert: The said William by his Contract of Marriage, had the
Lands and Estate of Bonington disponed to him by his Father Mr. James Scot; but
was not infeft therein: and after his decease his Brother Robert having
succeeded to him, did renew a Bond granted by the said William, in favors of
Robert Riddel; and having retired the said William's Bond, did grant a new Bond
for the Sum therein contained: And the said Robert having also deceased, before
he was infeft in the Estate, or served Heir to the said William; and the said
Gilbert the third Son having succeeded: a Pursuit was intented, at the instance
of the Relict and Executrix of the Creditor, against the said Gilbert, as
representing the said William and Robert his Brothers; at least to hear and see
it found and declared, that the said Bond granted by Robert, was granted by him
in contemplation and lieu of the said William's Debt and Bond; and that it
ought to affect any Estate that did belong to the said William; and in special
the benefit of the said Contract of Marriage, and disposition therein made in
favors of the said William.

It was Alleged for the Defender, That he did not Represent Robert nor
William, upon any Passive Titles; and tho he should represent William, neither
he nor the Estate would be Liable to the said Debt, In respect the samen was
extinct, and innovate by a new Bond granted by the said Robert; whom neither he
did nor would Represent: And the said Bond being granted only by Robert, could
not affect any thing belonging to William; and he was not concerned to debate
upon what account the said Bond was given by Robert.

The Lords did incline to sustain the Declarator, upon that head, that the said
Innovation was only to the effect, the Creditor might be the better secured and
satisfied; the said Robert being Appearand Heir for the time; and who if he had
lived would have perfited his Right, and obtained himself served Heir to
William; but being prevented by Death, so that the said Bond was altogether
ineffectual, the Pursuer had condictionem causa data causa non secuta, to be
Reponed against the said Innovation: and the Defender was in dolo pessimo to
question the same, seeing nemo debet locupletari cum aliena jactura; And he
ought not to have William's Estate without payment of his Debt: And some of the
Lords did urge and instance the case aftermentioned, viz. If the Younger of two
Brothers, the Elder having gone Abroad, and thought to be dead, should obtain
himself served as Heir to his Father; and the Creditors of the Father
conceiving that he had Right should renew their Bonds, and give back these that
they had from the Father, and thereafter the Elder Brother should return and
should be served Heir to his Father, whether in that case the Creditors might
have Action against the Elder Brother and Estate, notwithstanding of the said
Innovation?

But because the case was New, and not without Difficulty, The Lords before
Answer thought fit to try, what way it could be made appear that the said Bond
was in lieu of a Bond granted by William. Newbyth Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 241. Broun contra Ogilvie. eod. die.
A Person being pursued for an Annuity of Money, did claim the benefit of
Retention conform to the late Act of Parliament: But the Lords Found, that
albeit Retention was granted for relief of Debitors of their Taxation, and that
the Debtor was alike concerned as to the end foresaid, whether he paid the
Annualrent as the usura and profit of a principal Sum, or as Annuity due upon
a personal Bond; yet the Act of Parliament, mentioned only Annualrents: And
being, as all Acts of Parliament, stricti Juris, specially such as are
correctoriae Juris communis; it could not be extended beyond the Letter of the
Law. Nevoy Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 242. Colonel Fulertoun contra The Lord of Boyne. eod. die.
THE deceast Lord of Towie having named his Relict now Lady Boyne Tutrix to
his Daughter; and in case of her Marriage Colonel Fulertoun: The said Colonel
pursued the Lord of Boyne for delivery of the said Pupil: It was Alleged,
That her Mother and her Husband would entertain the Pupil gratis. It was
Answered, That Boyne being her Step Father, and having no other Relation, but
that of Vitricus, which in Law is not favored; his offer to entertain is not
Relevant against the Tutor, who has the Trust both of the Pupils person and
Estate: And it is to be presumed, that the offer of the Step-Father is upon a
design upon the Pupil her Person and Fortune; and that the case had been
determined in terminis 4. July 1649. Langshaw contra Mure.

The Lords Repelled the Defense, and Ordained the Pupil to be delivered to the
Tutor. Strathurd Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 243. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Warrant could not be given to cite at the Market cross
with certification pro confesso; seeing no person could be holden as confessed who
is not personally apprehended. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 244. Duke of Monmouth contra Earl of Tweeddale. eod. die.
THere being a Transaction betwixt the Duke and Duchess of Monmouth, and the
Earl of Tweeddale, whereupon a Discharge was granted by the said Duke and
Duchess to the said Earl, with consent of their Curators, which was also
superscribed by his Majesty taking burden for the Duke and Duchess; with an
obligement, that they should ratify after Majority: The said Duke and his Lady
pursued a Reduction of the said Discharge, upon a reason of Minority and
Lesion; It was Alleged, That all Parties having Interest were not called,
viz. The Officers of State for His Majesty's Interest; seeing His Majesty was so
much concerned, that if any thing were evicted from the Defender, His Majesty
would be Liable for the same.

The Lords Repelled the Defense: Without prejudice to His Majesty's Advocat to
appear for his interest, if he thought fit. Stathurd Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 245. Irving contra Caruther. 6. February 1675.
THE Summonds being referred to the Defenders Oath, who having declared that as
to what was referred to his Oath he could not remember nor be positive; It was
debated amongst the Lords, whether the Oath did prove or not: Or if the
Defender should be holden as Confessed, In respect he was to declare de facto
proprio and recenti; and in such a case the pretense of non memini is neither
excuseable nor relevant: And so it was Found by the Lords, tho some were of the
Opinion, that a person compearing and declareing upon Oath, that to his
knowledge he did not remember, could not holden as confessed, seeing he cannot be
said to be contumacious; and to want Memory is not a fault: And after a party
has declared, it is only to be considered, whether the Oath proves or not. Mr.
John Hay Clerk.

D. 246. Burnet contra McClellane. eod die.
A Father being pursued, as Behaving himself as Heir to his Son, and
Litiscontestation being made, and Witnesses adduced; the time of the Adviseing,
It was Alleged, That the Father could not represent his Son as behaving,
because the Defunct had a Brother who was produced, and at the Bar: Whereto It
was Answered, That in hoc statu the Defense was not receivable; and it could
not be said to be noviter veniens, seeing the Father could not be ignorant that
he had another Son.

The Lords, in respect of the State of the Process, would not receive the
Defense, tho verified instanter, unless the Son would suscipere judicium, and
be content that the Process should proceed as against him: which appears to be
hard; seeing that which was to be proven, was not only that the Defender
intrometted, but that he was appearand Heir; and in casu notorio, no probation
was to be respected to the contrary: and tho the Father could not but know that
he had a Son, yet he might be ignorant that his Son would be preferred to
himself, as to the Succession of his own Son: and in damno vitando, ignorantia
Juris is excusable. Mr. J. Hay Clerk.

D. 247. (...) contra Captain Martine and others. 9. February. 1675.
A Ship being taken by a Caper, and being found by a Decree of the Admiral to
be a Prize: Thereafter, upon a Decree of the Lords, reductive of that of the
Admiral, being found to be a free Ship, the Stranger did urge payment against
the Captain and the Owners of the value; And It was Alleged, That the Decree
of the Lords, Ordaining Restitution, was against them as correi debendi, and
not in solidum, and that they are only liable for their own parts: Whereunto It
was Answered, That though it was found, That the Captain had probable Reasons
for bringing up the said Ship, yet upon the matter, the Stranger was wronged by
the taking of his Ship; and in casu delicti, by spuilie or wrongous
intromission, or otherways, Decreets against the Persons therein contained are
construed to be in solidum: and the Stranger cannot know, what the respective
Interests and Parts of the Owners are; and ought not distrahi, and to be put to
Process against every one of them, for declaring of their Parts.

The Lords Found, That they were liable in solidum; Reserving their Debate and
Relief amongst themselves, as to their several Interests and Proportions. Lord
Forret Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 248. Burd contra Reid. eod. die.
THE Lords having formerly Found, That the Cedents of Personal Bonds, are
liable only to warrant debitorem esse, but not esse locupletem; It was
pretended, That there being a Question concerning Warrandice of a Right of
Annualrent out of Land, the same should be warranded no other way: But The
Lords Found, That the Warrandice of Lands, or of such real Rights, upon or out
of Land, are absolute, unless they be expressly limited and qualified by their
Right. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 249. Vetch contra the Creditors of James Ker and Peter Pallat. eod. die.
SIR Robert Stewart in Ireland and his Son, being Debitors by Bond in the Sum
of 800. lib. starl. to the deceast James Sanderson; which Bond being conceived
in the Form of English Bonds, did not bear Annualrent: The said James did
assign the said Bond in Favors of Ronald Graham in trust, and to his own
behoof, upon a Back-bond; and thereafter did assign the said Back-bond in
favors of James Ker and Robert Broun Merchants; as to two Parts to the said
Ker, and the third part to Broun.

Sir George Maxuel of Pollock being Trustee, and acting in name of the said
Stewarts, did grant a Bond to the said Ker and Broun, making mention of the
said Bond granted by the Stewarts, and of the Assignation made by the said
James Sanderson to the said Broun and Ker; and that after Count and Reckoning,
there was only resting of the said Sum 300. lib. sterling. which the said Sir
George, in name of the said Stewarts, is obliged to pay within three Months
after that Stewarts Bond should be delivered to him, with an Assignation or
Discharge.

The said James Ker being deceased, his Executors did intent Action against the
said Sir George Maxuel, for his part of the said Sum, viz. 200. lib.

In this Process, William Vetoh did compear for his Interest, and did allege,
that the Sum in question due by Sir George Maxuel, did belong to him, having
fallen under the Rebellion of the said James Sanderson, and the Gift of his
Escheat, first Gifted to David Rodger, fra whom the said William had right, and
thereafter to the said William himself: and tho the said Bond, granted by Sir
George Maxuel, was granted to the said Ker and Broun, yet it was granted for
the same Sums, that were due by the said Stewarts to the said Sanderson, as
appears by the Bond granted by the said Sir George Maxuel; so that the foresaid
Sum due to Sanderson, and the Bond for the same, having (as said is) fallen and
belonged to the King, it does still belong to him and his Donator;
Notwithstanding the said new Bond granted by Sir George Maxuel in place of the
same, seeing Surrogatum sapit naturam, etc. It was Answered, That the said
Sanderson being Debtor to Ker and Broun; as he might have paid his Debt after
the Rebellion, or the Creditors might have gotten satisfaction by poinding or
Arrestment before the Rebels Escheat, so he might have assigned the Debt due to
him for their satisfaction. Whereunto It was Answered, for the said William
Vetch, That the Rebel cannot make assignation stante rebellione, the Act of
Parliament in anno 1592. K. Jam. 6. Parl. 12. cap. 145. Entitled, Anent the
Escheats of Rebels, Bearing expressly, That no Assignation shall be valid being
made by a Rebel at the Horn, in defraud of the Creditor; if he be at the Horn
for the same cause: And therefore the said Assignation made by Sanderson when
he was at the Horn, in prejudice of Rodger, Vetch his Cedent, at whose instance
he was at the Horn for the same Debt, is void: and what may be in the Case of
actual payment, or of Poinding, or legal Diligence, needs not be debated in
this case; seeing the Rebel did neither make payment, nor was the said Debt due
by the Stewarts, affected with Legal Diligence, but a voluntar Assignation was
made by the Rebel, which being Null, for the Reason foresaid, and the Pursuers
Right to the Sum in question, being founded upon the same, the Pursuer can have
no Right to the foresaid Sum; and the said Vetch having undoubted Right (as
said is) ought to be preferred.

The Lords by their Interloquitor 10 Decenber last, did find that an
Assignation made by a Rebel to his Creditor, albeit for a Debt preceding the
Rebellion, and that the Assignation was granted before the Gift of the Rebels
Escheat, cannot prejudge the King or his Donator: But that payment made by the
Rebel, or any other in his name, upon his Precept or Assignation, being before
the Donators Gift, is sufficient to liberate the Creditor from Repetition.

It was further Alleged for the Pursuer, that the said Bond granted and due by
the Stuarts was extinct and innovat; In fua far as the said Sir George Maxuel
had granted the said other Bond to the said Ker and Broun for the same Sum,
which was equivalent to payment.

Whereunto It was Answered, That the said Bond granted by Sir George Maxuel was
in effect but a Bond of Corroboration, whereby the said Sir George became
expromissor, and upon the matter Surety for the said Sum; So that the former
Bond was not innovat nor extinct, being neither Discharged nor Retired; but
being only to be Discharged or Assigned upon payment made by Sir George, which
implies that it could not be innovat nor extinct, seeing it could not be
Assigned if it had been extinct.

The Lords before Answer to that Point, viz. If the said Transaction was
equivalent to Payment, declared they would take Sir George Maxuel's Oath ex
officio, at what time the said Bond granted by the Stuarts were delivered up to
him, and by whom; and if any Discharges were granted to him of the said Bond.

Sir George Maxuel having declared upon Oath, That he had recovered the said
Bond from Ronald Grahame, and that he had not taken a Discharge of the said
Bond either from him or from the said Ker and Broun.

This Day the Debate was again resumed at the Bar, and amongst the Lords; and
these Arguments were urged by His Majesty's Advocat. viz. That by the Rebellion
Jus quaeritur Domino Regi, and that confiscation ex delicto is upon the matter
a Legal Assignation, and equivalent to an Assignation intimate: And if there
were two Assignations, and the Debtor being out of the Country, the first
Assignation had been intimate at the Market Cross, and Pear and Shore of Leith,
and the Debtor having returned, the second Assigney had intimate his by way of
Instrument, and thereupon the Debtor had bona fide made payment to him, the
first Assigney notwithstanding would be preferable: And tho the Debtor would
be free in respect of Payment bona fide, yet the first Assigney might repeat
the Debt from the second as indebite paid to him who had no Right; so that the
King and his Donator having Right to Stuarts Debt, tho the Sum in question had
been paid to Ker and Broun (as it is not) a paritate rationis the Donator
might repeat the same as indebite paid to them; seeing by the said
Interloquitor, It is Found, That an Assignation made by a Rebel, albeit before
the Gift, cannot prejudge the King or his Donator, for the reason foresaid; It
follows necessarly, that the Assigney by virtue of such an Assignation has no
Right to the Sum Assigned, and consequently, if the Debtor pay the said Sum
bona fide, tho he may be liberate, yet the said payment cannot prejudge the
King, or his Donator, but they may repeat the Sum belonging to them: And if it
be not paid, but a Bond is renewed for the same, as in this case, the Donator
ought to be preferred.

The Assignation being null, as said is, There can be no Innovation or Deed
done by the Assigney who has no Right, in prejudice of the King or his Donator;
seeing a Debt cannot be innovat but by a person having Right to the same.

The Law does so far favor Legal Diligence done by the Creditors of Rebels,
that there are some Decisions in their favors preferring their Diligence done
before the Gift be declared; but voluntar Deeds done by Rebels in prejudice of
His Majesty, who has Jus quaesitum, and of the Creditor who has denounced, are
altogether reprobate; And the Law being clear, and there being no Decision to
the contrary in favors of Creditors in the case of payment upon such
Assignations as are void in Law; the Donator ought to be preferred; Otherways a
Door should be open to prejudge His Majesty of His Casuality, and Creditors of
their Diligence, seeing the Rebel may assign, and upon such voluntary
Assignations payment may be made: And there should need no Application to the
Exchequer for Gifts of Escheats, if they may be so easily evacuate by such
practices:

It appears by Sir George Maxuel's Oath, and by his Bond, that the said Debt
was not extinct; seeing Sir George did act in the Affair as a Trustee and doer
for the Stuarts; and their Bonds were neither Discharged, nor given back by the
Assigneys, who had Right to the same; but were recovered by the said Sir George
by his own means from Ronald Grahame.

The Lords did adhere to their former Interloquitor, and did Find that
Creditors getting payment from Rebels, either by poinding or by Assignation
before Declarator at the Donators instance, does secure the Creditor against
the Donator; And did also Find, that in this case the first Bonds were extinct;
and that the same being delivered to Sir George Maxuel, before Declarator at
the instance of the second Donator, that the Assigney is preferable. Sir David
Falconer for Veatch alteri Dalrymple, Char^ris, etc. Gibson Clerk.

This Decision appears to be hard, seeing Declaratoria non tribuit Jus, but
Declarat Jus quod est: And the Horning being declared upon the first Gift,
there needed not a Declarator upon the second. Vide infra 12. February, and 10.
Novem. 1675. inter eosdem.

D. 250. Douglass contra Jackson and Grahame. 11. February. 1675.
THE Lords Found, that a poinding is not lawful, unless it be begun before the
setting of the Sun; and what is to be done at that time, be all done and
complete before the Day light be gone.

D. 251. Lady Torwoodhead contra The Tennents. eod. die.
THE Lady Torwoodhead having gotten Aliment modified to her by the Lords of
Council of 600 Merks yearly; and for surety of the same having gotten the Gift
of her Husbands Liferent Escheat, did pursue the Tennents for Mails and Duties.

It was Alleged for Florence Garner. That he had Right to the Lands Lybelled,
and Mails and Duties of the same by Comprysings and Infeftments thereupon
expired.

It was Answered, That the Mails and Duties of the Lands exceed the Annualrents
of the Sums contained in the Comprysing; and by the Act of Parliament 1661. for
ordering the payment of Debts betwixt Creditor and Debtor, where the Lands
Comprysed exceed the Annualrents of the Sums contained in the Comprysing; The
Comprysers are restricted to the possession of such of the Lands dureing the
Legal as the Lords of Session should think just: And that the expireing of the
said Florence his Comprysings was interrupted by an Order used by Edward
Ruthven Son to the Lord Forrester.

It was Answered for Gairner, That the Lord Forrester had no Right to the
Reversion of Torwoodhead's Lands; so that no Order used by him, as to these
Lands, could be valid to interrupt the said Comprysing: And the said Order
neither was nor could be declared.

The Lords, In respect the Lord Forrester being principal and his Brother
Torwoodhead Cautioner, both their Lands were Comprysed for the same Debt, and
that the Principal may satisfy the Debt, and extinguish the Comprysing as to
both his own and the Cautioners Lands, They Found that the said Order did
interrupt the Comprysing as to both.

This appears to be hard. 1. Because the said Act of Parliament indulges the
favor foresaid to the Debitors themselves, upon the Conditions
thereinmentioned, viz. That they should ratify the Comprysers possession and
deliver the Evidents; and the same cannot be extended to Donators. 2. A
Comprysing cannot be interrupted, but either by Payment and actual
satisfaction, or by using and declareing an Order of Redemption: Until which be
done, the Comprysing cannot be thought to be unexpired. Craigie Reporter.

D. 252. Kinnier contra (...) 12. February. 1675.
THE Lords upon a Bill given in by (...) Kinnier who had obtained a Bonorum,
and a Testificat of diverse persons of Credit that he had become insolvent upon
occasion of loss and ill Debtors, and was otherwise virtuous; They dispensed
with that part of the Decree anent the wearing of the Habit.

D. 253. Presbytrie of Duns. eod. die.
THE Presbytrie of Duns having by Bill desired, That Letters of Horning may be
direct against certain persons who had been cited as Witnesses; and did not
appear before them.

The Lords did demurr, In respect Letters of Horning ought not to be direct,
but either by consent of Parties, or by Warrant of Acts of Parliament; As
appears by Acts of Parliament, ordaining Horning to be direct upon Sheriffs and
Commissars Decreets, and Decreets within Burgh, and Admirals Decreets.

D. 254. Cruickshanks contra Watt. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Disposition being made after Inhibition, but before
the Registration of the same, may be reduced ex capite Inhibitionis; seeing the
Execution of the Inhibition does put the Leidges in mala fide: And after the
same is complete, and thereby the Debtor and the Leidges are inhibite to give
and take Rights, the Inhibition ipso momento thereafter, is valide and perfect;
but resolvitur sub condition, if it be not Registrate in due time. Mr. Thomas
Hay Clerk.

D. 255. Veatch contra The Creditors of James Ker, and Peter Pallat. eod. die.
IN the case abovementioned Veatch contra The Creditors of James Ker and Peter
Pallat; It was farther Alleged for the said William Veatch, that he ought to
be preferred, because by the Act of Parliament 1621. Assignations or other
Rights granted by Bankrupts in favors of any of their Creditors, who had not
done Diligence, and in prejudice of a Creditor who had done Diligence by
Horning or otherwise, are void: And the Creditor who is partially preferred
and gratified, if he recover payment he is Liable to Refound: And by the Act of
Parliament in Anno. 1592. anent the Escheats of Rebels, Cap. 145. Assignations
made stante Rebellione in prejudice of the Creditor, at whose instance the
Cedent is at the Horn, are Null; and that the said Assignation made by
Sanderson in favors of Ker and Broun, was made by him after he was at the Horn
at the instance of David Rodger, Veatches Cedent: And the said Assignation
being Null for the Reason foresaid, all that has followed thereupon is void.

It was Answered, That the said Act of Parliament is only to be understood, in
the Case when any voluntar Payment or Right is made in defraud of the lawful
and more timely Diligence of another Creditor, having served Inhibition, or
used a Horning, Arrestment, Comprising, or other Lawful Mean to affect the
Dyvors Land or Estate; and that Horning is not such a Diligence as does affect,
being only personal Execution against the Debtor; and that the said Debt of
Stuarts was many years contracted by the Rebel after the said Horning; and that
the said Stewarts residing in Ireland, and their Bond being conceived after the
style of English Bonds, did not fall under Sanderson the Creditors Escheat.

Whereunto It was Answered, That by the said Act of Parliament, Bankrupts,
after they are at the Horn, cannot make any voluntar Right or Payment to
gratify or prefer other Creditors; so that there is no necessity to debate
whether Horning does affect or not; And yet the truth is, Horning is such a
Diligence as does affect, seeing thereby all the Escheatable Goods are affected,
and do belong to the King, and to the Creditor at whose instance the Horning
is, who is preferable to the King, and has an interest in the said Goods; and
that what ever belongs to a Rebel, whether the time of the Rebellion, or at any
time how long soever thereafter during the Rebellion, the same accrues to the
King, and consequently to the Creditor in the Horning; and that nomina
debitorum and Debts non habent situm, but are personal Interests, and sequuntur
personam Creditoris; and if they be moveable, do fall under his Escheat, which
is a Legal Assignation, as said is.

The Lords inclined to prefer Veatch. But because some of the Lords in voting
were non liquet, the Business was delayed. Vide supra 9. Febr. 1675. inter
eosdem. And Vide infra 10. November. 1675.

D. 256. Parishioners of Banchrie contra Their Minister. 16. February 1675.
IN the Case of the Parishioners of Banchrie against their Minister: The Lords
Found, That the Act of Parliament, 3. Sess. of his Majesty's 1st. Parl. cap.
20. Ordaining that ilk Minister should have Grass for one Horse and two Kine,
over and above their Gleb, Did import, That Ministers should have the said
Grass, or 20. lib. conform to the said Act, albeit their Glebs which they had
formerly, did extend to four Aikers, and much more than would be Grass, if the
same were left lee to that purpose, for a Horse and two Kine. Some of the Lords
were of a contrary Opinion, seeing, by the Act of Parl. K. Jam. 6. Parl. 18 cap.
Where there is no arable Land, 16. Soums Grass is to be designed for the four
Aikers which the Law appoints to be designed for Glebes: and upon the Ground
foresaid, Ministers having 16 Soums Grass, may pretend to have alse much more
Grass designed to them as will keep a Horse and two Kine, or 20. lib. Hattoun
Reporter. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 257. Binning contra Brotherstanes. eod. die.
ALexander Binning by Contract of Marriage with Margaret Trotter, was obliged
to resign a Tenement of Land in Favors of himself and his Wife in Liferent,
and the Heirs of the Marriage in Fie; and accordingly Resignation being made,
Infeftment was taken to him and his Wife, and their Heirs foresaid.

Thereafter the said Margaret having deceased, there being only one Daughter of
the said Marriage Margaret Binning; the said Alexander married a second Wife,
and did oblige himself to provide the Heirs of that Marriage to 10000 merks:
And thereafter did induce the said Margaret his Daughter of the first Marriage,
after her Minority, to give a Bond, obliging her to resign the abovementioned
Tenement to which she was to succeed as Heir of Provision, to her Father, in
favors of her self and the Heirs of her own Body, which failiening, in favous
of Alexander Binning her Brother of the second Marriage and his Heirs
whatsomever; and to do no Deed to prejudge him anent the Succession.

The said Margaret Binning being thereafter Infeft as Heir of Provision to her
said Father in the said Tenement, did by Contract of Marriage with William
Brotherstanes oblige her self to Resign the said Tenement in favors of her
self and the said William, and the Heirs of the Marriage; whilks Failieing his
Heirs whatsomever; and upon the said Resignation, she and her Husband were
Infeft.

Thereafter the said Alexander Binning her Brother did obtain a Decree against
the said Margaret and her Husband for implement of the said Bond; and for
granting a Procuratory of Resignation for resigning of the said Tenement,
conform to the said Bond; in favors of the said Margaret her self and the
Heirs of her Body, whilks Failieing in favors of the said Alexander: And in
obedience to the said Decree the said Margaret and her Husband did resign the
said Tenement: and Infeftment was taken to the said Margaret and the Heirs of
her Body, whilks Failieing to the said Alexander: After the said Margaret her
decease the said Alexander did obtain Decree against the Tennents of the said
Tenement for Maills and Duties, which being Suspended by the said William
Brotherstanes and turned in a Lybel; It was Alleged for him, that he ought to
be preferred being Infeft long before the Pursuer, and 7. years in possession:
Whereunto It was Replied, That the Defender was denuded of any Right that he
had by the Infeftment foresaid in favors of the said Margaret and her Heirs of
Provision foresaid; and that the Pursuer had thereby Right as Heir of Provision
to her.

To which It was Duplyed, That being incarcerat upon the said Decree against
him and his Wife (for Implement) he had resigned for Obedience as Husband, and
Authorizing his Wife; but did not intend, nor could not be decerned to denude
himself of his own Right, which he had for so Onerous a Cause by his Contract
of Marriage.

The Lords, having considered the Procuratory of Resignation granted by the
Defenders Wife and himself, did Find that he had granted the same, not only for
Obedience, and for his Interest as Husband, but for his own Interest, and as
taking burden for his Wife; and so did denude himself of any Right that he had,
in favors of his Wife, and the Pursuer as Heir of Provision: And therefore
preferred the said Alexander.

Upon the Debate, It was agitate amongst the Lords, whether such Clauses in
Tailies, viz. That no deeds should be done in prejudice of the Heirs of Tailie
and Provision and their Succession, do import that the Granter of such
Obligements should not have power to dispose of the Land that is Tailied, and
have that liberty which is inherent to Dominium? Or if it should import only,
that they cannot break the Tailie, or provide the Lands in Tailie to other
Heirs.

The President was of Opinion that the Fiar could not dispone nor do any other
Deed: And that the said Clause was not restricted to the altering or breaking
of the Tailie. But this point was not decided.

D. 258. Ratraw contra (...) 16. February 1675.
AN Appearand Heir having, upon an Exhibition pursued by him to the effect he
might advise whether he would be Heir, obtained the Writes to be exhibited in
the Clerks Hands; did thereafter upon a Bill desire the samen to be delivered,
pretending that he had use for the Writes for serving himself Heir; and no
other person could have any Interest for keeping them but himself.

The Lords granted the desire of the Bill: Albeit some of the Lords thought,
that the Writes could not be delivered to him, unless he were Heir, but only
such as he should have use of for his Service upon a Ticket to the Clerk to
redeliver the same, if he should not be served Heir within a certain time: And
that the Creditors had Interest, seeing the Appearand Heir, if he should resolve
not to be Heir, might embazle and put the Writes out of the way, in prejudice
of Comprysers.

D. 259. Hay contra Gray. 4. June. 1675.
A Merchant, having given a Commission to a Skipper to carry a parcel of
Salmond to Bourdeaux, and upon the Sale of the same there, to bring home Wines
and Prunes; pursued the said Skipper for the said Salmond and profit thereof,
and referred the Lybel to the Skippers Oath: And the Defender having qualified
his Oath in these Terms, viz. That being upon his Voyage to France, he was
forced to go in to Holland by Storm of Weather; So that he could not go to
Bourdeaux; And that he was forced to sell the Salmond in Holland, and with the
price of the same did buy a parcel of Cards and other Goods mentioned in his
Oath, for the Pursuers use; and having embarked the same to be transported to
Scotland, and in the interim War having arisen, the Ship and Goods were taken
by the Dutch; and that he had done for the Pursuer as for himself, and as other
Merchants had done for themselves; Which Oath being advised, It was debated
amongst the Lords, whether the Defender should be Assoilied, in respect of the
Oath and qualification foresaid? And It was Found, that albeit the Defender
might be excused upon the account foresaid, for not going to Bourdeaux and
fulfilling his Commission in terminis, yet as to the of the parcel of Cards
with the product of the Salmond, and the embarqueing of the same for the
Pursuers use, for which he had no order; he was to be considered as negotiorum
gestor, and upon his own hazard; and could not prejudge the Pursuer by
disposing of his Money; unless he were able to say, that gessit utiliter both
consilio and eventu; specially seeing he might have secured his Money in Factors
hands, or transmitted the same by Bills of Exchange, without employing or far
less hazarding the same without order. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 260. 8. June 1675.
THE Lords yesterday did Order, that in regard of the great abuse in desiring
and granting Advocations so frequently from Inferior Courts, to the great
prejudice of the People, and the retarding and delaying Justice; that therefore
the Ordinary upon the Bills may refuse to pass Advocations, if he find cause;
but that he ought to report all Advocations before they be past to the whole
Lords.

D. 261. Kyle contra Gray. eod. die.
THIS Day the Lords Found, That Advocations for Sums of Money within 200 Merks,
could not be past upon any reason of Iniquity. Castlehill Reporter.

Some of the Lords in the case foresaid were of Opinion, that Advocations
should not pass, tho the Process had been for a Sum above 200 Merks; Because
Litiscontestation had been made in the Cause; and after Litiscontestation there
can be no Iniquity but by a Decree; which ought to be Suspended without
Advocation.

D. 262. Grant contra Grant. 10. June 1675.
IN the Improbation of a Bond; the Bond being produced, and the Defender
refusing to abide by the same, Certification was craved against the said Bond,
because the Defender did not abide by the same: And the Lords were clear, that
the Certification should be granted for not abiding by the said Bond, tho it
was produced; but because the Witnesses in the Bond had been examined, and
there being only two Witnesses to the same, they both declared that they were
impuberes, the one of 8. and the other of 9. Years of Age, the time of the
subscribing of the Bond; and the Subscription was not like the Subscription now
used by them; and to their remembrance they were not Witnesses to the same; but
were not positive that they were not Witnesses.

The Lords, in respect of their Declarations, and that the Defender himself,
did in effect, at least presumptively, acknowledge the falsehood of the Bond;
in sua far as he did not abide by the same; Had an Impression that the Bond was
false; and therefore they granted Certification for not abideing by the same:
and did leave to the Pursuer, either to take out the Certification, or to
insist in improving of the Bond, or for declaring the same Null, as wanting
Witnesses, as he should think fit: Seeing without question, tho the Witnesses
did not fully improve it, yet in respect of their Age the time of their
pretended subscribing the same, and by their Declaration, they did not astruct
the Truth of the same; In which respect, the Bond ought to be constructed, and
looked upon as wanting Witnesses, and so Null. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 263. Scot contra Murray. 11. June. 1675.
A Suspension being raised of a Decree; Arrestment was used at the instance of
the Creditor, after the raising of the same; and upon that pretense, It was
craved by the Suspender, That the same might be loosed; and upon the Report of
the Bill, the Lords having debated, Whether the said Arrestment could be
loosed, being upon a Decree, though suspended?

The Lords Found, That tho a Suspension be raised of a Decree, yet it does not
cease to be a Decree, until it be taken away by a Decree in favors of the
Suspender; and that tho a Suspension sists execution, yet the Creditor may
arrest; seeing the Arrestment is no Execution, but a Diligence and Remedy to
preserve the Debitors Estate; to the effect that after discussing of the
Suspension, the Creditor may have execution against the same: And therefore
They Found the Arrestment could not be loosed. In this case, the Suspender had
consigned the Principal Sum, but not the Annualrents; otherwise if he had
consigned all, the Lords would have loosed the Arrestment; seeing the
Consignation of the Money is sufficient Surety to the Creditor. Mr. Thomas Hay
Clerk.

D. 264. Auchenleck contra E. Monteith. 15. June 1675.
WIdow Auchenleck pursued the Earl of Monteith, for the price of certain Ware
for his Ladies Clothes, extending (conform to an Account) to the Sum of 177.
lib. It was Alleged for the Earl, That the said Ware was furnished, after he
had served Inhibition against his Lady that she should not contract Debt to his
prejudice. Whereunto It was Answered, That the said Furnishing was necessary
for the Ladies Clothes, and albeit after Inhibition, she could not contract
Debt to her Husbands prejudice, yet the Earl being obliged to furnish her
Clothes, and other Necessaries; he will be liable for what is furnished to her
necessarily.

The Lords, (upon the Report of the Debate foresaid) having considered the
Inhibition, and that the execution of the same was not registrate; were of the
Opinion, that the said Inhibition was Null: But because it was not questioned
by the Defender, they Ordained that the Reporter should hear, what Answer the
Defenders Procurators could make as to the said Nullity,

It was thought hard by some of the Lords, That a Merchant, after Inhibition at
the Husbands Instance, furnishing bona fide to the Wife, should be frustrate
upon the pretense of an Inhibition; unless either the said Inhibition had been
intimate to the Merchant, or it were notourly known that the Wife was
Inhibited; seeing such Inhibitions are granted without any Ground either of
Write, as Bond or Contract, or the dependence of a Process; but only upon a
Bill and Desire of the Husband, sine causae cognitione: And it were hard, That
Merchants, when Persons and Ladies of any Quality, come to their Shops for
buying their Ware, should go to the Registers and try whether they be inhibite.
but these Points were not decided.

D. 265. Katharine McMillan Lady Logy contra Meldrums. 16. June 1675.
A Disposition being granted by a Husband to his Wife of Movables, and she in
an Improbation of the same, being urged to abide thereat; and offering to abide
at the same as a Write truly delivered to her by her Husband: The Lords Found,
That she ought to abide at the same simpliciter, and tho such a Qualification
may be allowed to Strangers and singular Successors, who may be in bona fide to
take Assignations to Writs; Yet Wives and conjunct Persons and Relations, are
in a different condition, seeing they are presumed not to be ignorant of the
Deeds and Transactions of their Husbands and Relations. Newbyth Reporter. Monro
Clerk.

D. 266. Thomson and Halyburton contra Ogilvie and Watson. eod. die.
DAvid Thomson having, by his Testament, nominate his Wife Executrix and
Tutrix; and having left a Legacy to his Son of 5000. lib. and having ordained
his Relict to employ the same upon Annualrent, in sua far as he ordained him to
be educate upon the Annualrent of the same: In a Pursuit for the said Legacy,
and the Annualrent of the same, It was Alleged, That the Executrix could not
be liable for Annualrent: And It being Replied, That she was also Tutrix, and
Tutors are liable after the first Term that they embrace the Office, for
Annualrent of the Pupils Means; and that having confirmed the Testament, by the
Nomination foresaid of her to be Tutrix, she has accepted the Office of
Tutorie: And the Point at Interloquitor being, whether by confirming of the
Testament, she had accepted of the Office of Tutorie? Some of the Lords viz.
(...) Were of the Opinion, That by Confirming of the Testament, she did not
accept of the Office: But it was Found by the Lords, That having confirmed
without Protestation that she did not accept of the Office, eo ipso she did
accept of the same: And tho she had emitted such a Protestation, it could not
be allowed, seeing she was not only named Executrix, but had a Legacy left her;
and she could not accept the Office of Executry and Legacy foresaid, and
repudiate the Office of Tutory of her own Child.

The Lords (in the Case foresaid) Thought, That if the Relict were able to make
appear, That having used all possible diligence, she had not recovered Payment
of the Defuncts Means; she could not be liable for Annualrent, but from the
time that she recovered the same. Castlenil Reporter. Monro Clerk,

D. 267. Gray contra Cockburn. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, In the Case betwixt the Lord of Cockburn and Mr, William
Gray Minister at Duns, That Cockburn, being liable to pay certain Bolls of
Victual betwixt Yule and Candlemass, might have paid the same upon Candlemass
day: and that as he might have paid the same he might have made offer thereof:
but that in all cases of that nature, Persons who are liable, and do make such
Offers, are not thereby liberate as to the greatest Pryces, unless the Party
be in mora to receive the Victual; either the time of the offer, or six days
thereafter. Castlehil Reporter. Monro Clerk.

D. 268. Heckford contra Ker. 17 June 1675.
MR. Hugh Ker having granted Bond to (...) Heckfords, for the Sum of 1000.
merks; and being obliged thereby to pay the said Sum with Annualrent at
Martimass thereafter; and for the Creditors surety having wadset by the said
Bond ten rudes of Land, to be possessed for the annualrent of the said Sum, so
long as the samen should remain unpayed: The Representatives of the said Mr.
Hugh were pursued for 6 lib. as the inlake, whereof the Rent of the Land did
come short of the Annualrent of the said Sum and for publict burdens: who did
allege, that the said Right being a proper wadset, and the said Lands being
possessed by the Creditor, the Debtor was not liable, neither for Annualrent nor
Public Burdens.

The Lords Found, That the Bond being of the Nature foresaid, and containing a
proper Wadset; so that if the Duties of the Lands had exceeded the Annualrent,
the superplus would have belonged to the Creditor entirely; and not been
imputed in payment of the Principal; the Debtor was not liable either for
inlake or public Burdens: And tho in the beginning of the Bond, the Debtor
was obliged to pay Annualrent, yet the payment of the same was qualified, and
to be understood according to the whole Tract of the Bond, viz. That the Duties
should be allowed for payment of the Annualrent, and that the Creditor should
possess, and have the use and (...) of the Land and Rents thereof for his
Annualrent; which is clearly a proper Wadset. Newbyth Reporter. Mr. John Hay
Clerk.

D. 269. College of Aberdeen contra The Town of Aberdeen. eod. die.
DOctor Reid having by his Testament left his Books to the College of
Aberdeen, to be kept by a Bibliothecare; and having left for a Patrimony and
Sallary to the Bibliothecare the Sum of 6000 Merks; and having named Mr. Robert
Dounie his own Relation to be Bibliothecare; and in case of his refuseal,
having appointed another to be chosen by the College: And the Master of the
Grammar School, Mr. Robert Paterson being presented to the said Office by the
Colldge, pursued a Declarator to hear and see it Found and Declared, that he
has Right to the said Office and Sallary.

It was Alleged for the Town of Aberdeen; That no Title was produced for the
Pursuer but the Extract of Doctor Reid's Testament, bearing the said
Mortification; which could not be respected, seeing the said Extract is out of
the Books of the Commissars of Aberdeen; and his Testament could not be
confirmed, but by the Commissars of Edinburgh, he having died out of the
Country; and therefore the said Extract could not be considered, but as a Copy,
and the principal ought to be produced; And it appears, that there was never
any Principal, bearing the Masters of the College to have the Election of the
Bibliothecare; seeing the Town of Aberdeen has been in use since the
Mortification to present to the said Office; and by a Contract in anno 1632.
betwixt the said Mr. Dounie and the Town, he is presented to the said Office by
the Town; to which Doctor Dun the Principal of the College was Witness, and
the Executors nominate likeways Witnesses.

The Lords Found, There was no necessity to produce the Principal, the Extract
being a sufficient Title: and as to the pretended Nullity, it was not Juris;
seeing non constat, that Doctor Reid died out of the Coutry: And if there were
any Ground upon the pretense foresaid, it were only of a Reduction.

It was Found also, That by the said Testament, the Nomination of the
Bibliothecare did belong to the College, and the possession of the Town
without a Right cannot Found a Defense in petitorio: and the Deed and Contract
with Dounie, and the Subscription of the Principal, and of the Executors of
Doctor Reid as Witnesses, could not prejudge the College.

The Lords having considered the Tenor of the Mortification, which gives Power
to the College to Name in case of Refusal of Dounie; Found nevertheless, that
the said Interest to Name and choose a Bibliothecare was not temporary and
prima vice; Seeing Wills of Defuncts were to be interpret benignly, Especially
in favors of Colleges; and there can be no reason, why the Defunct should
have appointed the said Election to be in manner foresaid for the first time,
and not thereafter: And if the College had not the Right foresaid, it should
not belong to the Town, but the Defuncts Heir, who does concur with the
pursuit. Newbyth Reporter Robert Hamilton Clerk.

D. 270. contra 18. June 1675.
IN an Adjudication, the Appearand Heir being called, and his Advocates having
compeared and desired to see the Process; It was Alleged, That he had no
Interest, having renounced, and that his compearing was only to retard the
Pursuers Diligence, that other Creditors might come in. This point of form
being reported, viz. Whether his Procurators should see: And if they, should
see, whether in communi forma or not, or in the Clerks hands?

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That being a Person necessar to be
called, and being called, his Procurators should see in communi forma, the Law
making no distinction; and tho he had Renounced, yet he had Interest to see and
object, whether the Pursuers Debt was the true Debt, or satisfied; and if it
appeared that it was satisfied, he may, notwithstanding his Renounciation,
enter if he thought fit: And the Renounciation may be questioned as false.

The Lords nevertheless Found, That he should see only in the Clerks hands
within 24. Hours; tho it was urged, that if the Party were in Town, that course
might be taken; but the Party being at the distance of 100 Miles, or any other
considerable distance, so that in so short a time the Procurator could not get
Information, it were better that in such cases the Processes should be seen in
communi forma: For if Parties had prejudice, they would apply again by Bills,
which would occasion greater trouble and delay. Redford Reporter.

D. 271. E. Weems contra Bruce. 22. June 1675.
A Bond being granted by the Earl of Weems to (...) Bruce and his Wife Gaw, and
the longest liver of them two, and to the said Bruce his Heirs: and the said
Gaw the Relict having intented a pursuit for payment of the Sum due thereby, It
was Alleged, it was prescrived, there being more than 40. Years Elapsed since
the granting. It was Answered, That the time of the Husbands Lifetime, the Bond
did not prescrive against the Pursuer, being cled with a Husband, and so non
valens agere.

The Lords, upon the Report made by my Lord Newbyth, Did ex tempore Find, That
it did not prescrive during the Husbands time: Tho some of them were of the
opinion, that the case was of importance as to the Consequence; and was to be
further thought upon and debated, in respect it cannot be said, but there was a
Person valens agere ever since the date of the Bond; the Husband dureing all
this time being valens agere; and after his decease, the Wife: and the Husbands
silence, being the Fiar, and the Person who had Right for the time, being
joined with the Relict her silence; and both being joined by the space of 40.
years; all the reasons of Prescription concurred in the Case, viz. That
Debitors should be secured after so long a time; and that there is praesumptio
Juris, the Bonds may be made up, and nothing thereon done till all the
witnesses were dead: And that maxim contra non valentem agere, etc. is to be
understood in the case, where there is not a person having Right valens agere,
by the space of 40 years: or in the Case of temporary and momentary
Prescriptions, but not in Prescriptions longissimi temporis: Otherways,
Prescription, being the great Salvo and Security of People, might be eluded,
and a person acquiring a Right of Lands, possessed by his Author peaceably, for
the space of 40. Years without any Interruption, should not be secure; seeing it
may be pretended, That the Husband, having been silent forty Years, without
any Interruption; his Wife, who pretends Right to the Lands by Liferent or
otherways, non valebat agere during the Marriage.

D. 272. Bruce contra Bruce. 23. June 1675.
DOctor Arnot having disponed, to one of his Nevoys, an Annualrent out of
certain Lands belonging to him; and thereafter having disponed to another of
his Nevoys, the elder Brother of the Annualrenter, the foresaid Lands: A
poinding of the Ground was intented, at the Instance of the Person who had
Right to the Annualrent: And It was Alleged, That the Disposition of the
Annualrent was never delivered by the Doctor, but was beside him the time of
his decease, and was viis and modis gotten out of his Charter Chest, and given
to the Pursuer: To which It was Answered, That the Pursuer had the Paper in his
Hands, and it was presumed to be delivered: And 2do. Tho it should be supposed,
that the said Right was amongst the Doctors Papers the time of his decease, yet
the Doctor having made the said Right public by an Infeftment, and Seasin
thereupon to the Pursuer, which was Registrat; albeit he might have evacuate
the said Right by destroying the Disposition, yet nevertheless having kept
the same by him undestroyed, it ought to be construed in Law, that being Uncle
to the Pursuer, and having given the said Right upon the account of the said
Relation, he kept the same by him to the Pursuers behoove, unless it could be
made appear, that the Doctor did any Deed to recall and evacuat the said Right.

The Lords repelled the Defense of not delivery, in respect of the Answer.
Hatton Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 273. Dowglass of Kelhead contra Carlyle and others. eod. die.
KElhead pursued a Declarator of Non-entry, pretending that he was Superior of
the Lands libelled: In which Process, It was Alleged, That he was not Superior
of the said Lands, In respect the Right libelled, that he had from my Lord
Queensberry, was to be holden of the Disponer: and Queensberry being Superior
to the Defenders, could not interpose another betwixt him and them: And upon
the proponing of the said Alledgance, the Pursuer was forced to reply, upon a
Right to the Casualities granted by a Paper apart by my Lord Queensberry to the
Pursuer, and thereupon Process was sustained: and decree given for the
retoured duty before the intention of the Declarator; and the full Avail and
Rent of the Land after the intention of the Cause. Of which, Suspension being
raised upon these Reasons. 1mo. That, after Decree of Declarator was
recovered, the Superior and his Donator has Right to the Lands during the
Non-entry; and may remove Tennents, or uplift the Duties from them; but before
Declarator, there could not be a Sentence for Poinding the Ground, for the full
avail. 2do. Tho the Ground could be poinded for the full Avail, yet the Pursuer
has no Right but to the Feu-duties, even after the intention of the Cause,
before the Pursuer did Found upon and produce the Assignation foresaid, as his
Right to the Casualities; seeing there being a question whether my Lord
Queensberry or the Pursuer had Right to the Superiority, and the Libel being
only founded upon the Pursuers Right as Superior, the Defender was in bona
fide, and could not enter nor be liable for the full avail, until the Question
was cleared by production of the said Assignation: and therefore could not be
liable until the same was produced.

The Lords, As to the first Reason, Found, That after the intention of the
Declarator of Non-entry, at the Instance of the Party having Right, the
Defenders are liable in the full avail; and that the real conclusion of
poinding the Ground for the same may be sustained; seeing the Ground may be
poinded for a Rent liquidate, as it was in this Case: and when Lands are not
retoured, the Pursuer, even before Declarator, may crave Right to the Rents. As
to the Second, The Lords were all clear, that the Defender was not liable for
the full avail, but after production of the Title, whereupon the Pursuit is
sustained: But it being moved, that the Defenders having proponed the said
Alledgance before the same was repelled, and decree given out for the full
avail, after intention of the Cause; some of the Lords were of the Opinion,
that there was now no Remedy: Others thought, That there being a clear iniquity
and prejudice to the Party, and the Lords being convinced of the same, they
ought to do justice to the party: And the question being brought before them
upon Suspension ex incontinenti; and not ex intervallo, the Sentence non
transivit in rem judicatam: Whereupon some heat having arisen among the Lords,
while some did plead the Credit of the House, and the Security of the People,
that the Decreets of the Lords in foro should be an ultimate and unquestionable
Decision; and others Thought and did represent, that the Honor of the House,
and Interest and Security of the People consists in this, that Justice should
be done, and no evident Iniquity should be, without Remedy; Especially where a
Decree has not taken effect, and become res judicata, but is drawn in question
immediately by a Suspension. The Lords did demur, and decided not that Point.
Castlehil Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 274. Hamilton of Munkland contra (...) Maxuel. eod. die.
UPon the Report of Redford, betwixt Hamilton of Munkland, and (...) Maxuel,
The Lords Found, That a Debt, due by a Person, who had disponed his Land upon
the account that a Manse was built, and that he was resting his Proportion of
the Charges, is not debitum Fundi. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 275. The College of Aberdeen contra the Town of Aberdeen. 24. June 1675.
IN the Case abovementioned, of the College against the Town of Aberdeen; The
Lords, having heard again a Debate in praesentia, Did adhere to what they had
Found formerly: and did Declare Jus eligendi of a Bibliothecare to pertain to
the College. Vide 17. June 1675. inter eosdem.

D. 276. Earl of Lauderdale contra Lady and Lord Yester. 25. June 1675.
THE Duke of Lauderdale having settled upon the Lady Yester his Daughter, his
Estate: and thereafter by Contract of Marriage betwixt the said Lady and my
Lord Yester, containing a Procuratory of Resignation, whereupon Infeftment
followed; the said Estate is disponed and resigned by her, with consent of her
Father, and him for his Interest, in favors of the said Lady, and the Heirs of
her Body of that Marriage; and these failiening, of any other Marriage: With
Provisions contained in the said Procuratory; And in special, that the said
Lands should be redeemable by the Earl, upon a Rose-noble; and that upon an
Order used, the said Right in Favors of the Lady and her foresaids should be
void: and two other Provisions in Case of Redemption, viz. 1mo. That in Case
the Duke of Lauderdale should think fit to redeem, that the Duke and his Heirs
should be liable, and obliged to pay, (likeas they bind themselves by the said
Provision, to pay) to the Lady and her foresaids, besides the Tocher, 7000.
lib. sterling. at the first Term after the Dukes decease. And 2do. That whereas by
the said Contract, the Lady, if the Estate had not been redeemed, was obliged
to pay all her Fathers Debts and Legacies, she should be free of the same, in
case of Redemption: Which Provisions are contained in the Infeftments.

The Duke, having used an Order, and having intented thereupon a Declarator of
Redemption; concluding that the Lands should be declared lawfully redeemed, and
that his Daughter should be decerned to denude her self; and to grant a
Procuratory for Resigning; since she was infeft by public Infeftment.

It was Alleged, That as to that Conclusion, that she should renounce; there
was no Warrant for the same; seeing there was not a Reversion in these Terms,
that she should grant the Lands orderly redeemed and renounce; in which Terms,
Reversions, which are pacta de retrovendendo, are ordinarily conceived; but that
the Reversion, whereupon the Order is used, is only a Provision contained in
the said Contract of the Tenor foresaid; with a resolutive clause, in case of
Redemption, which imports no Obligement upon the Lady, nor pactum de
retrovendendo, but only Jus Retractus, and a Faculty and Power to the Father to
Redeem; and in case of Redemption, the expiring and Nullity of the Right.

2. It was Alleged, That tho the Lady were to Renounce; her Renounciation
ought to be qualified and burdened with the provisions contained in her Right;
and in special, with the foresaid provision as to the secureing to her 7000.
lib. Sterling. and the other Provision foresaid for securing her relief of the
Debts.

It was Replied, That as to the said first Alledgance; that inest in all
Contracts bearing Reversions; whether in the formal Terms of a Reversion; or
Provisions upon the matter importing a Reversion: and ex stylo all Decreets of
Redemption do contain the said Decerniture to Renounce: And the Duke being
denuded in favors of his Daughter by public Infeftment, the habilis modus to
return again to his Right upon Redemption, is upon the Resignation.

As to the 2d. It was Answered, That the said Provisions are not in the
Reversion; and amount only to a personal obligement upon the Duke and his
Heirs; but not to be a real burden and incumberance upon the Right.

As to Debts, It was Answered, That there needs no other security for the Lady
her relief of the same; seeing she was to be liable thereto in contemplation of
the Right, if it should stand effectual in her Person: And its provided, in
case of Redemption, she should be free thereof.

It was Duplyed as to the said provisions; That the same, being in the body of
the Procuratory and Infeftment, are real; and they are insert unico contextu
with the provision, that the Lands shall be redeemable; and do qualify the
same: And that notwithstanding that it be provided, That in case of Redemption
she should not be liable to the Debts, yet she may be in hazard to be overtaken
as Successor Titulo Lucrativo; In respect, by the said Right it is provided,
that in case of Redemption the said 7000 lib. should be given to her and her
foresaids, which being a provision introduced in her favors, and in effect in
lieu of the Estate, and being so great, may fix upon her a Passive Title; as
having gotten by her Father beside her Tocher so great a Sum; which is not
payable to her Husband, but to her and her foresaids; and therefore could not
Renounce, but with the burden of the said provision for her Relief.

The Lords Found, That she ought to Renounce: Reserving to her the foresaid
provision, as Accords. Castlehill Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 277. Tutor to the Lord of Aitons Daughter. eod. die.
THE Tutor to the Daughter of the deceast Lord of Ayton, having craved by a
Bill, that he might be warranted by an Order of the Lords, to set the Pupils
Lands for less Duties than were paid formerly; seeing the former Duty could not
be gotten.

The Lords, Tho they had granted the like desire in favors of other persons
upon Bills, thought, upon better consideration, that it was fit to refuse the
said Bill; seeing upon such pretenses Minors may be wronged by their Tutors
Authority; and the Lords have only a Jurisdictio contentiosa in relation to
Processes or questions depending betwixt Parties; but not a voluntar
Jurisdiction, or power in relation to Administration of private Estates: And if
the Tutors Deed in setting pupils Lands were warrantable, the Law would secure
him: And therefore left him to do as he will be answerable. Redford Reporter.

D. 278. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
UPon a Report made to the Lords, concerning a Decree of the Commissars which
was questioned upon Iniquity, because it being urged, that Caution should be
Found in an Improbation, the Commissar did not Order the Party to find Caution.

It was Debated amongst the Lords, Whether Caution should be Found or Money
should be consigned, alsewell in Actions as upon Exceptions in Improbations?
And some were of the Opinion, that Caution or Consignation should be in all
questions of Improbation; Whether by way of Exception or Action, conform to the
Act of Parliament, Q. Mary. 7. Parl. Cap. 62. And some of the Lords were of the
Opinion, that the Law being clear to that purpose, Consignation should be
wherever such Questions fall out either by way of Action or Exception: But the
contrary was asserted by others, and they pretended Custom; but nothing was
instanced to verify the custom; and tho it were, it ought not to derogate to so
clear a Law upon so good Grounds.

The Lords did not decide this point at this time.

D. 279. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
UPon a Report made to the Lords concerning an Advocation; upon that reason,
that there was a Competition in the case upon double Rights: It was debated
among the Lords, Whether the cause being undoubtedly competent before the
Inferior Judge, the pretense; that there was a competition of double Rights
should be a Relevant Ground of Advocation: And some of the Lords were of
Opinion, that in the general to Advocate upon that Reason, it were hard; seeing
Inferior Judges their Jurisdiction as to Causes competent before them, is
founded upon their Rights; so that they have alse good Right to the same as to
any other property: And in Removings, and Actions for Maills and Duties, and
others such real Actions, when a Defense is founded upon a Right, or when
Parties compear for their Interest, and produce Rights, it may always be
pretended, that the question is anent double Rights; so that the Jurisdiction
of Inferior Judges may be altogether evacuated: And the Lords, who have scarce
time to decide Causes that are proper before them, should be cumbered with
Processes that may and ought to be determined by an Inferior Judge; contrar to
the Acts of Parliament, and in special the 39 Act of Q. Mary her 6th. Parl. And
the 8th. Act of His Majesty's 1st. Parl. 3. Sess. Discharging the Advocation of
Causes, whereunto Inferior Judges are expressly appointed Judges: But if it
should be represented and appear, that there is intricacie in such Causes,
wherein there may be question of double Rights, the Lords in that case may
Advocate: But upon the pretense of double Rights, as to which it may be there
is no difficulty, there ought to be no Advocation. Yet it was urged by (...)
that the Lords were in use to pass Advocations upon the reason foresaid; And
albeit the pretense of custom not being verified, and tho verified being
against Law, ought not to be put in the balance with express Laws founded upon
good Reason and Common Law, yet the Bill was past. Redford Reporter.

D. 280. Gilchrist contra Murray. 26. June. 1675.
IN a Process for payment of a Sum due by the Defender, the Lybel being
referred to his Oath, and he having declared with a quality, viz. That as he
was Debtor so he had made payment, partly in Money, and partly in Commodities
and Ware.

The Lords, Upon Advising of the Oath, Found, That the same not being special
as to the quality of Payment, viz. How much was paid in Money, and how much in
Goods, nor being special, as to the quantity of the several Goods; did not
admit the same: but if it were made special, as to Money paid by him, it would
be sustained pro tanto: And as to the delivery of Goods in satisfaction of the
Debt; It resolved in an Exception, and ought to be proven. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 281. Livingston contra Garner. eod. die.
A Bond being granted for payment of a Sum, and thereupon the Granter having
suspended in his own time; and a Decree of Suspension being recovered in his
favors: after his death, his Son being of the same Name, was Charged,
Denounced, and taken with Caption for the same Debt.

The Lords upon a Bill, Did Find, That the Son ought to be free of the said
Debt: and in regard of the Chargers trincating and fraudful Practice, they
modified 40. lib. to be paid by him, the one half to the Party, the other
half to the Poors Box. Gibson Clerk.

D. 282. Langlands Supplicant. eod. die.
A Bankrupt having obtained a Bonorum, by a Bill desired the Lords to dispense
with his wearing the Habit, in respect of an Attestation of two Persons, that
he had become irresponsal, upon the account of Cautionrie, and other Occasions
mentioned therein; which the Lords did: Albeit some of their Number were of
another Opinion, and did urge, that by the Act of Parliament, such Persons
being infamous, and the Lords by an Act of Sederunt, having Ordained that they
should wear the Habit, as is the Custom in all other Nations, that they may be
known to be such Persons; the Lords neither could nor ought to dispense with
express Laws and Statutes; and that no respect ought to be had to the
Attestation, being emitted by private Persons having no Authority, and not cited
nor sworn to that purpose: and the pretense contained in the Attestation was
most irrelevant. Gibson Clerk.

D. 283. Birnie contra Montgomerie. 29. June 1675.
A Pursuit for making up the Tenor of a Comprising was sustained, in respect
the Adminicles were most pregnant: and in special the Executiones were yet
extant and entire. Monro Clerk. (...) It is thought, that much Cautione and
tenderness should be used in Processes of the Nature forsaid, for proving the
Tenor of Compriseings; seeing Compriseings are to be considered, either as
Decreets or as Executions; and in effect, they are both upon the matter; In
respect the Messenger Decerns and Adjudges, and Dispones the Lands and others
comprised; and therefore the same ought to be subscribed, both by the
Messenger, who in subsidium does that which the Party ought to do, and does
dispone his Estate in satisfaction of his Debt; and by the Clerk of the
Compriseing as a Decree: and the Tenor of Decreets cannot be proven but by
Extracts; And a Comprysing being (as said is) Processus executivus, and
ultimate execution; it ought not to be proven but per relationem Nuncij, and
execution under the Messengers hands. And it were hard that executiones should
be made up by witnesses, and probation of the Tenor; Seeing there may be a
nullity in the same if they were extant: And tho witnesses may remember they
had seen executions, they can hardly remember upon the precise tenor of all the
words of the same: And if the tenor of the executions might be made up, there
should be no security; Seeing Prescription, which is the greatest Security of
the People, may be evacuated, upon pretense that there was an interruption by
the execution of a Summonds; but that the same being lost is made up by proving
the Tenor: and by an Act of Parliment K. Jam. 6. Par. 6. cap. 94. Its Ordained,
That the Tenor of Letters of Horning, and Executions thereof, is not probable
by Witnesses: And there is parity, if not more Reason as to Comprisings;
whereby the greatest Estates may be taken away, by a Decree for proving the
Tenor.

D. 284. Hall contra Murray. 30. June 1675.
ARrestment being upon a Decree; and the said Decree being thereafter turned
in a Lybel; The Lords Found, That the Decree ceased to be a Sentence; and the
Arrestment thereupon, is now of the nature of an Arrestment upon a Dependence,
and may be loosed. Gibson Clerk.

D. 285. Dunmure contra Lutfoot. eod. die.
THE Lords in an Improbation Found, (as they had done formerly in diverse
Cases) That an Extract out of the Books of an Inferior Court does not satisfy
the Production: the question being of a Write registrate in the Books of the
Canongate. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 286. Stewart contra Riddoch. eod. die.
JAmes Stewart of Aberlednoch, having obtained a Decree Cognitions Causae,
against John Riddoch, for implement of a Disposition, granted by David Riddoch
his Grandfather: and thereupon having also obtained a Decree of Adjudication,
the same was stopped upon a Bill given in by (...) Campbel of Tarririck;
pretending that he had a Right to a Contract of Marriage betwixt Alexander
Riddoch and his wife, as assigney constitute by the said Mr. Alexander, in
whose favors the Granter of the Disposition to Stewart was obliged by the said
Contract to dispone to him the same Lands; And the Assignation granted by the
said Alexander Riddoch, to the said Campbel being questioned as false.

The Lords thought fit to hear both Parties on their several Adjudications;
reserving Improbation of the said Assignation: and with this Declaration, that
if the said Assignation should be improven, the Decree and Adjudication upon
the same should fall.

Because there was a Competition in Diligence, The Lords did wave the Debates
in the Improbation; being most as to that Point, who should abide by the said
Assignation as true; seeing the Assigney Campbel declared, that his Name was
filled up in the same without his Knowledge: and was not concerned to abide by
the same: and Mr. John Drummond of Megginsh compearing, as having a complete
Warrant, and Commission from the said Mr. Alexander Riddoch, who was in
Barbados, to prosecute the said Action, which had been intented in Campbel's
Name, offered to abide by the said Assignation only as a Factor.

Some of the Lords thought, that a Write being questioned as false, there
should be some person to abide by the same upon their hazard simply; and not
with such qualities; seeing the consequence and hazard of persons, that abide by
Writes questioned upon falsehood, if the same should be improven, is the great
bulwark and security of the people against falsehood, which does increase
daily. But this point was not decided.

D. 287. Clerk contra Steuart. eod. die.
A Husband, by his Contract of Marriage, having got the Right of the Fie of a
Tenement of Land settled upon him; his Wife having resigned the same for
Infeftment to him and her, and the Heirs of the Marriage; whilks failiening his
Heirs. He and his Wife did thereafter enter in a Contract with another Sister
of his Wifes, who had Right to the equal half of the said Tenement, as Heir
portioner with her Sister; by which Contract there was a mutual Tailie with
consent of the Husband; and the Right of Fie, that by the former Contract was
settled upon her Husband, as said is, was disponed to the Wife; in sua far as
both the Sisters, with consent of their Husbands, were obliged to resign their
Respective parts, in favors of their Husbands and themselves in Liferent; and
the Heirs of the Marriage in Fie; whilks Failieing in favors of the Wifes
Heirs: Which Contract was questioned by a Reduction at the instance of a
Creditor of the Husbands; upon that reason, that the said Right of Fie granted
by the said Contract betwixt the Husband and the Wife, and her Sister, was in
defraud of the Husbands Creditors, and null by the Act of Parliament 1621. In
sua far as the Husband had a Fie of the said Tenement, by the Contract of
Marriage betwixt him and his Wife; which might have been affected with
Execution at the instance of his Creditors; and the said Fie was given, by the
said late Contract, to the Wife, so that the Husband had only a Liferent.

In this Process, It was Alleged. 1. That the Act of Parliament did militate
only in the case of Dyvors, and Dispositions granted by them. And 2. That the
said Act of Parliament does only rescind Alienations that are made without true
just and necessary Causes; and that the said Contract betwixt the Husband and
his Wife, and her Sister was made for a true and just Cause; and the Fie of the
said Tenement, which the Debtor had, was given away in respect of the
Obligements of the said Contract in favors of the Husband the Pursuers
Debtor; which was as equal as to advantages for the Pursuers Debtor, as they
were for the other party; seeing both the Sisters their parts of the Tenement
were provided in the same manner to the Respective Wives and their Husbands,
and the Heirs of the Marriage; whilks failiening the Wifes Heirs; and that the
Pursuers Debtor was a person opulent for the time, according to his quality;
and had sufficiency of Estate and Movables otherwise, that might have
satisfied the Pursuers Debt the time of the said last Contract, and thereafter:
So that the said Contract being valide ab initio, it could not be taken away
upon pretense, that thereafter the Husband became insolvent; seeing it cannot be
said, that the Husband did intend to defraud his Creditor, or that there were
any fraud upon his part.

It was Replied, That tho the case of Bankrupts and their fraudful practices
mentioned in the said Act, being so frequent, did give occasion and Rise to the
same; yet it appears evidently by the said Act, that it was intended, that
Debitors should not be in a capacity to give away any part of their Estate, in
prejudice of their Creditors, to any person; In sua far as the dispositive
words of the Act are in these terms, that in all Causes at the instance of a
true Creditor, the Lords will decern all Alienations and Rights made by the
Debtor, to any conjunct person, without true just and necessary Causes, and
without a just price really paid; the same being done after Contracting of
lawful Debts from true Creditors; to be null without further Declarator: And
the said Act does not bear, that all Rights made by Bankrupts should be Null,
it being hard to give a Character and definition of a Bankrupt; So that diverse
questions may arise anent the notion of Bankrupt; and what Debitors should be
esteemed Bankrupt; and therefore for cutting off the same, the Act is conceived
in the Terms foresaid; and annulls Dispositions made by Debitors without an
Onerous Cause: And the Lords, by the Statute ratified by the said Act, do
declare, that they intend to follow and practice the Laws Civil and Canon made
against fraudful Alienations in prejudice of Creditors: And by the Civil Law,
all Rights and Deeds made and done in prejudice of Creditors without an Onerous
Cause, are null, and may be rescinded action Pauliana: And the Law does
presume, praesumptione Juris, that they are fraudulent, being prejudicial to
Creditors ex eventu and re: who are not obliged to say, that they are fraudful
consilio; which is in animo and hardly can be proven.

As that point, viz. That the said Contract was upon valuable considerations;
It is Replied, That the taking of the Fie from the Husband, and giving the same
to the Wife; it is a Donation as to the Wife in prejudice of the Creditor; So
that there is no Onerous Cause as to the Husband.

The Lords, Upon Debate at the Bar and amongst themselves, did Find, that
Debitors might dispose of a part of their Estate by way of Gift, and without an
Onerous Cause; if they retain alse much and more than would satisfy their
Creditors: And therefore they Found the Defense Relevant, that the Debtor had
alse much Estate besides the Fie of the said Tenement, as would satisfy the
Pursuers Debt. Actor Falconer alteri Steuart. Monro Clerk. Praesentia.

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That the case, being of so great
consequence as to the preparative; it was fit to be thought upon: and urged
these Reasons. 1. That the Words and Letter of the Law appear to be clear,
against Deeds done by Debitors without an Onerous Cause. 2. Tho our Law were
not clear, yet in cases of that nature, when we have not a Municipal Law, nor
custom to the contrary, we ought to follow, tho not the Authority, yet the
Equity of the Civil Law, which is received every where, where there is no
custom to the contrary: Specially, seeing it is declared by the said Statute
mentioned in the Act of Parliament 1621, That the Lords are to follow the Civil
and Canon Law made against Deeds and Alienations in prejudice of Creditors. 3.
It is hard, to put Creditors to dispute the condition of their Debtors, the
time of making Donations; and whether they had effects and sufficiency of
Estate to satisfy their Debt, notwithstanding the said Deeds; which may be
unknown to the Creditors: It being sufficient to say, that the Deed was without
an Onerous Cause; and that the Debtor became insovent. 4. If a Debtor should
become insolvent ex post facto, tho the time of the Donation, the residue of
his Estate might have satisfied the Debt, It is more just and reasonable that a
Donator, who has a Lucrative Title, should rather suffer ex eventu than a
Creditor. (...) did argue to the contrair.

D. 288. Bonars Relict contra His Representatives. 2. July. 1675.
A Bill of Advocation being Reported of a pursuit at the instance of John
Bonars Relict, against his Representatives, before the Town of Edinburgh, for
payment of 10000 Merks, conform to a Bond granted by him: The Lords did
Advocate, not so much in respect of the importance of the Cause, the Town being
competent Judges; but because there was an Improbation depending before the
Lords, upon the same pursuit of the said Bond: And contingentia causa non
debet dividi; and does Found the Lords Jurisdiction to Advocat to themselves
all Questions concerning the said Debt.

D. 289. Earl of Dundonald contra Glenagies, and the Earl of Mar. eod. die.
A Tack of the Teinds of Kilmaranoch being set by the Abbot of Cambuskenneth,
to Sir James Erskine for his Lifetime; and for the Lifetime of his Heir Male;
and after the decease of the Heir Male, for the Lifetime of his Heir Male; and
two 19 Years thereafter: The Earl of Dundonald, having Right by progress to the
said Tack, pursued a Spulie of the Teinds.

It was Alleged, That the Tack is expired: And if the Earl of Dundonald will
condescend and prove that the said Sir James had an Heir Male surviving; the
Defenders will offer to prove that two 19 years had expired since the decease
of the last Heir Male.

The Lords Found, That the Pursuer should condescend upon an Heir Male, and
prove that he survived the said Sir James: And if he should condescend and
prove, that the Defender ought to prove (as said is) that the Tack was expired:
And did Assign to the Pursuer and Defender to prove Respective.

D. 290. Mr. Henry Morison. 3. July. 1675.
UPon a Bill against Mr. Henry Morison; It was desired, that in respect he was
an Advocate and Member of the House, he should summarly deliver certain Goods
entrusted to him by the Complainer: And It was Alleged for him, That the
Complainer ought to intent an Action in communi forma; And the Interest, that
he had in the House as an Advocate should give him Right to any privilege that
belonged to an Advocate, but ought not to put him in a worse case than other
Subjects, who could not be forced to defend upon such Bills: And the practice,
that the Advocates should Answer summarly to Complaints against them, is only
in relation to their Trust and Office, if they refuse to exhibit or deliver
Writes entrusted to them: And the Trust mentioned in the Bill was only to him
as quilibet, not as an Advocate.

D. 291. (...) contra (...) eod die.
A Discharge, alleged granted by a Minister to one of the Heretors of the
Paroch of a part of his Stipend, was quarrelled as false; and did appear to be
vitiate; in a process at the instance of the Minister for his Stipend: And the
user of the same being urged to abide by it, did offer to abide by it with a
quality, viz. That the payment not being made by the Heretor himself, (but by
his Tennent who took the said Discharge in the Heretors Name) he did abide by
the same a Write truly delivered by the Tennent.

The Lords did not sustain the said quality; Unless the Heretor would produce
the Tennent, and abide by the same as being truly subscribed and not vitiate;
which the Tennent did.

D. 292. Key contra Her Creditors. eod. die.
THE Pursuer of a Bonorum, having given her Oath, that there was no fraudulent
Deed done since the Disposition, whereby the Pursuer cesserat and Disponed
omnia bona.

It was urged, That the Pursuer should declare also, that no fraudulent Deed
had been done by her to defraud the Creditors, whether before or after the
Disposition; which was refused by the Lords; in respect that the ordinary Oath
given by such Pursuers did run in the Terms foresaid, that they had made no
fraudulent Right since the subscribing of the Disposition: Some of the Lords
were of Opinion, that the Pursuer should have declared, that she had done no
fraudulent Deed at any time; seeing cessio bonorum is an extraordinary remedy,
indulged to persons who are become lapsi upon some extraordinary occasion,
wlthout their own fault or fraud, and upon that account deserved favor; which
was not to be given to fraudatores who at any time had taken indirect ways to
prejudge their Creditors: And if the Pursuer, the very day before she
subscribed the Cession and Disposition, had made an anterior Right to prejudge
her Creditors, it were most inconvenient and absurd, that her Oath should only
be received in these Terms, that she had made no Disposition or fraudulent Deed
since the granting of the Disposition in favors of the Creditors: And as to
the pretense of custom and the conception of the Oath; it ought not to be
respected; seeing it cannot be said, that the Oath of Bankrupts, in the Terms
that it is now urged, was desired and refused; and if there had been any defect
in the conception of the Oath it ought to be helped.

D. 293. Bairdner contra Colier. eod. die.
IN a Process for abstracted Multures: The time of the advising of the Cause,
these points were debated amongst the Lords, viz. Whether or not, the Right of
a Miln, being Feued by the Abbot, in these Terms cum astrictis multuris, did
import astriction of all the Grains growing; so that these that were astricted
should be Liable to bring all the Corns that grew upon the Lands to the Miln;
and in case any such be sold the Heretors and their Tennents should be Liable
for astricted Multures: And 2. There being Decreets recovered at the instance
of the Feuar of the Miln, against the Feuars of the Lands, for abstracted
Multures of grana crescentia, if the same should import Astriction as to all
such Granes, tho neither the Right of the Feuar of the Miln, nor of the
Heretors of the Lands be express of grana crescentia; but only of the Terms
foresaid cum astrictis multuris.

Some were of the Opinion, as to the first point, That a Feu of a Miln in the
Terms foresaid cum astrictis multuris, should import nothing else but that they
that were within the sucken and astriction should be liable, only to grind at
the Miln all such Corns that they should have need and occasion to grind; Seeing
Thirlages are a most odious servitude and ought to be taken strictly: And
Multures being Moliturae and due for grinding, they ought to be understood only
in the case of Corns which the Fevers do bring to the Miln to grind; or which
they have need and use to grind; and yet abstract and go to other Milns:
Otherwise there should be no difference betwixt the Astriction of grana
crescentia, and an ordinary astriction. 2. The case in question was of a Miln
Feued by the Abbot of Culross, and of Lands likewayes Feued by himself after
the Feu of the Miln, and the time of the Feu of the Miln Lands being the Abbots
own, either in mainsing, or set to Tennents; It cannot be thought, that the
Astriction was in other terms than such as Tennents are in use to be astricted
to their Masters Miln; and beside the Teind and Seed, and the Duty payable to
the Master; which being payable to the Abbot the time of the Feu of the Miln
was free of astriction; the Tennent having the residue of the Rent for
entertaining of his Family, and for defraying the Charges of the Laboring, and
Servants Fies; and other necessar Expenses which could not be defrayed
otherwise, but by selling some of the Corns growing: It cannot be conceived
that the Abbot or any other Master would astrict his Tennents in these Terms,
that they should be liable for dry Multures, except it were expressed, and that
the Astriction had been granorum crescentium. Yet the Lords did demurr as to
this point, In respect it was vehemently urged by (...) that the Astrictions in
the Terms foresaid ought to be understood of grana crescentia; otherwise it
should be in the power of these who are astricted, to sell all their Corns, and
to buy Meal for their Family, and so to elude the Thirlage: Albeit It was
Answered, That it was not to be presumed that Fevers or Tennents would do so;
and if they did, they ought to be liable for abstracted Multures effeirand to
such quantities as were necessary, and they were in use to grind for their
Families.

Another point was Agitated and debate amongst the Lords, viz. That the said
Decreets could not be obtruded to the Defender; seeing neither he nor his Author
was called to the same, and res was inter alios acta: But the Lords did not
decide these points, but recommended to some of their number to endeavor to
settle the Parties.

D. 294. Oliphant contra (...) 7. July 1675.
(...) Oliphant desired an Advocation from the Town (...) Court, upon these
Reasons, viz. 1. That the Lybel was to be proven by the Defenders Oath which he
was to qualify. And 2. That the Defender was to prove a Defense by the
Pursuers Sons Oath, who was out of the Country; and the Town could not give a
Commission for taking his Oath: Both which Reasons were thought not to be
Relevant and the Advocation refused; In respect all Judges ought to receive
Oaths with intrinsic qualities, and Commissions may be direct by any competent
Judge.

D. 295. Lord Halcartoun contra Robison. July 1675.
THE deceast Lord Halcartoun being oblidged, by Contract betwixt him and his
deceast Father, to Infeft Mistress Margaret Falconer his Sister, in an
Annualrent of the principal Sum of 1000 Merks out of the Lands of Halcartoun
redeemable upon 1000 Merks: And to pay the principal Sum upon Requisition. Sir
Patrick Falconer immediate Younger Brother and Heir of Line to the said Mrs.
Margaret, Assigned the said Sum and Contract in favors of Robert Robertson;
And the said Robert having intended Action against the now Lord Halcartoun as
representing his Father, It was Alleged, That the said Sum being conquest in
the person of the said Mistress Margaret, it did not belong to the Heir of
Line, but to the immediate Elder Brother as Heir of Conquest.

The Lords, having heard the Cause in praesentia; and being resolved to decide
the question, betwixt the Heir of Line and Heir of Conquest, as to Heretable
Bonds, bearing such Obligements to Infeft; which had been often before in
agitation, but never decided but the time of the English; Did Find, that the
said Bond and Sum did belong to the Heir of Conquest, who would have succeeded,
in case the Right had been perfected by an Infeftment.

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That Bonds of that Nature should belong
to the Heirs of Line, for these Reasons. 1. That the Heir of Line is General
Heir and Successor in universum Jus, tam active quam passive, and is liable to
the Onus Tutelae, and other Burdens; and penes quem onus, penes eundem
emolumentum; unless the benefit of Succession be provided otherways, either
Provisione hominis, in the Case of Tailies; or Legis, and there is no Law
settling upon the Heir of Conquest, the Right of Succession as to Heretable
Bonds, whereupon no Infeftment has followed: And the Law of the Majesty, (...)
is only in the Case of Terrae and Tenementa and Feuda, as appears by the very
Words of the said Ancient Laws; and by Craig and Skeen de Verborum
significatione, in verbo Conquestus, and verbo Breve de morte antecessoris. 2.
As Bonds cannot be called Heretage, so they cannot be esteemed to be Conquest;
Heretage being properly Lands, wherein a Person succeeds as Heir to his
Predecessor: and if the Heir of Conquest, who is now found to have Right to
such Bonds, should decease, tho the samen would descend and belong to the Heir
of Line, yet such Bonds cannot be called Heretage: And Minors qui non tenentur
placitare de haereditate paterna, could not plead the same Privilege in the
case of Heretable Bonds.

3. Lands and Feuda can only be said to be Heretage, or to be Conquest, when
Parties have a real Right to the same by Infeftment; but as to Bonds, they do
not settle Jus in re, but at the most, a Jus ad rem.

4. Comprisings, Dispositions, and Reversions, being more of the nature of
Conquest, especially Reversions, which are real Rights, and do militate, not
only against the Granters, but singular Successors, do descend and pertain to
the Heir of Line, and not to the Heir of Conquest.

D. 296. Veatch contra Pallat. 10. November 1675.
THE Lords, in the Case beforementioned ( February 9 and 12. 1675) Veatch
against Pallat, having resumed the Debate; and it appearing upon Trial, that
the Common Debtor Sanderson, the time of the granting of the Assignation in
anno 1662 in favors of Ker and Brown, was not only Rebel but was in effect
Fallitus and Lapsus: They preferred Veatch to Pallat.

D. 297. Gibson contra Rynold and Tailor. 16. November 1675.
A Disposition being made by a Woman clothed with a Husband, of her Liferent
of a Tenement, redeemable upon the payment of a certain Sum within a short Term
therein mentioned allanerlie: A Decree of Declarator of the expireing of the
Reversion was obtained; and thereafter a Decree of Removing at the instance of
the Person Infeft upon the said Disposition, against the said Woman and her
Husband: Whereof a Reduction and Suspension being raised, upon that reason that
the suspender was clothed with a Husband the time of the expiring of the said
Reversion, and of the said Decreets; so that non valebat agere nor use the
Order of Redemption: and the Husbands Negligence in suffering the Reversion to
elapse, and the said Decreets to be obtained, ought not to prejudge her; seeing
she was content yet to purge by payment of the Sum contained in the Reversion.

The Lords, upon Debate amongst themselves, had these Points in consideration,
viz. 1mo. Whether or not a Redemption, being limited and temporary (as said is)
in the Case foresaid; there may be yet place, after the elapsing of the Term,
to purge: And some of the Lords were of the Opinion, that Reversions being
stricti Juris, there can be no Redemption, neither in the case of Legal nor
Conventional Reversions, after elapsing of the Term; nor place to purge: But
this Point was not decided. 2. It was agitat, whether a Woman cled with a
Husband, may be heard to purge, upon pretense that non valebat agere: as to
which Point, some of the Lords did demurr, and it was not decided: The Letters
being found orderly proceeded upon an other Ground, viz. In respect of the
Decree in foro contradictorio: But it is thought, that such Reversions should
expire even against Women clothed with Husbands, seeing it cannot be said that
they are in the case of Minors and non valentes agere, because they are
clothed with a Husband; And by the contrary, having the assistance and advice
of their Husbands, they are more able to go about their Affairs: And if their
Husbands refuse to concur, they may apply to the Lords, and desire to be
authorized by them. Strathurd Reporter. Monro Clerk.

D. 298. Halyburton of Innerleith. 17. November. 1675.
THE Lords, upon a Bill presented by (...) Halyburton late of Innerleith
Prisoner in Edinburgh for Debt, did permit, that until January next, he should
in the Daytime go out with a Keeper; the magistrates being liable if he should
escape: This was done upon pretense, that he intended to settle with his
Creditors, which he could not do unless he were allowed the Liberty foresaid:
But some of the Lords were of the Opinion, that the Emprisonment of a Debtor,
being the ultimate length of Execution; and not only custodiae causa, but in
effect that taedio and foetore carceris, Debitors may be driven to take a
course with their Creditors; That therefore the Lords had not power to give any
Indulgence or Permission, contrare to Law, and in prejudice of Creditors,
without their consent.

D. 299. Mr. Vanse. 18. November 1675.
CAptain Martine being pursued before the Admiral, for wrongs done by him in
taking free Ships and Goods, upon pretense that he was a Caper; and that the
same belonged to the Kings Enemies: and having desired an Advocation, the Lords
thought fit that he should find Caution: and because he refused, and pretended
he was not able, did commit him: and thereafter he having escaped out of the
Tolbooth of Edinburgh in a disguise, and in Women's Clothes; Mr. Vanse, Keeper
of the Tolbooth, did give in a Bill, representing, That there being so great a
number of Prisoners, upon account of Conventicles, and for Criminal Causes, and
the said Captain being incarcerate, not for a Crime, but for not finding
Caution, he was in bona fide not to look upon him as a Person that would
escape: and there being so many Persons who had access to other Prisoners to
furnish them Meat, and upon other Occasions, the said Captain his Escape, in
manner foresaid, was such, as the most faithful and diligent Keepers might have
been surprised and imposed upon: and therefore did desire that his Carriage
might be tried by the Lords; and if they should find him innocent, that he may
be cleared.

It was thought by some of us, That the Desire foresaid, resolving either in an
Absolvitor, or a Declarator of his Innocence; The Lords could not give a
Sentence as to either in Form; unless either there were a Pursuit against Mr.
Vanse, at the Instance of the Persons concerned; or a Declarator at his
instance, against them being called: and any Sentence that the Lords should
give, the Parties concerned not being called, will be no security to the
Petitioner: And whereas it was pretended, that this being an Incident, and a
Dependence before the Lords, they may proceed upon it, as accessory to the said
Dependence.

It was Thought, That the suffering the Prisoner to escape, tho it had a
dependence upon the Process, yet could not be called an Incident, but a
delictum, whereupon did arise a ground of Action against the Petitioner, both
at the instance of the Town of Edinburgh, who were directly liable to Creditors
for the escape of Prisoners; and at the instance of the Parties concerned: and
therefore their Interest and Action could not be prejudged in so summar a way
upon a Petition; they not being called: Whereas such Actions, being both of
importance as to the matter, and of difficulty and intricacy, do require not
only citation of Parties, but all the ordinary Solemnities of Process, both for
introduceing and discussing the same. Vide infra November. 23.

D. 300. Warden contra Berry. 20. November 1675.
THE Lords Found, That an Arrestment upon a Decree, after it was suspended,
may be loosed upon Caution. Done upon a Bill. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 301. Vanse contra Sandilands. 23. November 1675.
IN the Case abovementioned, concerning the Escape of Captain Martine, and the
Bill given in by Patrick Vanss; which was given up to (...) Sandilands
Commissioner for the parties concerned, and to his Procurators to see and
answer this day: It was Represented for Patrick Vanss, That Keepers of Prisons
are in effect Depositarij; and that Prisoners are entrusted and depositate to
be kept by them; And in Law Depositarius tenetur only de dolo and lata culpa;
and the Petitioner could be charged with neither: And the Prisoners Escape, in
a disguise, is such, as might have surprised and imposed upon the most
circumspect and diligent Keeper: And diverse Instances, from Lawyers and Story,
were adduced of Escapes of that nature, of prisoners in disguise; and of the
Impunity of Jaylors being free of Fraud, and any accession to the same:
Whereunto It was Answered, That the Keepers of Prisons are not Depositarij, but
public Servants and Officers; and in all cases of any Trust or Charge, when
the same is not gratuitous and dantis causa, but likeways causa accipientis,
and ubi intervenit merces, these who are trusted tenentur praestare culpam
levissimam: And seeing it cannot be said, that the Prisoner escaped vi majore,
which could not be resisted; nor casu fortuito, which could not be foreseen or
prevented, the Keeper, and his Servants, for whom he should answer, cannot be
said to be free of culpa: And albeit quaevis causa excusat a poena, where there
is no dolus, and the Instances adduced do militat only to that purpose; it
cannot be instanced either at home or abroad, that Magistrates and custodes
Carcerum under them, were found not to be liable in subsidium, for damnage and
interest for the escape of Prisoners: and yet the Lords inclined to free the
Petitioner: and that it may appear to be done the more warrantably, they
ordained him and his Servants to be examined concerning their Knowledge of the
said Escape.

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That it was to no purpose to examine
the Parties themselves; and tho they had Charity for the Petitioner, that he
was not conscious or accessory to the said escape, yet that he and his
Servants, for whom he should answer, could not be thought to be free of culpa
and negligence; and that is was hard, for securing him from prejudice, to
unsecure the People: and if such a preparative should be sustained, it would be
of dangerous Consequence, and not only a prejudice, but a discouragment to the
People, if after the extremity of Diligence and Trouble, Prisoners for Debt, or
upon other accounts, should escape impune, upon such pretenses: And it was
remembered, that upon the Occasion of the Indulgence, and Favor to Keepers of
Prisons in Edinburgh, there had been of late diverse Attempts and Escapes; and
in this instant Year, one being taken for a Highway Robber, and imprisoned in
Edinburgh, had escaped without any Censure or Punishment of the Servants of the
House. Vide supra November 18.

D. 302. Mr. James Eleis contra John Hall and others. 24. November 1675.
IN a Suspension of multiple poinding, at the instance of Mr. James Eleis of
Stainhopmilns against John Hall and the other Creditors of Mistress Masterton
and against the Creditors of James Masterton; It was Found, that Mistress
Masterton the Relict, not being confirmed Executrix Creditrix to her Husband;
her Husbands Creditors are preferable as to any Goods and Debts extant and
undisposed of, which belonged to her Husband; In respect albeit the Right of
the same was established in the person of the Executrix, yet they did pertain
to her as Executrix, and as having a Trust and Office; And to the effect the
Testament may be Execute; and what is confirmed should be made forthcoming to
all Parties having Interest; and consequently to the Defuncts Creditors, and
not her own: And the Executrix has not an absolute property in the Goods
confirmed, but only qualified and for Administration, and to the effect
foresaid.

2. It was Found, That a Servant, for his Fies, is not privileged and
preferable to other Creditors.

3. James Masterton having granted a Bond for payment of a considerable Sum,
after his own and his Wifes decease, in case he should not have Children of his
own Body; It was Alleged, That the said Bond, being without an Onerous Cause,
and not being effectual until after his decease, as said is, and failiening of
Heirs of his Body; was of the nature of donatio mortis causa, and could not
affect the Relicts part: Whereunto It was Answered, that the said Bond being
granted when he was in liege poustie, and had power as Dominus to dispose of
his Goods, or to grant Bonds which might affect the same; The Relict could have
no Legitime, but of the free Gear; the said Bond and other Debts being
satisfied.

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, that the Bond should affect the haill
Goods: But others thought that it ought to affect only the Defuncts part; seeing
there is a Commumon betwixt Husband and Wife; and albeit the Husband is said to
be Dominus, and has full Administration of the same, so that he may dispose
thereof, and grant Bonds for Onerous Causes; yet he cannot, in prejudice of the
Communion and the Wifes Interest foresaid, dissipate and give away the same by
fraudulent Donations, of purpose to prejudge either the Relict or the Children
of their Legitime: But this point was thought fit to be heard and debated in
praesentia.

D. 303. Forbes of Colloden contra Ross and others. 26. November 1675.
A Decree, at the instance of Forbes of Colloden against Robert Ross and
others, before the Commissar of Ross; being questioned upon that Ground, that
the said Commissar had committed Iniquity in Repelling Relevant Declinatures;
whereof one was upon the account of his Relation to the Pursuer, being the
Commissars Uncle: And an other was upon account of the nature of the Action,
Alleged not to be consistorial; and the subject of the Process, tho it had
being proper otherwise, yet being far above the Sum of 200 Merks, was such, as
by the Regulation, the Commissar could not be Judge in: And likewayes in
res^ect, that the Commissar did assume to himself a Power to modify a great
Sum, extending to above 6000. lib. for the Charges the Pursuer had been at in
pro^ecuting a Plea by warrant of the Defenders, and wherein he and they were
concerned: And the said Modification was upon no other Probation but the
Pursuers Oath; and that the modifying of so large a Sum did belong ex nobili
officio to the Lords of Session privative.

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That the Commissar, notwithstanding of
the Relation foresaid, could not be declined; seeing there is no statute that
Judges may be declined upon that account: And by the Act of Parliament 212. K.
Ja. 6. His 14. Parl. Anent the Declining of the Lords of Session; There is no
other Relation that can be a Ground of Declinator, but where the Judge is
related to either of the Parties, as Father, Brother, or Son: And yet others
were of the Opinion, that a Nevoy, being of so near Relation, may and ought to
be declined; In respect by the Common Law, persons of that Relation are most
suspect; and cannot be Judges: And by the said Law, a Judge may be declined
upon any Ground that may decline a Witness; and there is more reason to decline
Judges than Witnesses, seeing there may be penury of Witnesses, and they may be
so necessary, tho related to the Parties, that others cannot be Found: And the
said Act of Parliament, as all Acts of Parliament, especially such as are
correctory Juris communis, ought to be taken strictly; and cannot militate, but
in the case therinintended and expressed: And the said Act is upon special
considerations, in Relation to the Lords of Session, and particularly, of the
Eminent Integrity that is presumed, and ought to be in the Supreme Judicatory.

The Lords, without entering upon the Debate of the said other points, turned
the Dcereet in a Lybel. Forret Reporter. Clerk.

D. 304. Anderson of Dowhill contra Lowes. 27. November. 1675.
William Gibson did Dispone to William Norvel his Son in Law and Elizabeth
Gibson the Disponers Daughter, certain Aikers near Glasgow; which thereafter
the said William Norvel did Dispone to Thomas Norvel his Brother: And by a
Right from the said Thomas thereafter did pertain to Anderson of Dowhill.

But John Lowes, having thereafter Married the said William Norvels Relict
Elisabeth Gibson; and having, upon an Assignation to a Debt of the said William
Gibson, adjudged the said Williams Right from his Appearand Heir: And having
pursued an Improbation and Reduction of Dowhills Right; and in special of the
foresaid Disposition made by the said William Gibson to the said William
Norvel; Dowhill was forced to pursue forproving the Tenor of the said
Disposition, which was out of the way; and which he pretended to have been in
the Hands of the said Elizabeth Gibson; and to have been abstracted by the said
John Lowes her second Husband, intending to patch up the Right foresaid; And
these Adminicles bein Lybelled, viz. That the said Elizabeth Gibson being
pursued at the instance of the said Thomas Norvel before the Court of Glasgow,
for Exhibition of that Disposition; the said Elizabeth, for obtaining a
Suspension of the Decree of Exhibition recovered against her, did consign in
the hands of Henry Hope the said Disposition and other Writes; and that
thereafter the said Thomas Norvel, upon the said Disposition, did obtain a
Decree cognitionis causa, before the Baillies of Glasgow; In which the said
Disposition is mentioned as produced: And thereafter the said Thomas did also
obtain an Adjudication of the said Aikers, wherein also the same was produced:
And that there is an attested double of the said Disposition, which is written
by James Galbraith Agent, and attested by two famous Notars.

The Lords admitted the Summonds to Probation; And diverse Witnesses being
Examined, and in special the said James Galbraith, and these who were Servants
to the Clerk of the Court of Glasgow, the time of the obtaining of the said
Decreets Cognitionis causa, Adjudication, and others: After much debate, before
advising, in praesentia, and amongst the Lords themselves; Some of the Lords
were of Opinion, that pursuites, of the nature foresaid, being of so great
importance, and tending to make up a Right to Lands which may be of great
value; The Adminicles ought to be in Write and most pregnant; and that in this
case, tho there might be ground of presumption, yet it cannot be said, that
there are clear Adminicles in Write; In sua far as the attested double cannot
be considered as an Authentic Write, and it wants a date: And as to the
Decree of Adjudication, tho it mention the production of the Letters of
Disposition, yet it appears by the Depositions of the Witnesses, and it was
granted at the Bar, that the principal Disposition was not produced, but only
an attested Double, and needed not to be produced; the Decree cognitionis
causa being sufficient to instruct the Pursuers Title in the Adjudication: And
as to the Decree Cognitionis causa, that it is not a sufficient Adminicle,
seeing both it and the Decree of Adjudication, bearing the Production in the
same Terms, there might have been the same mistake in the Decree Cognitionis
causa, that is confessed to have been in the Adjudication, viz. That the Attested
double being only produced, yet the Production is made to bear the Disposition;
and there being so short a time betwixt the Decree Cognitionis causa which was
the 13. February, and the Adjudication which was on the 24. of the same Month,
it is to be presumed that the attested double has been produced in both: And
seeing in such pursuits for proving of Tenors rei gestae veritas ought to be
proven; yet it does not appear, by the Testimonies of any of the Witnesses,
that they knew that there was a Disposition truly subscribed by the said
William Gibson to the said William Norvel; and a pretended Disposition might
have been produced the time of the obtaining of the said Decreets; and might be
truly doubled; and yet be a false Write: And it were of a dangerous
consequence, upon such pretenses and Adminicles, to make up an Authentic
Write, to have the force of a principal Disposition as to all effects;
especially it being considered, that even Extracts do not satisfy in
Improbations, tho out of the Registers of the highest Judicatories; by reason
that Parties concerned will be prejudged of the means and indirect Articles of
Improbation, arising upon the sight and production of principal Writes, by
compareing Hand-Writes and Subscriptions and others: And if Tenors, being made
up, should be of more force than Extracts, there should be the same
Inconvenient and hazard to the People; and a Door should be opened to
contrivances, if after Papers are produced in Judgment, they should be
destroyed of purpose, and the Tenors of the same should be thereafter made up
by a Decree, which should satisfy the Production in Improbations.

The Lords thought fit again to Re-examine the said James Galbraith, before
they should proceed to Sentence: Vide 15. February 1676. inter eosdem.

D. 305. Blair contra Kinloch. 30. November 1675.
MR. George Blair, being called in an Adjudication at the instance of Kinloch
of Gourdie, as Superior of the Lands craved to be Adjudged; did allege that
they could not be Adjudged, because they did belong to him by a Disposition and
Resignation thereupon ad remanentiam: It was Answered, That Adjudications are
now in place of Comprysings; and as such Debates were not competent against
Comprysings the time of the deduceing of the same, so they ought not to be
admitted against Adjudications; seeing Comprysers and Adjudgers do Adjudge or
Comprise upon their own hazard: And if the Debtor has any Right or Interest,
it ought to be Adjudged; and if he has none, there is no prejudice to any
person.

The Lords Found, That there being no Competition of Creditors, and no hazard
of retarding the Pursuers Diligence upon that account; the Defender being
called might propone the said Defense; and ought not to be put to Trouble and
Charges to appear in any other Process for Mails and Duties, or Removing;
Especially seeing he was content, that if the Pursuer had a Reduction, as he
pretended, of his Right, that it should be discust presently; and tho he had no
Reduction, that what he could say against his Right should be heard and discust
by way of Reply. Forret Reporter.

D. 306. Mr. Vanss contra Sandilands. 1. December 1675.
IN the case abovementioned 18. and 23. of November. Vanss contra Sandilands.
The Lords having Examined the Servants of the Tolbooth and Captain Martines
Wife, Found that Mr. Vanss being free of any suspicion of Fraud, or Knowledge
and accession to the escape of Captain Martin; ought not to be Liable to any
hazard for the same.

D. 307. Barclay contra Arbuthnet. 3. December 1675.
Colonel Barclay, having produced in termino a Relaxation unregistrate, for
proving a Defense, Founded upon the Relaxation. It was Alleged before the Lord
of the Outer-house, that the Term ought to be circumduced: Whereunto It was
Answered, That it could not be circumduced, since he had produced the said
Paper, and Avisandum ought to be made, that the Lords might advise, whether it
proves or not.

The Lords Found, That in such Cases, where possibly a blank Paper, or a Paper
of an other nature than that which was to be produced, is produced in termino;
the Judge may and ought to circumduce the Term; where it is evident, that such
Papers are produced, not to satisfy, but to delay and abuse the Judge: But in
this case, seeing it was found, That Colonel Barclay had produced sufficiently
ad victoriam causae, so that there may be some ground of doubt and debate; The
Lords Found, That it was competent only the time of the advising. Gosfoord
Reporter.

D. 308. Lady Mouswel contra the Creditors of Mouswel. eod. die.
IN a Suspension of multiple Poinding against Agnes Rome Lady Mouswell and her
Children, and Douglas of Dornick, and the other Creditors of Mouswell; The said
Lady desired to be preferred for an Annualrent of 1000. merks yearly, wherein
she was infeft: It was Answered by the Creditors, that she had Right only to an
Annualrent of 800 merks yearly, having restricted her self to 800. merks, by a
Contract and Agreement betwixt her and her friends of Mouswell: Whereto It was
Replied, That the Restriction was personal in favors of the Heir of Mouswell,
and intuitu of the Obligements contained in the said Contract; that the Friends
should undertake the Sums mentioned in the said Contract respective which they
had not done: And albeit It was Duplyed, that the Minute does bear a positive
and absolute Restriction, and Renounciation of 200 merks, and that there is no
Provision or Clause irritant in the Minute, that if the Obligements upon the
other Contracters were not fulfilled that the Restriction should be void; Yet
The Lords preferred her for the whole Annualaent, Notwithstanding of the
Restriction foresaid: Which appears to be hard, Seeing some of the Creditors,
who did compete with the Lady, were not Contracters and obliged by the said
Contract; And the foresaid Restriction was not in favors of the Creditors who
were obliged by the said Contract, but in favors of her Son the Heir; And the
benefit thereof does accrue to his Creditors who had comprysed; and does in
effect redound to the advantage of the Heir and his Successors; Seeing the
Creditors will be the more easily satisfied, the burden of the Ladies Liferent
being restricted, as said is: and the other Creditors, who had not fulfilled
their Obligements, may be pursued for implement of the same: And it is a great
inconsequence, that because they had not fulfilled their part, that therefore
the Ladies part, which was fulfilled and execute, should become void: and the
pretense, that the Restriction foresaid was causa data non secuta is of no
weight; seeing the causa was the Obligement of the Creditors, which they might
be compelled to fulfill. Hatton Reporter.

D. 309. Cuninghame contra Maxwel. eod. die.
A Bond being suspended upon a Reason of Compensation, viz. That the Suspender
had debursed diverse Sums (conform to an Account) for the Charger: and the said
Reason being referred to the Chargers Oath, and deferred back again to the
Suspenders Oath; it was debated among the Lords, a quo tempore Compensation
should be sustained; whether from the time of the debursements, or from the
time the same was liquidat and cleared by the Suspenders Oath. And it was
Found, That Compensation should be sustained from the time of the Debursements:
seeing the said Sums then grew to be due.

Debts being illiquid, either because not constitute by Wr^te or Decree; or
because they are not due in Money but in Victual, or such like; which must be
liquidat, as to the Prices and Value, before there can be any execution for the
same; the Question may be of greater difficulty as to the last, seeing
compensatio is s^lutio, and ipso jure minuit; whereas a Debt in Money, cannot
be said to be payable, and far less to be paid in Victual, unless the Creditor
be content to be satisfied that way.

D. 310. Dalling contra McKene. 7 December 1675.
A Woman is understood to be praeposita negotiis domesticis; so, that for the
Provision of her House, she may take from Fleshers and Baxters and others such
Furnishing as is necessary: and her Declaration and Oath may be taken, and
ought to be trusted as to the same: and the Husband is presumed not to know the
particular Quantities: and these who do furnish, are not oblidged to enquire,
whether her Husband has given her Money sufficient to provide his House, if she
be a Person that is not inhibite: seeing the Husband has a remedy, if he has any
suspicion that she may abuse and wrong him, and may inhibite her. Glendoick
Reporter.

D. 311. Sheriff of Perth contra (...) eod die.
IT was Found, That the late Proclamation, remitting Fines due upon the
contraveening of Penal Statutes, ought to be extended to Ryots and Fines, upon
the committing of the same before the said Proclamation; the Persons being
thereafter Convict before the Sheriff. Glendoich Reporter.

D. 312. Lord Arnistoun contra Patrick Murray of Deuchar. 8. December 1675.
WHen Lands are pretended to be thirled to a Mill, the Heretor has good
interest to pursue an Improbation against the Heretor of the Mill, of all
Rights and Writes, bearing express constitution of the said Servitude: But that
General, viz. That the Defender should produce all Writes, which may import
Thirlage, ought not to be sustained; in respect there may be Writes importing
Thirlage consequentially, which the Defender is not obliged to know, what the
import of the same may be; and it were hard, that upon pretense of such an
Interest, the Defender should make his Charter Chest patent to the Pursuer: and
the Pursuer has a Remedy, if he apprehend that the Defender may trouble him,
upon pretense of Writes, which may import consequentially Thirlage, he may
force him to produce the same, by intenting a negatory Action and Declarator of
Freedom.

D. 313. (...) Lord of Wamfray. eod. die.
THE Act of Parliament against Protections. 3d. Sess. of His Majesty's 1st.
Parl. Cap. 3. giving Power to the Lords of Session, and Exchequer, Privy
Council, and Justice General, to grant Protections to persons summoned to
appear before them; is only to be understood in that case, when they are
obliged to appear personally to give their Oaths, or to be Witnesses; and
cannot appear by Procurators: And such Protections ought not to be granted upon
pretext, that Processes of Count and Reckoning and others cannot be managed
without their own presence: And this was Found upon a Bill given in by
Johnstoun of Wamfray; whereby he desired a Protection.

And yet it is thought, that in some cases, where it is evident that there is a
necessity of the Defenders presence to give Information in the point of Fact,
especially in general Actions of Count and Reckoning, Protections ought to be
granted.

D. 314. Veitch contra Hamilton. 9. December. 1675.
A General Action of Count and Reckoning, at the instance of Pupils and Minors
Post tutelam and curatelam, against their Tutors and Curators, is not
consistorial and competent to be pursued before the Commissars; where the
import of the Action exceeds the Sum and value to which the Commissars may be
Judges: And the pretense, that there are diverse Articles, and none of them
does exceed the said Sum is of no weight; seeing the Reply of articulatus
Libellus is only in the case, where the Debtor is pursued for diverse Sums,
which in effect resolves in diverse Actions: Whereas actio tutelae is but one
general Action and upon one Ground, viz. The Defender is Liable as Tutor and
Curator, whatever and how many soever the Articles of Intromission be: And upon
the Ground foresaid, the pursuit before the Commissars was Advocate. Newbyth
Reporter.

D. 315. The Creditors of James Mastertoun, and of his Relict Alice Thine. eod.
die.
BY our Custom and the Custom of diverse other Nations, tho there be a
Communion betwixt a Husband and a Wife as to Movables; yet the Husband dureing
the Marriage has not only Administration, but is Dominus actu; and may dispose
of the same, not only for Onerous Causes, but by way of Donation; and the Wife
has only a Right and Interest habitu; which exit in actum after the Marriage is
dissolved; as to all the Movables belonging to them, the time of the
Dissolution.

And yet if the Husband dispose of his Movables in fraudem, and of purpose to
prejudge the Wife, and to evacuate her Legitime and part of the Movables; as
was Alleged in the case in question; the circumstances being such as did
evince the Husbands fraud and purpose to settle his Estate upon his near
Relations after his Death; in prejudice of the Wifes Interest; such Donations
will not be sustained.

The said James Mastertoun, having made a Disposition in favors of his his
Wife, with the burden of his Debts, so that his Creditors should not be
prejudged; but that the said Right should be affected with the said Debts; It
was debated among the Lords, what the import should be of the said Clause; and
if the Creditors of the Husband had thereby a real Interst in the Goods; or
only a personal Action against the Receiver of the Disposition: And it was
thought, that the Goods being extant and undisposed of; the Receiver of the
Disposition with the said quality, was in the case of a Trustee or Executor:
And the Creditors of the Husband competing, upon their Diligence, to affect the
same with these of the Wife, would be preferable: But if they were disposed of
by the Wife, tho the price be not employed for the use of the Creditors, tho
they be extant the Husbands Creditors has no Interest in the same; seeing the
Wife was Domina and might sell the same; and Buyers finding her in possession,
are not concerned to enquire what way she should employ the price. Vide infra
17. December 1675. Thomson contra Eleis.

D. 316. Scot contra Kennedy. 10. December. 1675.
A Father, or any other person disponing his means, may qualify his own Gift;
and in special with that Provision, that if the persons be Pupils or Minors,
the same should be Administrate by the persons named in the said Disposition;
and yet these, in whose favors the Disposition is made, may choose Curators,
who will have the Administration of any other Estate belonging to them: But if
they be Puberes their persons are free; and neither of the said Administrators
can pretend to the keeping of them, quia curator datur rebus.

D. 317. McKneish contra Bryce and her Husband. eod. die.
A Woman being pursued upon a Bond; and having alleged, that it it was Null,
because she was vestita viro: The Reply, that she promised payment after her
Husbands decease, tho the Sum was only 100 lib. Scots, was Found not to be
probable by Witnesses. Glendoich Reporter.

D. 318. (...) contra (...) 16. December. 1675.
THE Lords Found, That a Merchant being in use to furnish diverse Years; That a
current account did not prescrive; Tho some were of Opinion, that the Act of
Parliament bearing no distinction; the Articles of Account ought to prescrive
from their Respective Dates; Seeing otherways the Act of Parliament may be
eluded, both in the case of Compts and other cases, which prescrive by the Act.
Nevoy Reporter.

D. 319. Wilson contra Deans. 17. December. 1675.
IT was Found, That a Woman keeping a Shop, and Traffiqueing as a Merchant with
the knowledge of her Husband, he is Liable for Debts Contracted by her, upon
the account of her Traffic, Action institoria. Forret Reporter.

D. 320. Thomson contra Mr. James Eleis. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, In the case of a Right of Movables, granted by a Husband to
his Wife with the burden of his Debts, and a Provision that they shall be
affected with the same, That the property of the Goods is settled in the person
of the Wife; so that she may dispose of the same: And these who acquire Right
thereto are not concerned to enquire, whether the price be converted to the use
and satisfaction of the Creditors; who will have a personal Action against the
Wife: So that she will in effect be in the case of an Executor and Trustee: But
if the Goods so affected be extant, the Creditors of the Husband will be
preferable to the Wifes proper Creditors; her Right being fiduciary (as said
is) and to the use foresaid. Praesentia. Vide supra 9. December 1675. The
Creditors of James Mastertoun.

D. 321. (...) contra (...) 21. December. 1675.
A Father having made a Disposition in favors of his Son, reserving his own
Liferent, with power likewayes to dispose of what he had provided; did appoint
certain Persons as Curators, and to have Administration of what he had
provided, dureing not only the Pupillarity, but the Minority of his Son; and
nevertheless his Son, having chosen Curators after his Pupillarity, there was a
Competition betwixt the said Curators, and the Person appointed by the Father
to Administrate.

The Lords Found, That the Son, as to his Person, was not in potestate of
either of the said competing Curators; seeing Curator non datur personae sed
rebus: and as to any other Estate, belonging to the Minor, any other way than
by the Provision of his Father, the same was to be governed by the advice of
the Curator, named and chosen by himself.

But the Lords demurred as to that Question, viz. Whether the Father might
affect the Right granted by himself, with the Quality and Provision foresaid,
that the Person named by him, should have administration of the Estate disponed
by him: And some were of the Opinion, that there is a difference betwixt a
Stranger and a Father; in respect Strangers are not obliged to give; and what
they are pleased to give, they may affect and qualify their Right thereof sub
modo, and with what Provisions they think fit; whereas a Father has a Duty
lying upon him in nature, to provide his Children; and by the Law he may name
Tutors to his Children; but after Pupillarity, he cannot put them under the
power of Curators, without their own consent: and if this practice should be
allowed, there should hereafter be no election of Curators: They did also
consider, that the Right granted by the Father, was in effect donatio mortis
causa, seeing the Father retained possession, and a power to revock: And it
seemed, that as the Father could not in Testament make Curators, so he could
not do the same by a Legacy, or any such Donation mortis causa.

D. 322. Mr. of Rae contra Dumbyth. 8 February 1676.
IN a Spuilie, at the Instance of the Master of Rae against Dumbyth, It was
Alleged, The Pursuit was prescrived, because not intented within 3. Years; so
that it could not be sustained to give the Pursuer Juramentum in litem and
violent Profits. It was Replied for the Pursuer, That long within the 3. Years,
a pursuit for Depredation had been intented, before the Justice; Which being of
a Higher Nature, and including Virtually, and in consequence, the conclusion of
Restitution and Profits, was a sufficient Interruption as to this pursuit.

The Lords, notwithstanding Found, the pursuit prescrived. Newbyth Reporter.
Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 323. Riccarton Drummond contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a special Service in an Annualrent, does give Right to
Heretable Bonds, and all other Heretable Estate, whereupon Infeftment did not
follow; and includes a General Retour, as Homo does include Animal. Newbyth
Reporter. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 324. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That when Creditors did compear in Adjudications, not being
called; they ought to be admitted with that quality, that since the course of
the Adjudger is stopped by their Compearance, the Adjudger shall be in the same
case as to any Adjudication at their instance, as if both Adjudications were
within year and day.

D. 325. College of Aberdeen contra (...) eod. die.
THE College of Aberdeen, having Right by Act of Parliament, to the Vacant
Stipends within the Bounds thereinmentioned; pursues for a Vacant Stipend: the
Bishop of Ross compeared and alleged, That the Kirk was his Mensal Kirk, so
that there could be no Vacant Stipend.

The Lords Found, That the College should have Right to any Stipend that
belonged to the former Ministers, either modified to them, or of which they
have been in Possession: and that it was consistent, that the Kirk should be
Mensal, and yet the Minister should have a Stipend, and that the Pursuers
should have Right thereto, being Vacant. Craigie Reporter.

D. 326. (...) contra (...) 9. February 1676.
IN a Suspension, a Reason of Compensation is lybelled, viz. That the Charger
was debtor to the Suspender upon account of a Fraught; and it was offered to
be proven by the Chargers Oath, that he was so Debtor; and by Witnesses what
the Fraught extended to

The Lords Found the Letters orderly proceeded; and that Compensation was de
liquido in liquidum, and not de liquidando by Witnesses.

D. 327. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
A Pursuit was intented for a Sum of Money, which the Defender was obliged by
his Promise to pay, in case he should be married; having gotten from the
Pursuer in the mean time a Piece, which the Pursuer was to loose, in case the
Defender should not be married.

The Lords sustained the Pursuit: Tho some of their Number were of the opinion,
that sponsiones ludicrae, of the Nature foresaid, ought not to be allowed.
Strathurd Reporter.

D. 328. Sir Patrick Nisbet contra Hamilton. eod. die.
AFter the Lands of a Debtor were denounced to be comprysed; a voluntar Right
was granted by him, of an Annualrent out of the samen Lands, for an Onerous
Cause; whereupon the Annualrenter was infeft by a public Infeftment, before
any Infeftment upon the Comprising: and there being upon the foresaid Rights a
Competition betwixt the Compriser and the Annualrenter: It was Alleged, That
after the Lands were denounced, the Debtor could not give a voluntar Right of
the same being litigious, and affected with the Denounciation: And on the other
part, it was debated, that the Debtor, not being inhibite, might give a
voluntar Right for an Onerous Cause, and the first consummate Right ought to be
preferred.

The Lords, In respect it was pretended there were contrary Decisions, Thought
fit, not to give Answer, until these should be considered.

D. 329. Park contra Rysly. eod. die.
A Tennent having sold Nine Score of Sheep, and the samen being carried off the
Roum where he was Tennent; the Master of the Ground, by Warrant of the Sheriff,
as having therein the Right and Interest of a tacit Hypotheck, did seize upon
the same.

The Lords Found, That neither the Master nor the Sheriff, without citing the
Party, could seize upon the said Goods, not being upon the Masters Ground; nor
give Warrant to that purpose: And yet seeing quaevis causa excusat a spolio,
they restricted the Pursuit to wrongous Intromission: and allowed to the Master
his Defense for Retention of the Goods, until he should be paid of his Years
Duty. Newbyth Reporter. Hamilton Clerk.

D. 330. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Right of a Wadset being comprised, the Compriser did require for the Sum
due upon the Wadset; and pursued the Representatives of the Debtor: It was
Alleged, for the Defender, That he could not pay the Money, unless the Pursuer
should put the Defender in Possession of the Lands: It was Answered, That the
Pursuer not having possession himself, and having loosed the Wadset by
Requisition, he could not put the Defender in possession: and the Defender
might have taken possession by his own Right: and it was enough that he was
content to renounce the Wadset; especially seeing neither the Pursuer nor his
Author had done any Deed to put the Defenders in worse case as to Possession;
and the Possession was apprehended and still continued by an Anterior
Compryser: and the Pursuer had obtained a Declarator, finding the said
Comprysing to be satisfied and extinct, so that the Defenders might easily
recover Possession.

The Lords notwithstanding Found the Alledgeance Relevant, and that the
Pursuers should put the Defenders in possession.

D. 331. Grant contray Barclay. 10. February 1676.
IN a pursuit upon a Passive Title of Behaving; It was Alleged, that before
intention of the cause the Defender had gotten a Gift of the Defuncts Escheat.

The Lords, Upon Debate amongst themselves, Found, that albeit the Gift was not
declared, yet it purged the Defenders vicious Intromission; being before the
intention of the Cause; and that the Defender, having the Goods in his hands,
needed not a Declarator.

This seemed hard to some of the Lords, In respect by our Custom there being
two ways adeundi haereditatem, viz. either by a Service or by Intromission was
the Defuncts Goods that were in his possession: The Appearand Heir, by meddling
with the Goods, gerit se pro haerede; And so by his Intromission having
declared his intention alse fully as if he were served Heir; semel haeres
cannot cease to be Heir; there being Jus quaesitum to the Creditors as to a
Passive Title against him. 2. The pretense, that the Defender is in the same
case, as if there were an Executor confirmed before the intention of the Cause,
is of no weight; Seeing the Defense upon the confirmation is sustained; because
there is a person against whom the Creditors may have Action, which is not in
the Case of a Donator. 3. A Donator has no Right without a general Declarator;
And tho, when the Donator has the Goods in his hand, there needs not a special
Declarator; yet, for declaring his Right, there must be a general one. 4. As to
that pretense, that the Defender cannot be Liable as Intrometter with the
Defuncts Goods, because they belong to the Fisk and not to him; It is Answered,
That the Goods being in the possession of the Defunct; the Appearand Heir
thereafter medleing with the same eo ipso adit; and the Creditors ought not to
be put to debate, being he is in Possession: And if a person should be served
special Heir to the Defunct, tho the Defuncts Right were reduced and the
Haereditas could be inanis as to the benefit, yet the Heir would be still
Liable. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 332. Mcquail contra Mcmillan. eod. die.
A Pursuit being intented against the Wife as universal Intrometter to a
Defunct, and her Husband pro interesse; and the Wife having deceased: It was
Found, that the Husband should not Liable, unless it were proven, that he had
Intromission with the same Goods; upon the Intromission with which the former
pursuit was intented against his Wife.

This was not without difficulty: And upon debate amongst the Lords, tho it was
not the present case, yet the Lords inclined to be of the Opin^on, that the
Husband, having gotten a Tocher ad sustinenda onera Matrimonij; If the Wife had
any other Estate, whereunto the Husband had Right Jure Mariti, he should Liable
in quantum locupletior. Nevoy Reporter. Robert Hamilton Clerk.

D. 333. Alexander Abernethie contra Arthur Forbes. eod. die.
THE Lord Saltoun having given a Bond of 20000 Merks to Alexander Abernathie,
upon account of his Service, and of the Service done by his Brother James
Abernathie: Thereafter the said Lord Saltoun did grant a Bond, making mention
that the Lands of Auchincleuch belonged to him and his Authors, and that the
said Alexander had been Instrumental to obtain a Reduction of the Rights of the
Estate of Salton, to the behoof of the said Lord Salton; and therefore
obligeing my Lord Saltoun to Infeft him in the said Lands.

The Lords Found, That the said Bond, being after the former and for the Causes
foresaid, and having no Relation to the said former Bond of 20000 Merks, that
it should be in satisfaction of the same; Could not be interpret to be in
satisfaction thereof: And the Brockard Debtor non praesumitur donare does not
militate in this Case; Seeing the Lord Salton was in a capacity to give both the
said Bonds, by way of Donation: and the question was not betwixt the said
Alexander and the Creditor, but betwixt another person to whom thereafter he
had gratuitously Disponed his Estate. In praesentia.

D. 334. Gibson contra Fife. 12. February 1676.
A Woman having lent 100 Merks, upon a Blank Bond; and the same being lost: The
Debtor was pursued for payment of the said Sum; and did confess that he had
truly borrowed the Money, and granted the Bond Blank; and he was willing to pay
the same, being secured against any pursuit, at the instance of any person, who
might have found the said Bond, and filled up his own name therein.

The Lords thought the case to be of great difficulty and import, as to the
preparative; that practice of granting Blank Bonds having become too frequent:
And resolved, in this case, to take all possible Trial by the Debitors Oath,
and otherwise, of the date and Writers Name and the Witnesses in the said
Bond: And thereafter to ordain the Debtor to pay upon surety, that the Pursuer
should relieve him of any Bond that should be found of that date and Sum; and
written and Subscribed by the Writer and Witnesses that should be found to have
been in the said Bond. Gibson Clerk.

D. 335. Anderson contra Lowes. 15. February 1676.
THE Lords, in the case abovementioned Anderson contra Lowes 27. November 1675.
Found the Tenor of the Write thereinspecified proven by the Adminicles
thereinmentioned. In praesentia.

D. 336. Marshal contra Forest and her Husband. eod. die.
IN a pursuit at the instance of a Minor against his Tutrix: The Pursuer having
referred to the Tutrix Oath, that she had intrometted with diverse particulars
belonging to him: The Husband of the Tutrix Alleged, that she could not
declare in his prejudice: It was Replied, That the Pursuer having an Action and
Jus quaesitum competent to him against his Tutrix, he could not be in worse
case as to modum probandi, by the Tutrix her superinduceing a Husband: And that
the Intromission of a Relict, after her Husbands decease, being such as to
Money, Bonds, and many other particulars, as could not be known to any person,
but to her self; nor proven, but by her own Oath; It were hard, that the Minor
should be prejudged of his Probation by her own Deed: And the Husband is not in
the case where a Debt is only to be constitute by the Wifes Oath; seeing the
Ground of the Debt is constitute by Write, viz. By the Nomination or Letter or
Tutory: And when there is a pursuit against any person, that Person cannot by
an Assignation prejudge his Creditor of his Probation by Oath; and the Minor is
more privileged; seeing by the Common Law Minors have a tacit hypotheck of
their Tutors Estate; and by our Law they ought to be favored, at least so far
as it should not be in the power of the Tutrix to ruin them, by convoleing ad
secundas nuptias ante redditas rations.

The Lords thought the case considerable: And Ordained the Tutrix to declare;
Reserving to themselves, to consider what her Declaration should import. Forret
Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 337. E. of Dumfermling contra the Earl of Callender. 16 February 1676.
THE Earl of Dumfermling, having Right by Assignation, to the Obligements
contained in the Contract of Marriage, betwixt the deceast Earl of Callender
and his Grandmother; in swa far as the same is in favors of the said Lady:
pursued the said Earl of Callender for Implement of the said Obligements; and
the Lord Almond, now Earl of Callender, as having gotten a Right to the said
Earl of Callender's Estate, with the burden of his Debts: and the said Earl in
the interim having deceased, did insist against this Earl of Callender: For
whom It was Alleged, That the Process ought to be transferred against some
representing the said Earl of Callender, as Heir of Line, or otherways: And tho
the Pursuers Procurators declared, they insisted only against Callender for a
Declarator, that the Estate disponed to him should be affected with the
foresaid Obligement: It was urged for Callender, That the said Earl's Heirs
ought to be called; Seeing the Declarator, against him being a singular
Successor, that his Lands should be affected, was only a subsidiarie
Conclusion, and could not be sustained before the Debt was constitute: and the
Debt could not be constitute, unless the pretended Debtor, or some
representing him, were called.

The Lords notwithstanding Found Process; and that there were no necessity of
calling or transferring against the Heirs of the Debtor. Actor Sinclar, Bernie
and others, alteri Lockheart. Monro Clerk. In Praesentia.

D. 338. Doctor Borthuick contra the Earl of Crawfurd. eod. die.
THE Earl of Crauford, having borrowed 8000 merks from the Mother and
Grandmother, and two of their Children, for themselves and in name and behalf
of their said Children; he is obliged by his Bond to infeft the said Mother and
Grandmother in Liferent and the said Children in Fie in an Annualrent out of
certain Lands; but by a mistake, the Precept of Seasin, contained in the Bond,
is in favors only of the Mother and Grandmother, and for infefting them as
Fiars of the said Annualrent, and accordingly they are infeft: And yet
thereafter the said Mother and Grandmother acknowledging, that the said
Infeftment was so taken upon mistake, did by a Disposition, bearing the
Narrative foresaid, dispone the Fee in favors of the said Children: and there
was a Pursuit intented at their instance, against the said Earl of Craufurd,
for poinding of the Ground, Wherein It was Alleged, That the Mother and
Grandmother, being only Lifrenters, could not resign the Fee, which they had
not: and if the Pursuers made use of their Right from them, the Defenders ought
to be assoilied; because the Mother and Grandmother, by a Transaction betwixt
the said Earl of Crawfurd and them, had accepted the time of the Englishes, a
parcel of Lands in satisfaction of the said Debt.

The Lords Found, notwithstanding of the said Alledgance, that the Pursuers
ought to have process for poinding the Ground; In respect the Mother and
Grandmother had de facto the Fie in their person upon the said Precept and
Seasin: And the same being given indebite, as said is, they might have been
compelled to denude themselves thereof: and therefore might voluntarly, and
accordingly did denude themselves thereof, and the said Transaction could not
prejudge them, seeing they derived their Right from the said Persons
qualificate, in respect of their Interest and Error foresaid; and they might
have been compelled to give the same: and the Earl of Crawfurd was not in bona
fide to contract with them; Seeing by the Bond granted by himself, they were
only Fiars, and the other but Liferenters. Actor Lockhart and Beaton, alteri
Cuningham and Suinton. Clerk in praesentia.

D. 339. Doctor Hay contra Alexander. 17. Febr. 1676.
DOctor Hay his Case, 28 January 1675. supra, resumed and taken to
consideration this day; And tho some of the Lords considered, that it was hard
to canvel Certifications in Pursutes of Improbation after a long Dependence,
and diverse Terms given to produce, and delays of Extracting, after
Circumduction of the said Terms; and that such Certifications are not only the
great Surety of these who obtain the same, but of these who obtain Right from
them, conceiving themselves to be secured with such Certifications: Yet the
President, and others of the Lords inclined to repone Alexander against the
Certification, the Writes being produced; tho it was urged, that beside the
Security and Interest of People, as said is, it was to be considered, that in
this Case, there were Advantages pretended to on both hands, viz. by Alexander
of an expired Comprysing; and by the Doctor of the said Certification: and that
Alexander and his Authors, by virtue of their Comprysing, had been many years
in Possession; tho there was probability the Comprysing was satisfied; and it
seemed to be equitable that the Doctor should have a Decree of Removing; and
should give a Reversion to Alexander, limited to such a time as the Lords
should find just, upon payment of what should be resting and unsatisfied by his
and his Authors Intromission, if there there were any part of the Debt yet
resting: But this Point was not decided, the Lords having recommended to some
of their Number, to endeavor an Accommodation betwixt the Parties.

D. 340. Abercrombie contra Acheson and Livington. eod. die.
A Taverner, after she had removed from her Masters Service, and was Married,
was pursued to Count and Reckon for Ale and Wine which the Pursuer offered to
prove was laid in in his Cellars.

The Lords Found, That the Pursuer ought to Lybel and prove that the Debt was
yet Resting: Seeing it was to be presumed, that Servants of that quality did
Count Weekly with their Masters; and the Pursuer would not have suffered the
Defender to go out from his Service before she had Compted and made payment:
And it appeared, that there had been former Decisions to that purpose. Lord
Justice Clerk Reporter.

D. 341. Dundass contra Turnbul and other Creditors to Whitehead of Park. eod.
die.
IN a Competition, betwixt an Infeftment of Annualrent and a posterior
Infeftment upon a Comprysing; the Lords inclined to find, that the Infeftment
of Annualrent was made public by a pursuit of poinding the Ground before the
Infeftment upon the Comprysing: But, some of the Lords not being clear, the
case was not decided. Gosford Reporter.

D. 342. Wauch contra Jamison. eod. die.
DOctor Bonar, being to go out of the Country did Dispone a Right of Lands and
of an Annualrent to Mr. John Smith his near Relation; upon a Backbond granted
by the said Mr. John, bearing that the said Right was granted partly in Trust,
and partly for surety to the said Mr. John for Sums due for the time to him by
Bonar; and of such Sums as Smith should advance to Bonar, or his Creditors: And
that the said Right should be Redeemable by Bonar or his Sister, if she should
survive him, by payment of the foresaid Sums.

Thereafter the Doctor did grant a Bond of 5000 Merks to the said Mr. John
Smith, bearing no Relation as to the said surety: And bearing, as to the
conception, a simple Moveable Bond to the said Mr. John his Heirs and
Executors: And after the said Mr. John Smiths decease, there being a
Competition betwixt Doctor Jamison his Heir and the Executor, as to the said
Sum of 5000. Merks: And the question being, whether it should be thought to be
Heretable, in respect of the said surety; or Moveable, In respect of the
conception of the said Bond.

The Lords did consider the case as of great moment, as to the consequence and
Interest of the People; and upon debate at the Bar in praesentia and among
themselves, they came to these Resolutions; viz. That it was consistent, that a
Sum should be Moveable, and yet that it should be secured by an Heretable
Surety, as in the case of bygone Annualrents due upon Infeftments of
Annualrent; and of bygone Feu-duties or Taxations; the same being
unquestionably Moveable ex sua natura; And yet there being a real surety for
the same, and a real Action for poinding the Ground even competent to
Executors: And likewayes in the case of Wadsets loosed by Requisition, and
bearing a provision, that, notwithstanding of Requisition, the real Right
should stand unprejudged until payment; in which case the Sum would be Movable,
tho still secured by Infeftment. 2. That, as to these qualities of Moveable or
Heretable, in relation to the Interest of Succession and Question betwixt Heirs
and Executors, the design of the Creditor and animus, was to be considered
principally: And if Debts, either by the conception, were Heretable ab initio,
or an Heretable surety taken thereafter for Moveable Debts, as a Wadset or
Comprysing; It was to be presumed, that the Creditor intended to alter the
quality of the Sums, and that they should belong to his Heirs: but if Creditors
should take an Heretable surety, without any intention to alter the quality of
the Debt, or that the same should ly as bonum stabile and fixed; the Debt
continues still Moveable: As v. g. If a Creditor, having done exact Diligence,
should take a Gift of Liferent Escheat, or Recognition, upon a Back-bond, that
he should be satisfied in the first place of his Debt: Or if in a Suspension, a
Disposition of the Debitors Estate should be consigned, because he cannot find
Caution: Or in the case of Bonorums, a Disposition of an Heretable Estate
should be made in favors of his Creditors: Or if a Debtor should Dispone his
Estate in favors of a confident person with the burden of his Debts: In these
and the like Cases, Because the Creditor does not intend, that his Money should
ly as an Heretable Debt, but upon the contrary has done, and is about to do
all possible Diligence, for recovery of the same, the Debt continues still
Movable, notwithstanding of the said accessory and extrinsick surety. 3. Bonds,
being taken after a general Surety in the Terms foresaid, for Debts to be
advanced, may be Moveable; notwithstanding of such Surety, if it appear that
the Creditor intended it should be such: As if such supervenient Bonds should
be taken to Executors, Excluding Heirs: Especially when such general Sureties,
for Sums as are to be afteradvanced, are not dispositive, but by way of
Provision containing Back-bonds, and not of the Right it self, viz. That the
Receiver of the Right should not be liable to denude, until he get payment of
the Sums that should be due to him at any time thereafter; In which case it
appears, that he has not a positive Right, and Surety for the said Sum, but an
Interest and exception of Retention.

The Lords in end, In the foresaid Cause, Found that the said Bond of 5000 M.
In sua far as it should be made appear, to be made up of the Sum mentioned in
the Back-bond, that was due to Smith at that time, should belong to the Heir an
as Heretable Sum; In respect, ab initio, the said Surety was granted for the
same: But, as to the residue of the said Sums, it should belong to the
Executors as Moveable; Seeing the Defunct had expressed his Intention that it
should be such, by the taking the Bond, in the form and conception of a
Moveable Bond. Cuninghame and Kincaid for Wauch, alteri Lockheart and Mckenie.
Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk. in praesentia.

D. 343. Ogilvie contra Buckie. 22. February. 1676.
IMprobation being proponed against a Discharge, after the same had been
questioned as Null, because it wanted the Writers Name, at least he was not
designed.

The Lords Found The said Write Null and not probative, unless the Pursuer
should condescend upon a Writer Living; at least, if he were Dead, should
produce Writes written or subscribed by him, to the effect the Pursuers may
thereupon have the means of indirect probation entier. Actor. Mckenie alter.
Thoirs.

D. 344. Aerskine contra Rynolds. eod. die.
THE Lords sustained a Declarator, at the Instance of a Creditor, to hear and
see it Found, That certain Sums provided by a Father to his Children, after the
contracting of the Debt, should be liable and subject to Execution for their
Debt: and that they should be liable themselves in quantum lucrati, tho there
was not a Reduction intented of the said Rights upon the Act of Parliament
1621. which the Lords were moved to do, not only because they thought, that the
said Declarator is a Reduction upon the matter, but the rather that the
Summonds were offered to be proven by the Defenders own Oaths: and in effect,
as to the most of the Sums, they were not a Subject of Reduction; seeing the
Debts were not all assigned to the Children; but the Bonds being blank in the
Creditors Name, the Father had filled them up in the Name of the Children: and
as to such as were assigned, for the most part, they were renewed in the Name
of the Children; the former Bonds being given back, with Assignations to the
same. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 345. Hilton contra L. Chynes. 24. February 1676.
THE Lady Cheynes being infeft in an Annualrent, upon a Right granted by her
Husband: Her Seasin was questioned upon these Grounds: 1. That it was Null, in
sua far as the Baillie and the Actorney in the Seasin were one Person, who
could not both give and take the Seasin. And 2. The Provision was during
Marriage, and after the Creditor that did compeat, his Debt; and tho it could
be sustained, where there was no Contract of Marriage, for a competent
Provision; yet it could not be sustained for the whole Annualrent, being
exorbitant; her Husbands Estate and Debt being considered.

The Lords, In respect, it did appear evidently, that it was a mistake of the
Notar, that the Seasin did bear the same Person to be both Baillie and
Actorney, in the Clause of Tradition; And seeing by the first part of the
Seasin, it was clear, that there was a distinct Actorney, who did present the
Seasin to the Baillie; Did therefore incline to sustain the Seasin: but before
Answer to that Point, they ordained the Parties to be heard upon the said other
Alledgance: and the Relict to condescend upon her Tocher and the Rent of the
Estate: and the Creditor upon the Burdens. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 346. Johnston contra Cullen. eod. die.
A Tack, being granted by a Husband to another Person, to the behoof of his
Wife; to begin at the first Term after the Husbands decease; was not sustained
against a singular Successor: because the said Tack was but a Personal Right,
not being cled with Possession: and the entry was conferred in tempus
indebitum, to begin after the Husband was denuded. Glendoick Reporter. Monro
Clerk.

D. 347. Johnston contra Orchardtoun. eod. die.
IN a Pursuit upon a Bond of Corroboration, It was Alleged, That the Principal
Bond ought to be produced; which was repelled, in respect, the maxim non
creditur referenti, nisi constet de relato, holds only in the Case, where there
is only a naked Relation to a Write, and not when the Write that relates
thereto does proceed to an Obligement thereupon; and it is not only Relative
but Dispositive. Glendoick Reporter. Robert Hamilton Clerk.

D. 348. Burnet contra Swan. eod. die.
A Seasin within Burgh being questioned, because it was not found in the Books,
was sustained; In respect of the Act of Parliament, excepting such Seasins from
necessity of Registration; it being to be presumed, that the Clerks do not
faill to registrate the same, and if they do not book them, it ought to be
imputed to them, and not to the Party. Sir David Falconer for the Seasin.
Alteri Seaton. Hay Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 349. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
IN a Pursuit against a Minor, It was Alleged, Quod non tenetur placitare,
because Minor: Whereupon there did arise two Questions, viz. 1. Whether the
said exception, being a Dilator, ought to be verified instanter: As to which,
It was Found by the Lords, That Minority, being in Fact, could not be verified
instanter. 2. It being replied, That the Defender was Major, which was offered
to be proven; and a conjunct Probation being desired by the Defender; It was
nevertheless Found by the Lords, That the alledgance of Minority being eleided
by the said Reply of Majority, which only was admitted, the Pursuer ought to be
allowed to prove his Reply, without Conjunct Probation to the contrary. Sir
David Falconer Actor. alteri (...) Hamilton Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 350. Rig contra Rig. 6 June 1676.
THE Lords Found, as they had done formerly in another Case, that where a
person of a near Relation stays for any considerable time in Family with
another, as in the Case in question a Brother with a Sister; and both are
Majores and of that age that they may agree, if it be so intended by either,
that the one should be considered and have a Fee and satisfaction as a Servant
to his Sister, or that the Sister should have satisfaction for the Aliment and
Entertainment of her Brother; if they make no such Transaction, that neither
the Sister can claim Aliment, nor the Brother a Fee, upon pretense that he did
serve, and did good Offices to his Sister; and that it ought to be thought and
presumed, that he did the same upon account of his Relation, for his
Entertainment: and that she did entertain him in contemplation of the said
Relation, and that he was useful. Hay Clerk.

D. 351. Pittarro contra the Tennents of Redmyre. 7. June 1676.
THE Abbot of Arbroth, by an Ancient Charter, having fewed the Miln of Conveth,
in these Terms, cum pertinen cum multuris totius parochiae de Conveth: The
Feuar of the said Miln in the Year 1597. did obtain a Decree of the Lords of
Session, against some of the Heretors of the said Parish, in foro as to some of
the Defenders; but in absence as to others, and in special as to the Heretor of
Redmyre being called. And now (...) Carnegie Younger of Pittaro, having
pursued, for abstracted Multures, the Heretors and Tennents of Redmyre; and
having founded both upon the said Charter of the Miln, and the said Decree; It
was Alleged, That the Defenders Right bears no Astriction: And as to the said
Charter, it must be understood of the Multures belonging to the Abbot; and of
the Lands pertaining to, or holden of him; and that the Lands of Redmyre do not
hold of the Abbot, but of the Lord of Drum, who holds the same of the King:
and that the Abbot could not astrict any Land but his own: and as to the said
Decree, that it was a latent Decree, in absence against the Defenders Author;
and that notwithstanding thereof, the defender and his Authors, had been in
Possession of Liberty, in swa far as, tho they came sometimes to the Pursuers
Miln, being nearest and most convenient, and the Multure being alse easy as at
any other Miln; yet the going to a Miln being facultatis, wherein Astriction
cannot be shown, they had used and were in Possession of the said Liberty to go
to other Milns.

It appeared, that the same Defense being proponed in the foresaid Decree
1597. for these who were compearing, was Repelled; In respect the said Charter
was so Ancient, and was so expressly of the Multures of the hail Parish; And
after so long a time it was not necessar to debate the Abbots Power to astrict
the said whole Parish: And the foresaid Charter does bear, that the Abbot did
give to the Fever the said Miln, in the same manner, and alse freely as one
Vmfridus had the said Miln and Multures, by a Grant and Right from K. William:
And it was presumable, that the said King, who might have thirled the said
Lands holden of himself, did give the Miln and Multures.

The said Decree likewayes 1597. did mention the Production of a Retour before
the Sheriff; and the verdict of an Inquest concerning the said Multures,

The Lords having among themselves debated, and considered, that the said
Decree 1597, tho in absence was a valide Decree; whereby the Defenders Author
is decerned, in all time coming, his Tennents, Cottars and Successors to pay
the Multure thereinmentioned: And that the said Decree was a standing Decree
by the space of 40 years; and never questioned; there was no necessity to
debate upon any other Grounds, than that the Pursuer had thereby a Right to the
said Multures; Seeing the Defenders did not deny, that they were in use to come
to the Miln, but pretend a Liberty and use to go likeways to other Milns: And
it cannot be said, that he had the said Liberty, the contrare appearing by the
said Decree which never was questioned, and now cannot be questioned being
prescrived, and yet the Lords Assoilied fra Bygones and Services, not contained
in the said Decree.

It being Alleged that the Farm should not be thirled: The Lords Found, That
the growing Corns being Astricted by the said Decree, there ought to be an
exception, but of Teind and Seed: And that the Tennents were Liable for such
Corns as belonged to themselves; and the Master for his Farm. Actores Sinclair
and Lermonth etc. for Pittarro alteri for the Defender Lockheart and Falconer.
Monro Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 352. Stenhouse contra The Heretors of Tweedmoor. eod. die.
THE Lord of Stenhouse, his Lands being designed for a Gleb; pursued some of
the Heretors within the Parish for his relief, conform to the Act of
Parliament: In which case, in respect the pursuit was by the space of 8. or 9.
years after the Designation; And the Heretors were in bona fide, and did
possess their own Lands, and had made fructus suos;

The Lords Found, That the Defenders were not Liable to pay the Annualrent for
the Sum decerned from the time of the Designation; Seeing usurae debentur only
ex pacto vel mora. Albeit it may appear, That that Relief that is due ex lege
is at least alse effectual, as if it were ex pacto: And the very Notion of
Relief imports that the Party should be relieved of all Damnage sustained by
him: And the Pursuer was prejudged, not only by the want of the value of what
he was to be Relieved of, but of the Interest of it. Gibson Clerk.

D. 353. Ramsay contra Zeaman. 7. June. 1676.
DOctor Zeaman, By Contract of Marriage, betwixt him and Margaret Ramsay, was
obliged to employ 10000 lib. to himself, and her in Liferent, and the Heirs of
the Marriage: And was also obliged to employ other 20000 lib. to himself, and
to the Heirs of the Marriage; with a Provision, that he should have power to
burden the said Heirs of the Marriage with an Additional Jointure to his Wife,
and the provisions of his other Children; at any time etiam in articulo mortis:
Which Jointure and Provision is accepted by the said Margaret, in satisfaction
of what else she could claim of Terce or Movables. And thereafter the Doctor
in his Testament, having named his Son and appearand Heir, to be his Executor
and universal Legator; and having left in Legacy to his Wife the Annualrent of
3000 Merks by and attour her Jointure; and diverse Provisions to his other
Children, and Legacies to other persons: His Relict and her present Husband
pursued her own Son, as Executor to his Father, for payment of the said Legacy
left to her: And it being Alleged, That the Inventar of the Testament would
not extend to satisfy all the Legacies; and that there ought to be a
Defalcation proportionably: It was Answered, That she was not to be considered
as an ordinar Legator, but in effect was a Creditor; In respect of the said
Provision and Power reserved to the Doctor, as said is: And that he had used
the said power and faculty.

The Lords Found, That the said Addition being left to her in Legacy; she was
in no better case than the other Legators; and had no preference before them
out of the Executry.

Yet it is thought, That if there be not so much of the Executry as to satisfy
the Relict her Legacy; the Heir will be liable for what she wants; Seeing, by
the said Provision, the Heirs of the Marriage are burdened with what he should
add to her Jointure etiam in articulo mortis: And albeit nemo potest facere ne
leges habeant locum in suo Testamento, and no person at any time can reserve a
Power to burden his Heirs, at such a time as in Law he is not in legitima
potestate; yet when any person gives any thing, or makes a Provision in favors
of any other person, or of his Heirs of Provision; he may give and qualify the
same sub modo, and with what burden he pleases; and therefore the Defender,
being not only Executor, but the only Heir of the Marriage, will be Liable by
the said Provision to the said Addition and Provision in favors of his Wife
and Children, albeit left in Lecto: And he cannot frustrate the same, upon
pretense that he will not serve himself Heir of Provision, but Heir of Line;
seeing he is the same person, and is both Heir of Line, and Heir of Provision:
And if need bees, the Relict and Children, as Creditors by the said Provision
contained in the Contract of Marriage and in the Testament, may get Decrees
against him as charged to enter Heir of Provision; and if he renounce may
adjudge the 30000 lib. provided to the Heirs of the Marriage. Actor Sinclair
alteri McKene and Zeaman. Gibson Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 354. Irving contra Forbes. 8. June. 1676.
IN the case, Irving contra Forbes: It was debated among the Lords, whether a
person should be Liable, as vicious Intrometter, notwithstanding that it was
Replied, that he was confirmed Executor: And Answered, That as to
Superintromission, beyond what was confirmed, he was Liable as Intrometter.

It was asserted by the President and some others, That it was the custom and
daily practique, That notwithstanding of Superintromission even before the
Confirmation, the Executors ought not to be Liable, but secundum vires; and
that a Dative ad omissa may be taken; yet others were positive of the Opinion,
that a Person, Intrometting with more nor is confirmed, was Liable as vicious
Intrometter; Seeing it could not be denied, but he was Intrometter; and he could
not plead, nor pretend to be Executor, as to what was not confirmed; and if
there were no Confirmation he would without question be liable as Intrometter;
and the Confirmation ought not to put him in better case; seeing,
notwithstanding of the same, as to Superintromission, he is not only
Intrometter without warrant and so vicious, but is perjured; having made Faith,
the time of the Confirmation, that nothing was omitted; And it is hard that a
custom, contrare to the Principles of Law, and to the Opinion of Hope and other
Lawyers, should be obtruded; unless, upon a Debate in praesentia, there be a
Decision, which may be the Foundation of a Custom.

D. 355. Burnet contra Gib. 9. June. 1676.
THE Lords, in a Spuilie of Teinds, Pursued at the instance of Alexander Burnet
contra William Gib, Found, That the Defender, or his Author having enclosed a
piece of Marish Ground to be a Yard; and having made no other use of the same
since, but for Carrets and Roots; he was not Liable to the Bishop Titular, or
his Tacksman of the Parsonage Teinds, for payment either of the value of the
Parsonage Teind, or for the Viccarage Teind; which was found by plurality of
one or two Voices.

These that were for the Decision did found their Opinion upon these Grounds,
viz. 1. That the Heretor potest uti Jure suo; and that the Titular has no tie,
nor Servitude upon him; but he may either Labor, or not his own Ground; If he
do it not in fraudem or aemulationem, of purpose to prejudge the Titular. 2.
That the Defender, in order to his own Interest, having thought fit to enclose
his Ground, and to make use of it for Carrets and Roots, for which, by the
custom of the Country, Teind is not due, neither to Parson, nor Viccar; the
Defender is not Liable for Teind; Seeing Viccarage Teind, and the payment of it
is regulate, according to Custom.

It was urged by the Lords that were of an other Opinion, That the Titular of
the Teinds had an interesse partiarium as to Teinds; so that albeit the Heretor
may uti Jure suo, it is to be understood, that he should use the same sine
injuria, without prejudice of the Titular: And if, of purpose to prejudge the
Titular, he should not Labor but suffer his Lands to ly waste, he will be
Liable to the Titular for the value of the Teind that was formerly payable, or
might have been gotten; As was Found in the case of the Lord of Polwart
against the Minister of Polwart. For, If he should enclose all or a
considerable part of his Ground that was arable Land, and whereof the Teind was
either paid to, or led by the Titular, it were hard that it should be in his
Power to prejudge the Parson to the advantage of the Viccar; But in that case
the small Teinds would be considered, as great and parsonage Teinds, quia
surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati: And far less, it ought to be in the Power
of an Heretor to prejudge altogether the Titular or the Minister, who is
provided out of the Teinds, as in the case in question, by encloseing Ground
formerly arable, and making that use of it, that neither the Titular nor Parson
can have any benefit of Teind; It being unjust, that the Titular should be
prejudged, and that the Heretor should advantage himself; and by his own Deed
should free himself of Teind: And albeit, by the custom in some places, Teind
is not paid for Carrets and Roots in Yards, the same being looked upon as
inconsiderable; and the Bounds, where the same are Sown or planted, being
small parcels of Ground, for the private use of the Heretors own Family; yet
when a considerable Tract of Ground is enclosed and parked, so that the Heretor
has the same if not more profit than he has of his other Labored Ground, by
selling the Roots and Fruits of the same, as about Edinburgh, or other great
Cities where great parcels of Corn-Land are taken in, and enclosed to the use
foresaid; as by the Common Law Teind is payable, even for such Fruits and
Profits; So by our Law, the Titular ought not to be prejudged: And the custom,
that Teind is not payable, for Roots and such like, ought to be understood of
such as grow in Yeards about Houses, as said is, for the proper and domestic
use of Heretor or Tennent; but not where a great parcel of Ground is taken in,
and destinate for profit and advantage, by Soweing, or Setting, and Selling
Herbs and Roots.

D. 356. Nairn contra Scrymger. 13. June 1676.
IN a Suspension, at the instance of a Person who had bought Lands, upon that
Reason, that the Seller who charged for the Price was obliged by the Contract
to give him a perfect Progress, and that the Progress exhibited to him was
defective, In swa far as, the Lands did hold of the Bishop, and the Original
Right was not produced, but only a Charter of Confirmation in Anno 1611; and
the Charter confirmed was not produced; and the Progress, since the Charter of
Confirmation, was but late; and some of the Charters had no Seasin following
upon the same; and some Seasins wanted the Warrant of Charters and Precepts:
And albeit it was alleged, that the Charters would be found Registrate in the
Bishops Register; that defect was not supplied thereby; seeing the Bishops
Register was not Authentic; and ought to have no other respect than a Register
of any other Lord or Baron, of the Writes granted by them.

The Lords Found, That, tho much may be said upon the Progress foresaid, to
defend against any Person that will pretend Right to the Lands; and to found
Prescription upon them: A Buyer nevertheless was not Obliged to accept and
acquiesce to the same as a sufficient Progress; seeing the Buyar ought to have a
Right; and Prescription with 40 Years Possession does not amount to a Right,
and there may be Replies upon Interruption: and at the best, Prescription is
not a Right but exceptio temporis.

But the Lords did allow, to the Charger, a time for making out a better
Progress: and Found, That the Suspender could not be forced to acquiesce in
absolute Warrandice, which was offered in Supplement of the Progress; In
respect the same is only the Ground of a Personal Action, and may become
ineffectual; if the Person, obliged to Warrant, should become insolvent. Actor
Falconer. alteri Stewart, etc. Gibson Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 357. Cornelius Neilson contra (...) 14. June 1676.
Cornelius Neilson one of the present Baillies of Edinburgh, having had notice
that a Privateer had a Ship taken by him lying at Stonehyve, fraughted with
Dails and other Timber, Did bargain with him for a Parcel of Dails and Trees to
the value of 200 lib. sterling; And the said person, with whom he had bargained,
being found thereafter to be a Pirate, being execute and hanged at London as a
Pirate; And the said Ship being found, with the Cargo of it, to be a free Ship
belonging to His Majesty's Allies, and unjustly taken by a Pirate; Yet the said
Cornelius had the Confidence to intent a Pursuit against the Owners and their
Factor, to hear and see it Found and Declared, that he had utiliter, in respect
of their Interest, made the said Bargain; seeing otherways the Pirate might and
would have carried away the Ship and Cargo; or otherways, not having men in
Company enough to navigate both his own and the said Ship, he might or would
have burnt and destroyed the same; and the Owners ought to be liable to refound
to him what he had given, for the said Parcel of Dails, and some Anchors and
Cables: And in the dispute, the said Cornelius Procurators did not stand to
hint and insinuate, that he was not without suspicion and jealousy, that the
said Person was a Pirate the time that he transacted with him; and that the
said Transaction was made upon a principle of Generosity (as they called it)
and Humaanity, in behalf and for the Advantage of the Owners.

It was Alleged for the Defenders, That the Ship and Goods being theirs, they
have rei vindicatio of the same, and may claim and recover the Ship and Goods,
where ever they are; and that Pirates are of all Theives the greatest; and res
furtiva non potest usucapi, and is extra commercium: And by the Law, even when
Persons are in bona side, and do buy stolen Goods, and could not probably know
whether they were stolen, yet the Owners may claim the same, and will not be
liable to refound the Price; but in this Case the Pursuer cannot in the least
pretend, that he was in bona fide; seeing by the Law of all Nations, when Goods
or Ships are taken via facti, by Privateers or others, they cannot break Bulk,
or dispose upon Ship or Cargo, or any part thereof, and if they do, Law looks
upon them as Pirates; and these who do buy, or get any of such Goods from them
as Receptatores. And seeing the Pursuer does acknowledge that he had suspicion
that the seller was a Pirate, he was in pessima fide to have any dealing with
him: And he cannot pretend he was negotiorum gestor, seeing negotiorum gestio is
only in the case, where a Friend, in absence of the Party concerned, does him a
good Office, eo animo, and upon no other account, but that his Friend should
suffer no prejudice: and upon the matter negotiorum gestor, so circumstantiate,
contrahit, or quasi contrahit with the Person cujus negotium gerit, which
cannot be said in this case; seeing the Owners were altogether unknown to the
Pursuer, not only as to their Person but as to their Nation: And the Pretenses
foresaid of Humanity and Generosity are not presumable, the Pursuer being a
Merchant, and who is known to be under the Character of a person apt enough to
take the Occasion of advantageous Bargains; and having bought the sa d Goods at
an easy rate and great undervalue, and it being evident, that he did intend
only his own interest, and not that of the Owners, in swa far as, he did not
buy the haill Ship and Cargo per aversionem, but only the parcel foresaid; And
it appears by a Commission produced, that he transacted so with the Pirate,
that the Ship was consigned in the hands of the persons thereinmentioned, to
the effect he might have alse many Dails and Timber at the low rate he had
agreed for, as would extend to the said Sum of 200 lib. starl. and the
superplus should be compted for, not to the Owners, but to the Pirate: And when
the Ship was brought ashore, he did not give notice to any Magistrates, that it
should be seized upon to be forthcoming to these who should have Interest,
there being ground of suspicion, that the said person was a Pirate: And as to
the Pretense and Citations adduced, that etiam malae fidei possessores have
necessarias impensas allowed to them; That is only in the case of Expenses upon
ruinous Houses, which otherways would perish, being debursed by a Person that
was in possession; and without which the House could not be preserved from
ruin, and in other cases of the like nature: but not in the case of Thieves,
Pirates and Resetters, who cannot pretend to have Repetition of the Price paid
by them; the same not being impensae but pretium.

Tho some of the Lords were of Opinion, That there was no Foundation for the
said Pursuit; and that there was rather Ground to Censure the Pursuer as a
Receptator; that such practices should have no Encouragement: Yet others being
of Opinion, that the Pursuer was favorable, having preserved the said parcel;
and a benefit arising to the Owners by his Transaction; The Lords Recommended
to the Parties to settle: Actores Cuninghame, Dalrymple, and Falconer, alteri
Lockheart and Mckenie. In praesentia.

D. 358. Doctor Frazer contra Hog. 16. June 1676.
IN anno 1593. Contractu Permutationis seu Excambii (ut loquimur) celebrato
inter Georgium Comitem Mariscallum and Menonem Hog de Blaridryn; Quia dictus
Menon dederat and disposuerat dicto Comiti quasdam terras villae Piscatorum
vulgo of the Fishertoun de Peterhead; Et villa de Peterhead erecta fuerat in
Burgum Baroniae; adeo ut terris istis dicti Menonis commode Comes carere
nequiret: Et quia dictus Menon habebat Jus ususfructus and Locationem ad longum
tempus terrarum de Blairidryn, Ideo dictus Comes disposuerat dicto Menoni and
suis haeredibus praedictas terras de Blairidryn; sed redimendas a dicto Comite
and suis successoribus, solutione trium millium mercarum and locatione dictarum
terrarum in Annos novemdecem post Redemptionem; pro mercede sedecem librarum
singulis Annis pro dictis terris pendi solita; ut in Contractu asseritur: Et
pro implemento dicti Contractus, Charta a dicto Comite and filio ejas concessa
in anno 1617. dictus Menon investitus and ejus haeredes, dictas terras
possederant, donec Dominus Alexander Frazer Archiatreus Regius, acquisito Jure
Reversionis seu Retractus in dicto contractu and Investitura contento, Jacobo
Hog nepote dicti Menonis praemonito (ut moris est) ut dictam summam reciperet,
and praedictas terras revenderet, Action declaratoria dictas terras vendicabat
Jure Retractus, rite ut asserebat redemptas.

Excipiebat Reus Retractum seu Pactum de retrovendendo apud nos stricti Juris
esse and specifice implendum; eo autem pacto cantum te^ras dictas redimendas
non solum solutione dictae summae, sed adjectum eas esse relocandas in tempus
praedictum; Locationem autem seu Assedationem nec oblatam nec depositam.

Replicabat Actor Pactum illud de Relocatione injustum and usurarium and
illicitum esse; terras siquidem ejus esse valoris ut merces Relocationis tantum
non imaginaria sit; Colonum enim pro iis pendere aut pendere posse quotannis
sexcentas minas: Et si Reo non solum dicta summa 3000 minarum, sed etiam
locatio adeo diuturna and pro mercede adeo exili danda foret; specie Locationis
ipsam Proprietatem vel ejus Pretium consecuturum: Adhaec, Constitutione Jacobi
2 di. Parl. 6. cap. 19. Statutum esse, in Contractibus Hypothecariis, quibus
terrae alienantur sub pacto de Retrovendendo, and Relocando post Redemptionem;
Conditiones and Ass^dationes istas haud servandas, terris redemptis, nisi
convenerit de justa mercede and pensione, saltem haud multum citra justam
Firmam, ut loquimur.

Resp^ndebat Reus multum interesse inter Contractus Mutui and alios puta
V^na^ionis and Permutationis etc. Ubi enim pecunia foeneratur and creditu^,
usurariae stipulationes illicitae sunt; and pacta alioquin licita reprobantur,
ut pacta Legis Commissoriae; ea ratione, quod debitori obaerato and i^opi
Creditor nihil non exprimet; ea autem ratio in aliis Contractibus cessat; and
in hoc casu; nec enim in eo mutuum, and consequenter nec usura nec pactum
usurarium nec Debtor inops, sed Contractus Permutationis inter Rei avum, virum
haud locupletem and Comitem praepotentem, cui terras suas ut sibi si non
necessarias, saltem commodas flagitanti, nedum leges inquiores dare:
Constitutionem autem praedictam Jacobi 2di. in Contractibus pignoratitiis locum
habere, ubi terrae Creditori impignorantur, ut ex verbis Constitutionis liquet
(when Lands are Wadset.) In casu praedicto nec Creditum nec Pignus esse; avum
suum nec pecuniam Comiti dedisse, nec repetere posse; cum dicto contractui
Clausula Requisitionis (ut loquimur) non insit; nec Reus praedictam summam
petere possit; nec Comes teneatur persolvere: avum suum permutasse terras suas
cum terris de Blairidryn, ea lege and satis iniqua, ut Reo haud liceat terras
avitas reluere; Cum penes Actorem extraneum and singularem successorem facultas
sit redimendi, si ea uti velit conditioni parendum; terras tempore
Permutationis incultas and forte steriles fuisse, in Regione saltuosa and
montana; si sua and parentum industria excultae and meliores sunt, id in suum
detrimentum haud retroquendum.

Quaestio ista, Domino de Castlehill referente, in domum interiorem introducta;
and inter Dominos disceptata; Cum de ea sententiis variatum, visa est altiorem
indaginem requirere; and, coram ipsis, Partibus and Patronis vocatis, audienda.
Actores Lockheart etc. alteri Cuninghame.

D. 359. Mitchel contra Litlejohn. 20. June. 1676.
MR. Litlejohn Tailiour, by Contract of Marriage with his first Wife Clerk, was
obliged to provide whatsoever Lands, Money or other Moveable Goods he should
acquire during the Marriage, to himself and to the Heirs of the Marriage: And
thereafter having Married a Second Wife (...) Mitchel, and having provided her
to an Annualrent, he did grant a Right to her a little before his decease, when
he was on Deathbed as was Alleged, whereby he declared, that, in
consideration, that his Wife had been very dutiful, and it was not reasonable,
that, if the Marriage should dissolve before Year and Day, she should want
altogether the benefit of her Jointure; therefore he wills, that tho he should
decease before Year and Day, she should have a Right to the said Annualrent, as
it is restricted by the said Write to less than she was provided to: And that
the Contract of Marriage and Infeftment thereupon should be effectual pro tanto
in the case foresaid; And is obliged to pay the said Annuity.

This Deed being questioned upon these Grounds. 1. That he could not do any
Deed in prejudice of his Heirs on Dead-bed. 2. That the Conquest being provided
(as said is) to Heirs of his first Marriage, both as to Lands and Movables, he
could not by the foresaid Deed, being a mere Donation, prejudge the Children of
the first Marriage. Upon occasion of the said question, the Lords thought fit
to consider, what the import of such Clauses of Conquest should be understood
to be; the same being so frequent; And there being hinc inde Angustiae, and
difficulties on both hands; seeing, upon the one, it may appear hard, that a
Husband should be restricted by such Clauses too much; and on the other hand,
that such Clauses should be ineffectual, and in the power of the Husband to
evacuate them; seeing all obligements ought to be understood cum effectu and ut
operentur: And in end it was Resolved, that the said Clause of Conquest, being
conceived in the terms foresaid, in favors of the Heirs of the Marriage; the
Husband does not cease to be Fiar, so that for Onerous Causes, he may dispose
of whatsoever he acquires; and the Heirs of the Marriage will be liable to his
Deeds and Obligements thereanent. 2. It was thought, That the Husband could do
no Deed in fraudem of the said Clauses, and of purpose to frustrate the same.
3. Tho some of the Lords were of the Opinion, that the Husband could not
dispose of the Conquest but for Onerous Causes, yet others thought, that he
might dispose thereof, without fraud and for Rational Causes and
Considerations; as in the case in question, upon the considerations
abovementioned, in favors of a dutiful Wife; And it was so sound by the Major
part; albeit others thought indeed, that the Husband, notwithstanding of the
foresaid Clauses, might provide a second Wife and his Children by her, out of
the Conquest dureing the first Marriage; if he had no other Estate, and the
Provisions be competent; But that in the case in question, the Deed foresaid
was a Donation, which the Children of the first Marriage, being Creditors by
the said Clause of Conquest, might question.

But the Lords Found, That if the said Deed was on Deathbed, the Defunct
having not only granted an Heretable Right, but having obliged himself, his
Heirs and Executors, to pay the said Sum, his Executry and Deads part would be
liable to the said Obligement; even as to Movables acquired dureing the first
Marriage; which may appear not to be without difficulty; seeing, as to the
Conquest, during the first Marriage, there could be no Deads-part; the same
being provided to the Children of the first Marriage, as said is.

Tho the Heir of the Marriage may renounce to be General Heir, and may take a
course to establish the Conquest, either in his own, or in the person of an
Assigney to his behoof; and so not be liable to the Defuncts Obligement,
without an Onerous Cause. Yet it is to be considered, whether, if they should
be served Heirs of the Marriage, they would be liable to the same; seeing all
Heirs represent the Defunct suo ordine, and are eadem per^ona? Or if they be
liable only to the Defuncts Deeds and Obligements for Onerous Causes?

Item, If such Provisions be not in favors of the Heirs of the Marriage, but
only of Bairns; Whether the Bairns will be liable to the Defuncts Debts? And if
all the Bairns will be liable to the same as Heirs of Provision?

It is thought, If Infeftment follow in favors of the Father and the Bairns of
the Marriage, they must be Heirs of provision to him: and that all the Bairns
(if it be not otherways provided) will be Heirs of Provision.

But these Points did not fall under debate. Actores Cuningham, alteri
Dal^ymple. Hamilton Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 360. Galbraith contra Lesly. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Bond being granted by two Persons conjunctly and
severally, being Merchants; and for the price of Merchant Ware: the same could
not be questioned upon that pretense, that one of them was Minor the time of
the granting the same; It being offered to be pro^en, that he was then, and is
since a Trafficquing Merchant. Monro Clerk. Sir David Falconer having reported
the same, in Order to his Trial, when he was to be admitted a Lord of the
Session.

D. 361. Irving contra Irving. 22. June 1676.
ALexander Irving of Lenturk raised Suspension and Reduction against John Ross
in Strathmore, and Francis Irving Brother to Drum, of a Decree of Spuilie and
wrongous Intromission; upon these Grounds, that the Witnesses had declared
falsely; In swa far as, being adduced by the Pursuer before the Council, they
had declared they knew nothing; and in the Process before the Lords, they
declared fully and positively, as to all that was Libelled. And 2. They
declared upon Quantities so exorbitant, that the same do amount to the
twentieth Corn; Whereas in the Country, where the Corns grew, they have
scarce the third Corn.

The Lords Found, That the Decree, being in foro, could not be questioned upon
any Ground; and in special upon the Testimonies of the Witnesses as false;
seeing there should be no end nor period of Pleas; and there being no
Protestation for Reprobatores. Some of the Lords were of Opinion, that as a
Decree founded upon a false Write may be questioned, so when the same is
founded upon false Testimonies, and the falsehood is evident, and may be
qualified sine altiore indagine, the same may be likeways questioned: And the
Remedy of a Reduction of Decreets in foro, being denied, only upon that
pretense of Competent and Omitted, ought not to be denied in such cases; seeing
the Ground foresaid, that the Testimonies were false, does arise upon the
Depositions of the Witnesses; and was neither known nor competent to the
Defender, who is not allowed to see nor to question dicta testium: And a
remedy, which in Law and Reason ought to be allowed, is not taken away,
because it is not protested for by a Party, who for the time did not know that
there were any Ground for the same. Newbyth Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 362. (...) contra Sheil. eod. die.
A Comprysing being deduced at the Instance of an Assigney, against the
Representative of the Debtor as lawfully charged; and the Compriser upon his
Infeftment having intented a pursuit for Mails and Duties;

It was Alleged, That the Cedent was debtor to the Defunct, so that the Debt
due to the Defunct, did compense the Debt due by him; and the Ground of the
Comprysing being satisfied, the Comprysing is extinguished: Which case being
Reported to the Lords, they had these Points in debate, and consideration
amongst themselves. viz. 1. That Compensation is only of personal Debts, and of
Sums of Money, de liquido in liquidum; but is not receivable in the case of
Real Rights and Lands, and Pursutes upon the same; Seeing in such processes
there is no Debt craved, but the pursuit is founded upon a Real Right: And some
of the Lords being inclined to think, that the Alledgance is not founded upon
Compensation, but upon Payment or the Equivalent, viz. That the Cedent habebat
intus; and in effect, and upon the matter was satisfied, being Debtor in alse
much as was due to him by the Defunct: And the Lords are in use to favor
Debitors, whose Lands are Comprised; and, in order to extinguish Comprisings,
to sustain process for Count and Reckoning; and declaring the same to be
extinct, not only by Intromission but by Compensation: Others were of the
Opinion, that tho Compensation ipso jure minuit and tollit obligationem, where
it is proponed; yet if the same be not proponed before the Decree, whereupon
the Comprysing proceeds; and when both Debts are in finibus of a personal
Obligement; the Debt contained in the Comprysing cannot be said to have been
paid before the Comprysing; and after the Comprysing is deduced, it cannot be
extinguished but either by Intromission within the Years of the Legal, or by
Redemption. 2. Whatever may be pretended as to the Cedent, that he could not be
in bona fide to compryse for a Debt due to him, having alse much in his hand as
would satisfy the same, yet such pretenses are not competent against the Third
Person having bona fide comprysed; or having Jus quaesitum; As in the case of a
Horning upon a Decree, it could not be obtruded to the Donator, that the Debt
was satisfied; The Obtainer of the Decree being Debtor to the Defender: And
if this should be sustained, expired Comprysings and Infeftments thereupon,
being now a most ordinary surety, may be easily subverted upon pretense, that
the Cedent was Debtor, in Sums equivalent, to the person, against whom the
Comprysing is deduced: And there is a great difference betwixt payment and
satisfaction, either by actual payment of the Debt, or by Intromission with the
Maills and Duties of the Lands comprysed, which is obvious and easy to be
known; and betwixt the pretense of satisfaction by Compensation; seeing payment
is exceptio in rem, and extinguisheth Debts as to all effects; and Intromission
is so notour, that the Buyer may and ought to take notice of the same; whereas
Compensation is but quasi solutio, and it has never effect, until it be
proponed.

That point was also in consideration with the Lords, Whether Compensation can
be proponed by any person, but such as has Right to the Debt? And as to this
point, there were different Opinions, and some of the Lords were of the
Judgment, that any person, having interest to defend against Comprysings and
pursuites upon the same, might allege they were satisfied in manner foresaid:
But others were of the Opinion, that no person can pretend to compence, but he
that could discharge the Debt, whereupon he would compence; and consequently
must have Right to the same: And in the case in question, neither a confirmed
Testament, containing the Debt due to the Defunct, nor any Right to the same
was produced.

The Act of Parliament, K. Ja. 6th. Parl. 12. Cap. 141. Being so positive, that
Compensation is only de liquido in liquidum, before the giving of Decreets, and
never after the giving thereof; Some of the Lords were of Opinion, that tho the
Defender had Right to the Debt due to the Defunct, Compensation could not be
received: But some of the Lords having desired, that the advising of these
points, being so considerable, should be delayed till to morrow, they were not
decided. Thesaurer Depute Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 363. Lamingtoun contra Raploch. eod. die.
A Suspension being craved, Upon that reason, that the Charger had been
Curator, and ante redditas rations could not charge him with any Debt; It was
Answered, That the Complainer being to be Married, he desired the Charger, and
some others to be his Curators, to the effect they might authorize him to
Contract; and the Charger had never intrometted.

Some of the Lords were of Opinion, That if it could be verified by the
Complainers Oath, that the Charger had no Intromission; and that these that
Intrometted were Responsal; In which case by the Civil Law, there is no actio
tutelae, but against these who intrometted; the others who had not Intrometted
being only Liable in subsidium, the said reason should not be sustained: But it
being pretended, that, by our custom, all Tutors and Curators are Liable,
whether they intromet or not without out distinction; and that Pupils may take
themselves to any of them: Tho it was not made appear, that the said point was
ever debated or decided, yet the Lords Ordained the Complainer to give in a
Charge against the Curator, and the Count to be discust upon the Bill.
Glendoich Reporter.

D. 364. E. Dumfermling contra Callender. June 1676.
BY Minute of Contract betwixt the deceast Earl of Callender, and Dam Margaret
Hay Countess of Dumfermling, he was obliged to Infeft the said Lady in the
Lands and Barony of Livingstoun in Liferent and Conjunctfee; and whatsover
other Lands and Sums of Money should be conquest during the Marriage: He is
obliged likewayes, to grant surety of the same, to her in Liferent, in the same
manner as of the former Lands: And in case of no Issue of Children, the one
half of the said Conquest to be disposed upon, as the Lady shall think fit: And
the Earl of Dumfermling having intented a Pursuit as Assigney by his Father,
who was Heir to the said Lady his Mother, for implement of the said Minute; for
declaring what Lands, Sums of Money and others were conquest by the said Earl,
dureing the foresaid Marriage; and for Infefting the Pursuer in the half of the
said Conquest: It was Alleged, That the said Obligement and Clause of the
Minute as to the Conquest, are conditional. viz. In case of no Issue of
Children; and that the said condition did not exist. viz. There being an Child
procreate of the said Marriage.

The Lords upon Debate, in praesentia, and among themselves; did Find, that the
said Condition did exist, In swa far as, tho there were Children of the
Marriage, yet there was no Children or Issue the time of the Dissolution of the
Marriage, by the Decease of the Lady.

Albeit It was urged, That these Conditions, si liberi non extiterint, vel non
sint procreati; and that Condition, si non sint liberi superstites, were
different in Law; and in the conception and import of the same: And in the
first case, si non sint liberi, sine adjecto tempore decessus vel dissoluti
Matrimonii, deficit ipso momento that there is a Child; And the Condition,
being in the Terms foresaid, in case of no Issue, both in Law and in Propriety
of Speech, cannot be otherwise understood and Interpret: And in Claris non
est locus conjecturae aut interpretationi, which is only, where words are
Homonymous or Ambiguous: And where a Clause is, of it self, such as may be
understood without addition; to make any, upon pretense of the intention of
Parties, is not interpretari sed addere; and intentio in mente retenta nihil
operatur: And that if there had been Children of the Marriage, who had Lived to
that Age, that they had been Married, and had had Children, who had all died
before the Dissolving of the Marriage, It could not be said, without absurdity,
that there had been no Issue; And both in Law, and by our custom, when there is
any Advantage given or provided by the Law, or by Contract, in favors of the
Husband in case of Issue, It is ever understood si liberi sint procrea^i, tho
they do not survive; As in the case of a Courtesy of Scotland: And that
Conditions ought to be taken strictly and according to the Letter; especially
in this case, the Provision foresaid, that the Lady, in case of no Issue,
should have either a Fee, or the half of the Conquest; or a Faculty to dispose
of the same.

It was farther Alleged, That the said Clause does not import, that the Lady
should have the Fee, or the half of the Conquest, but only a personal Faculty
and Power to dispose of the half of the Conquest; which she had not used: And
nevertheless it was Found by plurality, that the said Provision imported a Fee;
In respect the said Minute was a short paper, drawn by my Lord Callender
himself, who was altogether ignorant of the style and conception of Writes;
And, if it had been extended, as it was intended, it could not otherwise be
extended, but the Fee behooved to be provided to the Lady, as the half of the
Conquest, And, that the half of the Conquest should be disposed of by the Lady,
did import, that she should have a Fee and Dominium; the very nature and
essence of Property consisting in potestate Disponendi.

Some of the Lords were of Opinion, that the said Clause did import only a
personal Faculty: Upon these Considerations. 1. That the Right of Dominium,
being the highest Right and Interest can be given, it cannot be thought to be
given, but when the words are such, as are not applicable to any other
interest; whereas the said words do quadrate alse well, if not more, to a
Personal Faculty, than to an Heretable Fee. 2. The said Clause is conceived per
verba maxim personalia, viz. That the half of the Conquest should be disposed
by her; and if she should think fit, which are verba arbitrii and facultatis.
3. In dubiis minimum is to be understood and solitum; and ut evitetur absurdum;
And Respect is to be had to the quality of the Person; And albeit mean Persons,
in their Contracts of Marriage, do sometimes provide, that the Longest liver
may have all, It is not usual nor can be instanced, that ever, in a Contract of
Persons of quality, a Fee was provided to a Wife; It being the great design, of
the Marriage of such Persons, to raise a Family to the Husband; and it being
very ordinary, that a personal Faculty should be given to the Wife. 4. If the
Contract had been extended, it might, and ought to have been extended in these
Terms, That the Lady should Liferent the haill Conquest; and, in case of no
Issue, she should have the Personal Faculty foresaid: And tho the Conquest had
been provided to the Husband and her, and the Longest liver of them two, and
the Heirs of the Marriage, whilks faiieing the one half to his Heirs, and the
other to hers; her Husband would have been Fiar; and, in the case foresaid, her
Heirs would have been Heirs of Provision to him, as to the half of the
Conquest. Actores Sinclair, Bernie, etc. alteri Lockheart, etc.

D. 365. Doctor Wallace contra Symson. June 1676.
A Bill of Exchange being drawn by a Merchant in Edinburgh, upon his
Correspondent at London, payable to a Merchant at Bristol; the person, to whom
the said Bill was payable, was not in England for the time, but had gone to
Ireland; but his Friend, having broken up the Letter direct to him, and having
Found enclosed the said Bill of Exchange, did indorse the same to be paid to
another person upon the place; who did accordingly present the said Bill to the
Merchant, on whom it was drawn; who did accept the same conditionally, when it
should be right indorsed: And thereafter, the person, to whom the said Bill was
payable, having duly indorsed the same to be paid, as the Indorsation did
bear; The Mercant, upon whom the said Bill was drawn, did in the interim break,
before the Bill swa Indorsed was presented to him; There having interveened
betwixt the date of the Bill, which was 2 d. January, and the Right Indorsement
of the same, which was about the end of April, about 4. Months; So that the
Question was, whether the Drawer of the said Bill should be Liable to Refound
the Sum thereincontained?

It was Alleged, That he could not be Liable, In respect the said Bill was not
returned to him protested, either for not Acceptance or for not Payment: And
albeit in Law, and by the custom of Merchants, the Drawer be Liable unless the
Bill be paid; yet that is ever understood with a Proviso, that Diligence
should be done, and Protests should be taken; unless the Person, upon whom the
Bill had been drawn, had been evidently non solvent the time of drawing the
said Bill; which could not be Alleged in this case, seeing the Defender had
drawn upon the same person after the said Bill, to the value of 2000 lib.
sterling, which had been Answered: And had likewayes Answered Bills of his, of
great value; whereas if the Bill in Question had been returned Protested, he
would have retained the Provision he had in his Hand, or done Diligence, to
recover the value of the said Bill; or might have countermanded the said Bill,
and given an other Bill payable to a person that was upon the place.

The Lords notwithstanding Found, That the Defender and Drawer of the said Bill
should be Liable: But some of the Lords were of another Judgment: And the
Defender Repined, and gave in a Bill, desiring to be Heard.

D. 366. (...) contra (...) 4. July 676.
IN a Suspension against an Assigney, upon a Reason of Compensation, viz. That
the Suspender had Right to the equivalent Sum due by the Cedent, by an
Assignation prior to the Assignation granted by the Cedent to the Charger.

It was Answered, That the Assignation, granted to the Charger, was intimate,
before the Intimation of the Assignation granted to the Suspender: Whereunto It
was Replied, That ipso momento, that the Suspender got the Assignation
foresaid, being thereby Creditor to the Cedent, he had a Ground of Compensation
against the Cedent, and consequently against the Charger as Assigney: And an
Assignation, without Intimation, is a sufficient Right, and Ground of
Compensation; unless there were an other Assigney to the same Sum, competing
upon that Ground, that he had a better Right by an Assignation intimate.

The Lords notwithstanding did not allow Compensation, and Found the Letters
orderly proceeded. Newbyth Reporter, Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 367. Buchanan contra Logie. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a person out of the Country, being cited at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and Pear and Shore of Leith, upon 60. Days warning,
to be holden as confessed; tho he was not cited personally, and that the Decree
could not be questioned upon that Ground as Null: But if he were Living and
desired to be reponed to his Oath, there might be Ground to Repone him. Newbyth
Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 368. Lesly contra Fletcher. 5. July 1676.
SIR John Fletcher being obliged, by Contract of Marriage, to provide Dam
Marion Lesly his Wife of a second Marriage, to the Liferent of a Sum of 10000
lib. did thereafter Infeft her in the Lands of Gilchristoun, being of more
value and of a greater Rent: Whereupon she having obtained a Decree against
the Tennents; The Lords Found her Right, being granted stante Matrimonio, and
thereafter revocked, Null; In swa far as it exceeded the Provision in her
Contract of Marriage: And sustained her Decree only effeirand thereto; and
ordained her to be Liable for the superplus, until the said Sum of 10000 lib.
should be employed for her Liferent, conform to her Contract of Marriage.
Forret Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 369. Cheisly contra Edgar of Wadderly. eod. die.
EDgar of Wadderly being Charged, upon an Indenture betwixt him and Samuel
Chiesly Surgeon, for payment of the Sum thereincontained, for his Brothers
Prentice-fee, and Entertainment dureing his Prentice-ship: And having Suspended
the said Bond, and intented a Reduction thereof upon Minority and Lesion; The
Lords Found, That the Second Brother having no other Means nor Provision; his
Eldest Brother, who was Heir to his Father, and had the Estate, ought to
Entertain him, and to put him to a Calling: And did not sustain the Reason of
Lesion. Forret Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 370. Pitrichie contra Geight. eod. die.
SIR Richard Maitland of Pitrichie having obtained a Gift of Recognition of the
Estate of Geight; There was thereafter a Minute, betwixt him and his Father,
and the Lord of Geight; whereby it was agreed, that Pitrichie, who, and his
Predecessors had an ancient Wadset of the Lands of Achincreive and others,
being a part of the said Barony; should have the Reversion Discharged by
Geight; and that Geight should give him a new Right of the said Wadset-Lands,
irredeemable and holden of the King; and should pay to Pitrichie for the
Charges in obtaining and declaring of the said Gift 4000 Merks: And that, on
the other part, Pitrichie should Dispone to Geight the rest of the Estate, and
the Right he had thereto by the said Recognition.

Thereafter Pitrichie, having intented Declarator, for Nullity of the said
Minute; upon pretense that Geight did refuse and fail to perform his part; did
obtain a Decree, and did enter into a Bargain with the Earl of Aboyn, and did
dispone to him a considerable part of the said Estate; that by his Power and
Interest in the Country, he might be maintained, and be able to enjoy the
rest: But, before the granting of the said Right to Aboyn, Geight had intented
a Reduction of the said Decree of Nullity; upon that Reason, That the said
Decree was given, In respect he had not the Writes at that time in hand to
produce; and to instruct, that he was able to give a Right of the said
Wadset-lands to be holden of the King; and that they were now found upon search
of the Registers; So that he had not been in mora; and the not production of
the said Writes ought not to be imputed to him, but to the Confusion of the
Times; his Writes being scattered, and his Father having been long time a
Sufferer and Prisoner, for serving the King.

The Lords Found, That the said Decree, being in effect upon a Certification
for not Production, and Geight condescending, and offering to instruct, that he
had not been negligent, and the occasion and manner that the said Writes were
not in his Hand; and how he had recovered the same; he ought to be reponed
against the same: And that, by the Reduction, before the granting of the Right
to Aboyn, it was res litigiosa, and Aboyn ought to be in no better case than
Pitrichie.

D. 371. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
A Bond, granted by a Woman stante matrimonio, for payment of a Sum of Money,
being ratified judicially; It was Found, That the Ratification did not bind
her: being of a Deed null in Law, tho it was judicial; being likewayes stante
matrimonio.

D. 372. Blair of Kinfauns contra Mr. Thomas Fouler. 6. July. 1676.
IN the Case betwixt Sir William Blair of Kinfaunes and Mr. Thomas Fouler, It
was Found, That an Action, at the instance of the Executors of a Minister, for
building a Manss, and refounding the Expenses of the same, is competent against
the Heritors for the time and their Representatives; but not against a singular
Successor: and that it is not Debitum fundi. Newbyth Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 373. Rynold contra Erskines. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That, a Father having assigned certain Bonds for provision of
his Children, the Creditors have not only an Action of Reduction competent to
them, but a personal Action to refound the Sums uplifted, upon the Bonds, if
the Assignation should be found to be fraudulent: But did Reserve to the
Defenders to debate, whether the same was fraudulent; The Defenders having
Alleged, that the same were granted by their Father, having a plentiful
Fortune for the time, so that he might lawfully provide his Children. Newbyth
Reporter.

D. 374. Crauford contra Gordon. eod. die.
IN the Case, Alexander Crauford contra Sir Lodovick Gordon, The Lords thought
the point in question. viz. Whether or not, a Backbond being granted by the
Compryser, the time that he did receive an Assignation, whereupon he Comprysed;
or by a person having gotten a Disposition, did affect the said Rights, not
only as to the Granters of such Back-bonds, and their Representatives, but
likewayes as to Singular Successors; And if the same should be Found to affect,
if it did affect only while the said Right was personal, and before Infeftment,
but not after?

The Lords thought the said point, to be of that importance as to the
Consequence and Interest of the People, that it was recommended, that they
should have their thoughts thereupon, to the effect that the same may be
decided with great consideration; And accordingly, this day, the case being
fully debated among themselves, It was carried and found by plurality of Votes,
That such Back-bonds do affect, even as to a Singular Successor, tho extra
corpus Juris; And albeit they be granted after the receiving of such Rights;
And that they affect Comprysings, even after Infeftments has followed
thereupon, during the Legal, but not after. Diverse of the Lords did Argue and
Vote against the said Decision, and in special, A. I. C. N. B. S. T, Upon these
Grounds. 1. A Singular Successor does not succeed, in universum Jus as an Heir,
but only in Jus Singular; And if the said Jus be simple and pure, without any
quality in corpore Juris; any extrinsick quality or Deed may bind the Granter
and his Heirs, but not the Singular Successor, who neither can, nor is obliged
to know, and take notice of any quality that is not in the Right. 2. The
quality of a Right is an Accident of the same, and Accidentis esse est inesse;
So that, in Law, where the same is not in corpore Juris, it does not affect the
Right as to Singular Successors. 3. Upon the Considerations foresaid,
Reversions, and Bonds for Granting Reversions, do not militate against a
Singular Successor, unless they be in corpore Juris, or Registrate; And tho
there be an express Statute to that purpose, yet it does not follow a
contrario, where there is no Statute, Back-bonds should affect; seeing the said
Statute is made, conform to the Common Law, and is Declaratory as to
Reversions; being then most in contemplation of the Parliament, but does not
derogate from the Common Law in other Cases. 4. Back-bonds are upon the matter
Reversions and do oblige only to make a Retrocession in favors of the Cedent;
and cannot operate more, than if a formal Retrocession were made in favors of
the Cedent; which could not prejudge a Singular Successor, unless it were
intimate. 5. It would be an irrepairable prejudice to the People, and to
Singular Successors, who, finding a Right pure without any quality are in bona
fide to think, that they may securely take a Right thereto; And yet should have
no remedy, if, upon pretense of Back-bonds, and Deeds altogether extrinsick,
their Right may be questioned. 6. As to the pretense of the prejudice to the
People, viz. That they are in use to grant Assignations, in order to the
deduceing of Comprysings thereupon; and may be frustrate, if the Back-bond
should not affect the same, is of no weight; Seeing they trust the Assigneys;
And it is their own fault, if they Trust persons that do not deserve Trust;
And they have a Remedy by intimateing the Back-bonds, which, upon the matter
are Translations; whereas a Singular Successor has none. 7. That such
Back-bonds should affect Comprysings, not only before, but after Infeftment
during the Legal; But thereafter should cease to qualify the same; It seems to
be inconsistent with, and against the principles of Law. In praesentia.

D. 375. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Bishop and Executors, had Right only to the Quots of
such Testaments, as were confirmed in the Bishops time, in his own Right, as
Bishop for the time: And the said Quots, being in effect Sentence-Silver, dies
cedit by the Confirmation; so that whosoever is Bishop then, has Right to the
same.

They Found likewayes, That Quots being a part of the Bishops Patrimony and
Rent; The Quots, of all Testaments confirmed within the half Year, after the
Bishops decease, did fall under the Ann, and belong to the Bishops Relict and
Executors. Vide Carpzovium. lib. 1. Jurisp. Consistorialis de Salario defuncti
Pastoris semestri.

D. 376. Spence contra Scot 7. July. 1676.
IN a pursuit for payment of a Sum of Money, It was Alleged, That the Pursuers
Cedent was Tutor to the Defender, and had not made his Account: Which Defense
the Lords sustained against the Assigney; But it was their meaning, that the
Pursuer should not be delayed; and and that a competent time should be given to
the Defender to pursue and discuss his Tutor. Glendoich Reporter. Mr. John Hay
Clerk.

D. 377. Johnstoun contra Rome. 8. July. 1676.
IN a pursuit upon the passive Title of Successor Titulo Lucrativo; In swa far
as the Defender had a Disposition from his Father, without an Onerous Cause:
The Lords sustained the pursuit, albeit it was Alleged by the Defender, he had
made no use of the said Disposition, and was content to renounce the same;
which the Lords Found he could not do, being delivered to him. A Concluded
Cause Advised. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 378. Finlaw contra Little. 11. July 1676.
A Legacy being left in these Terms, viz. That it should be paid out of the
Testatrix her Household Plenishing, and Debts due upon Compts: The Lords Found,
That albeit the said plenishing, and Debts should not extend to satisfy the
said Legacy, that it was not a limited Legacy; but ought to be satisfied out of
the other Executry; and that the said words were only executiva, as to the
order and way of Payment in the first place; and Interpretatio should be ut
actus valeat; especially seeing the Legator was the Defuncts Relation: And it is
to be presumed, that the foresaid qualification was only as to the way of
payment; In respect the Defunct did look upon her Plenishing and Debts
foresaid, as sufficient to pay the same; And did not declare that the said
Legacy should be only paid out of the same, and in case it should be short,
that she should have no more: And it appeared to the Lords, that the Executors
had given up a very inconsiderable Inventar of the plenishing, and far short of
what a person of the Defuncts condition and profession, being a great
Innkeeper, behoved to have in order to her Calling. Actores Dalrymple etc.
alteri Hog. in praesentia.

D. 379. Bishop of Dumblain contra Kinloch of Gilmertoun. eod. die.
IN Anno 1620. His Majesty's Grandfather did Annex the Deanery of the Chapel
Royal to the Bishopric of Dumblain: And did mortify thereto an Annualrent of
Ten Chalders of Victual out of the Lands of Markle and Traprane: By virtue of
which Right the Bishops of Dumblane, have eversince possessed the said
Annualrent, until 1638. that the Bishops were suppressed: And thereafter, Mr.
Alexander Henderson, and Mr. Robert Blair being provided thereto, as his
Majesty's Chaplains, did continue in the possession of the same, till the
Bishops were Restored in 1661. and since the Bishop of Dumblane was in
possession of the same: But Francis Kinloch now Heretor, tho he had been in use
of payment of 8. Chalders of Victual, as a part of the said Annuity, out of his
Lands, since he acquired a Right to the same, being charged at the instance of
the said Bishop, did Suspend upon that Reason, viz. That the said Annualrent
was Wadset by the Earl of Bothwel in the Year 1587. to Mr. Thomas Craig for
7000 Merks: And John Murray Earl of Annandale having acquired the Right of the
said Annualrent; and having resigned the same in savours of K. Ja. to the
effect it might be Mortified, as said is; The King, by the said Mortification,
could give no other Right, than what flowed from the said persons his Authors,
which was redeemable, as said is; and de facto the said Right was Redeemed; In
sua far as, the Right of Reversion of the said Annualrent having come in the
person of the Duke of Lennox, Donator to the Forefaulture of the Earl of
Bothwell, and from him to the Earl of Balcleugh, and from the late Earl of
Balcleugh to Sir John Scot of Seatoun. Caetera desunt.

D. 380. Jaffray contra Murray. 8. November 1676.
A Party being pursued, upon the passive Titles; and in special upon that of
Charged to enter Heir; and having offered to Renounce, It was Replied that he
could not, Seeing Res was not integra; In Respect he had granted a Bond, Of
purpose, that thereupon the Estate might be Adjudged; The Lords Found, That
albeit he had not granted the Bond upon the design foresaid, yet, the Estate
being adjudged and incumbered by his Deed, he ought to be Liable to the
Defuncts Creditors pro tanto, Or to purge. Gibson Clerk.

It is Thought, That if the Appeirand Heir should dolose grant a Bond, that the
Defuncts Estate might be thereupon adjudged, ought to be Liable in solidum: But
if he grant a Bond which is a lawful Deed, and thereupon his Creditor adjudge,
which he could not hinder; It is hard to sustain a passive Title against him;
unless his creditor, having adjudged, were satisfied by that course; In which
case, seeing the Defuncts creditors are prejudged, It is Reason he should be
Liable pro tanto.

D. 381. Steuart contra Hay. 9. November. 1676.
LAnds being bought after Interdiction: A Reduction of the said Interdiction
was pursued at the instance of the Buyer, upon these Reasons. 1. That
Interdictions, by the Common Law, are only of prodigi; And Interdictors are in
effect given Curatores to them: And, by our custom, albeit Interdictions are
granted sine causae Cognitione, upon Bonds granted by persons interdicted, upon
that consideration and narrative, that they are persons facile, and not fit to
manage their Estate; whereupon the Judge presumes, that they are such; and upon
a Bill gives warrant to publish the same; yet the Interdiction in question
ought not to be sustained, seeing it is not the ordinary style of other
Interdictions; and the Bond of Interdiction bears no narrative of Facility; but
only that the Granter, for the standing of his Family, being very Ancient, did
oblige himself not to Dispone his Estate without consent of the Persons
thereinmentioned, and Letters of Publication were not raised thereupon, but
Inhibition was only used.

2. That Interdictions are a Remedy, for secureing weak persons, and ought not
to be a snare to others: And the Law favors, and helps these that are decepti,
and not decipientes: And that the Pursuer was in effect circumveened, in swa
far as, the said Interdiction was not Registrate till the Pursuer was in Terms
of Bargaining; and they had searched the Registers, and had not found any such
Interdiction; and the only Interdictor on Life, was Witness to the Bargain, and
got a part of the price; and the rest of the price was paid to Creditors
anterior to the Interdiction; And the Pursuer, relying upon the Ingenuity of
the Disponer, tho he might have secured himself by taking a Right to the said
Debts, did extinguish the same, by taking Discharges and Renounciatons.

The Lords being divided in their Opinions, The case was not decided this day.
(...) Hay Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 382. Inter eosdem. 10. November. 1676.
THE Lords sustained the Interdiction abovementioned, the Defenders offering to
prove, that the Person Interdicted was not rei suae providus: And Found, That
the person interdicted was thereby in the condition of Minors; And that he and
his Heirs could not question any Disposition or other Deed done by him, upon
the naked head of Interdiction, unless they allege and qualify Lesion: And
that the Pursuer of the Reduction may prove that the Bargain was profitably
made, and that the price was in rem versum: And the Lords declared, they would
not be nice as to Probation; but Reserved the consideration of it to themselves.

It was further Replied, That the Interdiction is Null, being Execute by a
person that was not a Messenger, being deprived; which was Repelled, In respect
of the Answer, that it was offered to be proven, that notwithstanding of the
Sentence of Deprivation, he was holden and tentus and reputatus to be a
Messenger: Notwithstanding it was Triplyed, that the Pursuer, in Fortification
of the Sentence of Deprivation, and his own Deposition; offered to prove, that
it was the common Opinion of the Country, that the Executor was not a
Messenger, then being deprived: Which was thought hard by some of the Lords;
being of the Opinion, that at least habitus and tentus and opinio ought to have
been allowed to both Parties to prove; Reserving to the Lords, to Consider the
Probation, and to Judge, according to that which should be Found most pregnant.

D. 383. Paterson contra Johnstoun. eod. die.
IT was desired by a Bill, That a party, against whom Witnesses had been used,
and who had declared, might be allowed to qualify the Inhability of the
Witnesses; and that a Term should be Assigned to that purpose: Whereupon it
was Agitate among the Lords, If a Reprobator should be sustained by way of
exception, whereupon there would be a new Litiscontestation: And it was urged
by some of the Lords, that if the Inhability of the Witnesses should be
qualified upon the ordinary Grounds, whereupon the Witnesses themselves are
interrogate, viz. That they are not worth the Kings unlaw, and such like; That
Reprobator ought not to be sustained; Especially the Party being heard, to
object against the Witnesses: And yet the Lords sustained Reprobator, by way of
exception, and without Limitation; In respect, the Oath of the Witnesses
concerning their own Hability is only an Oath of Calumny; and notwithstanding
thereof, a Reprobator may be pursued, by way of Action: And the Objections,
against the Witnesses, may come to the Parties knowledge, after they have
declared: And as there may be Two Litiscontestations, if an exception of
Falsehood, or any other, should arise upon the Production of the Writes; there
is eadem ratio as to the Witnesses; seeing the Objections against them could not
be proponed before Litiscontestation: And, if they be Relevant, they ought to
be proven; And it is the interest of both Parties, that the Reprobator should
be received by way of exception; ne lites protelentur: But the Lords Ordained a
Condescendance, to be given in, in Write, of the Grounds of the Reprobator; and
to be given to the other party, that he might be heard to debate, upon the
Relevancy of the same. Gibson Clerk.

D. 384. Inglis contra Boswell. 14. Novem. 1676.
A Father having granted Bonds of provision, in favors of his Children being
in familia; and having thereafter contracted Debt; It was Found, That the
Creditors, tho posterior, are preferable to the Children: And tho, in other
cases, It is presumed That Bonds or Writes, being in the hands of these to whom
the same are granted, were delivered ab initio; yet, in the case of Children,
the Presumption lies against them, that they are still in the hands of their
Parents, so that they are masters of the same: And eo ipso, that thereafter
they contract Debt, they revock the said Provisions, In swa far as they may
prejudge their Creditors; unless it be offered to be proven, that they were
delivered, and were the Childrens Evidents, the time of the contracting the
said posterior Debt. Newtoun Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 385. Davidson contra Wauchop. 16. Novem. 1676.
JOHN Wauchop, one of the Macers before the Lords, having taken a Right, by
Translation, to a Bond of 700 Merks, alleged granted by the deceast James
Davidson Jailer in the Canongate to (...) Horseburgh: And a Reduction and
Improbation being intented of the said Bond; The Lords did decern in the
Improbation; and Found the said Bond to be false and forged; and remitted (...)
Dumbar Forger to the Justice: Albeit the Writer and Witnesses, and the Debtor
and Creditor being all deceast, there were no means left for improving the said
Bond directly: Which the Lords did, In respect of the indirect Articles
aftermentioned, and the concurrence, in great number and pregnancy, of the
presumptions and evidences of falsehood, arising intrinsically upon the
inspection of the Write, and the compareing of Papers and otherwise, viz. 1.
That the Debtor Davidson was a person most Responsal; and the Creditor
Horseburgh indigent; So that, the Bond being of date 1644. It could not be
thought, that if it had been a true Bond, the Creditor, or his Relict, would,
or could have wanted payment so long; nothing being done to recover payment
until after 1669. That the said Bond, being Assigned to (...) Laurie, was
transferred in favors of John Wauchop, after all the means of Improbation had
failed by the decease of Writer and Witnesses. 2. The said (...) Laurie and
John Wauchop being examined upon Oath, It appears by their Declaration, that
the Assignation of the said Bond in favors of (...) Laurie was never delivered
to him, but was still retained by (...) Dumbar, who had Married the Relict of
the said Horseburgh; and pretended that the said Assignation was made by
Horseburgh, in favors of his Wife, but left Blank; And that Lawries Name was
filled up to the use, and in behalf of the said Dumbar and his Relict, for
security of a small Debt due to the said Laurie. 3. That John Wauchop did give
to Dumbar, for a Translation from Laurie, only 300 Merks, and did promise, in
case he should recover the said Debt, to pay 200 Merks more; of which, 100
Merks was to be paid to the said Laurie; And it cannot be thought, that Dumbar
would have given away so considerable a Sum, the Bond and Annualrent of the
said Sum extending to 100 lib. sterling. for 300 Merks presently, and 200 Merks
upon the condition foresaid. 4. It appeared by the Bond and Assignation, that
they were written with one Hand, and the Witnesses Subscriptions appeared to be
all written with one Hand. 5. The Writer and Witnesses are obscure Persons, and
not known; and the designation of them is so general, that they could not be
well found; being designed Writers and Indwellers in Edinburgh, and no
otherwise. 6. It appeared, by comparing other Papers written by Dumbar, both as
to the Character, and the Spelling; that the said Papers, being written by
Dumbar, are the same Write, that the Bond and Assignation is of. 7. It appeared
by some Papers subscribed by Davidson, produced by Wauchop to astruct and
approve, that his Subscription to the said Papers is not like that of the Bond.

Diverse Papers were produced, being alleged to be Forged by Dumbar; being
Bonds granted by persons who were Dead; and whereof the Writer and Witness were
likewayes Dead; which did labor of the same Grounds of Suspicion and
falsehood: And albeit they were not declared to be false, yet being questioned
and a warrant being given by the Lords to apprehend Dumbar, he had escaped, and
was Fugitive: And the said Dumbar is looked upon, and is pessimae famae as a
Falsary and a Forger.

The Lords were evil satisfied, That their Macer should have taken a Right to,
and used such a Write; But as yet have not Censured him. In praesentia.

D. 386. Paterson contra Mckenie. 22. Novem. 1676.
THE Defender, in the Improbation of an Assignation, transferred in in his
favors, being urged to abide by the same; and having offered to abide by the
same, as given to him for an Onerous Cause; and as true for any thing he knew:
It was Answered, That Certification ought to be granted, unless the Defender
would abide by the same positively, as a true Deed: Seeing, otherwise, false
Writes might be conveyed through many Hands, and the using of the same might
escape impune; notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament, against the users of
false Writes; if they should be allowed to qualify their abideing by the same,
in manner foresaid; which is contrar, to the very Notion of abiding by; which
imports a positive asserting the truth of the same. Upon which Debate the Lords
Considered the great inconvenients on either hand, if a Right may be taken to
false Writes and used impune; whereas before any person take Right to the same,
they ought to inform themselves concerning the same, and the Condition and
Quality of their Cedents. And on the other part, if commerce should be
obstructed so far as a Right should not be taken without hazard to Papers,
having no intrinsic nullity or defect, that of falsehood being altogether
extrinsick, and which cannot be known.

The Lords, in respect the Cedent, who had made the Translation of the Write
quarrelled, was Living, Ordained him to abide by the same simply: And suffered
the person, who has now Right thereto, to abide at the same with the foresaid
quality; But reserved to themselves, at the advising of the Cause, to consider
what the said qualification may import in behalf of the User. Actor. Mckenie
and others, alteri Falconer. Haystoun Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 387. Weir contra E. Bramford. 24. November 1676.
HIS Majesty and the Parliament having rescinded the Forefaulture of the late
Earl of Bramford, who had been Forefaulted the time of the Troubles for his
Loyalty; did so qualify the Act of Rescission and Restitution, that albeit he
had Daughters, who by the Law would have been Heirs of Line; yet the Estate was
settled by the Parliament, upon his Grandchild, Son to the Lord Forrester, who
had Married one of the Daughters.

Mr. William Weir, having Right by Assignation to a Debt of 5000 Merks. due by
the Earl of Bramford to Patrick Ker, one of the Grandchildren of the said
Earl; and a Decree being obtained for the said Debt, against Edward Ruthven
the Lord Forresters Son, as having succeeded in the said Estate, and being
bonorum possessor, and having Right as said is, to said Estate, ought to be
Liable passive to the Burden.

The Lords, by the said Decree, Declared, that the Estate should be Liable;
and thereupon Adjudication having followed against the said Edward, of a part
of the Estate, and Infeftment upon the same; the said Edward did intent
Reduction of the said Adjudication upon that Reason, That the said Decree
against Edward Ruthven, whereupon it proceeded, was Extracted wrongously, and
not conform to the Minutes and Interloquitor; which were in these Terms, that
the Estate should be Liable to the Debt; but not that the said Edward should be
decerned to pay; as the Decree bears: And that there could be no Adjudication
against the said Edward, who was not Heir to the said Earl: but there ought to
have been a Decree and Adjudication, against his Heirs of Line, being charged
to enter Heir.

Upon Debate among the Lords, some were of the Opinion, and did Represent, that
there could be no Adjudication against the Heirs of Line, nor Decereet
Cognitionis causa; seeing they could not be charged to enter Heir in special to
that Estate, which, by the Act of Parliament did not belong to them; but was
settled upon the said Edward, as said is; And that the said Decree against
Edward was Disconform to the Lords Interloquitor; Seeing it was not intended, by
the said Decree, that the said Edward or any other Estate of his should be
Liable to the said Debt; It being expressly declared in the said Decree, that
he should be free of personal Execution: And the said Decree was, but in
effect, a Decree Cognitionis causa: And therefore behooved to bear the
Decerniture foresaid, that he should be decerned to make payment, which was
only dicis causa, to the effect Execution might follow by Adjudication: And, by
the Summonds, whereupon the Decree proceeded, it was only craved, that the
Estate should be affected; And, by the Adjudication, Bramfords Estate was only
affected, and the Adjudger was content to declare, that he should affect no
other Estate.

Yet some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That the Decree not being in these
Terms, that the Lords decerned Cognitionis causa, to the effect Execution might
follow against Bramfords Estate; It was in Arbitrio Judicis, to sustain the
Decree to be a Ground of Adjudication or not: And that Mr. William Weir,
having been accessory to the Appeals, at the instance of Callender from the
Lords of Session, deserved no favor: And it was carried by plurality, that the
Adjudication should be reduced. Newtoun Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 388. Sheill Minister of Prestounkirk contra His Parishoners. 28. November
1676.
THE Lords Found, That Viccarage Teinds are ruled by Custom, and Local as to
the Quota and Kinds, and manner of payment of such Teinds as are truly
Viccarage: So far, that in a pursuit for Viccarage Teinds; The Defenders
Alleging, that some of them had been in use of paying only some certain Kinds
by the space of 20. Years; The Lord Found the said Alledgance Relevant, to free
them of other Kinds; Albeit they d d Reply, that the Pursuer was in possession
of the Kinds in question within the Parish; some others of the Parish, having
been in use to pay the same: And that Viccarage is nomen universitatis, ut
Baronia, and possession of a part interrupts Prescription; and is, in Law,
Possession of the whole. Newtoun Reporter.

D. 389. John Ker contra Jean Ker. eod. die.
IN a pursuit at the instance of a Donator: It was Alleged, That the Debt
pursued for, was Heretable quoad fiscum: And it being Replied, That the Pursuer
had Right thereto as Executor Creditor: The Lords Found Process upon that Title
tho supervenient; The Testament being confirmed after the intenting of the
Cause.

In the same Cause, It was Found, That a Testament being confirmed, the nearest
of Kin ipso momento has Jus quaesitum to that part of the Goods which belong to
them, and do transmit the same to their Executors, and these who represent
them; tho the Testament was not Execute, before the decease of the nearest of
Kin: And that the said Interest and Action, being in effect a Legitima, and
competent to them by the Law and Act of Parliament, is settled in their person
and does transmit; tho the same be not recovered in their own time.

D. 390. Scot contra Toish. eod. die.
AN Assignation, being made in Holland, according to the custom there, by way
of Instrument, under the Hand of a Notar, a Tabellion having retained the
Warrant in his Hands, Signed by the Parties, was sustained, in respect of the
custom and consuetudo loci. Justice-Clerk Reporter.

D. 391. Drumellier contra E. Tweeddale. 30. Novem. 1676.
IT was objected against a Witness, That he was Testis Domesticus, being
Servant to the Defender; at least having been his Servant the time of the
Citation: Whereunto It was Answered, That he was not presently his Servant; and
tho he was his Servant the time of the Citation, he might now be a habile
Witness: The Reason, why Servants cannot be Witnesses in behalf of their
Masters, ceasing in this Case, viz. That their Masters might have influence
upon them; and that they may declare in their Favors, out of fear, to be put
out of their Service: And as to the pretense, that it is presumed, that the
Defender put the Witness out of his Service, of purpose, that he might used as
a Witness; the same does amount only to praesumptio hominis, which cedit
veritati; And animus and design not being probable, but by the Oath of the
Party, the Defender and the Witness were free to declare, that he was not
removed out of the Defenders Service upon the design foresaid; And it was more
strongly to be presumed, that neither the Defender, being a Person of Quality,
nor the Witness would perjure themselves.

It was farther urged, That the witness was to be used upon a paper that had
been produced after the intention of the Cause, and for improving the Date of
the same; And that he was removed out of the Defenders Service before the
production of the said paper; So that he could not have that prospect and
design to use him as a witness, and that he was removed upon the account
foresaid.

The Lords, before Answer, Ordained, that the Time of the production of the
said paper might be tried. Redford Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 392. Grierson contra The Lord of Lagg. 1. December. 1676.
A Superior, having obtained the Gift of his own Ward, did pursue his Subvassal
at the instance of a Donator, in Trust and to his behoof for Maills and Duties,
dureing the Ward: And the Defender having Alleged, That the Pursuit was to the
behoof of the Superior himself; and that he or his Predecessor had Disponed to
the Defender his Lands with absolute warrandice.

The Lords Found, That the Gift of Ward, being given to the Vassal, did
accresce to the Subvassal, paying his proportion of the Composition: Albeit it
was urged, that as the King might have given the said Gift to another, he might
have given it to the Vassal himself; and he could not be in a worse case than
another Donator: And that the Subvassal knowing the nature of the Right, that
the Superior held Lands ward; was Liable to all Casualities arising ex natura
rei, to what Donator soever the same be given.

It was controverted amongst the Lords, What should be the Ground of the
Decision in point of Law: And some were of the Opinion, that it was upon that
Ground, that Jus superveniens accrescit; the Lands being disponed to the
Subvassal ut optima maxima: But it was the Opinion of others, That Jus
superveniens accrescit, when it is either of the Property, or of any Servitude,
or of Casualities that had fallen before the Right granted to the Vassal; but
not of Casualities arising thereafter ex natura rei: And therefore they
thought, that the Right should be found to accresce to the Vassal, upon that
Ground, that the Relation betwixt a Superior, and his Vassal, and the mutual
obligation and fides betwixt them, is such and so exuberant, that the Superior
should not take advantage of a Casuality fallen upon account of his own person,
and by his Minority: And that a Right of Ward, granted to the Vassal himself,
or to any other to his behoof, is upon the matter a Discharge of the Casuality,
both as to himself, and as to the Subvassal, that is concerned in consequence.
Newtoun Reporter. Haystoun Clerk.

D. 393. Home contra Scot. eod die.
IN a Process for Mails and Duties; It was Alleged, That one of the Defenders
was in possession by the space of 7. Years, by virtue of a Tack, and had the
benefit of a possessory Judgment: And it being Replied, That he ought to say,
that he had a Tack from a person having Right: And neverthess, The Lords Found,
That is was sufficient to Allege, that he had a Tack, and by virtue thereof in
so long possession.

This Decision seemed, to some of the Lords, to be hard; in respect a Tennent
is not properly in possession, but detinet to the behoof the Setter; So that he
could be in no better case than his Master, who, notwithstanding of his
possession, either in his own person, or in the person of his Tennent, cannot
plead the benefit of a Possessory Judgment; unless he had, or should allege
upon, some Right; And if the Master were called as de facto he was in the said
process, It were inconsistent, that his Tennent should have the benefit of a
Possessory Judgment and not himself. In praesentia.

D. 394. Rutherford contra Weddel. 5. December. 1676.
THE Lords, In a Suspension at the instance of a Bankrupt, who was Prisoner;
did allow him to come out without the habit; Because It was represented, that
the Debt was for the most part not contracted by himself, but by his Father:
Albeit some of the Lords were of the Opinion, that the Act of Sederunt bearing
no distinction, and being made upon good consideration, and conform to the
practice of all other Nations; That Bankrupts should be known by a habit to be
persons, that deserved no Trust; and that others may be affrighted from
contracting or under-going Debts, which they are not able to pay: And that the
pretense foresaid was frivolous, it not being presumable, that a person would
be Heir and become Liable to Debts, that he had not Contracted, unless there
were Effects and sufficiency of Estate, to pay the same: And if such pretenses
should be allowed; the Law would be altogether elusory. Gosford Reporter. Mr.
Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 395. The Town of Glasgow contra Greenock. 7. December 1676.
THE Town of Glasgow, having intented a Declarator against the Lord of
Greenock, containing these Conclusions, viz. That it should not be lawful to
Greenock, or his Burgh of Barony, to import any Goods from Abroad; which, by
the late Regulation, and Act of Parliament concerning the privileges of Burghs
Royal, being the 5. Act of the 3d. Session of his Majesty's Second Parliament,
belongs to the Royal Burghs; and are to be imported by them privative; and in
special Wine, Brandy; and Salt. 2. That if they should be found to contraveen
the said Act of Parliament, that the unfree Goods deprehended should not only
be Escheat; but their whole Goods; conform to former Laws and Acts of
Parliament against unfree Men.

It was Alleged for the Defenders; That, at least, they ought to be in the
same case as Strangers, and Unfree-men of Foreign Nations; who may import
without limitation, making Offer to the Royal Burghs; and if they do not buy
the same from them, being obliged to Sell them in whole sale, and at the price
to be limited and appointed by the Burgh where Offer is made; and that the
Burghs of Barony had been in use of importing as Strangers, the same being
qualified as said is; And the said Custom was not contrary to Law, but conform
to diverse Acts of Parliament, and in special the 100 Act of K. Ja. 5th. his
(...) Parliament, bearing, that if any Freeman, or other Scots-man dwelling
within this Realm, should bring home Wines, Salt, or Timber; That the
Magistrates of Burghs, where the same is entered, should set a price upon the
same; which imports that Unfree-men may import the same.

The Lords Found, That by the said late Act of Parliament; The matter of Trade
is so regulated; That as the Burghs of Barony their privileges to import Goods
and Commodities, that they could not import before, are settled upon them; and
on the other part, Royal Burghs are secured from the encroachment of Burghs of
Barony; So that they cannot import, but the particulars allowed to them by the
said Act: Therefore that, upon no pretense, the Burghs of Barony and Unfree-Men
can import any other Goods; and that they are not to have the Liberty that
Strangers have; Seeing Strangers are allowed the Liberty of Trade and Commerce,
being qualified as said is: And if the same were denied, there would be no
Trade betwixt our Merchants and them: Whereas the Liberty of Trade, and to
import Foreign Commodities, is only lodged and settled upon Royal Burrows,
upon good Considerations; and intuitu of the same they are Liable to a 6th.
part of Taxations, and other public Burdens. 2. It was Found, That, albeit in
the late Act of Parliament, there be not mention of Salt as one of the
Commodities allowed to the Royal Burrows, and contained in the specification,
that the same does only belong to the Royal Burrows; Seeing they are founded as
to all Commodities, not expressly allowed by the said Act to Burghs of Barony
and Regality in Jure: And the Burghs of Barony are excluded, by the said Act,
as to all others except these allowed to them expressly by the said Act; and
come under that general, viz. Such as are necessary for Tillage or Building, or
for the use of their Manufacture.

And whereas it was pretended by the Defenders, that Salt is necessary for the
curing of their Fishes. The Lords Found, That Manufacture, intended by the Acts
of Parliament, is only to be understood of Works erected by Companies or others
for making of Cloth, or such like; about which many poor People are Employed
and Entertained: And tho there be skill in cureing Herring, they are not a
Manufacture, but a Native Commodity, without any alteration of the form, and
only qualified by the cureing of the same: And that, upon that pretense, the
Defenders ought not to be allowed to import Salt: But was Recommended to some
of the Lords, being also upon the Council, to move that a course might be taken
for Regulateing the price of Salt; that it be not Arbitrary to the Royal
Burrowes, to sell the same at such Rates, as the Burghs of Barony cannot,
without prejudice, buy the same; So that they may be forced to desist from
making or exporting Herring.

The Lords Found, That the said Act having defined the pain to be the Escheat
of the Goods deprehended; And not the Escheat of the Contraveeners whole Goods:
And that as to Goods not deprehended, the pain ought not to be greater: And
that these who import unlawful Goods, contrare to the Act, tho they be not
deprehended, may be pursued for the value of the same, and no farther.

Some of the Lords were of another Opinion, as to this Point, and thought, that
seeing the late Act of Parliament, does mention only the case of unlawful Goods
deprehended; and does regulate the former Practice, as to the attaching and
affecting of the same; and it is inconsistent, that both the Goods deprehended
should be escheat, and likeways the Contraveeners other Goods should be
escheat; That therefore the former Laws are still in vigor. Actor Lockheart,
etc. alteri Cuningham. In praesentia.

D. 396. Marshal contra Holmes. 12 December 1676.
AN Advocation being produced, after the Judge had decerned, but before he had
cleared and dictate the minute of the Decree; which he did upon the Bench,
immediately after production of the Advocation.

The Lords Found the Decree Null, as being spreto mandato: But, in respect of
the Circumstances, and that the Judge had decerned before, as said is, they
turned it in a Lybel. Thesaurer-deput Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 397. Durham contra Durham. eod. die.
SIR Alexander Durham having upon Deathbed, given Bond to the Lord Clermount,
for 20000. merks; and at the same time, having ordained his Nevoy Mr. Francis
Durham his appearand Heir, to pay to Adolphus, natural Son to the said Sir
Alexander, 6000. merks; The said Mr. Francis did, after the Defuncts decease,
grant Bond relative to the foresaid Bond, and to the order for Adolphus his
Provision; whereby he ratified the foresaid Bond, and was obliged to pay the
said Provision to Adolphus, upon this condition, that the Countess of Midleton
should Warrant and Relieve the Estate of Largo, from all Inconvenients, and in
special, such as might arise from his Uncles Intromission, with public
Accounts; and if the Estate should not be free, in manner foresaid, that the
said Bond should be void.

The said Adolphus having pursued upon the foresaid Bond, It was Alleged, That
it was Conditional, as said is; And the Defender did condescend, that the
Estate was distressed for a Debt of 20000 Merks, for which a Decree was
recovered against his Heir.

The Lords Found notwithstanding, That the said Resolutive Condition was to be
understood so, that the Bond should not be void altogether; but only
proportionally effeirand to the distress. Newton Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

This Decision, tho it may appear equitable, appears to be hard in strictness
of Law; the precise Terms of the Condition being considered.

D. 398. College of Glasgow contra Parishoners of Jedburgh. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Presentation of an actual Minister before the Term,
was not a complete Right to the Stipend; unless there had been a Warrant for
his Transportation. Thesaurer-deput Reporter, Gibson Clerk.

D. 399. Inglis contra Inglis. 13. December 1676.
MR. Cornelius Inglis, having granted a Bond to Mr. John Inglis, for a Sum due
to himself, and for his Relief of Cautionries for the said Mr. Cornelius;
whereby he was obliged, for his Surety, to infeft him in certain Lands to be
possessed by him, in case of not payment of the Annualrent due to himself, and
the reporting Discharges from the Creditors to whom he was engaged: and
whereupon the said Mr. John was infeft by a base Infeftment.

The said Mr. Cornelius, in respect his Son Mr. Patrick had undertaken to pay
his Debts, did dispone to him his Lands; whereupon the said Mr. Patrick was
infeft by a Public Infeftment.

The said Lands being thereafter Comprised from the said Mr. Patrick; and there
being a Competition betwixt the said Mr. John Inglis, and diverse other
Creditors of the said Mr. Cornelius and his Son Mr. Patrick, who had comprised
the said Lands from the said Mr. Patrick: The Lords Found, That Mr. John Inglis
was preferable to the said other Creditors; In respect, tho their Infeftments
upon their Comprisings were public and the said Mr. John his Infeftment was
holden of the granter, yet the said Mr. John's Right was public as to Mr.
Patrick, in swa far as, the said Mr. Patrick had corroborate the same; and,
before the said Comprisings, had made payment to the said Mr. John, of certain
bygone Annualrents, in contemplation of his said Right; and had taken a
Discharge from him, relating to the same; so that his Right, being Public as
to Mr. Patrick, was public as to those who had Right from him; and Infeftments
holden of the Granter, being valid Rights by the Common Law; and by Act of
Parliament and Statute, invalid only as to others, who had gotten public
Infeftments, in respect of the presumption of Fraud and Simulation; the said
Presumption cedit veritati, and in this case is taken away in manner foresaid.

The Lords Found, That notwithstanding that the Right was granted to Mr.
Patrick, upon the Consideration foresaid, and for payment of the Debts
thereinmentioned, that the Creditors mentioned in the same, had not a real
Interest in the said Lands, but only a personal Action against the said Mr.
Patrick; in respect the said Right was not granted to him for their use and
behoof; neither was it expressly burdened with their Debts: and therefore the
Lords did Find, That all the Creditors, both of the said Mr. Cornelius and Mr.
Patrick, who had Comprised within Year and Day, should come in pari passu.

D. 400. Margaret Nevoy contra the Lord Balmerinoch. eod. die.
THE Lord Balmerinoch was pursued, as Representing and Behaving as Heir to the
Lord Couper, at the Instance of Margaret Nevoy, and diverse other Creditors of
the said Lord Couper; upon that Ground, that he had ratified a Disposition,
made by the said Lord Couper, in favors of his Lady on Deathbed; and was
obliged to comprise the said Lands, and to give the said Lady a Right to the
Comprysing, to be deduced, that should be preferable to other Creditors; And
that by the Act of Sederunt in my Lord Nithsdales Case, appearand Heirs,
granting Bonds to the effect their Predecessors Estate may be established in
their Person or in the Person of some Confident to their behoof, are liable as
Behaving: and It was Alleged for the Defender, that Behaving is magis animi
quam facti, and it is evident that the Defender did shune to be Heir; and did
of purpose take the Course foresaid, that he should not represent the defunct.

The Lords Found, That the Condescendence was only relevant in these Terms,
viz. That the Defender, or any Confident to his behoof, had comprised the said
Estate for Balmerinoch's own Debt; and had possessed by virtue of the Comprysing:
Or that the Lord Balmerinoch had communicate the Right of the said Comprysing
to the Lady Couper; and that she had possessed by virtue thereof; and could not
defend her self with her own Right as being in Lecto, Or otherwise defective.

It was the Opinion of some of the Lords, That it was sufficient and Relevant
to say, that Balmerinoch had Comprysed for his own Debt; and was obliged to
Communicate the said Comprysing; and had ratified the Lady Couper's Right: For
these Reasons. 1. The Law considers quod agitur, and not quod simulate
concipitur; And the Lord Balmerinoch, by taking the course foresaid to compryse
for his own Debt, intends upon the matter adire, and to carry away his Uncles
Estate, to frustrate Creditors. 2. Tho it be pretended, that there is a
difference betwixt Nithsdal's Case and this, In respect in that case, the
Adjudication was upon Bonds granted by himself, after his Fathers decease; And,
in this, the Comprysing is for my Lord Balmerinoch's Debts, Contracted before
my Lord Couper's Death; The said difference is not considerable, seeing as to
that case, there was a design to carry away the Defuncts Estate, by a Deed of
the Appearand Heir, to the prejudice of Creditors; and there is the same in
this. 3. Tho my Lord Balmerinoch had granted only a Ratification, without
Communicating any Right; eo ipso he behaved as Heir; In respect he had ratified
the Ladies Right, for any Right or Interest he had himself; and he had an
Interest, as Appearand Heir, sufficient to establish a Right in the Person of
the said Lady, and to prejudge Creditors; so that they could not question the
same; Seeing Rights on Deathbed, being consented to by the Appearand Heir when
they are made, or ex post facto, become valid and unquestionable ex capite
Lecti, as appears by the Law of the Majesty, concerning Rights on Deathbed.

D. 401. Earl of Argyle contra The Lord Mcdonald. 14. December 1676.
THE Earl of Argyle, having pursued the Lord Mcdonald, for Reduction of a Feu
holden of the Pursuer ob non solutum Canonem; It was Alleged, That the
Defender had a disposition of the Superiority from Lochzeal before my Lord
Argyl's Right, by a Disposition likewayes from him: And tho my Lord Argyle,
having completed his Right before the Pursuer by an Infeftment upon the same,
will have Right to the Feu-duties after his Infeftment; yet the Defender had
Right to the bygones by the foresaid Disposition made to him; which, being of
the Lands and Superiority and made to the Vassal himself, was, upon the matter,
an Assignation to the Feu-duties and a Discharge: And farther, That as to the
Feu-duties after my Lord Argyl's Right, he was in bona fide, not to pay the
same, having the foresaid Disposition as said is: And my Lord Argyle having
done nothing upon his Right to make Interruption; And therefore the Summonds
ought not to be sustained upon Cessation and not payment, before Intimation of
the Pursuers Right to the Defender: Both which Alledgances the Lords Found
Relevant.

In the same Case, The Lord Mcdonald having proponed an Alledgance, viz. That
my Lord Argyle was obliged by Bond to warrant Lochzeal at the Hands of the
Defender; and of any pursuit competent upon the said Disposition made to the
Defender, and quem de evictione tenet Actio, agentem repellit Exceptio; And the
same being Found Relevant, the Defender giving his Oath of Calumny thereupon;
The Lords, In respect the Defender being in Town had refused, at least had not
come to give his Oath of Calumny, had decerned: But the Lord Mcdonald having
intented Reduction of that Decree, upon offer to give his Oath of Calumny;
upon pretense, that it was toward the end of the Session, when his Oath of
Calumny was craved; and that upon some occasions, he had been forced to go
home, It was Alleged for the Earl of Argyle, that upon Mcdonalds Refusal to
give his Oath of Calumny, it was, in construction of Law, a Calumnious
Alledgance, and could not now be received; And the greatest favor could be
shown to him, was, that he should be heard to verify the same instanter. The
Lords did decern, superseding Extracting, until a day in January; that, in the
mean time, the Defender might verify the said Alledgance; having taken his Oath
of Calumny, that the Write was not in his own Hand. Actores Lockheart and
Bernie. alteri Cuninghame and Thoirs. In praesentia.

D. 402. Litlejohn contra Mitchel. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That Bonds granted on Deathbed, albeit they are Legacies, as
to that effect, that they do affect only the Deads part, yet they are
preferable to other Legacies left in the ordinary ways of Legacies; and that
the Defunct was in legitima potestate as to the affecting of his part, and
granting of Bonds to that effect. Justice Clerk Reporter. Gibson Clerk.

D. 403. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THO in Improbations the user of Writes, questioned as false, ought to compear
to abide by the same; yet a Commission was granted to take the Defenders
Declaration that he did abide by, In respect he was a person of great Age.

D. 404. Wallace contra Murray. eod. die.
THERE being a pursuit, at the instance of a Creditor against the
Representatives of an Intrometter with the Debitors Goods, The Lords Found,
That the Passive Title of Intrometter could not be sustained, after the
Intrometters decease, to make him Liable as universal Intrometter: And yet
sustained the same in quantum he was locupletatus; the Pursuer for the
Defenders farther surety, confirming before the Extracting of the Sentence, a
Testament as Executor Creditor to his Debtor. Thesaurer Depute Reporter.
Gibson Clerk.

D. 405. Grant of Rosollis contra L. Bamff. 19. December. 1676.
THE Lord Bamff, having acquired the Lands of Craigstoun from John Lion, did
give three Bonds to the said John Lion Blank in the Creditors Name, containing
each of them 5000 Merks; And, at the desire of the said John, did give a Letter
with the said Bonds with a Blank direction, bearing that the said John Lion,
having Disponed to him the Lands of Craigstoun, for which he had become Debtor
by certain Blank Bonds containing 5000 Merks; And therefore desireing that no
person might scruple to take the said Bonds; For it should be no
dissatisfaction to him, that they took them without acquainting him; but that
it should be holden, as if they had received the Bonds in the beginning, and
had their Names filled up therein at that time.

The said John Lion did fill up the Name of John Grant of Rosollis in the said
Bonds; and delivered the said Letter to him, putting a direction upon the same,
for the said John Grant: Whereupon the Lord Bamff being charged did Suspend,
upon that reason, that he ought to have Retention, because the said Bonds were
granted for the price of the said Lands and in contemplation of a valid surety,
free of all Incumberances; and the surety not being valid, In respect the Lands
were affected with Hornings, Inhibitions, and Comprysings, equivalent to the
Sums contained in the Bonds; he had in Law Condiction, as being ob causam non
secutam.

There was also compearance for the Donator of the said John Lions Escheat, who
did produce his Gift and Decree of general Declarator; and Alleged, that he
ought to be preferred, because he had Right to the Sums due by the said
Blank-bonds; In respect the Chargers Name was filled up in cursu Rebellionis:
And the said Blanks, being ab initio the Rebels, while they were Blank, they
fell under his Escheat; and he could not fill up, or deliver the same, in
prejudice of the Fisk.

The Lords Found, That the pretense foresaid of Condictio causa data, tho
competent against the said John Lion himself, if the Bonds had been filled up
in his own Name, would not be competent against the Charger, if his Name had
been filled up ab initio; Because if the Suspender had been content to give
Bond to him, It would have been delegatio, in which case the Exceptions
competent against delegantem would not have been competent against the Person,
in whose favors the Delegation was made: And that the Charger was upon the
matter in the same case, seeing the Suspender by his Letter was content, that
the Bonds should be holden, as if they had been filled up ab initio.

The Lords also Found, That the said Bonds being Blank, tho they continued
Blank, were the said John Lions proper Bonds; and if he had deceased before the
filling up of the same, they would have fallen under his Executry; and
consequently, he being Rebel and his Escheat gifted and declared, they fell
under his Escheat: And His Majesty, and the Donator could not be prejudged by
any Deed of the Rebel, in filling up of the same.

It was also Found, That albeit the Lord Bamff, by his Letter, was bound up,
that he could not question the said Bonds upon the pretense foresaid of
Condictio, or any other that might have been competent against the said John
Lion; Yet, notwithstanding of the said Letter, the King might have given, and
he might accept either a Gift of Lions Escheat, or a Right from the Donator,
and thereupon might claim Right to the said Sums. Thesaurer Depute Reporter.
Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 406. Tennent, Young, and others, contra Sandy Procurator-Fiscal of the
Regality of Ogilface. eod. die.
IN a Declarator of a Liferent-Escheat; It was Alleged, That there could be no
Escheat upon the Horning Lybelled; Because it was upon Letters direct by the
Secret Council, upon a Decree of a Regality Court; And by the Acts of
Parliament, The Lords of Session are only warranted, to direct Letters of
Horning summarly, upon the Decreets of Sheriffs, and Baillies of Regality, and
other Inferior Judges.

The Lords Thought, That the Council could not direct Letters of Horning upon
the said Decree; Seeing, before the Acts of Parliament, Letters of Horning
could not be direct upon the Decreets of Inferior Judges summarly, without a
Decree Conform before the Lords of Session; And Statutes being Stricti Juris,
the Council could not direct Letters, unless by the same Statute they had been
warranted to that effect; and it appears, that the said Statute was founded
upon good Reason and Considerations, tho they be not expressed, viz. That the
Lords of Session are always sitting in the time of Session; and in vacance,
there is some of their Number appointed to receive and pass Bills of
Suspension, if there be cause; whereas the Council sits but once a Week
ordinarily in Session-time; and in Vacance but thrice. 2. The Lords do not pass
Suspensions but upon good Reasons, and they are to consider the said Decreets,
which is not proper for the Council. 3. As Suspensions are raised of the said
Decreets, so often times there is a necessity of raising Reductions; and the
Lords of Council are not competent Judges to the Reduction of the said
Decreets: But the Lords thought not fit, that there should be a question
betwixt them and the Council, concerning their Privilege; and therefore did
forbear to give answer, until some accommodation should be endeavored: And it
was proposed by some, that the Decree of the Regality Court, being for keeping
of Conventicles; and that practice, concerning so much the Peace of the
Country, that all Disturbance thereby might be prevented; and upon that
account, it being recommended to the Council, by Act of Parliament, that they
should see the Laws against Conventicles put effectually in execution; The
Council, as they might conveen the Contraveeners before themselves, may
commissionate the Inferior Courts to proceed as their Delegats; and upon their
Decreets given by them as their Delegats, that they may direct Letters of
Horning. Thesaurer-depute Reporter.

D. 407. Ker contra Hunter. 20 December 1676.
A Personal Action was sustained, upon a Right of Annualrent, against the
Tennents during their Possession, for the Mails and Duties effeirand to the
said Annualrent. Thesaurer-depute Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 408. Carnegie of Balmachie contra Durham of Anachie. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That albeit by the common Law, Annualrent be due for Tocher;
yet, by Our Custom, it is not payable, unless it be so provided by the Bond or
Contract for the same: but in the case in question, They Found the Defender
liable to pay Annualrent, in respect the Debtor had been in use of payment, at
the least, had promised to pay Annualrent for certain years bygone: and
Annualrent once paid, implies a tacit Paction to continue the payment of the
same. Thesaurer-depute Reporter. (...) Clerk.

D. 409. Veitch contra Pallat. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Rebel, contracting Debt after Rebellion, cannot assign
in satisfaction of the same, any debt due to him: and tho the Assigney should
transact with the Debtor of the Debt assigned, before a Gift and Declarator;
the Donator will be preferable. Lockheart and Hog for Veitch, alteri Cuningham
and Seaton. Gibson Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 410. Inter eosdem. eod. die.
AND in the same Case, It was Found, That a Bond granted after Horning, tho it
did bear that the same was for Wines; yet being the Rebels assertion, could not
prejudge the King: but it being alleged, and offered to be proven, that the
said Wines were truly furnished before the Rebellion: The Lords Found the
Alledgance relevant to be proven, only by the Rebels Count Books, and by Books
of Entry; and not simply by Witnesses, without such Adminicles in Write.

D. 411. Pallat contra Veitch. eod. die.
THE Lords likeways Found, That the Presumption introduced by the Act of
Parliament, that Gifts of Escheat are simulate, in respect that the Rebel is
suffered to possess; is only in that case, where the Rebel has a Visible and
Considerable Estate of Lands or Tacks, and is in possession of the same: but
when the Rebels Estate is either not considerable, consisting only of an Aiker
or two, (which was the case in question) or in nominibus, and not known to the
Donator, so that the Donator had reason not to trouble himself, and to look
after either that which was inconsiderable, or which was not known to him;
there is no ground to presume that the Gift is simulate.

D. 412. Tait contra Walker. 22. December 1676.
THE Children of a second Marriage, having pursued the Son of the first, for
Implement of their Mothers Contract of Marriage, and the Provisions therein
contained in their favors: It was Alleged, That they were Debitors
themselves, in swa far as, they were Executors named and confirmed to their
Father: And It being Replied, That the Testament was given up by the Mother,
they being Infants for the time, and she was not their Tutrix, and so could not
bind them.

The Lords Found, That there was Difficulty in the case, in respect the
Pursuers were now past 40 years, and they had never questioned or desired to be
reponed against the said Confirmation: And on the other part, It was hard, that
a Deed of their Mother, having no Authority to do the same as Tutor or Curator
should bind them; and there was no necessity to be reponed against the same, it
not being their Deed, and being ipso Jure void: and therefore before Answer,
the Lords thought sit to try, if the Pursuers had meddled with any part of the
Executry, or had done any Deed that could import Homologation of the said
Testament. Newbyth Reporter.

D. 413. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
IT was questioned amongst the Lords, whether an Inhibition could be sustained,
albeit the Execution did not bear a Copy to have been affixt at the
Mercat Cross; And it was Resolved as to the future, it should be declared, that
Executions of Inhibitions should be null, unless Copies were affixt; In respect
there can be no Executions without giving of Copies, either personally, or at
their dwelling house: And when the Leidges are inhibite at the Mercat Cross in
general, so that a Copy cannot be given to every person, it ought to be left at
the Mercat Cross in subsidium: But, because it was informed, that many
Executions did not bear Copies to be left at the Mercat Cross, The Lords did
forbear to give Answer as to the Inhibition in question, until the style and
custom should be tried.

D. 414. Dick of Grange contra Sir Andrew Dick. 22. December. 1676.
SIR Andrew Dick having obtained, upon a Petition to His Majesty, a Warrant to
the Exchequer, to pay to his Wife and Children 130 lib. sterling. Yearly: The said
Annuity being Arrested at the instance of (...) Dick of Grange; It was
Alleged, in a Process to make forthcoming, that, being Alimentary, it could
not be Arrested: Whereunto it was Replied, that the said Sum was not
Alimentary, so that it could not be affected with Sir Andrew his Debts; In
respect, whatsomever belongs to a Debtor, either on his own Right or Jure
Mariti is Liable to his Debts; and it is not in the Power of a Debtor to make
any thing belong unto him Alimentary, but there must be an express constitution
to that effect; which is only in that case, where the King or any other person
does give any thing, and does qualify their own Gift with that express
provision, that it should be only for the Aliment of the person gratified, that
it should not be affected with any Debt or Execution for the same; whereas His
Majesty's Grant was only in the Terms foresaid, and was procured from His
Majesty, not upon any special consideration or respect to Sir Andrew's Lady,
but upon a Representation made by Sir Andrew, that he had a former Wadset from
the Earl of Mortoun of his Estate in Orknay, and the same being taken from him
by a Reduction at the instance of His Majesty of the Earl of Mortoun's Right
of Orkney; he and his Family would be in a sad condition: And therefore the
said Annuity being granted by His Majesty in lieu and intuitu of the said
former Right, surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati.

It was farther Replied, That albeit the said Annuity were Alimentary, the
Pursuers Debt ought to affect the same, being likewayes Alimentary, In respect
it was for Money furnished for the Aliment and Entertainment of the said Sir
Andrew and his Lady, and privilegiatus non utitur privilegio contra
privilegiatum.

The Lords Found, That the said Annuity was Alimentary and could not be
Arrested, and the Aliment being de die in diem, the Debt due to the Pursuer
could not affect the same, unless it had been for Aliment, while the Annuity in
question was in cursu. Forret Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 415. E. Argyle contra The Lord of M^naughtoun. 3. January 1677.
IN a pursuit at the instance of the Earl of Argyle, against the Lord of
M^nauchtoun, who held some Lands of him Ward, for the single avail of his
Marriage; It was Alleged for the Defender. 1. That the Defender had Married
the time of the Usurpation, at which time the Casualities of Ward and Marriage
were taken away by an Act and Proclamation of the Usurpers, whereby the
Defender was secured and was in bona fide to Marry without requireing the
Superiors Consent. 2. De facto the Superior had consented to his Marriage, In
swa far as the Defender having given notice to him by a Letter, the Marquess of
Argyle being then at London, that he was to Marry with a Gentlewoman, who is
now his Wife, the Marquess did return a Letter (which was produced) showing
that he could not but approve his matching with the said Gentlewoman being the
Lord of Ardkindles Daughter; and if they should proceed to the Marriage, that
he wished them well.

Whereunto, It was Replied, That the Usurpers by their Act could not prejudge
the Pursuer, or any other Superior, but that they might claim the Obventions
and Casualities, that did fall unto them, by the nature of their Vassals Right;
as it was found in the case of Sir George Kina^rd and the Master of Gray, that
Lands holden in Ward being Disponed in the time of the Usurpation, without the
Superiors consent, did recognize notwithstanding of the said Act: And as to the
said Consent, It was Replied, that the said Letter was but a Civil Complement,
without any mention of the Marquess his Interest as Superior, and without an
express License to Marry, and Discharging any Interest, or pretense that he had
to the Defenders Marriage.

Upon Debate at the Bar and among the Lords, Some were of the Opinion, that
there being no Contempt that could be alleged of the Superior; and the Vassal
having so much reason to think, that he needed not his Consent, In respect the
said Act was a Law de facto, and for the time; the whole Country being forced
to submit to the Usurpers, and to acquiesce to their Orders; That Communis
error facit Jus, and quaevis causa excusat as to Casualities arising upon
feudal Delinquency or Contempt: And the Superiors Interest, that was intended
of the Law, was not that he should have a Sum of Money, but that his Vassal
should not Marry without his Consent, and match with Families either
disaffected, or in which the Superior could not have confidence; and the avail
of Marriage is penal in case the Vassal should either Marry without the
Superiors consent, or should refuse to Marry a person proffered by the Superior
to be his Wife.

Upon the foresaid Considerations, they were of Opinion, that the Defense was
relevant; and that there was a great difference betwixt the case of Recognition
and Marriage, in regard the reason of the Decision in the case foresaid, was,
that the Vassal did upon the matter contemn the Superior, after the Kings
Restitution, seeing he did not apply for a Confirmation; Whereas the Vassal,
being once married, it were to no purpose to desire the Superiors Consent.

On the other part, some of the Lords argued, that the single Avail is not
penal, but only the double; seeing the Vassal, attaining to the age of marriage,
if he should die unmaryed, yet the single avail would be due: Whereunto It was
Answered, That poena is in Law, when a Person is liable to pay a Sum, either
for doing or not doing a Deed; and as the Vassal is liable to the double Avail,
for refuseing the Person offered by the Superior, so he is liable to the single
for not marrying, and tho matrimonia are libera, so that a Person may marry or
not as he pleases, yet causative many things are allowed, which cannot be
directly: And it being the design of the Feudal Law, and Superiors, in giving
out their Lands, to have still Vassals to serve them and their Family, the
appearand Heir is obliged by the nature of his Holding to marry, or in poenam
to pay the avail: and if the Vassal should desire his Superior to offer him a
Person that he might marry, or to consent that he should marry, such a Person
as he thought fit for him; and the Superior should refuse both, it were hard,
that notwithstanding the Vassal should be liable to pay the Avail of his
marriage.

The Lords nevertheless Found, That the single Avail of Marriage is not penal.
Actores Lockheart and Hamilton, alteri Cuningham. Mr. John Hay Clerk. In
praesentia. Vide infra 23. January 1677. inter eosdem.

D. 416. Mitchelson contra Mitchelson. 4. January. 1677.
A Younger Brother, being served, before the Baillies of Kirkcaldie, Heir of
Line to the immediate elder Brother: Thereafter the eldest Brother did desire
to be served Heir of Conquest to the same Person; and the Baillies not being
clear to proceed, in respect of the former Service, unless it had been reduced:
The Lords Thought, That, upon their Refusal, the Elder Brother may Advocate for
Iniquity; and that the Brieves may be served before the Macers: and that the
Eldest Brother being wronged by the foresaid Service, to which he was not
called, so that it was res inter alios acta, he ought not to be prejudged
thereby, nor put to the trouble and Charges of a Reduction. Gibson Clerk.

D. 417. Earl of Glencairn contra Brisbains. 5. January 1677.
FRancis Freeland of that Ilk, having disponed to John Mcknair and Robert
Hamilton irredeemably: and they thereafter having disponed the same, with
consent of the said Francis, to John Brisbain: And the said John having granted
a Reversion to the said Francis his Heirs of his own Body allanerly; for
payment of the Sum of 8000 merks, and what farther Sums should be debursed for
improving the Lands, building or repairing the Houses, with Annualrent frae the
Debursements, upon the said John Freeland his own Declaration; and that after
the first Term after the said Francis his decease: The Earl of Glencairn,
Creditor to the said Francis Freeland, alleging that the said Reversion was
granted by Fraud and Contryvance, and in prejudice of him and Lawful Creditors;
and that the said Reversion was granted in manner foresaid, not in favors of
his Debtor but his Heirs for eludeing their Execution; Pursued a Reduction of
the said Disposition made in favors of Hamilton and Mcnaire; and a Declarator
that Brisbaines Right should fall in consequence; and that it should be lawful
to him to comprise the said Reversion, and to use an Order as if it had been
granted to the said Francis Freeland himself.

The Lords Thought, That if the Price were not adequate (which was to be tried)
the Conclusions foresaid should be sustained. Thesaurer-depute Reporter. Gibson
Clerk.

D. 418. Creditors of Mouswel contra The Lady and Children. 6. January. 1677.
JAmes Douglas of Mouswel, by Contract of Marriage, betwixt his Eldest Son
James Douglas, and (...) Lawrie, did dispone to his Son the Fee of his Estate,
reserving his own Liferent; and with a Provision, to be contained in the
Infeftment, That it should be lawful to him to take on and burden the Estate
with the Sum of 18000 merks, for the Provision of his other Children, and for
doing his other Affairs: And accordingly the said James did provide, to eight
Children, 9000. merks out of the said Estate, by a Bond granted within a year
after the said Marriage, and Infeftment thereupon.

Both the Father and the Son the Fiar being deceased; and the Son having left
only one Son of the Marriage an Infant; there followed a Contract ^etwixt Agnes
Rome Grandmother to the Child, and Janet Lawrie the Mother, and certain Friends
of the Family, whereby it was agreed, that the Grandmother should quite 200
merks of her Liferent yearly, and the Mother 400 merks of her Liferent; and
that the Grandmother should Confirm her Husbands Testament for payment of his
Debts; and for the superplus of the Debt, the Friends should undertake the
same; and upon payment, having taken Right thereto, should superceed personal
Execution, until the Child were major; the Annualrents being in the mean time
paid by the Grandmother, as Tutrix to her Grandchild. The Grandchild having
deceased, while he was yet Infant; both the Creditors and the Friends, and the
Relict, did take a course to affect the Estate by Comprysings; and upon their
Infeftments and Rights, having pursued the Tennents, so that they were forced
to raise a multiple Poinding; It was Alleged for the Creditors, That the
Grandmother her Liferent ought to be restricted, conform to the said Contract,
whereby she had discharged the said 200. merks yearly: Whereunto It being
Answered, That res devenerat in alium casum; and that the said Restriction was
in favors of her Grandchild, and for the standing of the Family, and in
contemplation of the Undertaking, and Obligement foresaid of the Friends, which
they had not done, and cessante causa cessat effectus: and, the Estate being
altogether ruined, she ought to be in her own place.

And albeit it was thereto Replied by the Creditors, That, whatever might be
pretended to be the impulsive Cause, yet the said Restriction being once
granted does continue, notwithstanding of the pretense foresaid; seeing there is
no resolutive Clause or Provision, that the Case abovementioned falling out,
the Grandmother should be in her own place; but on the contrare it appears by
the Contract, that the Death of the Child was then under her consideration, In
respect, it is provided expressly, that if the Child should die the Restriction
of the Mothers Life-rent should cease, and she should be in her own place; and
so, the Provision foresaid being only in favors of the Mother, and not of the
Grandmother, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis: It being considered
likeways, there was not the same reason for the Grandmother, In respect by the
decease of the Child, the Mothers Interest in the Estate did altogether cease,
whereas the Heir, who did succeed to the Child, was the Grand-mothers own Son:
And as to the pretense, that the Friends had not fulfilled their part of the
Contract, It was Answered, that the Contract being in effect in favors of the
Family, both the Relict and the Creditors were thereby obliged, and might yet
be urged to fulfill their obligements: And tho they should both fail, the Family
could not be prejudged; and that the Friends, accordingly as they were obliged,
they had taken course with the Debts: and tho it was pretended that they had
not done it debito tempore, the said pretense was of no moment, seeing no time
is limited by the Contract.

Nevertheless the Lords Reponed the Relict against the said Restriction.

In the same Cause, There being a Competition betwixt some of the Creditors,
whose Debts were Contracted by the Grandfather Agnes Rom's Husband before his
Sons Contract of Marriage; and betwixt the Children, who were Infeft, as said
is, upon the Bond of Provision, granted by their Father, conform to the faculty
foresaid.

It was Alleged for the Creditors, That they ought to be preferred, In
respect, that upon Bonds of Corroboration granted by the Son the Fiar, they had
Comprysed and were Infeft by public Infeftments; at least had charged the
Superior; So that their Right being public, and for a true Debt anterior to
the Childrens Provision, they were preferable to the Children, their Infeftment
being base.

The Lords Found, That the Children should be preferred, In respect the
Comprysings were against the Son; and the Comprysers could be in no better Case
than the Son himself, whose Right was affected with the said faculty in favors
of the Children: So that neither he, nor any having Right from him, could
question the Right granted by virtue of, and conform to the said Faculty.

This Decision, being by plurality, seemed hard to some of the Lords; who did
consider, that the foresaid Faculty was not only in behalf of the Children, but
of supervenient Creditors, if the Father had thereafter Contracted any Debt,
and if the Father had given surety to the said Supervenient Creditors by base
Infeftments, and if his Anterior Creditors before the said Contract had
comprysed and had been Infeft, they would have been preferred to the said
posterior Creditors having only base Rights, and multo magis to the Children.

They considered also, That the Estate being, by the said Contract, Disponed
simply to the Son, with a Reservation only of the Fathers Liferent and the said
Faculty; and the Son not being obliged to pay the Fathers Debts by the said
Contract, if there had been 18000 Merks of Debt anterior to the Contract,
Anterior Creditors might have pursued the Son for the same, not only because he
was Appearand Heir and Successor Titulo Lucrativo, but because he was obliged
by the Contract, at least his Estate burdened for the said Sum; And the
Anterior Creditors might either have taken that course, or might have Comprysed
the Interest competent to the Father by the said Faculty: And seeing the Son
might have been forced in manner foresaid to satisfy the said Creditors, he
might have granted Bonds of Corroboration, whereupon they might have Comprysed;
and having comprysed, and having gotten public Rights, they are preferable to
the base Right of the Children.

In the same Cause, The Creditors did allege, that they ought to be preferred
to the Children, because their Provision was after their Debt, and was without
an Onerous Cause; And nevertheless the Lords Found the Defense for the Children
Relevant, viz. That their Father, the time of the granting of the said Bon^,
for their Provision, had a sufficient Estate, besides, out of which the
Creditors might have been satisfied.

This Decision, being also by the Major part, seemed hard to others, who
thought that a Debtor could do no Deed in prejudice of his Creditors, without
an Onerous Cause: And tho the Father might be looked upon, the time of the
granting of Provisions to Children as in a good condition, and therefore the
Creditors to be secure and needed not do Diligence, yet if thereafter he should
become insolvent, the loss ought to be upon the Children, and not the
Creditors: And that it being a principle, That a Debtor can do nothing in
prejudice of his Creditor, without an Onerous Cause, It is certainly both Fraud
and prejudice, that he should not pay his Debt, but should give away, to his
Children, that part of his Estate which the Creditors might have affected: And
Inhibitions being only in these terms, That the Party Inhibite should do no
Deed in defraud of the Creditor; It might be pretended, by the same Reason in
Reductions ex capite Inhibitionis, that the Party Inhibite did nothing in
defraud or prejudice of the Pursuer, In respect, the time of the granting the
Bond or Right craved to be reduced, he had Effects and sufficiency of Estate
beside. Lockheart etc. for Queensberry and other Creditors. Cuninghame,
Anderson and Mckenie for the Children and Relict. Gibson Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 419. Stewart of Castlemilk contra Sir John Whitefoord. 10. January 1677.
SIR Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk, having pursued a Reduction of a
Disposition of the Lands of Coats, made by James Stewart of Minto, in favors
of Sir John Whitefoord; ex capite metus: In swa far as, the said Sir John
Whitefoord had taken the said James and kept him in privato carcere for some
time; and thereafter, having a Caption against him, had detained him Prisoner:
and had caused transport and convey him in that condition, from diverse places
in the night Season; and by his Servants had threatened him with long
Imprisonment; and in end had prevailed with him to dispone to him the said
Lands, being eight Chalders Victual of Rent, and where there was a Coal of 100.
lib. sterling. of Rent; upon an Obligement only to pay him an yearly Annuity of
400. merks: In which process, the said Sir John, and Duke Hamilton, who had
thereafter acquired the said Lands from the said Sir John, did compear, and
propone the Defenses following. 1. That the foresaid Qualifications of Force
were not Relevant to import metus, qui potest cadere in Constantem virum, being
neither mortis nor Cruciatus; nor so circumstantiate, as is required of the
Law, for founding the said Action. And 2 That albeit metus were relevantly
qualified, the foresaid Deed cannot be questioned upon pretense of the same,
unless the said James Stewart had been lesed or damnified by the same; Seeing it
appears by the Title, quod metus causa, etc. A Reduction and Restitution upon
that head is not competent, ubi non est damnum, and nihil abest; as is clear by
diverse Texts, in the case of a Creditor useing force to get what is
unquestionably due to him; and in this case the said James had no prejudice, in
respect he was obliged by an antecedent Minute to dispon the said Lands: so
that the said Disposition was but for implement of the said Minute, which the
said Sir John did give back to be cancelled by Minto, when he got the said
Disposition. And 3. It was offered to be proven, that, after the said James was
at liberty, the said Disposition was granted by him.

The Lords Found, That the Libel and Qualifications of metus and Force were
relevant; and yet, in respect the Defenders were so positive as to their
Alledgance, that the Disponer was at liberty when he granted the said Right;
they allowed a conjunct Probation concerning the said Qualifications of Force,
and the condition the Disponer was in for the time, and the way of granting the
said Right; whether he was under Restraint and the Impression of Fear, or in
Freedom? Or whether the samen was granted by him freely and voluntarly?

As to the said other Defense, that there was no damnum, the Lords repelled the
same; and would not allow that point of Fact to be tried, whether or not there
were a former Minute, for Implement of which the said Right was granted? And
whether it was given back for, and the time of the granting of the said
Disposition?

Some of the Lords were of the Opinion, That the Qualifications libelled, were
not relevant to import such a force and metus, as could be the ground of a
Reduction of the said Right; ex eo capite; tho they were convinced that the
practice foresaid is most unwarrantable and dolosa; and that thereupon the
Right may be questioned as to Sir John himself, but not as to a singular
Successor: and that there is a difference betwixt a Reduction ex capite metus,
which is competent against singular Successors; and a Reduction ex capite doli,
which is not competent against a singular Successor, who bona fide has acquired
a Right, for an Onerous Cause.

But diverse of the Lords were of Opinion, that the Defense foresaid, that
there was no damnum, was most relevant, for these Reasons; viz. All
Restitutions upon what mediums soever, whether metus or dolus, or lubricum
aetatis, are against damnum and prejudice; for frustra should Restitution be
craved, if there be no damnum. 2. It is evident by diverse Laws, and the Title
foresaid, quod metus, etc. That ex edicto quod metus causa, etc. non datur
actio si nihil absit; and succurritur only captis and laesis. 3. By the Civil
Law, there were diverse Remedies competent to these who had been forced to do
any deed; viz. A Civil action ex Edicto Praetoris, and a Criminal Action ex
lege Julia; and a Penal Remedy ex decreto Divi Marci, That a Creditor by force,
extorting what is truly due, amittit Jus Crediti: And our Reductions ex capite
metus are but Civil Actions, as that ex Edicto: And the said other Remedies
being penal, by the Municipal Law of the Romans, cannot be introduced by the
Lords of Session being Civil Judges, without an Act of Parliament. 4. All
Restitutions should Repone both Parties in integrum; and it were unjust, that
if it were constant, and the Lords were convinced upon their own certain
knowledge, that there had been an antecedent Minute, and that the same had been
cancelled upon the granting of the said Disposition, that Minto should be
restored, and not the said Sir John; that now res non est integra, seeing the
antecedent Minute is not Extant; and tho it were Extant, it would be
ineffectual, In respect Minto has Disponed the foresaid Lands to this Pursuer
who is Infeft; and, having the first Infeftment would be preferable, whether
the Minute were Extant or not. 5. As to the pretense that was so much urged,
that it would be of dangerous consequence, that such Deeds extorted by force
should be sustained upon the pretext of non damnum; and that it would tend to
encourage such practices, the same is of no weight; seeing the Deed, being just
upon the matter, may and ought to be sustained, and yet the way of procureing
the same may be severely punished. 6. As to the difficulty of Probation, there
being no Adminicles in Write, that there were such a Minute, It is not
considerable; Seeing multa permittuntur causative, which cannot be done
directly; and that tho the Result of Probation by Witnesses, may be the making
up or taking away of Writes, which cannot be done directly, but by Write; yet
when that which is to be proven is in Fact, it may be proven by Witnesses; as
in the same case, that the Disposition in question was Extorted, it may be
proven by Witnesses, to take away the said Disposition: And if a person should
be forced to grant a Disposition of Lands of 20. Chalders of Victual of Rent,
and in Exchange should get a Disposition at the same time of other Lands of the
half value, it were a good Defense and probable by Witnesses, that the Pursuer
did get, the time of the granting the Disposition of Lands, worth 20 Chalder
Victual, a Disposition of less value; and Contingentia causae and of a
Transaction and circumstances of the same, ought not to be divided; but may and
ought to be entirely proven by Witnesses, alse well for the Defender as the
Pursuer. Actor Lockheart and Sinclair. alteri Cuningham and Mckenie. Mr. John
Hay Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 420. Commissar of St. Andrews contra Watson. 11. January 1677.
THE Lords sustained a pursuit at the instance of the Master of the Ground,
against these who had bought, from his Tennent, his Corns and other Goods,
wherein the Pursuer had a Tacit Hypoth^^k. Glendoich Reporter. Mr. John Hay
Clerk.

D. 421. Viscount of Oxenford contra Mr. John Cockburn. eod. die.
MR. John Cockburne, having gone Abroad with the Viscount of Oxenford; and
after his Return, having gotten several Bonds from the said Viscount of
considerable Sums, and also a Pension of 1000 Merks: And having charged upon
the same, the Viscount Suspended upon that Reason, that the said Mr. John,
dureing their being Abroad, had received great Sums of Money remitted to him
upon the Viscounts account, for which he had not Compted; and that, after Count
and Reckoning, he will be found Debtor to the Viscount in more than the Sums
charged for: And it being Alleged by the said Mr. John, that he is only
comptable for his Intromission, and that his Actual Intromission ought to be
Instructed by Write or by his Oath; and the Declarations, of Merchants and
Factors Abroad, cannot be Probation to bind upon him so great Intromissions.

The Lords considered the condition of the Viscount for the time, that he could
not Intromet himself; and that the said Mr. John had such Influence upon him,
that having been his Governor at Schools, and upon the desire of his Friends
being put from him by an Act of Council, He, notwithstanding, without and
contrare to the Advice of his Friends, carried him Abroad; and since his return
had gotten from him the Bonds foresaid: And therefore thought fit to try the
Business to the bottom; And to ordain the said Mr. John to give in his Compts
of what was received and debursed, when the Viscount was Abroad; and the
Factors and other Witnesses to be Examined, concerning his Intromission; and
whether or not any Moneys, that were remitted for the Viscounts use, were
received by the Viscount himself, or by the said Mr. John. Redford Reporter.
Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 422. Lord of Bavilay contra Barbara Dalmahoy. eod. die.
A Horning, against a Person dwelling within the Shire of Edinburgh, upon Lands
Annexed to the Barony of Renfrew, being denounced at Edinburgh, was sustained;
In respect that the said Lands were Locally within the Shyre of Edinburgh: And
the Rebel, In respect of his Residence there, was Liable to the Jurisdiction of
the Sheriff, and to all Burdens, and had all Capacities competent to the Shire
of Edinburgh, Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 423. Baillie contra Somervel. eod. die.
THERE being a Provision in a Contract of Marriage in these Terms, that 5000
Merks of the Tocher should return to the Father in Law, in case his Daughter
should decease before her Husband, within the space of 6 Years after the
Marriage, there being no Children betwixt them then on life; and in case the
Father in Law should have Heirs Male within the space of six Years after the
Marriage.

The Lords Found The said Provision copulative; and that the Tocher should not
return, albeit the Father in Law had Heirs Male within the foresaid time; Seeing
the other Member of the said condition did not exist; In respect, albeit his
Daughter deceased within the said time, yet she had a Child of the Marriage
that survived. Gosford Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 424. Jaffray contra Lord of Wamfray. 12. Jan. 1677.
A Sum, due be a Bond bearing an Obligement to Infeft and Requisition; was
Found to be Moveable after Requisition; and to fall under Escheat,
notwithstanding the late Act of Parliament Ordaining Bonds bearing Annualrent
to be Heretable; but remains still Heretable quoad fiscum; In respect Bonds of
the nature foresaid became Moveable by Requisition, even before the said Act of
Parliament; And the Fisk, since by the foresaid Act of Parliament, is not put
in better case, is not in worse. Glendoich Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 425. Inter eosdem. eod. die.
IN the same case It was Found, That an Instrument of Requisition was Null,
because it did not bear, that the Procuratory was produced: And an Instrument
being produced extended under the Notars Hand, and being quarrelled upon the
Ground foresaid, The Lords did not allow the Notar to give out an other
Instrument, bearing the Procuratory to be produced; nor did admit probation by
Witnesses, that the Procuratory was produced; Seeing such Solemnities are not
presumed, and cannot be proven by Witnesses, but by valide and formal
Instruments: And a Notar having given out an Instrument, that is defective,
cannot thereafter give an other to supply the defect; Otherways the question
being betwixt the Creditors, who had done lawful Diligence and a Donator, it
should be in the power of a Notar to prefer and gratify either party, as he
should be prevailed with, either to give out, or not to give another Instrument.

D. 426. Inglis contra Lawrie. eod. die.
SOme of the Lords were of the Opinion, that a Husband may give validly, during
Marriage, to his Wife, a Provision or Jointure, where there is no Contract of
Marriage: But that the Wife could not give to the Husband, tho there were not a
Contract of Marriage, and that she might revock any such Donation: which
appears to be hard and unequal. Actor Colt, alteri Dalrymple. Mr. Thomas Hay
Clerk. But this Point was not decided.

D. 427. Fordel contra Caribber. 16. January 1677.
IN a Reduction, at the instance of the Lord of Fordel, against Monteeth of
Caribber, of a Disposition granted by Monteeth of Randyfurd to Caribber; upon
that Reason, That the said Disposition was not delivered, but was lying by the
Defunct in his Charter Chest, and blank in the Name and Date; and that the
Defender intrometted with the same unwarrantably, and filled up his Name.

The Lords Ordained certain Persons, who were going to France, to be examined
before Debate; reserving to themselves to consider what their Depositions
should work.

Tho it may appear hard, that a Write should be taken away by Witnesses; yet
the Reason being relevant, and in Fact, and resolving in dole and Fraud, it may
be proven by Witnesses. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 428. Stewart of Ardvorlich contra Riddoch. eod. die.
DAVID Riddoch, by Contract of Marriage betwixt his Son Alexander and Jonet
Ballentyne, did dispone to the said Alexander his Estate: and thereafter did
dispone the same to his second Son David Riddoch, for payment and with the
burden of all his Debts: who did thereafter dispone the same to Stewart of
Ardvorlich for a just price.

The said Stewart of Ardvorlich pursued a Reduction of the Disposition,
contained in the said Alexander his Contract of Marriage; upon that Reason,
That the said Contract of Marriage was not delivered to the said Alexander, at
the least there being but only one double subscribed, the same was given back
to David Riddoch the Father; and was lying by him the time of his decease: And
it was evident, that it was never intended, that any other use should be made
of the said Contract, but only in order to get a Marriage to the said
Alexander, as being provided to the said Estate; in swa far as the said
Disposition, in favors of the said Alexander, was without the burden of the
Disponers Debts, which were very great; and did not so much as reserve his
Liferent: Whereunto It was Answered, That the Contract was a mutual Evident,
subscribed by both Parties, and that Marriage had followed upon the same; and
therefore it could not be taken away, upon the pretense of not delivery.

The Lords Found, That tho the Contract had been beside the Father the time of
his decease, it was not to be considered as instrumentum penes debitorem, being
a mutual Evident: But thereafter It was Replied, That the Pursuer offered to
prove, that not only the said Contract was lying by the Disponer, the time of
his decease, but an Assignation blank of the said Contract; which, being in the
Disponers Hands, was in effect a retrocession or Discharge of the Disposition,
contained in the Contract: Which Reply the Lords found Relevant. In praesentia.

This Reply was Found also probable prout de jure.

D. 429. Cuningham contra Halyburton. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Tacksman of Lands, within Burgh, may be removed, if he
be behind in payment of his Duty; unless he find Caution as to the future; in
the same manner as Tacksmen of Land in the Country. Forret Reporter. Gibson
Clerk.

D. 430. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That a Burgess of the Town, tho he be not Incola, if he
trade, may be stented for payment of his Majesty's Taxation.

D. 431. Earl of Glencairn contra Brisbain. eod. die.
THE Lords Found, In the Case abovementioned Glencairn contra Brisbaine, That
the true Value of the Lands should be proven, to the effect it may be known
whether the Price be adequate or not: And albeit the Lands had not been
labored by Tennents, being still in the Heretors hands, the Value might and
ought to be proven, by the soweing and increase, and the quantity of the Land;
and what Lands in that part, of the like quantity and quality, may be set for:
And it was not enough, that now the Earl of Glencairn offered 2000 merks more,
in respect the Lands might have been improven; or the said offer might be made
upon Picque or Emulation. Hatton Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

In this Case the Lords allowed a conjunct Probation:

D. 432. Caribber contra Fordel. 17. January 1677.
THIS Day again in the Case abovementioned Caribber contra Fordel, The Lords
did Find, upon a Bill given in by Caribber, That albeit Write cannot be taken
away but by Write directly; and that a Disposition could not be taken away but
by a Renounciation or some other Writ, where there is no question as to the
Validity and Formality of the same; Yet it may be taken away by a Reduction Ex
capite Metus and Doli, and minoris aetatis and Lesion: And that in such
pursutes, the Reasons being in Fact, and Lybelled either upon Force or
Circumvention and Fraud, are probable by witnesses; and that the Reduction at
Fordels instance upon that Reason, viz. That the Disposition in question was
found among the Defuncts papers, the time of his Decease, and was intrometted
with and filled up by Caribber, is ex eodem capite Doli. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 433. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
AN Edict of Executrie, being Advocate from the Commissars; a Bill was given
in, desiring that the Advocation might be summarily discust, seeing both nearest
of Kin, Creditors, and the Fisk were concerned, that the Testament should be
confirmed and execute; which Desire, the Lords thought could not be granted, in
respect of the Act of Regulation: but it was thought a great Escape and
Inadvertency, that such Advocations should be past, seeing the Lords could not
confirm Testaments: and if any Party should be prejudged by any Act of the
Commissars, it may be reduced, upon the head of Iniquity: And the Lords
thought, it was fit that a new Edict should be raised; and if an Advocation
should be sought, the Reason should be discust upon the Bill.

D. 434. Earl Argyle contra Mcnaughtoun. 23. Jan. 1677.
IN the Case abovementioned, Earl of Argyle contra Mcnaughtoun, It was Found,
That Mcnaughtoun having acquainted the deceast Marquess of Argyle, that he was
to Marry with his Lady; and that the Marquess having returned an Answer by his
Letter of the Tenor abovementioned; the said Letter imported his Consent to the
Marriage; and that the Marquess having consented, he could not claim the
Benefit of the Marriage. Vide supra 3. January 1677.

D. 435. Tailfer contra Sandilands. eod. die.
A Curator having in his Accounts given in an Article of Incident Charges upon
occasion of the Minors Affairs, viz. That he had met with Agents and others in
Taverns, in Relation to the Pupills Affairs; and had been at Charges in
drinking with them, extending to a considerable Sum, during the whole time of
his Charge: The Lords did not allow the same in the Terms foresaid; But
Ordained him to condescend upon the particulars: And if he kept a Book and
Diary of his Debursements, so that he might warrantably declare, that he had
truly debursed the particulars thereinmentioned; they inclined to modify the
same to such a Sum, as they should find reasonable.

D. 436. Home of Ford contra Steuart. 24. January 1677.
A Wadset being granted in these Terms, That the Wadsetter should possess the
Lands; and that the Granter should free the Wadsetter of Levies of Horse, and
Feu-duties, and Ministers Stipends: It was Found that the Wadsetter is not
Liable to Count and Reckon for the Duties and superplus of the same, exceeding
the Annualrent; In respect, the Wadset was a proper Wadset; and the Wadsetter
was not free of all Hazards of the Fruits, Tennents, War and Vastation. Redford
Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 437. Ronald Grahame contra Sarah Rome. eod. die.
JOhn Rome being obliged by his Contract of Marriage with his second Wife to
provide 10000 Merks in favors of himself, and his Spouse in Conjunct-fee, and
the Heirs of the Marriage; whilks Failieing to his own Heirs and Assigneys: And
to provide also 5000 Merks in favors of the Remanent Bairns of the said
Marriage:

The Lords Found, That the Father was Fiar of the said Sums; and that the Heir
of the Marriage and Remanent Bairns had an Interest only to succeed to him as
Heirs of Provision in the same: And that the Creditors might affect the said
Sums; and would be preferable to the Bairns; Notwithstanding their Debts were
Contracted after the said Contract of Marriage, and Inhibition thereupon; seeing
the Inhibition could not take away his Fee: And the Import and Effect both of
the said Obligements and Inhibition is only, that the Father should do no
fraudulent Deed, without an Onerous Cause, in prejudice of the same. Gosford
Reporter.

D. 438. Ardblair contra Wilson. eod. die.
A Bond being granted by James Bisset of Neitherbalcarne to the Lord of
Ardblair for Love and Favor; to be paid after his decease: The Lords Found,
That the said Bond, being granted without an Onerous Cause, to be paid in
manner foresaid after the Granters decease; could not prejudge posterior
Creditors, who were in bona fide to lend their Money, notwithstanding any such
Latent Deeds and Bonds.

This Decision seems to be hard; Seeing it was lawful both to the Granter and
Receiver of the said Bond, to grant and receive the same: And the said
Donation, being lawful ab initio, could not become thereafter unlawful by any
Deed of the Granter: And Fraud cannot be pretended, but where Creditors or
others, the time of the granting of such Bonds, were prejudged; unless it did
appear by some speciality and circumstance in the case, that there had been a
design to Cheat and Circumveen these who were to lend their Money, by granting
and settleing upon the Relations of the Debtor, his Estate; and thereafter to
get in his Hands, his Creditors Means, whom he was not able to satisfy; which
was Found in the Case of Maisson and Pollock, and was not Alleged in this
Case. Nevoy Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 439. Sinclair contra Home of Renton. eod. die.
A Bond of Corroboration being granted for a Sum due upon a Wadset; with power
to use Execution without Requisition: The Lords Found, That the Creditor may
summarly compryse upon the same without previous Requisition. Glendoich
Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 440. Nairn contra Stuart of Innernytie. eod. die.
A Presentation being granted by a Bishop to a Prebendary in favors of a
person dureing his Lifetime; and after his decease to his Son: The Lords Found,
in a multiple poinding and competition, betwixt the persons substitute in the
said Presentation; and another Prebendar provided by the succeeding Bishop, by
the decease of the first Prebendar; That the Substitution, contained in the
Presentation foresaid, did expire by the decease of the Father, and that the
Substitution was void; In respect, the Bishop could not, in prejudice of his
Successor, grant a Presentation in the Terms foresaid, bearing a Tailie and
Substitution. Castlehill Reporter. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 441. Drumellier contra E. Tweeddale. eod. die.
IT being objected against Major Bunting, being led as a Witness for Drumellier
against the Earl of Tweeddale; That he had given Partial Counsel, at least had
concerned himself as a Party for Drumellier; In swa far as, he had been at
Consultations with him, in Relation to the Process.

The Lords Found, That he could not be a Witness, tho he was a person of
Integrity above exception; and that he was free to declare that, at the said
Consultations, the point, whereupon he was to be used as a Witness, was not in
consideration. Gibson Clerk.

D. 442. Grange Dick contra Oliphant. eod. die.
AN Assignation being granted for relief, and payment of certain Sums mentioned
in the Assignation; for which the Assigney was Cautioner for the Cedent; the
same was questioned upon that head, that it was never delivered, but was still
in the Cedents Hands: The Lords Found, That the said Assignation was never
delivered: And yet they Found, That it was an effectual Evident in favors of
the Assigney, In respect the Cedent had made the same public by a Horning
thereupon. Sir George Lockheart etc. alteri Cuninghame etc. In praesentia.

D. 443. Ker contra Kers. 25 January. 1677.
A Disposition being questioned, as being made in lecto, at least delivered
then: It appeared by the Deposition of one of the Witnesses, used for proving
the Lybel, that the said Write was subscribed diverse Years before the Disponer
was on deathbed; and that the same was delivered before deathbed to the said
Witness: and that the Defunct having called for it on deathbed, for drawing
two other Dispositions, of the Lands contained therein; one in favors of the
Pursuer the Disponers Heir; and the other in favors of a Son of the Disponer,
who was Father to the Person in whose favors the Disposition in question was
made: And upon debate amongst the Lords, what should be the import of the said
Testimony, seeing the Depositar did not declare in what Terms the same was given
to him by the Disponer; whether to the behoof of the said Person, in whose
favors it was made or not; or upon any other account, for keeping the same, so
that the Disponer might call for and alter it: It was Found, 1. That the
Disponer might have revocked the same; In respect it did not appear, that it
was delivered to the behoof of the Person to whom it was made.

This Decision seems to be hard; in respect the Disposition was now in the
Hands of the Receiver, so that it was to be presumed, that it was delivered,
either to him, or to the said other Person to his behoof: and the delivery
ought to be construed, and presumed to have been, ut operetur: and the nature
of the Act it self, imports that it should be to the behoof foresaid: It not
being to be imagined, that if the Disponer had intended to have retained the
Power in his Hands, either to make the said Right effectual, or not; he would
have given it out off his Hands.

2. The Lords Found, Upon the Testimony foresaid, That the Disponer having
revocked the said Disposition not simply, but to the effect foresaid, that the
said two Dispositions should be granted; The Pursuer therefore had not Right to
the whole Lands, contained in the said first Disposition; but that the same
should divide, conform to the said two Dispositions. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk. In
praesentia.

D. 444. Procurator-Fiscal of Glasgow contra Cowan. 26 January 1677.
THE Commissar of Glasgow, having sustained Process, at the Instance of the
Procurator-Fiscal, for the trial of a falsehood of Executions, whereupon a
Decree had proceeded: and having upon Probation of the falsehood, decerned the
user of the said Executions, to pay 300. lib. to the Procurator-Fiscal as a
Fine: and the said Decree being suspended; The Lords Found, That the Commissar
was not competent Judge to the improbation of Executions, by way of Action;
seeing they cannot reduce their own Decreets; and Improbation is a Reduction ex
capite falsi. Justice-Clerk Reporter. Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk.

It is to be considered, that the most part of Decreets, before Inferior Judges,
are for Null-Defence, and upon false Executions: and it were hard, that there
should be no Remedy but by Improbations before the Lords, which may depend long
and are very chargeable; So that Decreets before Inferior Judges being for the
most part for inconsiderable Sums, the Remedy should be worse than the Mischief.

It appears indeed, that the Commissars have not power to Fine; that being a
Criminal Jurisdiction; and that they are not Judges to Improbation by the
indirect manner; The Trial of Falsehood, by circumstances and presumptions,
being Altioris Indaginis; and of that Difficulty, that it ought not to be left
to an Inferior Judge. Item, The Trial of Falsehood, as to that effect that
Falsaries may be punished, ought not to be by any Inferior Judge; But it seems
to be just and necessary, that Parties, grieved by such Decreets, should be
allowed to pursue the obtainers of the same, to hear and see them reponed
against the said Decreets, upon that Ground that they were not cited to the
same; to be proven by the Witnesses and Executer himself, declaring that they
pursue to that effect allanerly: And it appears not to be inconsistent with Law
and Form, that this course should be taken; seeing the Judge does not reduce his
own Decree, ex capite iniquitatis; and it may be provided, that such Pursutes,
tho they be upon the matter Improbations, are only to the effect foresaid; and
that no other effect or consequence shall follow upon the same; and multa fiunt
per indirectum, which cannot be directly: And if a Party, who is holden as
confessed, should raise a lybel before an Inferior Judge, that it may be Found
that he was not Contumax, being out of the Country, or Sick, or detained by
Storm, or some other insuperable Impediment; and that therefore he should be
reponed; and the Decree should be holden as a Lybel; such a Pursuit would not
be incompetent, tho in effect it would be a Reduction upon the matter.

D. 445. Donaldson contra Rinne. 27 January 1677.
IT was moved, whether or not a Decree of an Inferior Judge, being questioned
upon that Ground of Iniquity, that the Lybel was not proven; and the
Depositions of the Witnesses being produced by the Pursuer ab initio; The Lord
of the Outer House may advise the Probation; Or if it ought to be advised by
the whole Lords? It was Found, That the Depositions being produced (as said is)
the Lord may give his own Interloquitor, as upon any other Write produced ab
initio, to instruct the Lybel. Tho some of the Lords were of Opinion, that the
Probation ought to be considered and advised by the haill Lords; And it was
hard, that the Probation being found sufficient, by a competent Judge, it
should be in the power of one single Lord to review the same, and find the
contrare. Mr. John Hay Clerk.

D. 446. Murray Pupil contra (...) 31. January 1677.
A Pupil of 4. Years of Age, being pursued upon the Passive Title of a Charge
to enter Heir; and the Friends conceiving that it were fit to Renounce: none of
them being Curators, nor being willing to meddle, and to authorize the Pupil to
renounce; The Lords Decerned, but superceeded Personal Execution, until the
Pupil should be past Pupillarity. Castlehil Reporter.

D. 447. Master of Rae contra Sinclar of Dumbaith. 1. February 1677.
SInclar of Dumbaith, Sandside and others having in a Hostile manner invaded
the Lord Raes Country: There was a Criminal pursuit intented against them for
the Crimes committed upon the occasion foresaid; but the said pursuit being
taken away by a Remission, there was thereafter a Spuilie pursued at the
instance of the Master of Rae, having Assignation from his Father; and by his
Tennents whose Goods had been Robbed and taken: And it being Alleged against
the said Pursuit, that it was prescrived, The Lords sustained the Reply, that
the Prescription was interrupted by the foresaid Process before the Justices:
And again this Day a Summonds of Spuilie, which had been formerly intented,
being produced; and it being Alleged, that by the said Summonds and Execution
upon the same, the Prescription was interrupted, The Lords Found, That the same
did not interrupt; In regard it appeared, that the Names of the Defenders have
been Blank in the said Summonds, and since filled up with another Ink: And it
appeared by the Executions, that the same were at the instance of Gray of Arbo
and others mentioned in the Summonds, without specifying the said other
Persons; and the Defenders had settled with, and satisfied Arbo; So that it
appeared, that the Names of the said other persons had been filled up in the
body of the Summonds, of purpose to be a Ground for the said Reply: But tho the
Lords did not sustain the Process, as to the effect of giving the Pursuer
Juramentum in litem; In regard the Goods Libelled, were Libelled to extend, as
to the number of Good, and the Damnage sustained by the Pursuers Cedent, to
vast Sums, exceeding the value of that whole Country; yet the Lords did adhere
to their former Interloquitor, That they would consider, the time of the
advising, the profits of the Goods as in a Spuilie.

It occurred to some of the Lords and was moved, whether Juramentum in litem,
being given to the Party wronged; and upon that account, that the quantities
and the Kinds of Goods, taken from him, could not be so well known to others
and proven; if the same be a personal favor; Or if it may be extended to an
Assigney? Newbyth Reporter.

D. 448. Holmes contra Marshall. 2. February 1677.
THE Lords Found, That a Woman, being provided by her Contract of Marriage, to
a Liferent of the Conquest of Lands, or other Goods that should be acquired
dureing the Marriage: And the question being of Movables, and she having
accepted a Third of the same, she could not return to crave a Liferent of the
other two parts; tho it was Alleged by her, she had not accepted the same in
satisfaction of what she could claim. 2. It was Found, That a Woman, being
provided, as said is, to a Liferent of all the Movables her Husband had the
time he Married her; and which he should acquire during the Marriage; It was in
her Option, either to take her to her Liferent of the whole; or to claim the 3d
part in property; but, making Election, could not vary. Tho this was Found by
plurality, yet some of the Lords were of Opinion, that by the Provision
foresaid she has only a Liferent; and that she had not the said Election; Seeing
eo ipso that she is provided to a Liferent of all, it is intended and agreed,
there should be no Communio bonorum; It being inconsistent, that she should be
both Proprietar and Liferentar usufructu formali, Newbyth Reporter. Gibson
Clerk.

D. 449. (...) contra Tait. 6 February 1677.
THE Lords Found, That a Bond, being granted on Deathbed, with consent of his
Appearand Heir for his Interest; bearing an obligement to pay a Sum of Money;
Is to be considered, not as a Legacy, but as a Bond inter vivos: Seeing, by the
Common Law, all persons are in legitima potestate as to the granting of Bonds;
And our custom, whereby persons on Deathbed are not in in liege poustie, is
qualified with an exception, viz. unless the Heir consent; in whose favors the
same is introduced.

Castlehill Reporter.

D. 450. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Lords Found, That Appearand Heirs may be pursued, as behaving before the
year expire; seeing eo ipso that miscent, adeunt passive: And as to that
pretense, that they would be wronged if it should have appeared by the
probation that they did not meddle; It is of no weight; Seeing the Lords may
modify Expenses.

D. 451. (...) contra (...) 29. February. 1677.
AN Exhibition being pursued at the instance of an Heir of Conquest: And it
being Alleged by the Heir of Line, that some of the Lands, whereof the Writes
were craved to be exhibited, were in Holland; and that by the custom there, the
Eldest Brother did not succeed as Heir of Conquest; but all the Brothers and
Sisters equally; so that the Writes ought not to be delivered to the Pursuer,
who had only an Interest as to the fifth part; whereas the Defender had four
parts, having acquired three from his Brothers and Sisters, and having one
himself; and he having the far greater interest in the Land and Writes, ought
to have the keeping of the same, being Liable to make them forthcoming to the
Pursuer.

The Lords notwithstanding preferred the Elder Brother to the keeping of the
Writes.

In that same Cause, It was Alleged, That, as to the Lands in Scotland, the
Defuncts Right was only by a Comprysing, which was personal, and whereupon no
Infeftment had followed; and which belonged to the Heir of Line, as Tacks and
Reversions: The Lords, nevertheless, Found, that the Heir of Conquest has Right
to the same, conform to a late Decision.

D. 452. Purveyance contra Knight. 8 June 1677.
THE Lords Found, Upon the advising of a concluded Cause, after Debate in
praesentia, in the Case in question, That Liber Rationum, and a Compt-Book of a
Merchant, containing an Article of Debt, due by him to the Pursuer, was a
sufficient Probation: In respect the said Compt-Book was written with the
Merchants own Hand; and he was known to be a person of great Honesty and
Exactness: and the Article was so clear, that the time therein mentioned, he
stated himself to be Debtor in the said Sum, all by gone Annualrents being
paid; and in an other part and Article of the said Book, he did acknowledge,
that he had borrowed the said Sum, and was special as to the time; and there
was a great Confidence and near Relation betwixt him and the Creditor; and
therefore the Lords decided as said is; in respect of the said Circumstances:
but thought it hard, that Compt-Books in Scotland, where there is not that
exactness that is else where, in keeping Books, should have that Faith that is
given to them elsewhere. Mr. Robert Stewart Actor, alteri Cuningham. Mr. John
Hay Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 453. Campbel contra Taite. eod. die.
THE Lybel being referred to the Defenders Oath; and he having declared upon a
general Interrogator, that he was not owing the Sum acclaimed; It was urged,
the time of the advising of the Oath, that the Defender should declare, whether
or not he had gotten a parcel of Lint, and what way he had paid the price of
the same. The Lords Found, That he should not be urged to declare upon that
Interrogator; In respect it was not desired he should be interrogate upon the
same when he did declare; and having denied that he was any ways Debtor, he
would be involved in Perjury, if upon a special Interrogator he should
acknowledge that he was Debtor upon the account therein mentioned. Mr. Thomas
Hay Clerk. Stewart and Swinton Advocats.

D. 454. Patrick contra Anderson. eod. die.
AN Executor, having alleged that the Testament was Exhausted, and for
probation, having produced the Defuncts Bond, with a Discharge from the
Creditor after the Defuncts decease: and it being Found, That the same did not
prove, unless there had been a Sentence produced: It was thereafter Alleged
for the Executor, that seeing he instructed the Debt, and that he had paid the
same bona fide, the same ought to be allowed for his liberation; at least that
the said Debt should come in pari passu with the Pursuers; unless they could
object against the same, as not a true Debt; which was Repelled; in respect no
Legal Diligence had been done for the said Debt.

Some of the Lords were of Opinion, that it should have been allowed to come in
pari passu; In respect the Diligence, used by the Pursuer, in intenting a
Pursuit against the Executor, was only Personal, and did not affect the Goods;
and the Executry being short, and the Goods being to be forthcoming to all
Parties having Interest, any Creditor may compear for his interest, and crave
to have a proportion of the same at any time before Sentence; Otherways a great
Creditor, in alse much as may be equivalent to the Executrie, if he should
pursue the Executor before the other Creditors, they may be all frustrate. Mr.
Thomas Hay Clerk.

D. 455. Blackwood contra Pinkill. 9. June 1677.
A Father having infeft his Grandchild in Fee of his Estate, and his Son
Father to the Fiar, in Liferent; with a Provision, that the Liferent should be
alimentary to him: The Lords, Upon a Debate among themselves, concerning the
said Qualification of the Liferent, were of the Opinion, that the Son being
provided before to some other Lands simply, without the said Quality, the
Creditors of the Son might, by their Diligence, affect the said alimentary
Liferent; except so much of the same as the Lords should think fit to reserve
for a competent Aliment to the Son: but there was not a Decision in the Case.
Mr. John Hay Clerk. Concluded Cause.

D. 456. Captain Binnie contra Gibson. 20 June 1677.
THE Lords Found, That a Party, being pursued as representing his predecessor;
for payment of the Sum due by a Bond; might propone a Defense of Payment;
notwithstanding that he had, before, pursued an Improbation of the said Bond:
In respect the Bond being ancient and not granted by himself, he was in bona
fide to pursue Improbation of the same; and thereafter it appearing to be a
true Bond, he may also allege payment; giving his Oath of Calumny upon the
Defense.

D. 457. Pringle contra Pringle of Torsonce. 21. June 1677.
THE Lord of Torsonce having disponed his Estate to his Eldest Son for Love
and Favor; with a Provision contained in the Disposition, that it should be
lawful to him to burden the said Lands by Wadsets of the same; Or Annualrents
forth thereof, for the Sum of 5000 Merks Redeemable by his Son: And having
thereafter granted a Bond to a Daughter of a second Marriage, of 1000. merks,
who did pursue the Representatives of the Son, for the said Sum, It was
Alleged for the Defender, That he could not be pursued Personally; but if
there were any Ground of an Action, it would be only for a Declarator, that the
Lands are liable to the said Debt. 2. That there could be no Ground of
Declarator, in respect the Disponer had not made use of the said Faculty, nor
granted a Wadset for the said Sum; and that the Defunct had a personal Estate
and Executry; And in swa far as, he had not, conform to the said faculty,
secured the Pursuer out of the said Lands, he had declared his Intention, not
to make use of the said faculty.

The Lords Found, That the Pursuer ought to discuss the Executry, and any other
Estate belonging to the Disponer: and if the said Sum could not be recovered
out of the personal Estate, that he might have recourse against the said Lands;
which was Found by the Lords, upon these considerations, viz. That the Right
made by the Father being for Love and Favor, the said Reservation ought to be
interpret benign, and it was to be considered quid actum; the Fathers
intention being to have a Power, to contract alse much Debt as might amount to
the said Sum; And eo ipso that he did grant the said Bond, he did burden the
said Lands virtually; and in his own time they might have been comprysed for
the said Sum; and therefore may be now affected and comprysed. 2. The Fathers
End being to have power to burden with the said Sum, the modus and way was
insert ex stylo by the writer; that which is mentioned in the Disposition being
the most ordinary, and therefore to be understood demonstrative but not
taxative. 3. Tho some of the Lords were of Opinion, That the Pursuer may
immediately, as other Creditors, have recourse against the Estate; yet it seemed
to be reasonable, that, in this case, the Reservation being in the Terms
foresaid; and the Bond, whereupon the Security was founded, not relating to the
same, the Executry should be first discust: Seeing by the Common Law the
Executry was ever first liable; And tho, by the Lords Practice, Creditors may
pursue either the Heir or Executor, yet there being such a speciality in this
case, and the Defender not representing personally the Grandfather, as Heir, or
otherways by Progress, his Representatives ought to be first discust, and the
said Lands to be liable only in subsidium. Actores Sir George Mckenie, Mr.
Robert Stewart. Alteri Lockheart and Pringle. Gibson Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 458. Malloch contra The Relict of David Boid. 26. June 1677.
A Second Compryser having pursued a Declarator, that the prior Comprysing was
satisfied by Intromission; and the Defender having in the Count and Reckoning
given in an Article of Debursements for prosecuting and defending of Processes
concerning his Right; The Lords Found, That, as to the extinguishing of the
Comprysing upon the account of Intromission, the Expenses in deduceing the
Comprysing and obtaining Infeftment were only to be allowed; but not any other
extrinsick Debursements: But the Comprysing being extinct and satisfied, if
there were any superplus of Mails and Duties, for which the Compryser was to be
comptable, he might retain, of the first end of the same, such as were
profitably expended, not only in Relation to his own, but the Pursuers Right.
Newbyth Reporter.

D. 459. (...) contra (...) eod. die.
THE Defender, in a Spulie, having Alleged that the Goods were his own; and
that, having given them to the Pursuer to be grassed, he might have taken away
his own Goods: It was Replied, That the Pursuer was not obliged to debate the
Right and property of the said Goods; but in spolio, he needed Lybel no more,
but that the Goods were upon his Ground and in his Possession; and taken away
vi and in manner Lybeled: And spoliatus ante omnia restituendus.

The Lords debated among themselves, whether the Defense be Relevant; and did
not decide the case: Some being of Opinion, that if it should evidently appear,
that the Pursuer was not in Possession of the Goods as suos, but in behalf of
the Defender; as if there were a Writ betwixt the Pursuer and Defender,
bearing that the Goods were the Defenders; and that the Pursuer contractu
Locationis and Conductionis had taken the same in graseing; that the Defender
could not be Liable for Spuilie of his own Goods: But if it should appear, that
there was any violence in taking them away, he may be pursued for a Riot.

D. 460. Drumkilbo contra Mcmath and Oliphant. eod. die.
JAnet Mcmath Lady Grange being Creditrix to the Lord of Kilspindie; And
having, upon an Arrestment in the hands of Drumkilbo, obtained a Decree to
make forthcoming; There was thereafter a Suspension of double poinding against
the said Janet Mcmath, and Sir Laurence Oliphant of Gask, who pretended Right
to the Sum due by Drumkilbo, by an Assignation intimate before the Arrestment:
And in the Competition foresaid, the said Sir Laurence was preferred. But
thereafter in an Improbation of the said Assignation, at the instance of the
said Janet Mcmath, the said Sir Laurence having abiden by the same, It was
Found, after a long and litigious dependence by the space of 50 Years, that the
Assignation was false: And William Dick of Grange, the said Janet her Son,
having thereafter intented a pursuit against the said Sir Laurence, to hear and
see it declared, that in respect the said Sir Laurence, by his compearance, and
making use of the said false Assignation, had been prefered; and had rendered
the foresaid Diligence by Arrestment ineffectual; and had transacted and made
benefit of the said false Assignation; That therefore, In swa far as he was
Lucratus he should make the same forthcoming for payment of the Pursuers just
Debt; Especially it being considered, that he had Discharged one of the
Cautioners in Drumkilbo his Bond: It was Answered, That he was in bona fide to
acquire a Right to the said Assignation, neither knowing, nor being accessory
to the Forgeing of the same; and he had made no benefit by uplifting from
Drumkilbo any part of the said Debt; but by transferring his Right in favors
of Mr. John Blair; which he had done bona fide: And as to the Discharging the
Cautioner, it could not prejudge the Pursuer, seeing the Discharge would fall in
consequence of the Assignation.

The Lords Found, That, albeit he were not accessory to the Forgery, yet having
used a false Write, and having litigiously so long maintained the same; and
upon that occasion, the Pursuer be ng altogether frustrate; he ought to be
Liable in quantum lucratus, and what he had gotten more by the Transaction with
Mr. George Blair then he had given for acquireing the said Right: And the Lords
reserved Action to the Pursuer against the Cautioner: And in case the Cautioner
should be Assoilied, without prejudice to have recourse against the said Sir
Laurence as Accords. Actores Lockheart, Monnypenny etc. alteri Cuninghame etc.
Mr. Thomas Hay Clerk. In praesentia.

D. 461. (...) contra The Lord of Cramond. eod. die.
MR. Cornelius Inglis being Debtor to Mr. John Inglis of Cramond in the Sum of
3500. Merks; He did give to Cramond, for Security of the said Sum, and for
relief of Cautionries for him, extending to toward 10000 M. a Bond for payment
and relieving him of the said Sums; with an obligement to Infeft in the Lands
thereinmentioned, for his Security and relief of the said Sums; and a precept
of Sasine whereupon Infeftment followed: And thereafter, Mr. Patrick Inglis,
the said Mr. Cornelius his Eldest Son, did grant a Bond to Cramond, relateing
expressly to the said former Bond and Right of Relief, and in Corroboration
thereof, and the Infeftment thereupon, containing an Obligement for Payment and
releif of the said Sums.

Thereafter the said Mr. Patrick did obtain, from his Father, a Right and
Infeftment of the said Lands, upon that narrative, that he had undertaken the
payment of his Fathers Debts; and that he was engaged for him; and that the
said Right was granted to him for his Relief; whereupon he obtained Possession;
and, before any Diligence, at the instance of any of the other Creditors, he
did pay some Annualrent to Cramond upon a Discharge, relateing to Cramonds
Right and Infeftment foresaid.

Thereafter there being a Multiple poinding raised against Cramond, and some of
the Creditors, who had deduced a Comprysing against the said Mr. Patrick of his
Right; the Creditors Alleged, that they ought to be preferred, because
Cramonds Right was only base, and the said Mr. Patrick's Right was cled with
Possession, before any pretense of Possession in the person of Cramond; and
that they having Comprysed Mr. Patrick's Right are thereupon preferable to
Cramond; Whereunto it was Answered, That Cramonds Right, being a Right of
Relief, could not take Possession ex natura of the Right, until a distress; and
because it was provided by the Right it self, that Cramond should enter to the
Possession in case of distress; and in case he should not be paid of his
Annualrent; which he could not do before Declarator: And that the Lords had
diverse times Found, that Infeftments of Warrandice, whereupon there could be
no Possession before Eviction, should be preferred to posterior Infeftments;
and that Infeftments of Annualrent, being anterior, should be sustained in a
Competition with posterior base Infeftments cled with Possession; Because the
first Term of Payment of the Annualrent was not come, when the posterior
Infeftment came to have Possession; and that the Competition was not betwixt
Cramonds and the Comprysers Infeftment upon the Comprysing, but Mr. Patrick's
own Infeftment; and that Cramonds Infeftment was cled with Possession before
the Compysers Right and Interest, by payment of the Annualrent of the said Sum
due to Cramond himself; as appeared by the Discharge accepted by Mr. Patrick
relating to Cramond his Right and Infeftment foresaid: And that base
Infeftments by the Common Law being valide; And by the Act of Parliament K. Ja.
5th. in anno 1540. It being provided, that for obviating Fraud by granting
private and latent Infeftments, in prejudice of posterior Infeftments that are
public, being either holden of the Superior or by Possession; the said Act of
Parliament cannot be extended to this Case; In Respect Cramonds Right cannot be
said to have been fraudulent and private as to Mr. Patrick; In respect he did
not only know the same, but did ratify and corroborate the said Right as said
is, both before his own Right and after the same; and before the interest of
Creditors, he did in effect ratify and homologate the same, by making payment
conform thereto, as said is.

The Lords, In Respect the case was of moment, as to the Preparative, Ordained
that it should be Debated amongst themselves: And upon the Debate, they decided
these points. 1. That, the said Act of Parliament K. Ja. 5th. being general,
and there being no Exceptions of Infeftments of Relief, the said Act is
comprehensive of the same. 2. Tho the Act of Parliament, anent Registration of
Seasings, does secure Singular Successors, yet the said Act of Parliament K.
Ja. 5th. is not taken away, tho in in some cases, the Lords are apt to favor
prior Infeftments, where there is no presumption of Fraud: And therefore, when
there is any pretense of Possession, as in the case of Infeftments of
Warrandice, they Found that fictione Juris the Possession of the principal
Lands is the possession of the Warrandice. 3. That albeit Mr. Patrick could not
question Cramonds Right for the Reason foresaid, yet the Comprysers, being
Singular Successors, may question the same.

The Lords therefore preferred the Creditors: And yet sustained Cramonds
Infeftment, In swa far as concerns the Sum foresaid due to himself, and not as
to Cautionries; In respect the said Discharge was only of the Annualrent of the
Sum due to himself.

This Decision appears to be hard, upon these Considerations: First, Because
Cramonds Infeftment, tho base, as to the point of Right, by the Common Law is
preferable: And as to the said Statute, it introduces only a praesumptio Juris,
that base Infeftments, not cled with Possession, are presumptively fraudulent:
And the Question, whether Cramonds Infeftment was fraudulent, was to be
considered in relation to Mr. Patrick and his Infeftment, and not to his
Successors: And the said presumption was taken away by Mr. Patrick his Deed
foresaid, having corroborate, as said is, Cramonds Infeftment; which was
verified by a Write Subscribed by Witnesses, and which was was Found to
militate, even against the Creditors, and to cloth Cramonds Infeftment with
Possession. 2. Cramonds Right being Jus individuum, tho upon distinct Grounds,
it could not be fraudulent and private ex part, and ex part public. Actores
Sir John Cuninghame, etc. alteri Lockheart. In praesentia.

D. 462. Mr. John Kincaid contra Gordon of Abergeldie. eod. die.
MR. John Kincaid having pursued Gordon of Abergeldie, as representing his
Father, by Behaving: His Defense was, That he had Right by an expired
Comprysing, whereby his Father was denuded, so that he could not be Heir to
him. But in the same Process, in respect a Reduction and Declarator was
intented at the said Mr. Kincaid's instance, within ten Years after the
appearand Heir had purchased a Right to the said Comprysing; The Lords, tho
there were no Order used, did simul and semel sustain the said Processes: and
appointed Count and Reckoning, and Auditors.

FINIS.
ERRATA in the Decisions.
PAge 4. lin. 15. read rata. p. 9. l. p^nult. Pursuer 1 Person. p. 15. l. 29.
Lord of r. Lord. p. 17. l. 17. after him add but. ibid. l 26. after of add ^.
p 33 l 7. after Goods, add The Reason was found relevant. p. 35. l 21. r.
conclude. p. 37. l. 5. have 1. give. p. 50 l. 9. after we add no. p. 51. l. 38.
most r. more. p. 54. l. 9. after anterior add to the Sons Right. p. 58. l. 35.
after Right add till. p. 65. l. 11. purchase 1. possession p. 73. l. ult. yet
1. so. p. 74. l. 37. after to add an. p. 75 l. 35. D ctor 1. Granter. p. 84. l.
22 after confirmable, add Quots of Testaments confirmed before the Act
restoring Quots to the Bishops. p. 85. l. 18. due r. done. p. ^9. l. 18. after
by. add Writ or. p. 105. l. 11. Donator r. Executor. p. 108. l. 27. ^eu-duties
r. Augmentations. p. 111. l. 43. after Creditor add confirmed before the Act of
Sederunt. p. 17^. l. antep. after flagitanti add ^ecula^e non potuit.

INDEX OF THE Pursuers and Defenders NAMES Mentioned in the foregoing Decisions.
A.
ABercrombie contra Page 19. Abercrombie contra Atcheson and Livington. Page
162. Aberdeen College contra the Town thereof. Page 130, 133. Aberdeen
College contra Page 157. Abernethie contra Forbes, Page 159. Act of Sederunt
anent proponing Alledgances. Page 74. Act of Sederunt anent liberation of
Prisoners. Page 114. Act of Sederunt anent Advocations. Page 126. Advocats
their ^^int Petition. Page 106. Aetskine contra Rynolds. Page 164. Allan contra
Campbel. Page 28. Anderson contra Tarbet. Page 56. Anderson contra Low^s. Page
149, 160. Antrobus contra Anderson. Page 32. Ardblair contra Wilson. Page 214.
Argyle (Earl) contra L Mcdonald. Page 197. Argyle contra Menaughtan Page 203,
213. Armstoun (Lord) contra Murray. Page 153. Auchinleck contra E Menteath.
Page 127. Auchintoul contra Innes. Page 88
B.
BAillie contra Somervel. Page 210. Bairdner contra Collier. Page 142. Balmedie
contra Baillies of Abernethie. Page 54. Balmerinoch contra Tennents of
Northbervick. Page 90. Banchries Parochiners contra their Minister. Page 124.
Barclay contra Arbuthnet. Page 151. Bavilay contra Dalmahoy. Page 210. Bayne
contra Carvie. Page 71. Bernie contra Page 57. Bernie contra Montgomerie. Page
137. Binnie contra Binnie. Page 56. Binnie contra S^ot. Page 115. Binnie contra
Brotherstones. Page 124. Binnie contra Gibson. P. 221. Binnie contra Farquhar.
P. 19. Bishop of Edinburgh his Executors contra the present Bishop. P. 83.
Bishop of Dumblain contra Kinloch. P. 185. Bislet contra Broun. P. 10.
Blackwood contra Pinkill. P. 221. Blair contra Blair. P. 67. Blair contra
Kinloch. P. 151. Blair contra Fouler. P. 182. Blantyre contra Walkingshaw. P.
6. contra Blantyre. P. 14. Bogie contra Executors of the Lady Oxford. P. 73.
Boid contra Story. P. 76. Bonars Relict contra his Representatives. P. 141.
Borthwick (Lord) contra Ker. P. 15. Borthwick (Doctor) contra E. Craufurd. P.
161. Bowie contra Hamilton. P. 18. Broun contra Veatch and Scot. P. 7. Broun
contra Ogilvie. P. 116. Bruce contra Bruce. P. 132. Bryand contra Grhame. P. 6.
Bu^hanan contra Logie. P. 181. Burd contra Reid. P. 118. Burgie (Lady) contra
Strachan. P. 39. Burnet contra Leyes. P. 3. Burnet contra Johnston. P. 9.
Burnet contra Lutgrue. P. 115. Burnet contra McCleilan. P. 117. Burnet contra
Swan. P. 166. Burnet contra Gib. P. 169. Bute (Lady) contra Sheriff thereof. P.
7.
C.
CAmphel contra Tait, P. 220. Carfrae contra Tailiefer, P. 104. Carnegie contra
Durham, P. 200. Carse contra Carse, P. 17. Cassils contra Whiteford, P. 24.
Chalmers contra Ferquharson and Gordon, P. 105. Cheap contra Philp, P. 34.
Cheyne contra Chrystie, P. 19. Cheislie contra Edgar, P. 181. Clerk contra
Stewart, P. 139 Colarnic (Lady) contra Tennents, P. 112. Collector of the
Taxations contra the Parson of Auldhamstocks, P. 49. Colvil contra Feuars of
Culross, P. 28. Commissars of Edinburgh contra the Commissars of Briechen, P.
64. Commissar of St. Andrews contra Watson, P. 209. Craig contra Edgar, P. 85.
contra Lord of Cramond, P. 224. Cranston contra Wilkieson, P. 9. Cranston
contra Ker, P. 113. Cranston contra Broun, P. 86, Craufurd contra Town of
Edinburgh, P. 16. Craufurd contra Gordon, P. 183. Cry contra Findlater, P. 37.
Cruickshanks contra Watt, P. 122. Cuming contra Johnston, P. 16. Cuningham
contra Lees, P. 75. Cuningham contra Maxuel, P. 152. Cuningham contra
Halyburton, P. 212.
D.
DAlling contra Mckenie, P. 153. Dalrymple contra P. 31. Daliel contra P. 47.
Davidson contra Town of Innerness, P. 32. Davidson contra Richardson, P. 49.
Davidson contra Wauchop, P. 188. Dick contra Dick, P. 202. Dick contra
Oliphant, P. 215. Dickison contra Sandilands, P. 5. Donaldson contra Rinnie, P.
217. Douglas contra L. Wamphray, P. 258. Douglas contra Jackson and Grahame, P.
121. Douglass contra Carlyle, etc. P. 132. Drumelier contra E. Tweeddale, P.
191, 215. Drumkilbo contra Mcmath and Oliphant, P. 223. Drummond contra Menies,
P. 92. Drummond Rickarton contra P. 157. Dumfermling E. contra E. Callender, P.
161, 178. Dundass contra Turnbul, and other Creditors of Whitehead of Park, P.
163. Dundee Town contra E. Findlater, P. 59. Dundonald E. contra Glenagies and
the E. Mar, P. 141. Dunmure contra Lutfutt, P. 138. Dunse Presbytrie contra P.
122. Durham contra Durham. P. 195.
E.
EDinburgh Town contra E. Loudoun, P. 101. Edmondstoun contra Preston, P. 103.
Elies contra Keith and Wiseheart, P. 4, 38 Elies contra Wiseheart, P. 10. Elies
contra Hall and others. P. 148.
F.
FAlconer contra E. Kinghorn, P. 6. Ferguson contra More, P. 4. Ferguson contra
P. 69. Findlay contra Little, P. 184. Fyffe contra Daw, P. 39. Forbes contra
Blair, P. 33. Forbes contra Innes, P. 52. Forbes contra Ross, etc. P. 148.
Fordel contra Caribber, P. 211, 213. Fountain contra Maxuel, P. 48. Fraler
contra Hog, P. 173. Fullerton contra Lord of Boyne. P. 116.
G.
GAlbraith contra Lesly, P. 175. Gardner contra Colvil, P. 44. Gibson contra
Fiffe, P. 160. Gibson contra Reynold and Taileor. P. 145. Gilchrist contra
Murray. P. 136. Gilespie contra Auchinleck P. 50. Glasgow (Town) contra P. 58.
Glasgow (Town) contra Greenock. P. 193. Galsgow (College) contra Parochiners
of Jedburgh. P. 195. Glasgow (procurator Fiscal) contra Cowan. P. 216 Glencairn
(Earl) contra Brisbaines. P. 204. 213. Glencorse (Lord) contra his Brethren
and Sisters. P. 53. Glendoning contra E. Nithsdale. P. 102. Gordon contra
Pitsligo. P. 82. Gordon and Ludquharne contra P. 93. and seq. Govan contra
Paip. P. 21. Grahame contra Rome. P. 214. Grants and Row contra Viscount of
Stormount. P. 4. Grant contra Grant P. 126. Grant contra Barclay. P. 158. Grant
contra Lord Bamff. P. 198. Gray contra Gordon. P. 16. Gray contra Forbes and
Lindsay. P. 68. Gray contra Cockburn. P. 129. Grierson contra Lord of Lag. P.
192. Grott contra Sutherland. P. 68.
H.
HAll contra Murray: P. 138. Halcartoun (Lord) contra Robison. P. 144.
Halyburton contra Halyburton. P. 16. Halyburton contra Scott. P. 63. Halyburton
of Innerleiths Petition. P. 145. Hamilton contra Broun. P. 27. Hamilton contra
Smith P. 37. Hamilton contra Symenton. P. 38. Hamilton contra Lord Beilhaven.
P. 49. Hamilton contra Earl of Kinghorne. P. 81. Hamilton contra Maxuel. P.
133. Harper contra Hamilton P. 13. Harroway contra Haitly. P. 31. Hartshaw
contra Hartwoodburn. P. 27. Hattoun (Lord) contra Baterson. P. 66. Hay contra
Litlejohn. P. 28. Hay contra Magistrates of Elgine P. 17. Hay contra Oliphant.
P. 36. Hay contra Drummond. P. 47. Hay contra Jamison and Alexander. P. 108.
Hay contra Gray. P. 125. Hay contra Alexander. P. 162. Heckford contra Ker. P.
129. Hedderwick contra Wauch. P. 10. Hempsfield contra Bannatyne. P. 98.
Henderson contra Henderson. P. 68. Henderson contra P. 40. Hermistoun contra
Lord Sinclar. P. 39. Hermistoun contra Cockburn. P. 69. contra Hepburne. P. 74.
Hilton contra Lady Cheynes P. 165. Hog contra Countess of Home. P. 49. Holmes
contra Marshell. P. 218. Home contra Creditors of Kello P. 26. Home contra
Countess of Murray. P. 35. Homes contra Paterson. P. 50. Home contra Fewars of
Coldinghame. P. 52. Home contra Tailzifer. P. 58. Home and Elphingston contra
Murray. P. 89. Home contra Scot. P. 192. Home contra Steuart. P. 214.
I.
JAffray contra Murray. P. 185. Jaffray contra Lord Wamphray. P. 211. Inglis
contra Boswell. P. 187. Inglis contra Inglis. P. 195. Inglis contra Laurie. P.
211. and Lord Innes contra. P. 57. Innerness (Town) contra Forbes etc. P. 77.
Innes contra Innes. P. 99. Johnstoun contra Cuninghame. P. 35. Johnstoun contra
Erskine. P. 62. Johnstoun contra Cullen. P. 165. Johnstoun contra Orchartoun.
P. Ibid. Johnstoun contra Rome. P. 184. Johnstoun of Wamphry Supplicant. P.
153. Irving contra Carruthers. P. 117. Irving contra Forbes. P. 169. Irving
contra Irving. P. 175. Justice contra Stirling. P. 58. Justice Clerk contra
Lamberton. P. 46.
K.
KEith contra Lundie. P. 39. Keith contra Grahame. P. 60. Kelhead contra Irving
and Borthwick. P. 92. Kennedy contra Hamilton. P. 19. Ker contra Ker. P. 39.
61. 191. 216. Ker contra Ruthven. P. 71. Ker contra Hunter. P. 200. Ker contra
Fleyming. P. 35. Key contra Creditors P. 142. Kilburny contra Cuningham. P. 70.
Kincaid contra Gordon. P. 225. Kinghorn (Earl) contra Lord Udney: P. 53. Kings
Majesty's Letters to the Lords of Session. P. 71. Kinloch contra Rait. P. 91.
Kinnier contra P. 122. Kyle contra Gray. P. 126.
L:
LAmingtoun ontra Raploch. P. 177 Langlands Supplicant. P. 137. Lauderdale
(Earl) contra Vassals of Musselburgh. P. 48. Lauderdale (Earl) contra Lady and
Lord Yester. P. 134. Lepar contra Burnet. P. 5. Lesly contra Bayne. P. 21.
Lesly contra Lesly. P. 25. Lesly contra Fletcher. P. 181. Letter from the Lords
of Session to the King. P. 102. Linlithgowes Freeholders contra their
Commissioners to Parliament. P. 76. Litlejohn contra Mitchel. P. 198.
Livingston contra Garner. P. 137. Lugtoun (Lady) contra Hepburne and
Creichtoun. P. 67. Lumsden contra Summers. P. 30. Luss (Lord) contra Earl of
Nithsdale. P. 100. Lion King at Arms contra P. 13.
M.
Mackbrae contra Mclaine. P. ^7. Mcintoish contra Frazer. P. 100. Mcintoish
contra Mckenie. P. 110. Mckenie contra Fairholm. P. 11. 14. and 23. Mck^ttrick
contra P. 56. Mcleod contra Young. P. 5^ Mcmillan contra Meldrums. P. 128.
Mcne^sh contra Bryce and her Husband. P. 155. Mcquaill contra Mcmillan. P. 15^.
Malloch contra the Relick of David Boid. P. 222. Marshell contra Forest and
his Spouse. P. 160. Marshel contra Holmes. P. 195. contra Martine. P. 118.
Mastertouns Creditors and Relict. P. 154. Maxuel contra Tennents of Duncow. P.
64. Maxuel contra Maxuel. P. 105. contra Maxuel. P. 100. Meldrum contra
Tolquhone. P. 104. Menies contra Burnet. P. 14. 28. contra Miln. P. 21. Miltoun
(Lady) contra Whiteford. P. 64. Minister Moram contra Bairfoot. P. 11. Mitchel
contra Mitchel. P. 30. Mitchel contra Litlejohn P. 174. Mitchelson contra
Mitchelson, P. 204. Monmouth (Duke) and Duchess contra Scot. P. 40. Monmouth
(Duke) contra Earl of Tweeddale. P. 117. Monteith contra E. Callender and
Gloret. P. 22. Mr. Henry Morison, P. 141. Moubray contra Arbuthnet, P. 90.
Mouswel La. contra the Creditors on the Estate, P. 152. Mouswel its Creditors
contra the Lady and her Children, P. 205. Mure contra Law, P. 73. contra
Murehead and Scot, P. 60. Murray contra Tutor of Stormont, P. 71. Murray contra
P. 217.
N.
NAirn contra Scrymgeor, P. 170. Nairn contra Stewart, P. 215. Neilson contra
Arthur, P. 67. Neilson contra P. 170. Nevoy contra L. Balmerinoch, P. 196.
Newburgh (Earl) contta Stewart, P. 15. Nicolson contra Lord of Philorth, P.
50. Nisbet contra Hamilton, P. 157.
O.
OGilvie contra Buckie, P. 164. Oliphant contra Drummond, P. 7. Oliphant contra
P. 112, 143. Oxford Viscount contra Cockburn. P. 210.
P.
PAllat contra Veatch, P. 201. Paplay contra Magistrates of Edinburgh, P. 61.
Park contra Rysly, P. 158. Parkman contra Allan P. 55, 61. Paterson contra
Johnston, P. 187. Paterson contra McKenie, P. 189. Paton contra Stirling of
Ardoch, P. 63, 75, 82. Patrick contra Anderson, P. 220. Perths Sheriff contra
P. 153. Petrie contra Richart, P. 12. Pilton contra Creditors of the Lord
Sinclar, P. 87. Pitmedden contra Seatons, P. 96. Pitrichie (Lord) contra Lord
Geight, P. 181. Pittarro contra E. Northesk, P. 97. Pittarro contra Tennents of
Redmyre, P. 166. Pollock contra Pollock, P. 45, 57. Pringle contra Cranston, P.
4. Pringle contra Pringle, P. 221. Purves contra Blackwood, P. 20. Purveyance
contra Knight. P. 220,
R.
RAe (Master) contra Dumbyth. P. 156. 218. Ramsay contra Carstairs. P. 69.
Ramsay contra Zeaman. P. 168. Rankin contra Skelmorly. P. 47. Rattraw contra P.
125. Reid contra Tailzifer. P. 20 Reid contra Lady Lundy. P. 65 Reynolds contra
Erskines. P. 182 Rig contra Rig. P. 166. Rioch contra P. 49. Rutherford contra
Weddel. P. 193.
S.
SAndilands contra Earl of Hadington. P. 69. Scott contra Murray. P. 127 Scott
contra Kennedy. P. 155 Scott contra Toish P. 191 contra Scot P. 60 Scrimgeor
contra Kingheny P. 111 Shaw contra P. 26. 58 contra Sheill P. 176 Sheill contra
Parochiners. P. 190 Simpson contra Adamson P. 59 Sinclar (Hugh's) Creditors
contra Annandale. P. 71 Sinclair contra Home P. 215 Spence contra Scot P. 184
Spencerfield (Lady) contra Hamilton P. 75 Steill contra Hay P. 9 Stenhouse
(Lord) contra Heretors of Tweedmoor P. 168 Stewart contra Mcduff P. 89 Stewart
contra Riddoch P. 138. 212 Stewart contra Hay P. 186 Stewart contra Whiteford.
P. 207 Strachan contra Morison P. 57
T.
TAcksmen of the Customs contra Greenhead P. 45 Tailfer contra Sandilands P.
214 Tait contra Walker P. 201 contra Tait P. 219 Tarsappies Creditors contra
Kilfaunes P. 70 Tennent, Young etc. contra Sandy P. 200 Thoirs contra Tolquhone
P. 85. 96 Thomson contra Mckittrick P. 10 Thomson contra Stevenson P. 26. 30
Thomson and Halyburton contra Ogilvy and Watson P. 128 Thomson contra Eleis P.
155 Torwoodhead (Lady contra Tennents P. 121 Traquair (Lady) contra Earl of
Wintoun P. 60 Trotters contra Lundy P. 44 Trotter contra Trotter P. 56
Tulliallans Minister contra Colvil and Kincardine P. 108 Tutor to the Lord of
Aitons Daughter Supplicant P. 135
U.
URquhart contra Frazer P. 23 Urquhart contra Cheyne P. 24
V.
VA^se contra Sandilands, P. 147, 151. Vanse his Petition, P. 146. Veatch
contra Duncan, P. 3. Veatch contra Creditors of Ker and Pallat, P. 118, 123,
145, 201. Veatch contra Hamilton, P. 154.
W.
WAllace contra Symson, P. 179. Wallace contra Murray, P. 198. Wamphray Lord,
Supplicant P. 153. Warden contra Berrie, P. 147. Watt contra Halyburton, P. 34.
Watson of Dunykier contra his Vassals, P. 36. Watson contra Law. P. 37. Wauch
contra Jamison, P. 163. Weavers of Edinburgh contra Magistrates thereof P. 29.
Wedderburn contra Scrymgeor P. 9, 14. Weir contra E. Bramford. P. 189. Weymes
contra Bruce, P. 131. Whitehead contra Straiton, P. 43. Wilkie contra P. 13.
Wilson contra Magistrates of Queensferry, P. 51. Wilson contra Deans, P. 155.
Y.
YOung contra Young. P. 29.
Z.
ZInzian contra Kinloch P. 30
An Alphabetical INDEX FOR Finding the Principal Matters handled in my Lord
DIRLETON 'S Collection of Decisions. Where it was thought fit, for better
Orders sake, to prefix to them Numerical Figures, and the Letter d. Which there
and in the following INDEX denotes either Decision or Dispute.
A.
ABBEY should not protect against Captions. decision 127. ABIDING by a Writ.
d. 142. see d. 168. d. 262. d. 265. d. 286. d. 386. d. 403. Abideing by a Bond,
as truly assigned and delivered by the Cedent. d. 11. Abideing by, in
Improbations. d. 291. ABSOLUTE Warrandice of Kirklands, extended to warrant
from the designation of a Gleib; Tho it was Alleged, That ex natura rei, and
not ex defectu Juris the Gleib was evicted; but not to extend to a Supervenient
Law. d. 93. ACTIO TVTELAE. d. 314. ACT before Answer. d. 183. ADJUDICATION. d.
270. d. 305. d. 324. see. d. 45. d. 107. Adjudication of the Earl of Bramfords
Estate. d. 387. ADVISEING of the Cause. see d. 73 If an ADVOCATE, upon a Bill
summarly given in against him, be obliged to deliver up. v. g. Goods entrusted
to him; or if he be only obliged to Answer summarly in Complaints against him,
in Relation to his Office and Trust? d. 290. Advocates, who had withdrawn,
their Petition for Readmission. d. 226. ADVOCATION. d. 261. d. 228. d. 294. d.
396. Advocation of an Edict of Executry. d. 433. Advocation upon a Competition
of double Rights. d. 279. All Advocations, before they be passed, to be
Reported to the whole Lords. d. 260. ALIENATIONS in prejudice of Creditors. d.
287. ALIMENT. d. 165. d. 177. d. 414. d. 455. Aliment and Fee. d. 350. Aliment
craved in the interim, until a Provision falls payable. d. 2. ANN. see d. 194.
d. 379. ANNUALRENT. d. 408. see d. 45. d. 146. d. 154. d. 266. d. 407. An
Annualrenter Comprysing for the principal Sum, may pass from his Comprysing,
and recur to his Infef^ment of Annualrent. d. 83. ANNUITY. see d. 241. Annuity
payable out of the first and readiest Rents, found to be entirely due, tho the
Rents were exhausted with Debts. d. 99. Annuity to a Wife out of Lands, liable
to Public Burdens, d. 143. APPEARAND HEIR. d. 119. see d. 63. d. 95. d. 270.
d. 450. Appearand Heir to a Baron, cannot have a Moveable Heirship, not being
actually Baro. d. 209. ARBITRIVM JVDICIS not allowed to alter a punishment
determined by Law. d. 20. ARRESTMENT. see d. 201. d. 300. Arrestment being on a
Decree, turned thereafter into a Lybel, may be loused. d. 284. Arrestment
cannot be loused upon pretense, that it was laid on after the Decree was
Suspended. d. 263. First Arrestment, tho last Decree of forthcoming (being
sine mora) found preferable. d. 110. Arrestment upon a Dependence. d. 237.
ARTICVLATVS LIBELLVS. see d. 314. ASSIGNATION. see d. 123. Assignation, after
Summonds Execute, not sustained as a Title, albeit the Cedent concurred. d. 46.
Assignation Blank in the Creditors Name. d. 54. Assignation by a Wife to her
Husband by her Contract of Marriage. d. 195. Assignation not intimate in the
Cedents Lifetime. d. 51. An Assignation to Maills an Duties in all time
comeing, obliges the Cedent and his Heirs, to grant a Disposition, whereupon
the Assigney may be Infeft. d. 89. ASTRICTION. d. 293. d. 351. see d. 173.
ATTESTER of a Cautioner acquit, proving that the Cautioner was then Repute
Responsal as to that Debt. d. 121 AVAIL of Marriage. see d. 415.
B.
BACKBONDS. d. 211. see d. 162. Backbond to the Exchequer. see d. 198.
Backbonds by Comprysers.. d. 374. BACKTACK. see d. 57. BAILIF. see d. 131,
BANKRUPTS. d. 94. see d. 198. d. 249. d. 282. d. 287. d. 292. BANNA. see d. 13.
BARON. d. 209. BASE Infeftments. d. 461. A Base Infeftment sustained to a Wife
as public, others being in possession by Redeemable Rights from the Husband,
tho he was not in possession himself. d. 100. BEHAVING as Heir. d, 400. d. 450.
d. 462. BENEFICE. see d. 115. BIDEING be. see Abideing be a Writ. Litera A.
BILLS of Exchange. d. 231. d. 365. see d. 236. BISHOPS. see d. 194. d. 375.
BLANK Writs. d. 334. d. 403. see d. 54. d. 139. BONAE fidei possessor. d. 123.
BOND blank in the Creditors Name. d. 139. A BOND being granted by a Wife and
her Husband with a Clause to Infeft; tho null as to the Obligement to pay the
Sum yet valide as to the Right of her Lands. d. 6. d. 25. A Bond granted by a
Father to a Daughter is revockable, if it be not completed by delivery, or by
Infeftment, if it be Heretable: Or by Assignation intimated, or confirmed
Testament, if it be Moveable. d. 106. Bond of provision. d. 140. see d. 384. A
Bond to a Husband and his Wife, and the longest liver, and the Heirs betwixt
them, and to the Heirs of the longest Liver, Found to make the Husband Fiar. d.
144. A Bond reduced, being Subscribed by one Notar in a matter of Importance.
d. 135 A Bond whereof the Term of payment was long after the Date, and
Annualrent to be paid in the interim, Found Heretable quoad fiscum. d. 39.
Bonds granted on Death bed. d. 402. d. 449. Bonds of provision undelivered, tho
prior in date but posterior in delivery, cannot affect the Fee interveening. d.
129. BONORVM. d. 282. BOOKING of Seasins. see d. 384. BOX of Journeymen. see d.
70. BURGAL Lands. see d. 22, d. 190. A Burges that is not Incola. see d. 430.
BURGHS of Barony. see d. 395. BURGHS Royal. see d. 78. d. 124. d. 190. If
Burghs Royal cannot fine Unfreemen for Tradeing, but only Charge them to
desist. d. 79,
C.
CAPER. see d. 247. CAPTIONS. see d. 127. CAVSA data and non secuta. d, 308.
CAUTIONER. see d. 26. d. 31. d. 50. d. 55. d. 121. d. 122. d. 147. d. 213. If
Cautioners may take Assignation, and burden the Cocautioners with the whole
Debt? d. 212. d. 228. If Cautioners will be liberate, when Magistraters are
Liable loco Rei ex delicto? d. 91. CERTIFICATION in Improbations d. 210. d.
230. Certification in an Improbation, of an Old Comprysing, not sustained. d.
50. Certification pro confesso. see d. 243. Certification in an Improbation
being Extracted, production of the Writ immediately thereafter will not Repone
against the same. d. 80. Certification in an Improbation not granted, where the
Defender produced a more Eminent progress than the Pursuer, until that were
discussed. d. 113. In a CESSIO bonorum, The ordinar Oath runs in their Terms,
That the Bankrupt had made no fraudulent Right, since the subscribing of the
Disposition. d. 292. CHAMBERLANES. see d. 37. CHARGES upon six days benorth
Dee. d. 222. CHILDRENS Provisions. d. 344. d. 373. see d. 418. d. 437.
CIRCUMDUCTION of the Term. d. 307. Circumduction of a Decree Reponed against
as to Personal, but not as to Real Execution. d. 98. CITATION. d. 243. see d.
232. d. 367. Citation of Parties out of the Country. d. 170. CLAUSE cum Curiis
and Bloodwitis. see d. 5. The Clause cum Molendinis and multuris Imports
freedom from Astriction. d. 1. Clause de non alienando. d. 136. Clause in
favors of a Husband and Wife, and their Heirs, makes the Husband Fiar, as
persona dignior. d. 85. Clauses of Conquest. d. 359. Clauses of Conquest, how
to be understood in Contracts of Marriage? d. 9. COALS. see d. 220. Coals
constant and casual Rent, how modified? d. 175. COLLECTORS Fee. see. d. 65.
COLLEGIAT Church. see d. 112. COMMISSARY-Court. see d. 314. Commissaries. see
D. 221. COMMISSION. see d. 207. d. 208. Commission, for taking of a Strangers
Oath in Holland, sustained, tho not subscribed by the Party, being Subscribed
by the Judges there. d. 239. COMMISSIONERS. see d. 188. COMMUNION betwixt
Husband and Wife. d. 136. see d. 302. d. 315. COMMUNITY and Pasture, and
casting Peats and Truff. d. 149. COMPENSATION. d. 191. d. 326. d. 366. see d.
200. d. 211. Compensation a quo tempore to be sustained? d. 309. Compensation
against a Comprysing. d. 362 Compensation when granted against an Assigney upon
a Debt of the Cedent? d. 3. COMPETITION betwixt Assigneys and Arresters. d.
201. Competition betwixt Donator and Creditor, d. 249. Competition betwixt a
Compryser and an Annualrenter. d. 328. Competition betwixt Creditors and
Children. d. 384. Competition of double Rights. see d. 279. Competition of
posterior Creditors, with Creditors by Bonds, without an Onerous Cause. d. 438.
Competition of Heirs and discussing. d. 69. COMPOSITION. see d. 174.
COMPRYSING. d. 235. d. 251. d. 439. d. 458. see d. 24. d. 44. d. 63. d. 83. d.
133. d. 211. d. 230. d. 203. d. 385. d. 362. d. 374. Comprysing of a Wadset, d.
330. Comprysing upon a Charge to enter Heir Null; the person, at whose instance
the charge was, having no Right to the Debt the time of the Charge, but
acquired thereafter. d. 47. Comprysing upon a Heretable Bond, without
Requisition sustained. d. 22. Comprysing does not extinguish a Wadset. d. 134.
Comprysings before the Year 1652. not regulat by the Act Debtor and Creditor.
d. 60 A Compryser upon Debts, anterior to the Debitors Rebellion, being Infeft
before Year and Day, is preferable to the Donator of the Liferent Escheat. d.
178. COMPT-Books of Merchants. d. 452. CONDITION. see d. 18. d. 32. Condition
Resolutive. see d. 397. Conditions copulative. d. 423. Conditions in Contracts
of Marriage, si non sint liberi, etc. d. 364. CONDVCTIO Rei dubiae. see d. 108.
Couductores Vectigalium. Ibidem. CONFESSION presumptive of a person holden as
confessed. d. 217. CONFIDENT persons getting Dispositions from Debitors, may at
the Debitors desire satisfy such Creditors, as they shall think fit. d. 174.
CONFIRMATION necessary in Scotland of goods there, belonging to Strangers
elsewhere. d. 21. CONJUNCT probation of the value of Lands. d. 431. CONQUEST.
see d. 9. d. 359. Conquest found probable by the Debtor, and Witnesses in the
Bond. d. 68. CONSIGNATION in Improbations d. 278. CONSVETVDO Loci. d. 390.
CONTINGENTIA Causae non debet dividi. see d. 288. A CONTRACT Subsequent to a
Wadset, (whereby the Back-tack duties, are accumulated and made a princial
Sum, and that there should be no Redemption, till these were Satisfied) not
regarded, in respect the said Contract was not Registrate, in the Register of
Reversions. d. 27. Contracts of Marriage. see d. 9. d. 123. d. 161. d. 169. d.
172. d. 185. d. 195. d. 364. CORREI debendi. see d. 231. COUNTERBAND Goods. d.
132. d. 153. CREDITORS on the account of Funerals and Druggs. d. 206. When
Creditors do appear in Adjudications not called, they ought to be admitted with
that quality, that the Adjudger shall be in the same case, as to any
Adjudication at their Instance, as if both Adjudgers were within Year and Day.
d. 324. CURATOR. d. 363. d. 435. see d. 88. d. 316. Curator non datur personae,
sed rebus, so that the Minors. person is not in potestate. d. 321. Curators
Subscriveing only to Writs and not the Minors. d. 216.
D.
DAMNAGE by Ruinous Houses sustained; without necessity to say, that the
Defender was required to repair his House. d. 66. DATE. see d. 179. DEATHBED.
Vide in Lecto. Litera L. DEBTOR non praesumitur donare how to be interpret? d.
333. DEBITVM Fundi. d. 274. d. 372. DECIMAE inclusae not Liable to the
Augmentation of Ministers Stipends. d. 229. DEEDS in Lecto. see in Lecto Lit.
L. DECLARATOR of, Redemption. d. 276. A Declarator, that Childrens Provisions,
being granted after Contracting of the Debt, should be Liable to the Creditors
and their Diligence, sustained without Reduction. d. 344. Declarator general of
Non-entry being intented, the hail Duties are due. d. 28. Declarator of the
Nullity of a Minute. d. 118. DECLINATOR of Judges. d. 303. DECREE see d. 98.
d. 203. A Decree against a person holden as confessed craved to be declared
Null. d. 232 Decreets in foro. d. 361. see d. 225. d. 370. Decreets of Inferior
Judges. see d. 445. DEFENSE after Litiscontestation. d. 246. In DELICTS by
Spuilie and wrongous Intromission Decreets against persons are construed to be
in solidum. d. 247. DELIVERY of Writts. d. 150. d. 272. d. 442. see d. 106. d.
129. Dementia. See d. 76. DENOUNCIATION of Lands. see d. 328. DEPENDENCE. see
d. 36. DEPOSITIONS of Witnesses in one Process craved to be repeated in
another. d. 219. Depositions of Witnesses to ly in Retentis. d. 236.
DESIGNATION of Lands for a Gleib, and relief thereof, conform to the Act of
Parliament from the rest of the Heritors, but Annualrent found not due from the
time of the Designation. d. 352. DISCHARGES granted by a Master to Tennents
without Witnesses. d. 189. A DISPONER may qualify his Right, and in special if
the person be a Pupil; that such as are named in the Disposition, should
Administrate. d. 316. A Disposition made after Inhibition, but before the
Registration of the same, may be reduced ex capite Inhibitionis. d. 254.
DISCUSSING of Heirs. see d. 69. DONATIO inter virum and Vxorem. d. 204. d. 426.
d. 362. DONATOR. see d. 14. d. 249. d. 389. d. 411. A Donator of ultimus
Haeres: d. 38. The Donator, a quo tempore has he Right to the full Rents? d.
273.
E
EDICT of Executry. d. 433. EJECTION sustained at the Masters instance, tho the
Tennent did not concur, but not quoad omnes effectus. d. 19. Ejection
sustained at the Wifes instance, where the Husband is absent. d. 105. ERROR and
mistake. d. 338. ESCAPE of Prisoners. d. 299. d. 301. d. 306. ESCHEAT. see d.
14. d. 59. d. 75. d. 162. d. 205. d. 331. d. 409. d. 411. Escheat passes cum
sua causa. d. 177. EXAMINATION of Witnesses in an Improbation. d. 42. EXCEPTIO
Falsi proponed peremptory d. 126. Exceptions quo casu they affirm the Lybel.
see d. 199. d. 223. EXCHANGE. see d. 231. EXECUTOR. d. 62. d. 182. d. 454 d.
412. see d. 181. d. 187. d. 205. d. 224. An Executor has not an absolute
property in the Goods confirmed, but only qualified and for Administration. d.
302. Executor Creditor. see d. 389. Executor Creditor Liable to do Diligence.
d. 35. Executors giving Oath upon the Inventar. d. 97. EXERCITORES navis Liable
in solidum. d. 166. EXHIBITION sustained of Writts intrometted with by the
Defender, albeit not proven, that he had them at or since the intenting of the
Cause, he having meddled with them in the Charterchest, whereby fraud is
presumed. d. 114. Exhibition ad deliberandum. d. 49. d. 258. EXPENSES. see d.
281. d. 458. Expenses of Executors upon pursueing of Processes do affect
Legators. d. 181. Anent EXTRACTING of Decreets; and when res est integra as to
the proponing of New Defenses. d. 203.
F.
FACULTY reserved in a Disposition to burden with a Sum. d. 457. Faculty
reserved out of the Right of Fee, to burden the same with a Sum of Money. d.
418. Causa FALSI. see d. 196. d. 385. FEES of Commissioners to the Parliament.
d. 188. FEUARS. see d. 190. FEU-DUTY. see d. 92. d. 229. FIAR. see d, 95, d,
136, d, 144, d, 213 d, 350, d, 418. FINES. see d, 311. FRAUDULENT Rights. d.
48. d. 156. Fraudulent Rights contrare to the Act of Parliament 1621. d. 198.
FUNERALS. see d. 206. FORTHCOMING. see d. 110. Forthcoming, in effect
Execution, and equivalent to a poinding. d. 53.
G.
GESTIO pro haerede. d. 151. see d. 119. Gestio pro haerede, by Intromission
with Rents not sustained, where there is a Title. d. 67. Gestio pro Haerede
elided by the Behavers having got a Gift of the Defuncts Escheat ante motam
litem. d. 331. Gestio pro Haerede inferred by the Appearand Heirs consent to
expired Comprysings. d. 63. GIFT of Ward, in favors of the Vassal himself,
accresces to the Subvassal. d. 392 Gifts of Escheat. d, 409, see d, 187, d,
224. d, 249. Gifts of Escheat and Backbonds d, 162 Gifts of Escheat when
presumed simulate. d, 411. GLEIB. see d, 93. d, 352. GOODS Disponed stante
rebellione fall under Escheat. d. 75. GOVERNORS going Abroad with Youngmen,
their case as to their Intromission. d. 421. GRANA crescentia. see d, 293.
GRASS due to Ministers. d, 256.
H.
HABIT of Bankrupts. d. 282. HEIR. see d, 69, d, 85, d, 169, d, 172, d. 214, d,
353, d, 400, d, 416 d, 450. Heir of Line. see d, 107, d, 295. If an Heir of
Provision may be pursued where the Heir of Line has renounced, but not yet
discussed by Adjudication. d, 107. Heirs of Conquest see d, 295. Heirship
Movable see d, 151, d, 209. HERITABLE. see d. 39. Heritable Bonds decided to
belong, not to the Heirs of Line, but of Conquest. d. 295. HOMOLOGATION. see d.
27. HORNING. d, 253, d. 422. see d. 59, d, 222. d. 406. HUSBAND. see d, 85, d,
100, d, 105 d, 125, d, 144. d. 182, d, 315, d, 319. d, 336. Husband and Wife;
and how far her Oath will oblige him? d. 71. A Husband conveened for his Wifes
Debt. d. 332. A Husband taking burden for his Wife. d. 257. A Husband Liable
for the Wifes Debt in quantum lucratus; But an ordinary Tocher being ad
sustinenda Onera Matrimonii is not Lucrum. d. 10. HYPOTHEQUE. see d. 420.
I
IACTVS Retis. see d. 220 IMPENSAE necessariae not allowed to a Compryser, in a
Declarator that he was satisfied by Intromission. d. 133. IMPROBATION. d. 168.
d. 196. d. d. 230. d. 339. d. 262. d. 286. d. 385. d. 386. d. 456. see d. 42.
d. 50. d. 80. d. 113. d. 145. d. 163. d. 210. d. 265, d. 278. d. 291. d. 403.
In an Improbation; an Extract out of the Books of an Inferior Court, does not
satisfy the production. d. 285. Improbation of Executions before Inferior
Judges. d. 444. Improbation of poinding will not elide Spuile, being proponed
at advising of the Cause. d. 73. INCORPORATION, see d. 152. INFEFTMENT. see d.
100. d. 160. d. 399. INFEFTMENT of Annualrent. see d. 83. Infeftment of
Annualrent and personal action thereupon. d. 407. Infeftment of Annualrent made
public, by a poinding of the Ground. d. 341. Infeftment of Warrandice base, to
be holden of the Granter, preferable to a public Infeftment of property
granted thereafter holden of the Superior, and cled with possession diverse
Years; and the possession of the principal Lands is interpreted the possession
of the Warrandice Lands. d. 15. INFERIOR Judges. see d. 279. d. 294. d. 406. d.
444. INHIBITION, d. 213. d. 254. d. 413. Inhibition against a Wise. d. 264.
Inhibition at the Instance of the Heir of a Marriage. d. 214. Inhibition upon a
Dependence. d. 36. Inhibition upon an obligement to Warrant. d. 116. d. 117.
Inhibitions do not affect Renounciations; so that the Debtor in a Wadset may
pay his Debt and take a Renounciation, tho the Creditor Granter be inhibited d.
96. INNOVATION. d. 240. INSTITORIA Actio. see d. 319. INSTRUMENT of Requisition
must be perfected, and cannot be supplied by an unsubscribed minute after the
Notars decease. d. 102. INSTRVMENT Bellica see d. 132. Instrumenta quae in
quibusdam sapiunt naturam Testamenti, and in alijs naturam actus inter vivos,
cui Juri ascribenda sunt? d. 103. Instrumentum penes debitorem repertum. see d.
428, INTERDICTION. d. 381. d. 382. see d. 29. d. 34. INTERRUPTION. d. 216.
INTROMISSION. d. 221. d. 224. see d. 67. d. 133. d. 137. d. 187. d. 199. d.
223. d. 205. d. 404. INVENTAR. see d. 97. IOURNEY-MENS keeping of a Box. d. 70.
JUDGES. see Declinator. JVRAMENTVM in Litem. see d. 322. d. 447. JURISDICTION.
see d. 279. Jurisdiction of a Bailif of Regality. d. 131. JVS Mariti. see d.
123. Jus praesentationis. see d. 112. Jus Relictae. d. 315. Jus superveniens.
d. 128. Jus tacitae Hypothecae how far competent to the Master of the Ground?
d. 329.
K.
KEEPING of Writs. d. 451. Keeping of Writs of Lands, where there is a joint
interest, allowed to him who offers Caution to the other portioners. d. 227.
KINGS Decree arbitrall. see d. 229. KIRK. see d. 112. Kirk-Lands. see d. 93.
L.
In LECTO d. 443. see d. 40. d. 157. d. 186. d. 193. d. 353. d, 402. d. 449. A
LEGACY, left upon condition, subsists, tho the Condition did not exist, when
there is praesumptio voluntatis Testatoris. d. 18. d. 32. LEGATORS. d. 378. see
d. 181. d. 402. LEGATVM of a Heretable Sum. d. 197. LETTERS of Horning upon the
decreets of Inferior Judges. d. 406. LIFERENT. see d. 9. d. 33. Liferent
Escheat. see d. 198. A LIFERENTER of the whole must entertain the Fiar, tho
only appearand Heir, the time of the entertainment. d. 95. LITISCONTESTATION.
see d. 74. d. 119. d. 246. LOCVS poenitentiae. d. 192. LOOSEING of Arrestment.
d. 300. LORD of the Outter house adviseing probation. d. 445. Lords of Session.
see d. 180. see, Trial. Lords of Session their Letter to the King. d. 218. The
LION sustained Judge Competent in an Action against a Messengers Cautioner for
damnage and interest. d. 30.
M.
MAGISTRATES of Burghs. see d. 91. Magistrates of Burghs are not obliged to
officiate longer than one year. d. 124. Magistrates taking Assignation to a
debt, for which they were liable subsidiarie, do come in place of the
principal, and the Cautioner is liberate. d. 147. Magistrates liable for the
Negligence of their predecessors; an Incorporation being persona quae non
moritur. d. 152. MANDATVM excedens how far Liable. d. 259. MARRIAGE. d. 415.
see d. 202. d. 327. MASTER of the Ground. see d. 329. MENSAL Kirk. see d. 325.
MERCES. see d. 220. MERCHANTS. see d. 452. A Merchant's current account does
not prescribe. d. 318. MESSENGER. see d. 235. METVS. see d. 419. A MILN-DAMN
cannot be drawn from one side of a Burn to another, without consent of the
Heritor having Lands on the other side, or a Servitude. d. 87. MINISTER. see d.
25. d. 112. d. 229. d. 256. Ministers Stipend. d. 398. MINOR. see d. 61. d. 72.
d. 88. d. 216. d. 321. Minor non tenetur placitare competent against
Declarators of Right, but not when the Minor is pursued in a Molestation, where
a pursuer is in possession. d. 64. A Minor Cautioner for his Father in a Bond,
Null. d. 26. d. 31. d. 55. MINORITY excluded, It being offered to be proven,
that the Minor was then a Traffiqueing Merchant. d. 360. Minority and Lesion.
d. 369. MODIFICATION of Expenses. d. 281. Clause cum MOLENDINIS and Multuris.
see d. 1. MOLESTATION. see d. 64. MOOR. see d. 86. MORTIFICATION. d. 379.
Mortification for a Library Keeper to the College of Aberdeen. d. 269. d. 27.
MOVEABLE Bond. d. 424. Moveable Heirship. see d. 209. Moveable Sums. see d.
342. Movables Disponed to a Wife with the burden of the Debts, and that they
shall be affected with the same, yet the Property thereof is settled in the
person of the Wife. d. 320. MUIR. see Moor. MULTURES. see d. 58. d. 293.
N.
NAVTAE, Caupones etc. If it takes place in the case of a Horse stolen out of
the Park, it being told the Pursuer, that the Keeper would not be Answerable?
d. 104. NEAREST of Kin. see d. 389. NEGOTIORVM Gestor. d. 357. NON Creditur
Referenti nisi constet de Relato, how to be understood? d. 347. NON ENTRY. see
d. 28. d. 273. NON Memini. d. 245. NOTAR. see d. 102. d. 135. NOTARS
Subscription in subsidium wanting the solemnity de mandato, if Null? d. 81.
NOVATION. see d. 240.
O.
OATH. d. 453. see d. 97. d. 101. d. 225. d. 239. d. 245. d. 280. Oath of a
Tutrix after she was clothed with a Husband. d. 336. OBJECTION aga nst a Right
of Annualrent, not competent to hinder a Decree of Adjudication thereupon, but
reserved to the poinding of the Ground. d. 45. OFFER of Victual payable betwixt
Zuil and Candlemass. d. 267. ORDER of Redemption. see d. 251.
P.
PARLIAMENT. see d. 188. A PARTY holden as confessed being out of the Country
upon a citation at the Market Cross of Edinburgh. d. 367. PARTIES having
Interest not called. d. 244. If Parties may be Reponed against a Decree in
foro. d. 370. PARTNERS and socii Liable in solidum conjunctly and severally. d.
8. The PASSIVE Title of Intrometter, not sustained after the Intrometters
decease to make Liable as Universal Intrometter but in quantum locupletatus. d.
404. The Passive Titles are not acknowledged by a Defense in Jure; Otherways,
if the Defense be founded upon a Right in the person of the Predecessor. d.
199. d. 223. PASTURE see d. 149. PATRON. see d. 25. PAVLIANA actio. see d. 287.
PAYMENT of Feu-duties probable prout de Jure. d. 92. PERSONAL Faculty. see d.
364. PIRATES see d. 357. Locus POENITENTIAE. see d. 192. POINDING. see d. 73.
Poinding of the Ground. see d. 338. d. 341. d. 146. Poinding to be begun before
setting of the Sun, and completed before Daylight be gone. d. 250.
POSSESSION. see d. 161. Possession of a part validates an Infeftment of
Annualrent in solidum. d. 154. POSSESSORY Judgment. d. 393. A Possessory
Judgment only competent by virtue of a Real Right. d. 155. PREBEND. see d.
112. d. 440. Receiving PRECEPTS upon Chamberlands (for the Creditors farther
security) do not oblige them to the formalities of protesting, presenting etc.
d. 37. PRESCRIPTION. d. 196. d. 271 d. 318. d. 322. Prescription, as to a
Cautioner, elided by payment of Annualrent by the principal d. 112.
Prescription of Annualrent, if stopped by a Decree of poinding the Ground
against the Tennents, the Heretor not being called? d. 146. Prescription of
Horning, as to Escheat, interrupted by the Kings Minority, and the late
Usurpation. d. 59. PRESENTATION to a prebendary with a Substitution. d. 440.
PRESUMPTIONS for taking away of a Bond. d. 215. PRISONERS, see d. 299.
Prisoners for small Debts, viz. not exceeding 200 Merks, may be enlarged with
the Parties consent, without Relaxation. d. 238. If Prisoners for a Debt may be
allowed by permission from the Lords to go out in the Day time with a Keeper?
d. 298. PRIVILEGED Debts. see d. 206 PRIZE. d. 207. d. 208. see d. 132. d.
247. In a Prize, Found, that the Owners may be heard to Reduce the Sentence
upon Reasons omitted by the Skipper. d. 120. PROBATION. d. 410. Probation by
Witnesses. d. 427. d. 428. d. 432. see d. 419. Probation prout de Jure. d. 158.
d. 160. PROCLAMATION remitting Fines, due upon the contraveening of penal
Statutes. d. 311. PRODUCTION in an Improbation see d. 285. PROGRESS of Writts.
d. 356. PROMISE see d. 192. Promise not probable by Witnesses. d. 317 PROPER
Wadsets. d. 268. PROTECTIONS are understood to be allowed, only in the case
when persons are obliged to appear personally to be Witnesses; or to give their
Oaths before the Session, Exchequer, etc. and cannot appear by procurators. d.
313. PROVING the Tenor of a Comprising d. 283. Proving the Tenor not sustained,
without a sufficient Adminicle in Writ. d. 77. PROVESTS of Burghs Royal not
Liable subsidiarie, albeit, being charged, they go not personally to apprehend
Rebels, having sent their Officers. d. 78. PROVISION in a Contract of Marriage
in favors of Heirs Female, d. 169 d. 172. Provision to a Wife in Lecto
restricted to a Terce. d. 141. Provisions of Children. d. 373. d. 437. see d.
344. d. 418. PVBLICATIO Testimoniorum allowed in no case, but Improbations ex
quaestione falsi. d. 163. Public Burdens. see d. 143. Public Infeftments. d.
399. PUPIL. see d. 90. d. 242. d. 316. A Pupil charged to enter Heir. d. 446.
Q.
QUALIFIED Oath. d. 225. d. 280 d. 294. A QUALITY in an Oath super facto alieno
resolves in an Exception, and must be proven. d. 101. QUOTS of Testaments. see
d. 375. Quots of Testaments not confirmed in the Bishops Lifetime fall not
under the Bishops Executry or Ann. d. 194.
R.
RATIFICATION of a Bond granted by a Wife stante Matrimonio does not bind her,
being of a Deed Null in Law. d. 371. REAL RIGHT. see d. 155. REAL Clause. see
d. 41. REBEL see d. 411. A Rebel being allowed by the Donator to continue in
possession for five years, or thereabout, The Gift of Escheat presumed
simulate. d. 14. REDEEMABLE Rights. see d. 100 REDEMPTION. see d. 251. d. 276.
d. 358. REDUCTION. see d. 7. d. 72. d. 237. Reduction and Production therein.
d. 111 Reduction at the instance of a Creditor of a Reversion, granted not to
the Debtor himself, but to his Heirs allenarly. d. 417. Reduction ex capite
metus. d. 419. Reduction ex capite Minoritatis. d. 61. Reduction ex capite
Minoritatis sustained of a Bond granted with consent of Curators, albeit the
Money was delivered to them, seeing it was not converted to the Minors use. d.
88. Reduction ob non solutum Canonem. d. 401. Reduction of an Interdiction. d.
34. Reduction of an Interdiction, the person being rei suae providus. d. 29.
Reduction, of an usurary Bond or Contract, must be with concourse of the Kings
Advocate. d. 56. In a Reduction of a Testament ex capite dementiae, the pursuer
ordained to condescend on qualifications inferring it. d. 76. REGALITY. see d.
131. REGISTRATION of Sasines of Burgal Lands. see d. 22. RELICT. d. 448. A
Relict not kenned to her Terce, cannot stop a Removing. d. 234. A Relict
provided to a Liferent of all Goods belonging to her Husband, ought to sell
such Goods as may perish, and make the Sum arising therefrom forthcoming after
her decease. d. 32. A Relicts Liferent burdened with a Sum of Money, borrowed
by the Husband for making the purchase of the said Right, viz. as to the
Annualrents of the said Debt dureing the Relicts Lifetime. d. 9. RELIEF. see d.
82. d. 212. d. 228. Relief de Jure inest, where persons are obliged conjunctly
and severally as principal Debitors. d. 4. REMOVEING. see d. 234. RENOUNCIATION
not allowed from one, who had granted Bond, that the Estate might be adjudged.
d. 380. Renounciations. see d. 96. d. 119. d. 270 d. 276. RENTS. see d. 99.
REPLY of Majority Found probable by the Pursuer only, and a Conjunct Probation
denied. d. 349. REPROBATORS. d. 383. Reprobators, upon probation of Corruption
probable prout de Jure after Sentence. d. 160. REQUISITION. d. 425. see d. 22
d. 102. RES inter alios acta. see d. 219. Res Litigiosa. see d. 370.
RESERVATION of a power to burden Heirs etiam in Lecto. d. 353. RESOLUTIVE
Condition. d. 397. RESTRAINT. see d. 299. RETENTION. d. 241. In RETENTIS. see
d. 74. REVERSION. see d. 27. d. 276. d. 417. If Reversions, limited to a time,
do prescrive against Wives cled with Husband? d. 297. ROYAL Burghs and Burghs
of Barony their Liberties. d. 395. RUINOUS Houses. see d. 66.
S.
SASINE. see d. 22. d. 345. Sasine by a Husband to his Wife propriis manibus.
d. 125. A Sasine within Burgh not booked. d. 348. SERVICE of Heirs. d. 416. see
d. 323. SERVITUDE see d. 87. d. 312. A Servitude, of a Divot in a Moor, found
not to hinder an Heritor to Labor and improve the same, there being so much
thereof set apart as would satisfy the end of the Servitude. d. 86.
SESSION-Books do not prove the Age of a Party, to infer Reduction ex capite
Minoritatis. d. 72. SINGLE avail of Marriage. d. 202. SOCII. see d. 8. SOLENNES
Induciae. see d. 167. In SOLVTVM data. d. 200. A SONE subscribing as Witness to
the Fathers Provision, of the rest of the Children on Deathbed, hinders
Reduction ex capite lecti. d. 40. A SPECIAL service in an Annualrent does give
Right to Heretable Bonds, and all other Heretable Estate whereupon Infeftment
did not follow. d. 323. Post SPONSALIA and Banna, a Woman not sui Juris, and
can do no deed in prejudice of her self, or of her future Husband, without his
consent. d. 13. If SPONSIONES ludicrae, anent Marrying, ought to be allowed? d.
327. SPULZIE. d. 447. d. 459. see d. 322. Spulie being restricted to wrongous
Intromission, the Defenders are not liable in solidum but conjunctly. d. 137.
STENTS imposed by Burghs upon their Fevers. d. 190. STIPENDS. see d. 229. d.
325. d. 398. STRANGERS. see d. 21. d. 239. SUBSCRIPTION in subsidium. see d.
81. SUBSIDIARY Action against the user of false Writs. d, 460. SUBSTITUTION.
see d. 213. A SUBVASSAL, being Infeft by a Baron cum curi^s and Bloodwitis, may
hold Courts and unlaw for Blood. d. 5. Subvassals, being in possession, ought
to be called in an Improbation against the Vassal their Author. d. 145. If a
SUCCESSOR in a Benefice be Liable for his Predecessors Taxation? d. 115.
Successor Titulo Lucrativo. d. 130. d. 184 d. 377. A SUM, expressly provided by
a Clause in a Disposition and Infeftment, to be paid by the Receiver of the
Disposition, otherwise his Right to be void, such a Clause found Real. d. 41.
Sums may be Moveable, tho secured by Heretable Rights. d. 342. SUPERVENIENT
Title. d. 389. SUSPECT Tutor. see d. 90.
T.
TACIT Hypotheque. d. 420 TACK. see d. 145. Tack of Teinds. d. 289. A Tack,
not cled with possession and conferred in tempus indebitum. d. 346. A Tack
razed in the date. d. 179. A Tack, set by a Minister for more than three years
without consent of the Patron, how sustained? d. 25. Tacks after Redemption. d,
358. Tacks; and in what case remittitur Merces? d, 220. TACKSMEN of Lands
within Burgh. d, 429. TAILZIES. d, 257, d, 266. TAVERNERS are presumed to Count
Weekly with their Masters. d, 340. TAXATION. see d, 115, d, 241. Taxation not
augmented upon the account of the Collectors Charges. d, 65. TEINDS. d, 148, d,
355. see d, 289, d, 388. Teinds belong to the Minister Jure Repraesentationis,
albeit the Kirk be a Member of a Collegiate Church, and the Minister not
prebend. d, 112. TENENDAS. see d, 149. TENNENTS. see d, 189. TENOR and proving
thereof. see d, 77, d, 185, d, 304. If the Tenor of Comprysings may be prouen?
d, 24. TENTVS and reputatus. see d, 381, d, 382. TERCE, d, 141, d, 234.
TESTAMENT. see d, 76, d, 103, d, 375, d, 159, d, 194, d, 197. Testament
sufficiently executed by a Decree, tho no payment be made thereupon. d, 49.
TESTIMONIES of Witnesses. see d, 361. TESTIS Domesticus. d, 390. In Testium
conflictu major pars praevalet. d, 109. THIRLAGE. d, 312, see d, 293 d, 351.
Thirlage constitute by reservation of Multures, as to these who consent to the
reservation, albeit no preceding Thirlage. d, 58. TRANSFERRENE. d, 52, d, 337.
Transferring in a Reduction. d, 7. TRIAL at the Admission of the Lords of
Session. d, 180. TRUST. see d, 186, d, 193. TRUSTEES. see d, 174. Trustees when
they denude are to be relieved of all hazard, upon account of the Trust. d, 43.
TVTELAE Actio. see d. 314. TUTOR and Pupil. d. 242. d. 376. see d. 336. A Tutor
being pursued to remove as suspect, there being Debts betwixt him and the
Pupil, another friend appointed by the Lords to be joined to him. d. 90. A
Tutor craving by a Bill, that he might set his Pupils Lands for lesser Duties,
refused. d. 277. Tutors Liable only for the time they accept and not after they
knew they were named. d. 233.
V.
VACANT Stipends. d. 325. Non VALENS agere. see d. 297. VASSAL. see d. 145.
VASTATION by War, Found to give Conductores Vectigalium a proportional
abatement; albeit it be Conductio rei dubiae. d. 108. VICCARAGE. d. 388. see d.
148. VICTUAL. see d. 267. VICIOUS Intromission. d. 187. d. 205. d. 354.
U.
ULTIMUS Haeres. see d. 38. UNFREEMEN. see d. 79. USURARY Bond. see d. 56.
W.
WADSET. d. 436. see d. 27. d. 96. d. 134. d. 268. d. 330. d. 439. A Wadset
bearing only for security, and until the Wadsetter should be satisfied by
Intromission, Found to be an improper Wadset, tho without a Backtack. d. 57,
WADSETTERS must count for the excrescence of the duties. d. 176. WAIRD Lands
being disponed by a Father, with obligement for two Infeftments; The Son must
complete the said Right by Entreing and Infefting the Party, Reserving to him
Action for Relief of his Ward and Marriage as accords. d. 82. WARRANDICE. see.
d, 15. d. 93. WARRANDICE from Astriction. d: 173. The WARRANDICE of a
Disposition of a Comprising, found in dubio to warrant the Validity of the
Compryseing and the Reality of the Debt; but not to refound the price in case
of Eviction. d. 44. WARRANDICE of Lands is absolute, unless expressly limited:
But Warrandice in Assignations of Bonds is only debitorem esse, but non esse
locupletem. d. 248. WEARING the Habit. d. 252. WIFE. see. d. 6. d, 10. d. 71.
d. 85. d. 100. d. 105. d. 125, d. 141. d. 143. d. 144. d. 182. d. 204. d. 257.
d. 264. d. 297. d. 315. d. 332. d. 353. d. 371. A Wife consenting to a
Disposition of Lands made by her Husband; is not hindered to evict the same, she
acquireing thereafter a Right from another Person. d. 128. A Wife having a
peculium settled upon her exclusive of her Husbands Intrest therein, found
liable for a Bond granted by her. d. 164. The Wife is praeposita negotiis
domesticis for Provision of the House. d, 310, A Wife Trafiqueing as a
Merchand, the Husband is liable for Debts Contracted by her on the account of
that Trafique, action Institoria. d. 319. A WIFES obligement stante
matrimonio. d. 84. Wives and conjunct persons ought to abide by Writs
Simpliciter. d. 265. Wives Infeftments upon their Contracts of Marriage
sustained albeit Base, in respect of the Husbands possession. d. 161.
WITNESSES. d. 441. see d. 42. d. 109. d. 219. d. 236. d. 317. d. 383. d. 419.
d. 427. d. 428. d. 432. Witnesses before Answer. d. 171. Witnesses depositions
how received before Litiscontestation to ly in Retentis? d. 74. Witnesses in a
Bond not being designed, It Is allowed to the person to design them; one of the
Witnesses being yet on life. d. 12. WRITERS name may be condescended upon after
the Writer and Witnesses are Dead: And in what case and Terms? d. 343. Writers
to the Signet discharged to alter the solennes Jnduciae in Bills and Summonds,
except in such as are privileged by the Law. d. 167.
FINIS.

