A SERMON Preached before the KING AT NEW MARKET October 8. 1671.

By the Honorable JOHN NORTH Fellow of Jesus College in Cambridge.

Printed by his Majesty's special Command.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, 1671. And are to
be sold by Edw. Story Bookseller in Cambridge.

Psalm the 1. verse the 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel
of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of
the scornful.
WE need not wonder that vice should engross a great parcel of the world, if we
consider that we are all endowed with a freedom of will, which may easily be
perverted by the flattering enjoyment that an unlawful action does present. It
has been already, and will always be the constant humor of every Generation
that passes, to complain of its own Times as the latter Days, as the dregs of
an Iron Age which by a vast disproportion has outlasted the other three of a
purer metal. But the more deplorable things are, the higher care we should
employ to keep our selves unspotted from the general stain; that we may neither
be allured by pleasure, nor invited by an evil and numerous example; which as
it is ever dangerous, so chiefly, when men are not content to be wicked, unless
they offer to justify it too. Heretofore, though they engaged in courses full
as bad, yet they did not throw off all sense of Religion: they retained still
their esteem of goodness, confessed their infirmity, and sometimes intermingled
fits of a severe Repentance; so that it might admit of a favorable
construction, to proceed rather from a strong and unreclaimed temper then a
deliberate intent. But now many abroad embrace Immorality as a profession;
transact it in the face of the world without the least remorse; study the
highest provocation; boast of their horrid attempts; proclaim as a matter of
Glory, to what a stress of impiety, to what a Violence of sin, their mind does
submit and their body will endure. It Is their Counsel, as the Psalmist calls
it, that which they pursue upon the maturest thoughts: It Is their way, the path
they are resolved to tread. Nor are they looser in their lives then in their
Principles and Discourse. They would hide a naughty practice by the
unsettledness of their mind: They would vanquish fear altogether, that it might
not steal in upon them, when their head is heavy or their spirits are
exhausted: And so, they seat themselves in the Chair of the scornful: turn
Religion into a jest: play with sacred things: use the inspired Volume as a
Topic, from whence they raise their unsavory wit: They brandish some pitiful
objections against Religion, which have been confuted a thousand times: they
list themselves under some Champion or other, who has been reported to espouse
their cause: his arguments they manage: his Phrases they cite, though they
understand them not.

Now although the exposing of their rashness may seem a subject improper for an
Auditory, that expresses so much devotion as to fill these sacred places; yet
since it is the frailty of our nature to regard less the proffer of happiness
then a representation of danger; I cannot better confirm the Virtuous in the
excellent choice they have made, then by disparaging the contrary vices: this
being the very manner our Psalmist takes of describing the godly. I shall
therefore for the entertainment here, endeavor to show the mischief to which
that Counsel betrays, the dismal mansion to which that way does lead, and what
a vain security the deceitful Chair of the scornful does afford; which for the
clearer Method I shall distinguish into these two Parts, levelling the one
against a dissolute, the other against a profane kind of life: And intending to
demonstrate, how inconsistent they both are with the least pretense to
Religion, how unsatisfactory in respect to an ordinary prudence, and how unable
to promote the design for which they are followed.

as many countries as we survey, so many concurring suffrages we may gather up.
None ever exercised a Religion, who did not place in sobriety the most proper
Service: None ever owned a life hereafter, who did not by that determine the
happy or miserable condition there. Nay though a foolish suspicion should arise
within our breast concerning the truth of a particular Dispensation; yet this
other engagement we could never remove, as that which Nature her self has
implanted in us, as that which constitutes a part of our Reason as much as any
Notice or Axiom in speculative Learning. We frame as evident a conception of
good and evil, as of like or unlike, simple or compound; and are as fully
persuaded that we must avoid the one and pursue the other, as that the whole
does exceed the part: both advanced beyond further proof. And since none but
the Founder of the Universe can have imbued us with such intimations, we must
esteem them as his eternal Law; to which if the recompense always annexed be
not evenly distributed here, it must wait for us in another place. Nor as to
these duties of our Natural light, can any plead the least color of an excuse.
They are not involved in a foreign tongue, not purchased from beyond the seas,
or transmitted by an uncertain Tradition: but what he reads in a large and
lively Character within himself; by which alone it pleased God to govern far
the greatest part of the Earth till our Saviors time: and when he did impart a
new discovery, it seemed chiefly to aim at the renewal of this Image, which
superstition had defaced. For though he imposed those minute Ceremonies with so
severe a charge upon the Jews; yet when not offered up together with a moral
Virtue, he throws them back with the greatest disdain, as if he had never
enjoined them.

To urge then the inference: How stupendous a piece of folly does the
Dissolute commit, who neglects what is commended by an Universal consent? who
stiffly adheres to a certain sect of Opinions, who fondly observes the little
Punctilio's that discriminate his Party, and still omits what is allowed by
all. If we should perchance err in other things, so as it flows not from a
peevish and contradicting spirit, or is contracted by an almost invincible
Ignorance, we know not how far the throne of Heaven may dispense: But what
tolerable evasion can he invent, who lives directly opposite to what his reason
prescribes, to what all Revelation adds a fresh command, and which has been the
only point preserved entire from the least dispute? He is not only involved
in the fortune of his own Sect, not only in danger from the falseness of his
own Religion: but whatever proves true, if there be at all any judgment
hereafter, the sentence of Condemnation must pass upon him. So that we may
justly conclude, such Desperadoes as these do it out of a confidence that there
is no Religion; to whom in the second place I address my self.

because men, they think, will not so much condemn their lives as the source
from whence it rises, their horrid unbelief: for which they rather assume a
pride, as if they had a greater sagacity then their neighbors, that they are
not deluded with the common Imposture, which has so long abused the world. But
may we not suspect they proceed in a more preposterous way? Do they not first
rashly overwhelm themselves in vice, and then allay their fears by such a
persuasion? do they not first discard a good Conscience, and then make
shipwreck concerning the Faith, in Saint Paul's language? then shake off
Religion when it is their Interest there should be none? lest any relenting
thoughts should disturb their sober and melancholy intervals, whilst their
body weakened by a former sin recovers strength enough to perpetrate another.
What clearer argument can we have of this then when we see young Boys lost in
wickedness before they attain to years of discretion: who give the first
instance of their apprehension in naughtiness, and by a corruption of mind
imbibed through the example of others, draw on a Maturity sooner then Nature
ever intended. And really we may in the general observe, that most tainted with
this infidelity have consumed their earlier years in luxury: so that they
entered on it before their judgment was ripe, and have not spared any leisure
since from their enjoyments. And can we imagine these have fully discussed the
merits of the cause? or are they indeed fit to decide the question concerning
Religion? Can they have weighed every demonstration? or examined each
consequence? If we would presume to debate it, we must first furnish our heads
with all parts of Learning; A huge acuteness in Philosophy, a vast reading in
History and Philology must conspire in such an enterprise, the preparing of
which would take up the largest portion of our time.

How silly a rashness does it then import to fix an hasty Conclusion; which one
would avoid even where no other mischief could follow but a bare mistake? And
how much more to build on so weak a Foundation, a resolution of life, on which
depends an Eternal concern? It is therefore the hope of a freedom from Rule,
of a security from a troubled Conscience that diminishes the Faith. Experience
attests how much in business of lesser moment, our advantage governs our
Belief; how readily we fancy, what we desire should be. And besides, in our
present case we lie more open to an easy abuse, when we have abated the
vigor of our Parts by a continual distemper. Let them show by a sober
deportment, that they hugg not those desperate maxims for their profit; and
then I question not, they will relish sounder things.

Hovvever all this study to cheat our selves will avail nothing; perhaps the
heat of youth, the briskness of spirit, and constant diversion of our mind by
some disorder or other may stifle, may lull asleep our Reason, may induce a
kind of stupidity: But when either sickness shall interrupt or age quite
abolish our pleasures, how then shall we secure our amazing thoughts? The
advantage which beguiled us before, will cease, and our judgment return to its
former quickness: we shall see the inconvenience of a precipitated sentence: we
shall sadly perceive upon how prejudiced a ground we proceeded before: we shall
understand the certainty of that, which with such confidence we lately derided;
and to that sense will be joined the affrighting horror of a mispended life.
This has been the fate of all the associates, the Copartners in unbelief, if
they have ever reached the Plato does thus incomparably bespeak the young
Atheist, (...)
years of a declining age, or did not expire their last in a Duel or a drunken
fit. Though they dared heaven before, though they invented affronts to
Religion, and thought themselves fortified against the strongest impression,
yet upon a languishing bed or the apprehension of an imminent danger, they have
altered their mind, revoked their sentiments, and declared their change to the
whole world. I need not heap up instances with which all History Bion the
Atheist falling sick, (...). And therefore Laertius prettily plays upon him
with his Poetry.
does abound; but rather press we would not buy consternation and repentance at
so dear a rate: that we would not nourish an incredulous humor, till at last
it recedes of its self, and leaves behind the piercing sense of our unavoidable
ruin.

But that I may beat them out of their utmost Refuge; Suppose we should for
once and in a frollick allow them as strong an evidence as they desire: suppose
we should grant ten nay an hundred to one on their side against Religion, which
is more then their boldest patrons ever assumed, who could never drive it
higher then an even balance, or a faint possibility there might perhaps be
none. Notwithstanding these unreasonable odds, the lying under an Eternal
torment is of so hideous a Nature, as a prudent man would not venture it,
though placed in the remotest degree of chance. What though an hundred things
may happen as soon? yet since we are utterly undone for ever if it should fall
out: since we must be wrapped up in immortal flames, who would foolishly run the
hazard. Especially considering how little is lost; though we should cleanse our
hands in vain: though we should restrain our exorbitant passions for nothing:
or to no purpose pass over the few years of our race in a Virtuous carriage.
And then having behaved our selves well, with what chearsulness shall we resign
our breath at last in that saying of Socrates, which indeed he spoke not so
much out of distrust, as an affectation of (...). Plat. Phoed.
doubting every thing, If there be another state after this; I have a title to
Happiness: If none, I cannot be Miserable. (...), etc. Platon. Apol.


judgment, whether the various sorts of intemperance do not corrupt the habit
of our Health, accelerate our decay, and hasten our dissolution. For if they
bring not a raging Fever at present, or a worse Contagion, they treasure up
matter for the growth of more lasting Diseases hereafter. The greater violence
we expose our bodies to, must by the Laws of Philosophy be revenged upon us
in a shorter duration. Not to mention the dangerous quarrels, which a
distempered brain or an amorous heat may engage us in: or how we spoil the
Race of manking, whilst we convey down to our unfortunate posterity a crazy
and infected constitution.

Religion it self proposes the contrary Virtues upon this score alone as
necessary to the sustaining of our bodies. The Eternal and immutable reason is,
that we are bound to preserve our selves in that state of Beings wherein we
are placed, till it pleases God to dismiss us: a notion which flourished among
the Gentiles. Now the particular management requisite to this selfpreservation,
depends on the peculiar Frame with which every order of Beings is clothed, and
so may vary according to the several Classes of them: But to the fabric of
our humane Nature conduces most sobriety, temperance and the rest; which carry
no Essential goodness in themselves, because not consisting even amongst us in
the same minute proportion; but only as they advance in us the Universal end,
which all Beings according to their several capacities must promote.

Nay further, Epicurus the grand Master of irreligion stands on our side. He
turned the gods out of his infinite worlds, excluded their providence, and
acknowledged nothing higher or finer then Matter; so that we have all the
Reason to believe he would only consult his own Interest. He indeed roundly
proclaims it our best and noblest design to gratify our sense, and thought the
most sottish and beastly pleasure agreeable enough in its self to that purpose:
But then holding, that we must severely weigh all Circumstances, and embrace
only those delights which betray not to a further inconvenience; and even
admit that horrid thing pain when it opens the passage to a clearer happiness;
he at last (...).
pronounces that Epic. Epist. ad Pythoc.
the only entire, unmixed (...)
and complete pleasure lies in the Ibid.
Rules which we call by the name of Virtue. And to this he exactly composed his
life, whence Cicero says of him, we question not Epicurus Itaque, ut saepe
dixi, de acumine ejus agitur non de inoribus: quamvis spernat voluptates eas
quas modo laudavit. Tus. Quaes. l. 3.
his manners, but his understanding; because he Epictetus apud Ar^ia^. l. 3. c.
7.
declines those very pleasures he praises so much. So that there is no ground
imaginable left for Luxury.

But if any one sensible of this, does after that example lead a life strict
enough, and yet harbors infidelity in his heart; I would represent to him,
that seeing it is the same pains to follow Virtue out of a politic
consideration as it is upon a more generous account, what a huge and monstrous
folly must it be to disclaim the hopes or venture the success in another world.
The trouble is the same in practice: the difference lies in the choice of the
End, which is only a bare persuasion.

I descend now to the other Branch of my discourse which strikes against
profaneness. And this I must accuse first, honor for him; which consideration
alone Epicurus thought Argument strong enough for a Divine worship. But then
further recollecting that he raised the stately fabric of the Universe, that
he imparted to us our existence and can with the same breath recall it again,
or, which is worse, continue it in an everlasting misery; as well our gratitude
as our fear must excite in us the highest degree of Reverence. This is the
primary notion of Religion, upon which all other sacred Offices are founded.

Now Honor and Reverence consist only in a separation from vulgar usage, in
setting a greater value upon, in retaining more veneration for one then we
commonly do for others. And when applied to a Person, we express the signs of
it by a serious mentioning his name with some adjunct of praise, by putting a
restraint upon our selves in his presence, by keeping our distance, by
addressing to him in a solemn manner: all which are different from our ordinary
behavior among those of our own quality. When ascribed to a thing, we show our
respect by a removal from a Trivial use, by dedicating it wholly to some
peculiar service; which indeed we do for the relation it bears to the Person we
honor: for as we testify our esteem of a Grandee by making a present; so we
offer to God himself what we reserve only for an Holy employment.

What then shall we think of the profane who lays these enclosures open? who
distinguishes not between Sacred and Common? A wicked life may disgrace
Religion, an Athiest may slyly suggest there is none; but then we really, then
we actually abrogate it, when we disanul those signs, in which the public
Profession of it is seated. Nothing more free, more careless then our usual
talk; nothing more idle then the discourse we spend over our cups: How much
then do we undervalue our Eternal Creator, when we mix his Name with such
impertinent trifling? How can we debase or prostitute it more, then when we
season our Phrase with it, when we rudely interpose it almost between every
word, when it slips so often out of our mouths as we discern it not our selves?
But how much higher does the scorner fly, who is not content to cast off his
respect, unless he derides what he should adore? who will put an indignity upon
God himself, rather then loose a jest? whom the innumerable ldiotisms and
Proverbs of our tongue, suffice not to dash one against the other in his little
pretenses to wit, unless he plays with and upon the holy Scripture?

I would fain imprint upon our mind a just horror of thisnotorious Sin. Let us
recall therefore into our memory, what a seriousness possesses us in the Royal
presence: what a guard we set upon our thoughts: what a silence we impose upon
our tongue, or else with what care we deliver every syllable; let us consider
with what modesty we appear in the company of a great Personage: with what
troublesome formality we demean our selves. In our converse we are familiar
with none but whom we esteem no better then our selves: at least we reckon we
are then acquainted, then intimate with our friends when we dare speak any
thing before them; especially we venture to break our conceits, only on the
inferiors to our own rank: some Philosophers have imagined, all laughter
springs from contempt; and that is the main design of abusive wit. None will
offer to do it but toward them they despise: None will endure it but people of
a poor, little and slavish temper, whom rich men and haughty entertain among
their dependants for the same purpose. The profane then presuming so far with
God Almighty, do invade Heaven and seat themselves by his Throne; it is as much
as if they declared themselves as Good as he: when they treat him like one of
their Dear Companions it is a sign they acknowledge as little distance. Nay what
I tremble to speak, they aspire to a degree above him, while they make him and
what is appropriated to his Service the subject of their abominable mirth.

And how do we expect God should resent this, who has always seemed most
jealous of his honor, and vvhenever he takes upon him a Title of severity,
it is for a just vindication of that. One of the bitterest circumstances that
attended our Saviors passion lay in the mockery which the Soldiers heaped
upon Him; and therefore omitted by none of the Evangelists. They dressed him up
in Royal robes that they might make the better sport: they covered his Sacred
eyes, that he might by Inspiration tell 'em who had presumed to strike him.
Among these Cursed vvretches must the profane be numbered, and will at last be
joined in the same extremity of torture. God has been always observed to
resist the proud, and sure he will with greater fury oppose those that would
raise themselves by a depression of Him; so that if Hell contains any place
hotter then other: if Lucifers apartment be more intolerable then the rest,
these will be lodged there, who certainly have arrived to the very height of
wickedness.

which if compared with this, sinks into a lesser crime. But then to what
purpose do they so often repeat the Holy Name if it signifies nothing? if it
denote only a fiction, why do they fill their mouths with an empty word?
They may as well clap any incoherent syllables together, and fashion one no
Language ever owned, and rattle it out twice or thrice between every sentence.
If the sound only pleases, I fancy they might coin another of a more graceful
noise. They make the same use of Oaths and imprecations that others do, whilst
they confirm every promise, back each asseveration, enforce every threat, with
three or four of them. If then there be no Religion, why do they beat the Air
with what implies nothing? None gives any more credit to them, though they damn
themselves a thousand times, then as if they had rapt out so much Arabic. And
what valor is it to scoff at the Religion they have already disclaimed? They
may as well vent their wit against Jupiter and Juno and the rest of the heathen
Theology.

an ill sort of irreligion, and upon such base Principles, as destroy all good
Nature and affection, which even Atheism naked in its self does not extinguish.
For those of old perverted have still maintained an Universal love, an obliging
way of demeanor, a Moral honesty, if not upon better grounds yet at least in
respect to the necessity of Government: so that the age under Augustus which
some remark as most infected with this disease, enjoyed a more calm and sedate
time then commonly happens. But now men are led into an Apostasy by believing
that we are all born mortal enemies one to the other: that each has a design of
usurping a Power over the rest: that its only a little policy that cements us
together, which may without blame be broken upon a prospect of our Emolument:
that there is no tie of gratitude: and that success gives a right to whatever
we attempt.

The mischief of all which is that it teaches men to be so indeed: And
therefore we may be confident the greatest pleasure the profane take, is to vex
and grieve the spirits of sober people; for commonly they run out the more
before them whose Virtue or Profession obliges to be most offended at it. And
what savours more an inhumane rustic and clownish temper? What, though any of
them are so unhappy as to think Religion ridiculous and to make it so by their
foolery? yet since so many thousands among whom they live, have the tenderest
regard for it, in civility they ought to abstain. Is it good manners to inveigh
against any Person in the presence of one whom we know to be his entire friend
and much concerned for his repute? or breeding to fall upon a discourse, which
we find unpleasant to one of the company? If therefore the reverence we owe to
God exceed the strongest passion we can cherish for the dearest relation here
on earth, what a barbarous thing must it be to mock at another devotion? which
as often as we undervalue, so many arrows we strike into his soul. And one part
of the trouble which a good man receives in this case, is upon our account in
charity to us, while he laments the conditition we are in, while he deplores
the terrible punishment we must one day undergo. They were wont formerly to
show their distate of a profane speech by rending their clothes; which if one
should do now as often as he hears any such thing, we might sometimes carry
nothing but rags with us to bed. When therefore no other consideration will
prevail; if we pretend to understand the laws of Honor or the rules of
conversation, in which we seem to delight so much: if we challenge a better
breeding then meaner folks, or a more gentle nature; we must forbear this
unhallovved kind of raillery which offends as many ears as it penetrates.

Thus have I discharged what I propounded for my Subject: where if I have
sometimes argued from places less suitable to the assurance we may well demand
for our Faith, it has been only in compliance to them I would reclaim. I waved
it for the present only that I might expose the mischiefs of those vices taken
barely in themselves for the sake of which they reject Religion; hoping that if
the ends of a worldly policy could bring them off, they might afterward do it
of their own accord upon a more noble Principle.

There remains only an humble advice in the Name of God, that we would
continue to beware the splitting upon these two Rocks, Debauchery and
Profaneness: which we ought more carefully to decline at this time; for since
there are so many addicted to them out of irreligion, we shall be interpreted
to do so too: by which we sacrifice our own credit and unhappily confirm them
in their desperate way; for they will think there are so many suffrages the
more added to their side. They have been noted to gather Proselytes as much as
any Party whatever: and to dive into the mind of others by discourse whether
they are not of the same bold opinion with themselves; whereby it appears, they
support their timorous hearts more by their company, by their fellows in
iniquity then any strength in their Cause.

And that we may be the better armed let us now whilst this solemn Exercise
has composed our thoughts: whilst no temptation hovers before our eyes duly
perpend these things; and if satisfied in the truth of them as surely we must,
let us use the same Method the Mathematicians do: who having once proved a
proposition do not examine it again as often as they have occasion to apply it,
but ever after take it for a Maxim and build other Theoremes upon it. So here
also being already convinced let us set an unmovable Rule for our whole life.
Let not any cajoling pleasure reduce us to an uncertainty, or to dispute the
case again: for then we are sure to be overthrovvn. If once we be so easy as
to admit any sin to plead for it self, by its plausible and fawning excuses it
will infallibly overcome. There is a great deal of Mechanism in the body;
when a pleasant object is presented, there arises a tumult within us whether
we will or no: the unruly spirits fly in pursuance of it and oppress with
their numbers the seat of the Understanding; so that we cannot then fairly
deliberate or frame an exact scrutiny, but must move upon some judgment we
have formerly made. We have all experience how much a fit of anger does
transport us beyond the limits of discretion: each strong inclination is as
truly a passion and does debauch our reason as much, though the same violence
does not outwardly break forth. Let us therefore at any unlawful opportunity
not parley but command. Let us not be ruled by the thoughts which are then
suggested to us, but summon into our mind the apprehensions we have had in such
a place and at such a time as this.

In a word, let us remember the Scripture almost always denotes Religion by the
fear of the Lord, by the fearing of his Name, which is for that cause styled
the beginning of Wisdom; and that Reverence here is like modesty in manners,
which if we once discard, no bounds will ever after contain us.

Now to Almighty God, the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor
and Praise for ever and ever. Amen.
I cannot forbear by way of Appendix to subjoyn the translation of that most
excellent passage cited in Greek, p. 12. out of Plato de leg. where he thus
accosts the young hectoring Atheist.

My son, you are yet but a young man: In process of time you will come to
change for the quite contrary many of those Opinions you now espouse. Stay
therefore till then, before you determine of great affairs; and the greatest of
all, which perhaps you imagine not, is the framing of a right Notion concerning
the gods, because on this depends the choice of a Wicked or a Virtuous life.
Now I Will discover one thing to you which I may truly enough affirm: And it is
this; You and your Camerades are not the first nor the only persons which have
had this desperate Sentiment concerning the gods. There have been always more
or less, those that have fallen into this disease. But I may tell you what has
happened to most of them; Never did any take up in his youth the denial of the
Existence of a God, that carried the same mind with him to his declining age.

Those Verses of Laertius, cited p. 13. upon Bion the Atheist, who falling sick
in his old age applied himself in Prayers and Sacrifices to the gods, whom he
had always before derided; may thus be rendered.

A Fool, to think the Existence of the gods
Could for a price be bought or sold:
As if forsooth they only then should Be
When Bion pleased so to hold.
FINIS.

