A COLLECTION OF Miscellanies: CONSISTING OF POEMS, ESSAYS, DISCOURSES, and
LETTERS, OCCASIONALLY WRITTEN

By John Norris M. A. and Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

-- -- Diram qui contudit Hydram, Notaque Fatali Portenta labor subegit,
Comperit Invidiam supremo fine domari. Hor. Epist. Lib. 2. Epist. 1.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER For John Crosley Bookseller, 1687.

IMPRIMATUR,

JOH. V-ENN Vice-Cancel. Oxon.
June 22. 1687.
TO THE HONORABLE LEOPOLD - WILLIAM FINCH WARDEN OF All Souls College.
SIR,
THE greatness of your Quality and Personal worth, considered with that Happy
Relation which has further endeared you to us, gives you so just a Title to
these Performances, that I could not without an heinous Alienation devote them
to any other Patron. And therefore, however my boldness may be taxed for making
you so disproportionable a Present, yet certainly I should have incurred more
dishonor by witholding a Debt, and Presumption is a less Crime than Injustice.

Sir, it is by your kind Patronage and Protection (next to the favorable
influences of a good Prince) that our Studies prosper, and our Laurels thrive
and flourish, and that any of us are in a capacity to throw in the least Symbol
into the Muses Exchequer. To whom then should the Fruits of this Sacred ground
be offered, but to that Sun by whose genial influence they grow and ripen?

To you therefore I humbly present this Collection of Miscellanies for the
entertainment of your leisure hours, which were composed at some of mine. I
shall not beg your Protection any farther than you shall find it worthy of it.
I am only concerned that you should hence conclude how well your (now more than
ever fortunate) Society stands affected toward you, particularly how much you
are honored and esteemed by

Sir, Your humble and most devoted Servant John. Norris.
All Souls Coll. June 1. 1687.
TO THE READER.
OF all the tedious things in the world I was ever the least Friend to long
Prefaces, and therefore I shall only commend to your hands this Collection of
Miscellanies occasionally composed at several times, as my Humor and Leisure
served me, with a brief account of my Design as to both Parts of the Collection.

Not to trouble you with a Pompous discourse of the nature of Poetry, its
Measures of Criticism, its Variety, Antiquity, its great use and excellence and
the like, which have been at large set forth by many curious Pens, I have only
leisure at present to observe, that Poetry is of late mightily fallen from the
Beauty of its Idea, and from its ancient Majesty and grandeur, as well as
Credit and Reputation.

It may appear strange indeed that in such a Refining Age as this, wherein all
things seem ready to receive their last turn and finishing stroke, Poetry
should be the only thing that remains unimprov'd. And yet so it happens, that
which we generally have now adays is no more like the thing it was formerly,
than Modern Religion is like Primitive Christianity.

It Is with this as with our Music. From grave, majestic, solemn strains, where
deep instructive sense is sweetly conveyed in charming numbers, where equal
address is made to the Judgment and the Imagination, and where Beauty and
Strength go hand in hand, it is now for the most part dwindled down to light,
frothy stuff, consisting either of mad extravagant Rants, or slight Witticisms,
and little amorous Conceits, fit only for a Tavern entertainment, and that too
among Readers of a Dutch palate.

The truth is, this most excellent and Divine Art has of late been so cheapned
and depretiated by the bungling performances of some who thought themselves
inspired, and whose Readers too have been more kind to them than their Planets,
that Poetry is grown almost out of Repute, and men come strongly prejudiced
against any thing of this kind, as expecting nothing but Froth and Emptiness,
and to be a Poet goes for little more than a Country Fiddler.

But certainly he had once another Character, and that in as nice and wise an
Age as this. If we may believe the great Horace he was one

-- -- Cui men's Divinior, atque Os
Magna locuturum -- -- -- --
He had then his Temples surrounded with a Divine glory, spoke like the Oracle
of the God of wisdom, and could describe no Hero greater than himself. Poetry
was once the Mistress of all the Arts in the Circle, that which held the Rains
of the world in her hand, and which gave the first, and (if we may judge by the
effects) perhaps the best Institutes for the moralizing and governing the
Passions of mankind.

The Design therefore of the present undertaking is to restore the declining
genius of Poetry to its Primitive and genuin greatness, to wind up the strings
of the Muses Lyre, and to show that sense and gracefulness are as consistent in
these as in any other Compositions. I design here all the Masculine sense and
Argument of a Dissertation, with the advantage of Poetic Fineness, Beauty and
Spirit, and accordingly I have made choice for the most part of Divine and
Moral Subjects, and if I meddle with any other sort, I commonly turn the stream
another way, as particularly in those two Poems called Beauty and Love, which I
have rescued from those sordid abuses they have hitherto suffered.

I confess it is a difficult Province to make substantial massy Sense yield to
the softnesses of Poetry, and accordingly we find there are few Poems after the
Divine and Moral way but what are stiff, flat and insipid; but without this
Mixture Poetry is nothing worth, and when it has it, it has all it can have,
and is withal so Divine a thing, that even Plato I fancy would give it
entertainment in his Commonwealth.

I need not make any other Apology for my conversing with the Muses, for I do
not think it an employment beneath the Character of a Scholar, and tho I have
now set up my outmost Pillar, yet I cannot find in my heart to repent me of
those few Blank hours bestowed in this Exercise. For I have the example of some
of the greatest and wisest in all Ages to warrant me, and the greatness of
Solomon is seen as much in his Divine Pastoral, the Canticles, as in his
Proverbs or Sermons, and the wise Ben-Sirach among other Characters of his
Heroes puts in this among the rest, that they were such as found out Musical
tunes, and recited Verses in writing. Eccl. 44. 5.

And thus much for the Verse-part. Concerning the Essays and Discourses I have
only this to say, that I designed in them as much Brevity and Clearness as are
consistent with each other, and to abound in sense rather than words. I wish
all men would observe this in their writings more than they do. I Am sure the
multitude of Books and the shortness of Life require it, and sense will lie in
a little compass if men would be persuaded to vent no Notions but what they are
Masters of, and were Angels to write, I fancy we should have but few Folio's.

This is what I designed and endeavored in the whole. Whether I have attained
it or no, I submit to Judgment.

All Souls Coll. June 1st. 1687. J. Norris.

THE CONTENTS OF THE PROSE-PART.
Of the advantages of Thinking. Page 145. Of the Care and Improvement of Time.
153. Of Solitude. 158. Of Courage. 165. Of Seriousness. 170. Of the slightness
of all Secular, and the importance of minding our Eternal, Interest. 175. A
Metaphysical Essay toward the Demonstration of a God, from the steady and
immutable Nature of Truth. 193. The Christian Law Asserted and Vindicated: Or,
a general Apology for the Christian Religion, both as to the Obligativeness,
and Reasonableness of the Institution. 211. A Discourse concerning Perseverance
in Holiness. 249. A Discourse coucerning Heroic Piety, wherein its Notion is
stated, and its Practice recommended. 275. Contemplation and Love: Or, the
Methodical Ascent of the Soul to God, by steps of Meditation. 295. A Discourse
upon Romans 12. 3. Not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think;
But to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
Faith. 333. Considerations upon the Nature of Sin, accommodated to the Ends
both of Speculation and Practice. 361. An Idea of Happiness in a Letter to a
Friend, Enquiring wherein the greatest Happiness attainable by man in this Life
does consist. 393. A Letter of Resolution concerning some Passages in the
foregoing Treatise. 431. Another Letter concerning the true Notion of Plato's
Ideas, and of Platonic Love. 435. A Letter concerning Love and Music. 446. A
Letter concerning Friendship. 450. A Letter of Self-Consolation occasioned by
the Death of a Friend. 455.
ERRATA.
Page 164. for ingeniously read ingenuously. Page 170. for gaiety read gait.
Page 281. for (...) read (...)

The Passion of our B. Savior represented in a Pindarique Ode.
-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a Lachrymis? --

I.
SAY bold Licentious Muse,
What Noble Subject will thou choose,
Of what great Hero, of what mighty thing,
Will thou in boundless numbers sing?
Sing the unfathomed Depths of Love,
(For who the Wonders done by Love can tell,
By Love, which is it self all Miracle?)
Here in vast endless Circles may thou rove,
And like the traveling Planet of the day
In an Orb unbounded stray.
Sing the great Miracle of Love Divine,
Great be thy Genius, sparkling every Line,
Love's greatest Mystery rehearse,
Greater then that
Which on the tee^ing Chaos brooding sat,
And hatched, with kindly heat, the Universe.
How God in Mercy chose to bleed, and dye
To rescue Man from Misery,
Man, not his Creature only, but his Enemy,
II.
Lo, in Gethsemane, I see him prostrate lie,
Pressed with the weight of his great Agony.
The common Sluices of the Eyes
To vent his mighty Passion will not suffice,
His tortured Body weeps all-o're,
And out of every Pore
Buds forth a precious Gem of Purple Gore.
How strange the Power of afflictions rod
When in the Hand of an incensed God!
Like the commanding Wand
In Moses Hand
It* works a Miracle, and turns the Flood
Of Tears into a Sea of Blood
See with what Pomp Sorrow does now appear!
How proud She is of being seated here!
She never wore
So rich a Dye before.
Long was he willing to decline
The Encounter of the Wrath Divine.
Thrice he sent for his Release
Pathetic Embassies of Peace,
At length his Courage overcame his Doubt,
Resolved he was, and so the bloody Flagg hung out.
III.
And now the Tragic Scene's displayed,
Where drawn in full Battalia are laid
Before his Eyes
That numerous Host of Miseries
He must withstand, that Map of Woe
Which he must undergo.
That heavy Wine Press which must by him be trod,
The whole Artillery of God.
He saw that Face whose very Sight
Chears Angels with its Beatific Light,
Contracted now into a dreadful frown,
All clothed with Thunder, big with death
And Showers of hot burning Wrath,
Which shortly must be poured down.
He saw a black and dismal Scroll
Of Sins past, present, and to come,
With their intolerable Doom
Which would the more oppress his spotless Soul;
As the Elements are weighty proved
When from their Native Station they are removed.
He saw the foul Ingratitude of those
Who would the Labors of his Love oppose,
And reap no benefit by all his Agonys.
He saw all this,
And as he saw to Waver he began,
And almost to repent of his great Love for Man.
IV.
When lo, a heavenly Form all bright and fair,
Swifter then Thought shot through the enlight'ned Air.
He who sat next the imperial Throne,
And read the Councels of the Great Three-One,
Who in Eternity's Misterious Glass
Saw both what was, what is, and what must come to pass;
He came with Reverence profound,
And raised his prostrate Maker from the Ground;
Wiped off the bloody Sweat
With which his Face and Garments too were wet,
And comforted his dark benighted Mind
With sovereign Cordials of Light refined.
This done, in soft addresses he began
To fortify his kind Designs for Man,
Vnseal'd to him the Book of Gods Decree:
And showed him what must be,
Alleged the Truth of Prophecies,
Types, Figures, and Mysteries,
How needful it was to supply
With humane Race the ruins of the Sky.
How this would new accession bring
To the Celestial Quire,
And how withal it would inspire
New Matter for the Praise of the great King.
How he should see the travail of his Soul, and bless
Those Sufferings which had so good Success.
How great the Triumphs of his Victory,
How glorious his Ascent would be,
What weighty Bliss in Heaven he should obtain
By a few Hours of Pain,
Where to Eternal Ages he should Reign.
He spoke, confirmed in mind the Champion stood,
A Spirit divine
Through the thick Veil of Flesh did shine,
All over Powerful he was, all over Good.
Pleased with his successful Flight,
The Officious Angel posts away
To the bright Regions of Eternal Day,
Departing in a track of Light.
In haste for News the heavenly People ran,
And joy'd to hear the hopeful State of Man.
V.
And now that strange prodigious hour,
When God must subject be to humane Power,
That Hour is come,
The unerring Clock of Fate has struck,
'Twas heard below down to Hells lowest Room,
And strait th Infernal Powers th appointed signal took.
Open the Scene my Muse, and see
Wonders of Impudence and Villainy;
How wicked Mercenary hands
Dare to invade him whom they should adore,
With Swords and Staves encompassed round he stands,
Who knew no other Guards but those of Heaven before.
Once with his powerful breath he did repel
The rude assaults of Hell.
A ray of his Divinity
Shot forth with that bold Answer, I am He,
They reel and stagger, and fall to the Ground,
For God was in the Sound.
The Voice of God was once again
Walking in the Garden heard,
And once again was by the guilty Hearers feared,
Trembling seized every joint, and chilness every Vein.
This little Victory he won.
Showed what he could have done.
But he to whom as chief was given
The whole Militia of Heaven,
That Mighty He
Declines all Guards for his defense
But that of his inseparable Innocence;
And quietly gives up his Liberty.
He Is seized on by the Military bands,
With Cords they bind his sacred hands,
But ah! how weak, what nothings would they prove,
Were he not held by stronger ones of Love.
VI.
Once more, my wearied Muse, thy Pinions try,
And reach the top of Calvary.
A steep Ascent: But most to him who bore
The Burden of a Cross this way before.
(The Cross ascends, there is something in it sure
That Moral is and mystical,
No Heights of Fortune are from thee secure,
Afflictions sometimes Climb, as well as fall)
Here breath a while, and view
The doleful st Picture Sorrow ever drew,
The Lord of Life, Heavens darling Son,
The Great, the Almighty one,
With out-stretch'd Arms, nailed to a cursed Tree,
Crowned with sharp Thorns, covered with Infamy;
He who before
So many Miracles had done,
The Lives of others to restore,
Does with a greater, lose his own.
Full three long hours his tender body did sustain
Most exquisite and poignant pain.
So long the Sympathizing Sun his light withdrew,
And wondered how the Stars their dying Lord could view.
VII.
This strange defect of light
Does all the Sages in Astronomy affright
With fears of an Eternal Night.
The Intelligences in their Courses stray,
And Travelers below mistake their way,
Wondering to be benighted in the midst of Day.
Each mind is seized with Horror and Despair,
And more o respread with darkness than the air.
Fear on, it is wondrous all and new,
It Is what past Ages never knew.
Fear on, but yet you will find
The great Eclipse is still behind.
The luster of the face Divine
Does on the Mighty Sufferer no longer shine.
God hides his Glories from his sight
With a thick Skreen made of Hells grossest night.
Close-wrought it was, and Solid all,
Compacted and Substantial,
Impenetrable to the Beatifick light
Without Complaint he bore
The tortures he endured before;
But now no longer able to contain
Under the great Hyperbole of pain,
He mourns, and with a strong Pathetick cry,
Laments the sad Desertion of the Diety.
Here stop my Muse, stop and admire,
The Breather of all Life does now expire;
His Milder Father Summons him away,
His Breath obediently he does resign;
Angels to Paradise his Soul convey,
And Calm the Relicts of his grief with Hymns divine.
Annotations.
THis Ode is after the Pindaric way; which is the highest and most magnificent
kind of writing in Verse, and consequently fit only for great and noble
Subjects, such as are as boundless as its own Numbers. The nature of which is
to be loose and free, and not to keep one settled pace, but sometimes like a
gentle stream to glide along peaceably within its own Channel, and sometimes,
like an impetuous Torrent, to roll on extravagantly, and carry all before it.
Agreeable to that description of Horace:

Nunc pace delabentis Hetruscum
In mare, nunc lapides adesos
Stirpesque raptas and pecus and domos
Volventis una non sine montium,
Clamore vicinaeque Sylvae.
And this may serve to explain the Introduction of the Poem:

And hatched with kindly heat the Universe. Love in the Gentile Theology, is
made the most ancient of the Gods, and the Sire of all things. (...) says
Plutarch. And it is described by Simmias Rhodius, in a pair of Wings, which
suited well with the Symbolical representation of the Chaos by an Egg, which
was brooded and hatched under these Wings of Love. This whole matter is rarely
well, and at large expressed by Aristophanes in Avibus. The plain and
undisguised meaning of it is this, That the Creation of the World was the
effect of the Divine Love, God having no other end in it besides the
Communication of his own Happiness.

As the Elements are weighty proved,
When from their Native Station they are removed.
This is according to the Aristotelean Hypothesis, that the Elements are not
heavy in their own places, which whether it be true or no, I shall not now
dispute. However, it serves for an Illustration, which is sufficient for my
present purpose.

He saw the foul Ingratitude of those, etc. The bitter Ingredients of our
Lord's Cup mentioned hitherto, were taken from things relating to his own
personal concern. But this last motive of his Sorrow proceeds wholly on the
behalf of others, of whose final Impenitence he is supposed to have a
foresight. This I take to be a good and proper insinuation of the excellency of
our Blessed Lord's temper, his exceeding great Love and Philanthropy, when
among the other Ingredients of his Passion this is supposed to be one, that
there would be some, who, by their own default, would receive no benefit from
it.

Vnseal'd to him the Book of Gods decree, etc. Whether the Angel used these
topics of Consolation or no, is a thing as indifferent to my purpose, as it is
uncertain. In the Scripture it is only said in general, that there appeared an
Angel from Heaven strengthening him. However, these Arguments are such as are
probable and pertinent, and that is sufficient.

In haste for news the heavenly people ran,
And joy'd to hear the hopeful state of man.
It is highly reasonable to believe that those blessed and excellent Spirits,
who out of their compassionate love and concern for mankind, ushered in the
news of our Savior's Nativity with Anthems of Praise and Thanksgiving; and are
said likewise to rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner, were also mightily
transported with joy, when they understood that our Savior, notwithstanding
the reluctance of innocent Nature, was at length fully resolved to undertake
the Price of our Redemption.

Full three long hours his Tender Body did sustain
Most exquisite and poignant pain.
It is supposed by the Ancient Fathers, that the Sufferings which our B.
Savior underwent in his Body, were more afflictive to him than the same would
have been to another man, upon the account of the excellency and quickness of
his sense of feeling: And this opinion I take to be as reasonable, as it is
pious. For since, according to the Principles of Philosophy, the sense of
feeling arises from the proportion of the first Qualities, it follows, that the
better the complexion or temperament of any man is, the better his Feeling must
needs be. Now it is very reasonable to believe, that that man who was to be
substantially united to the Godhead, and who was begotten by the miraculous
overshadowings of the holy Spirit, should have a Body endowed with the best
Complexion, and most noble Harmony of Qualities that could be, that so it might
be a suitable Organ for his excellent Soul. And if so, then it follows that the
flesh of our Lord's Body was so soft and render, and his feeling so exquisitely
quick and sensible, as never any man's was before: And consequently the severe
usages which he underwent, not only at his Passion, but throughout his whole
Life, must needs be in a Singular manner afflictive to him. And hence appears
the vanity of their opinion, who are little or nothing affected with the
consideration of our Lords Passion, because they think it was made light to
him, by reason of his union with the Godhead. 'Twas easy for him (some
inconsiderate Persons are ready to say) to suffer this or this, for he was God,
and not mere man, as we are. True, he was so, but his being God did no way
lessen the punishment he underwent as man, but only supported him in his
existence under it, in the same manner as God is supposed, by an act of his
Almighty Power, to preserve the bodies of the Damned, incorruptible among the
everlasting burnings. But this I think is no kindness to them. Neither did the
Society of the Divine Nature any more diminish the Sufferings of our dearest
Lord; nay, in one respect it proved an accidental aggravation to them, because
upon the account of this Noble Union he had given him a Body of a most
admirable Complexion and Harmonious Temperature, and consequently of a Flesh
exceeding tender, and most exquisitely perceptive of the least impressions.

So long the Sympathizing Sun his light withdrew,
And wondered how the Stars their dying Lord could view.
The Eclipse which accompanied the Passion of our Savior was so remarkable and
miraculous, that 'twas taken notice of by many of the Gentile Historians. There
are three things which made this Eclipse so very remarkable, the time of its
Appearance, the time of its Duration, and the Degree of it. 1. For the time of
its Appearance, it was at full Moon, when the Moon was not in Conjunction with,
but in opposition to the Sun. And this appears not only from the testimony. of
Dionysius, who affirms that he saw it at that time, but also from the time of
our Lord's Passion, which, according to the relation of the Evangelist, was at
the Celebration of the Passover. Now the Jews were bound to celebrate the
Paschal Solemnity always at full Moon, as is to be seen in the twelfth of
Exodus. This was no time therefore for a Natural Eclipse, because 'twas
impossible that the Moon should then interpose betwixt us and the Sun. 2. For
the time of its Duration, it was full three hours, which is another evidence
that this was no Natural Eclipse: For the Natural Eclipse of the Sun can never
last so long, both because of the great disproportion between the Suns
Magnitude, and that of the Moon, and because of the swift motion of the latter.
3. For the degree of it, it was a total Eclipse. The Sun was so darkened, that
(as Historians report, who write of that Eclipse) the Stars appeared. And this
is another Argument that it was no Natural Phoenomenon, it being impossible
that the Body of the Moon, which is so infinitely less than that of the Sun,
should totally eclipse it. Now all these three Remarkables are comprised in the
compass of these two Verses. For in that it is said that the Sun withdrew his
light, it is intimated that the light of the Sun was not intercepted by the
ordinary conjunction of the Moon, but that by an Extraordinary Commission from
the God of Nature, the Sun rein'd in his light, and suspended the emission of
his Beams. And this denotes the time of its appearance, (viz.) when the Moon
was not in Conjunction. The time of its duration is implied by the words, So
long. And lastly, the Degree of it is implied in the last Verse,

And wondered how the Stars their dying Lord could view. Where the appearance
of the Stars is not directly expressed, but only insinuated and couched, for
the more elegancy of the thought.

And calm the Relicts of his grief with Hymns divine. It is here supposed that
the Passion of our Savior was now over, and his Father's wrath wholly
appeased. For I can by no means approve the opinion of those who fancy that our
Savior, in the interim betwixt his Death and Resurrection, descended locally
into Hell, there to suffer the torments of the damned. His own words upon the
Cross, It is finished; His promise to the penitent Thief, that he should be
with him that day in Paradise, and his last resignation of his Spirit into the
hands of his Father, do all of them apparently contradict it. But yet, though
the bitter Cup was wholly drank off upon the Cross, it is natural to imagine
some little relish of it to remain behind for a time. Though all his sufferings
and penal inflictions were ended before his death, yet, I suppose (and I think
very naturally) some little discomposures of mind, remaining like the
after-droppings of a shower, which his Soul could not immediately shake off,
upon her release from the Body. In allusion to that of Virgil,

Inter quas Phoenissa recens a vulnere Dido
Errabat Sylva in Magna --
Where the Poet fancies the Ghost of Dido being newly released from the pains
of Love, could not presently forget her shady walks and melancholy retirements.
Now these Remains of Sorrow and after-disturbances of mind which cleav'd to the
Soul of the Holy Jesus, I suppose here to be allay''d by the Music of Angels
in his passage to Paradise.

An Hymn upon the Transfiguration.
I.
HAil King of Glory, clad in Robes of Light,
Out-shining all we here call bright:
Hail Light's divinest Galaxy,
Hail Express Image of the Deity.
Could now thy Amorous Spouse thy Beauties view,
How would her wounds all bleed anew!
Lovely thou art all over and bright,
Thou Israel's Glory, and thou Gentile's Light.
II.
But whence this brightness, whence this sudden day?
Who did thee thus with light array?
Did thy Divinity dispense
T'its Consort a more liberal influence?
Or did some Curious Angel's Chymick Art
The Spirits of purest light impart,
Drawn from the Native Spring of day,
And wrought into an Organized ray?
III.
However it was done, it is Glorious and Divine,
Thou do with radiant wonders shine.
The Sun with his bright Company,
Are all gross Meteors if compared to thee.
Thou art the fountain whence their Light does flow,
But to thy will thine own do owe.
For (as at first) thou did but say,
Let there be light, and strait sprang forth this wondrous day.
IV.
Let now the Eastern Princes come and bring
Their Tributary Offering.
There needs no Star to guide their flight,
They Will find thee now, great King, by thine own light.
And thou, my Soul, adore, love, and admire,
And follow this bright Guide of Fire.
Do thou thy Hymns and Praises bring,
Whilst Angels with Veiled Faces, Anthems sing.
The Parting.
I.
DEpart! The Sentence of the Damned I hear;
Compendious grief, and black despair.
I now believe the Schools with ease,
(Tho once an happy Infidel)
That should the sense no torment seize,
Yet Pain of Loss alone would make a Hell.
II.
Take all, since me of this you Gods deprive,
It Is hardly now worth while to live.
Naught in exchange can grateful prove,
No Second Friendship can be found
To match my mourning Widowed Love;
Eden is lost, the rest's but common ground.
III.
Why are the greatest Blessings sent in vain,
Which must be lost with greater pain?
Or why do we fondly admire
The greatest good which life can boast?
When Fate will have the Bliss expire,
Like Life, with painful Agonies it is lost.
IV.
How fading are the Joves we dote upon,
Like Apparitions seen and gone:
But those which soonest take their flight,
Are the most exquisite and strong.
Like Angels visits, short and bright;
Mortality's too weak to bear them long.
V.
No pleasure certainly is so divine
As when two Souls in Love combine:
He has the substance of all bliss,
To whom a Virtuous Friend is given,
So sweet harmonious Friendship is,
Add but Eternity, you will make it Heaven.
VI.
The Minutes in your conversation spent
Were Festivals of true content.
Here, here, an Ark of pleasing rest,
My Soul had found that restless Dove,
My present State methought was best,
I envied none below, scarce those above.
VII.
But now the better part of me is gone,
My Sun is set, my Turtle flown.
Tho here and there of lesser bliss
Some twinkling Stars give feeble light,
Still there a mournful darkness is,
They shine but just enough to show it is night.
VIII.
Fatal divorce! What have I done amiss,
To bear such misery as this?
The World yields now no real good,
All happiness is now become
But painted and deluding food:
As mere a Fiction as Elysium.
IX.
Well then, since nothing else can please my taste,
I Will ruminate on pleasures past.
So when with glorious Visions blessed,
The waking Hermit finds no theme
That Is grateful to his thoughtful breast,
He sweetly recollects his pleasing Dream.
To a Lady, who asked him, What Life was?
It Is not because I breathe and eat,
It Is not because a vigorous heat
Drives round my Blood, and does impart
Motion to my Pulse and Heart:
It Is not such proofs as these can give
Any assurance that I Live.
No, no, to Live is to enjoy;
What marrs our bliss does Life destroy:
The days which pass without Content,
Are not lived properly, but spent.
Who says the Damned in Hell do Live?
That word we to the Blessed give:
The Sum of all whose happiness
We by the name of Life express.
Well then, if this account be true,
To Live is still to Live with You.
The third Chapter of Job Paraphrased.
I.
Cursed, ever cursed be that unhappy day,
When first the Suns unwelcome ray
I saw with trembling eyes, being newly come
From the dark Prison of the womb.
When first to me my vital breath was lent,
That breath which now must all in sighs be spent.
II.
Let not the Sun his chearing Beams display
Upon that wretched, wretched day;
But mourn in Sables, and all over shroud
His glories in a sullen cloud.
Let light to upper Regions be confined,
And all below as black as is my mind.
III.
Cursed be the night which first began to lay
The ground work of this house of Clay:
Let it not have the honor to appear
In the Retinue of the year.
Let all the days shun its society,
Hate, curse, abandon it as much as I.
IV.
Let Melancholy call that Night her own,
Then let her sigh, then let her groan:
A general grief throughout all Nature spread,
With folded arms, and drooping head.
All Harps be still, or tuned to such a strain
As Fiends might hear, and yet not ease their pain.
V.
Let neither Moon nor Stars, with borrowed light,
Checquer the blackness of that Night:
But let a pure unquestioned darkness rear
Her Sooty Wings all over the Air;
Such as once on the Abyss of Chaos lay,
Not to be piere'd by Stars, scarce by the edge of Day.
VI.
Why was there then, ah, why a passage free
At once for life and misery?
Why did I not uncloister'd from the Womb
Take my next lodging in a Tomb?
Why with such cruel tenderness and care
Was I nursed up to Sorrow and Despair?
VII.
For now in sweet repose might I have lain
Secure from any grief or pain:
Untouched with care, my Bed I should have made
In Death's cool and refreshing shade.
I should have slept now in a happy place,
All calm and silent as the Empty space.
VIII.
There where great Emperors their heads lay down,
Tired with the burden of a Crown.
There where the Mighty, Popular and Great,
Are happy in a dear retreat;
Enjoy that solid Peace which here in vain
In Grotts and shady walks they sought to obtain.
IX.
None of Hells Agents can or dare molest
This awful Sanctuary of rest.
No Prisoners sighs, no groanings of the Slave,
Disturb the quiet of the Grave.
From toil and labor here they ever cease,
And keep a Sabbath of sweet rest and peace.
X.
Why then does Heaven on Mortals Life bestow
When it is thus overtax'd with woe?
Why am I forced to live against my will,
When all the good is lost in ill?
My sighs flow thick, my groans sound from afar,
Like falling waters to the traveller.
Seraphic Love.
I.
It Is true, Frail Beauty, I did once resign
To thy imperious Charms this Heart of mine:
There did thou undisturbed thy Scepter sway,
And I methought was pleased to obey.
Thou seem so lovely, so divine,
With such sweet Graces did thou shine,
Thou entertain'st my Amorous sense
With such Harmonious excellence,
That, Credulous and Silly I,
With vain, with impious Idolatry,
Adored that Star which was to lead me to the Deity.
II.
But now, thou soft Enchantress of the mind,
Farewell, a change, a mighty change I find;
The Empire of my Heart thou must resign,
For I can be no longer thine.
A Nobler, a Diviner Guest,
Has took possession of my Breast,
He has, and must engross it all,
And yet the room is still too small.
In vain you tempt my Heart to rove,
A fairer object now my Soul does move,
It must be all Devotion, what before was Love.
III.
Through Contemplation's Optics I have seen
Him who is Fairer than the Sons of men:
The Source of good, the light Archetypall,
Beauty in the Original.
The fairest of ten thousand, He,
Proportion all and Harmony.
All Mortal Beauty's but a ray
Of his bright ever-shining day;
A little feeble twinkling Star,
Which now the Sun's in place must disappear;
There is but One that is Good, there is but One that is Fair.
IV.
To thee, thou only Fair, my Soul aspires
With Holy Breathings, languishing desires.
To thee m' enamored, panting Heart does move
By Efforts of Ecstatic Love.
How do thy glorious streams of Light
Refresh my intellectual sight!
Tho broken, and strained through a Skreen
Of envious Flesh that stands between!
When shall m' imprisoned Soul be free,
That she thy Native uncorrected Light may see,
And gaze upon thy Beatific Face to all Eternity?
The Retirement.
I.
WEll, I have thought on it, and I find
This busy World is Nonsense all,
I here despair to please my mind,
Her sweetest Honey is so mixed with Gall.
Come then, I ll try how it is to be alone,
Live to my self a while, and be my own.
II.
I Have tried, and bless the happy change;
So happy, I could almost vow
Never from this Retreat to range,
For sure I nor can be so blessed as now.
From all the allays of bliss I here am free,
I pity others, and none envy me.
III.
Here in this shady lonely Grove
I sweetly think my hours away,
Neither with Business vexed, nor Love,
Which in the World bear such Tyrannic sway:
No Tumults can my close Apartment find,
Calm as those Seats above, which know no Storm nor Wind.
IV.
Let Plots and News embroil the State,
Pray what is that to my Books and Me?
Whatever be the Kingdom's Fate,
Here I am sure to enjoy a Monarchy.
Lord of my self, accountable to none,
Like the first Man in Paradise, alone.
V.
While the Ambitious vainly sue,
And of the partial Stars complain,
I stand upon the Shore and view
The mighty Labors of the distant Ma^n.
I Am flushed with silent joy, and smile to see
The Shafts of Fortune still drop short of me.
VI.
The uneasy Pageantry of State,
And all the plagues to Thought and Sense
Are far removed; I Am placed by Fate
Out of the Road of all Impertinence.
Thus, tho my fleeting Life runs swiftly on,
'Twill not be short, because it is all my own.
The Infidel.
I.
Farewell Fruition, thou grand Cruel Cheat,
Which first our hopes do raise and then defeat.
Farewell thou Midwife to Abortive Bliss,
Thou Mystery of fallacies.
Distance presents the Object fair,
With Charming features and a graceful air,
But when we come to seize the inviting prey,
Like a Shy Ghost, it vanishes away.
II.
So to the unthinking Boy the distant Sky
Seems on some Mountain's Surface to rely;
He with ambitious haste climbs the ascent,
Curious to touch the Firmament:
But when with an unweari'd pace
Arrived he is at the long-wish'd-for place,
With Sighs the sad defeat he does deplore,
His Heaven is still as distant as before.
III.
And yet 'twas long e're I could thoroughly see
This grand Impostor's frequent Treachery.
Tho often Fooled, yet I should still dream on
Of Pleasure in Reversion.
Tho still he did my hopes deceive,
His fair Pretensions I would still believe.
Such was my Charity, that tho I knew
And found him false, yet I would think him true.
IV.
But now he shall no more with shows deceive,
I will no more enjoy, no more believe.
The unwary Jugler has so often shown
His Fallacies, that now they are known.
Shall I trust on? the Cheat is plain,
I will not be imposed upon again.
I Will view the Bright appearance from afar,
But never try to catch the falling Star.
On a Musician, supposed to be mad with Music.
I.
POOR dull mistake of low Mortality,
To call that Madness, which is Ecstacy.
It Is no disorder of the Brain,
His Soul is only set to an higher strain.
Out-soar he does the Sphere of Common sense,
Raised to Diviner Excellence;
But when at highest pitch, his Soul out-flies
Not Reason's Bounds, but those of vulgar Eyes.
II.
So when the Mystic Sibyl's Sacred Breast
Was with Divine Infusions possessed,
'Twas Rage and Madness thought to be,
Which was all Oracle and Mystery.
And so the Soul that is shortly to Commence
A Spirit free from dregs of Sense,
Is thought to rave, when She discourses high,
And breathes the lofty strains of Immortality.
III.
Music, thou Generous Ferment of the Soul,
Thou universal Cement of the whole,
Thou Spring of Passion, that do inspire
Religious Ardours, and Poetic Fire,
Who'd think that Madness should b' ascribed to thee
That mighty Discord to thy Harmony?
But 'twas such ignorance that called the Gift Divine
Of various Tongues, Rage, and the effects of Wine.
IV.
But thou, Seraphic Soul, do thou advance
In thy sweet Ecstacy, thy pleasing Trance:
Let thy brisk passions mount still higher,
Till they join to the Element of Fire.
Soar higher yet, till thou shall calmly hear
The Music of a well-tuned Sphere:
Then on the lumpish mass look down, and thou shall know
The Madness of the World, for grovelling still below.
The Consolation.
I.
I Grant it is bad, but there is some relief
In the Society of Grief.
It Is sweet to him that mourns to see
A whole house clad in Sorrow's Livery.
Grief in Communion does remiss appear,
Like harsher sounds in Consort, which less grate the Ear.
II.
Men would not Curse the Stars, did they dispense
In common their ill Influence.
Let none be rich, and Poverty
Would not be thought so great a Misery.
Our discontent is from comparison;
Were better states unseen, each man would like his own.
III.
Should partial Seas wreck my poor Ship alone,
I might with cause my Fate bemoan.
But since before I sink, I see
A Numerous Fleet of Ships descend with me,
Why don't I with content my breath resign?
I will, and in the greater ruin bury mine.
The Choice.
Stet quicunque volet potens
Aulae culmine lubrico, etc.

I.
NO, I shall not envy him whoever he be
That stands upon the Battlements of State,
Stand there who will for me,
I Would rather be secure than great.
Of being so high the pleasure is but small,
But long the Ruin if I chance to fall.
II.
Let me in some sweet shade serenely lie,
Happy in leisure and obscurity;
Whilst others place their joys
In popularity and noise.
Let my soft minutes glide obscurely on
Like subterraneous streams, unheard, unknown.
III.
Thus when my days are all in silence past,
A good plain Countryman I Will dye at last.
Death cannot choose but be
To him a mighty misery,
Who to the World was popularly known,
And dies a Stranger to himself alone.
The Meditation.
I.
IT must be done (my Soul) but it is a strange,
A dismal and Mysterious Change,
When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay,
And to an unknown somewhere Wing away;
When Time shall be Eternity, and thou
Shall be thou know not what, and live* thou know not how.
II.
Amazing State! no wonder that we dread
To think of Death, or view the Dead.
You Are all wrapped up in Clouds, as if to thee
Our very Knowledge had Antipathy.
Death could not a more Sad Retinue find,
Sickness and Pain before, and Darkness all behind.
III.
Some Courteous Ghost, tell this great Secrecy,
What it is you are, and we must be.
You warn us of approaching Death, and why
May we not know from you what it is to Dye?
But you, having shot the Gulf, delight to see
Succeeding Souls plunge in with like uncertainty.
IV.
When Life's close Knot by Writ from Destiny,
Disease shall cut, or Age unty;
When after some Delays, some dying Strife,
The Soul stands shivering on the Ridge of Life;
With what a dreadful Curiosity
Does she launch out into the Sea of vast Eternity.
V.
So when the Spacious Globe was deluged over,
And lower holds could save no more,
On the utmost Bough the astonished Sinners stood,
And viewed the advances of the encroaching Flood.
O're-topp'd at length by the Element's increase,
With horror they resigned to the untried Abyss.
The Irreconcilable.
I.
I Little thought ( my Damon) once, that you
Could prove, and what is more, to me, untrue.
Can I forget such Treachery, and Live?
Mercy it self would not this Crime forgive.
Heaven's Gates refuse to let Apostates in,
No, that is the Great unpardonable Sin.
II.
Did you not vow by all the Powers above,
That you could none but dear Orinda love?
Did you not swear by all that is Divine,
That you would only be and ever mine?
You did, and yet you live securely too,
And think that Heaven's false as well as you.
III.
Believe me, Love's a thing much too divine
Thus to be Ape'd, and made a mere design.
It Is no less Crime than Treason here to feign,
It Is Counterfeiting of a Royal Coin.
But ah! Hypocrisy's no where so common grown.
As in Most Sacred things, Love and Religion.
IV.
Go seek new Conquests, go, you have my leave,
You shall not Grieve her whom you could deceive.
I don't lament, but pity what you do,
Nor take that Love as lost, which never was true.
The way that is left you to befriend my Fate,
Is now to prove more constant in your Hate.
The Advice.
Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus.
Hor.
I.
What Is forming in the Womb of fate
Why art thou so Concerned to know?
Do think 'twou'd be advantage to thy state?
But Wiser Heaven does not think it so.
With thy Content thou would this Knowledge buy,
No part of life thou would pleasant find
For dread of what thou see st behind,
Tho would but taste of the inlightning fruit and Dye.
II.
Well then has Heaven events to Come
Hid with the blackest Veil of night;
But still in vain if we forestall our doom
And with Prophetic fears our selves affright,
Grand folly! whether thus 'twill be or no
We Know not, and yet silly Man
Secures his evils what he can,
And stabbs himself with Grief, lest Fate should miss the Blow.
III.
Be wise, and let it be thy Care
To manage well the present hour,
Call home thy ranging thoughts and fix them here,
This only mind, this only's in thy power.
The rest no settled, Steady course maintain,
Like Rivers, which now gently slide
Within their bounds, now with full Tide
Overflow, whom houses, cattle, trees resist in vain.
IV.
It Is He that is happy, He alone
Lives free and pleasant that can say
With every period of the setting Sun,
I Have lived, and run my race like him to day.
To Morrow let the angry Heavens frown,
Or Smile with influence more kind,
On Chance depends what is yet behind,
But sure what I have seized already's all my own.
V.
Fortune who no diversion knows
Like disappointment, laughs to see
How Variously she can her gifts Transpose,
Sometimes to one, sometimes to another free.
Be sure to enjoy her while she is pleased to stay.
But if for flight she does prepare,
Don't you at parting drop a tear,
But hold your Virtue fast, for that alone you may.
To himself.
I.
NOt yet Convinced? why will thou still pursue
Through natures field delusive Bliss?
It Is false, or else too fugitive if true,
Thou may as soon thy Shadow overtake as this.
The gaudy Light still dances in thy eye,
Thou hot and eager in the Chase
Art drawn through many a thorny rugged place,
Still languishing and sighing, but can ne re come nigh.
II.
Give over my Soul, give over, nor strive again
This treacherous Chymic gold to find.
Tell me, why should thou fancy there remain
Days yet to come more sweet, than those thou'st left behind.
A wiser Chemist far then thou, to obtain
This Jewel all his treasures spent,
But yet he failed in's grand Experiment,
And all he gained was this, to know that all was vain.
III.
Forbear, and at another's Cost be wise,
Nor longer this Coy Mistress woo.
He Is mad that runs where none can win the prize,
Why should thou lose thy Mistress and thy labor too?
Heaven does but sport with our Simplicity
By laying Jewels in our way,
For when we stoop to seize the glittering prey,
They Are snatched away again, and baulk our greedy eye.
IV.
It Is so, the Choicest good this world can give
Will never stand Fruition's Test.
This all by experience find, yet few believe,
And in the midst of Cheats hope they shall once be blessed.
Strange Magic this. So Witches tho they find
No Comfort from their airy meat,
Forget at next Cabal their slender treat,
And greedily again fall to their feast of Wind.
V.
But thou my Soul thy strong Conviction show,
And never reach at Bliss again.
Our best good here is Nature's bounds to know
And those attempts to spare, which else would be in vain.
Here then Contain thy self, nor higher good
In this enchanted place pursue.
And pity those shortsighted Souls that do,
This World is best enjoyed, when it is best understood.
The Refusal.
I.
THink not to Court me from my dear Retreat
No, I protest it is all in vain.
My Stars did never mean I should be great,
And I the very thought disdain.
Or if they did, their will I Will disobey,
And in my little Orb remain as Fixed as they.
II.
Honor, that Idol which the Most adore
Receives no Homage from my Knee.
Content in privacy I value more
Than all uneasy Dignity.
How should that Empty thing deserve my Care,
Which Virtue does not need, and Vice can never bear?
III.
Shall I change solid and unenvied joys
Of a Serene tho humble state
For splendid trouble, pomp and senseless noise?
This I despise as well as hate.
Poor gain of that Condition, which will be
Envied by others, and as much disliked by me.
Hymn to Darkness.
I.
HAil thou most sacred Venerable thing,
What Muse is worthy thee to sing?
Thee, from whose pregnant universal womb
All things, even Light thy Rival first did Come.
What dares he not attempt that sings of thee
Thou First and greatest Mystery.
Who can the Secrets of thy essence tell?
Thou like the light of God art inaccessible.
II.
Before Great Love this Monument did raise
This ample Theater of Praise.
Before the folding Circles of the Sky
Were tuned by him who is all Harmony.
Before the Morning Stars their Hymn began
Before the Council held for Man.
Before the birth of either Time or Place
Thou reign*st unquestioned Monarch in the empty Space.
III.
Thy native lot thou did to light resign,
But still half of the Globe is thine.
Here with a quiet but yet awefull hand
Like the best Emperors thou do command.
To thee the Stars above their brightness owe
And mortals their repose below.
To thy protection Fear and Sorrow ^lee,
And those that weary are of light, find rest in thee.
IV.
Tho Light and Glory be the Almighty's Throne,
Darkness is his Pavilion.
From that his radiant Beauty, but from thee
He has his Terror and his Majesty.
Thus when he first proclaimed his sacred Law
And would his Rebel subjects awe,
Like Princes on some great solemnity
H' appeared in's Robes of State, and Clad himself with ( thee.
V.
The Blessed above do thy sweet umbrage prize,
When Cloyed with light, they veil their eyes.
The Vision of the Deity is made
More sweet and Beatific by thy Shade.
But we poor Tenants of this Orb below
Don't here thy excellency's know,
Till Death our understandings does improve,
And then our Wiser ghosts thy silent night-walks love.
VI.
But thee I now admire, thee would I choose
For my Religion, or my Muse.
It Is hard to tell whether thy reverend shade
Has more good Votarys or Poets made.
From thy dark Caves were Inspirations given
And from thick groves went vows to Heaven.
Hail then thou Muse's and Devotion's Spring,
It Is just we should adore, it is just we should thee sing.
The Invitation.
Come my Beloved let us go forth into the Field, let us lodge in the Villages.
Cantic. 7. 11.
I.
COme thou divinest object of my love
This Noisy Region don't with us agree,
Come let us hence remove,
I cannot here enjoy my self or thee.
Here Vice and Folly keep their Court
Hither their chiefest Favorites resort,
Debauchery has here her Royal Chair,
This is her great Metropolis,
What e're we see or hear Contagion is
Their Manners are polluted like the air.
From both unwholsom vapors rise
And blacken with ungrateful steams the neighboring skies.
II.
Come we will e'n to our Country Seat repair
The Native home of Innocence and Love.
There we will draw purer air
And pity Monarchs, sitting in our grove.
Here Virtue has her safe retreat
Abandoned by the Many and the great.
Content does here her peaceful Scepter sway
Here Faithfulness and Friendship dwell
And Modesty has here her humble Cell,
Come my Beloved, Come, and let us away.
Be thou My Angel good and kind,
And I Will never look at Sodom which we leave behind.
III.
In fields and flowery meadows, woods and groves
The first and best delights of humane kind,
There we will enjoy our loves
All free, and only to our selves confined.
Here shall my eyes be fixed on thee
'Till every Passion be an ecstasy.
Each hour to thee shall be Canonical,
The Sweets of Nature shall not stay
My Soul, but only show to thee the way,
To thee. Thou Beauty's great Original.
Come My Beloved let us go prove
These sweet Advantages of Peace, Content and Love*
Sitting in an Arbor.
I.
THus ye good Powers, thus let me ever be
Serene, retired, from Love and Business free;
The rest of your great World I here resign
To the Contentions of the great,
I only ask that this Retreat
This little Tenement be mine.
All my Ambition's to this point confined,
Others enlarge their fortunes, I my mind.
II.
How Calm, how happy how serene am I!
How satisfied with my own Company!
To few things foreign my Content I owe
But in my self have almost all
Which I dare good or pleasing call,
Or (what is as well) I fancy so.
Thus I come near my great Creator's state,
Whose whole Bliss in himself does terminate.
III.
Pleased with a various Scene of thought I lie,
Whilst an Obliging Stream slides gently by
Silent and Deep as is the Bliss I choose,
All round the little winged Quire
Pathetic, tender thoughts inspire
And with their strains provoke my Muse.
With ease the Inspiration I obey
And Sing as unconcerned and as well pleased as they.
IV.
If ought below deserve the name of Bliss,
It must (what e're the great ones think) be this.
So once the traveling Patriarch doubly blessed
With dreams divine from Heaven sent,
And his own Heaven of Content,
On's rocky pillow took his rest.
Angels stood smiling by and said, were we our Bliss
To change, it should be for a state like his.
V.
It Is strange so cheap and yet so great a good
Should by so very Few be understood.
That Bliss which Others seek with toil and sweat
For which they prodigally wast
Their treasures, and yet miss at last,
Here I have at an easy rate.
So those that Costly Physic use in vain,
Sometimes by some Cheap by Receipt their health obtain.
The Complaint.
I.
WEll it is a dull perpetual Round
Which here we silly mortals tread,
Here Is naught I Will* swear worth living to be found,
I wonder how it is with the Dead.
Better I hope, or else ye Powers divine
Unmake me, I my immortality resign.
II.
Still to be Vexed by joys delai'd
Or by Fruition to be Cloyed?
Still to be wearied in a fruitless Chase,
Yet still to run, and lose the race?
Still our departed pleasures to lament
Which yet when present gave us no Content?
III.
Is this the thing we so extol,
For which we would prolong our breath?
Do we for this long life a Blessing Call
And tremble at the name of Death?
Sotts that we are to think by that we gain
Which is as well retained as lost with pain.
IV.
Is it for this that we adore
Physicians, and their art implore?
Do we bless Nature's liberal supply
Of Helps against Mortality?
Sure it is but Vain the Tree of Life to boast
When Paradise wherein it grew is lost.
V.
Ye Powers, why did you man create
With such insatiable desire?
If you would endow him with no more estate
You should have made him less aspire.
But now our appetites you Vex and Cheat
With real Hunger, and Phantastic meat.
A Pastoral
Upon the B. Virgin gone from Nazareth to visit Elizabeth. Wherein the sadness
of the Country Nazareth is described during the absence of the Virgin.

Translated out of Rapin.

The speakers are Asor, Alphaeus and Zebede.

Asor. ANd why Alphaeus, in this sweet shade do thou
Make songs, which are not seasonable now,
Since we of fair Parthenia are bereft;
Parthenia has our fields and mountains left.

Alph. Ay something 'twas my Pipe was the other day
So strangely out of tune, and in so hoarse a Key.

Zeb. And I too this misfortune might have known
By some late signs, had my thoughts been my own.
My little Goats as I to Pasture led
When the grass rises from its dewy bed.
I wondered why the new born flowers hung down
Their languid heads, as if scorched by the Sun.
The Lilly and the Rose to droop were seen,
And so did the immortal Evergreen,
Parthenia (alas) was gone --
For thee sweet Maid Lilly and Rose did grieve
The Evergreen thy absence did perceive.

Asor. There grows a shady Elm in our yon grove
Where Philomel would constantly repair,
Sweet Philomel of all the Joy and Love
And with melodious Accents fill the air.
When Parthenis was here, this shady tree
Was never, never from her Music free.
But now divine Parthenia is gone
Silent and sad she wanders up and down
And among thorns and lonely hedges makes her moan.

Alph. Whilst thou fair Nymph did bless us with thy stay
Each grove was sprightly, every wood was gay.
The boughs with birds, the caves with Swains did ring,
And the shrill grasshopper about the fields did sing.
But now each wood is silent as the grave,
Nor does the Shepherd whistle in his cave,
Nor does the Bird sit Chirping on the bough,
Nor is the grasshopper to be heard now.

Zeb. The Fields with living Springs were fruitful made,
And every Spring had his refreshing shade.
Sweet flowers to the Bees were never denied,
The Fold with grass was constantly supplied.
Now Parthenis is gone the industrious Be
Cannot flowers procure with all his industry,
The Folds want grass, the Fields their living Springs,
Nor have the Fountains now their shady coverings.
Divine Parthenia! with thee we have lost
All the delights our Rural life could boast.

Asor. My little Goats were boldly wont to go
And climb the desert hills, my Sheep would do so too.
Then happy Sheep, the Wolf the Fold did spare,
The Heat the infant trees, the Rain the ripen dear.

Alph. Thou now perhaps sweet Nymph art trave'ling o*re
Some Craggie hills, unknown to thee before,
Whilst we sit here among the shady trees,
And swallow down each Cool refreshing breese.

Zeb. Say you sweet Western blasts that gently blow
And you fair Rivers that as swiftly flow,
You who so often have been vocal made
By Swains that pipe and sing under the shade,
Say, now while Phoebus holds the middle Sky
Under what Rock does sweet Par heniae ly?
Or through what Coasts may I her wanderings trace?
Or in what fountain sees she now her lovely face?
Ah! tho our way of life be plain and course
Yet don't thou like thy Country e're the worse
Since 't 'as thy happy Parent been and Nurse.

Asor. Ah! where is that sweet retreat can thee detain
If thou thy native Country do disdain?
Here are pure springs, and over the springs are bowres,
Fine woods and fruit trees, and a world of flowers.

Alph. But why fair Nymph would thou be absent now.
When the sweet Strawberry raises up his head
Like Morning Sun all delicately red,
And Odorous blossoms spring from every bough.

Zeb. Don't you my Sheep that yonder bank come near
It Is to Parthenia sacred all that is there,
Nor would the grass be touched by any but by Her.

Asor. Before fierce Boreas blow with*s boisterous mouth,
Or rainy weather come on from the South
Be sure Parthenia to return again
Lest by the Cold thou suffer or the rain.

Alph. In a choice Garden is reserved for thee
Sweet Marioram, and a large Myrtle tree,
Myrtles thou always love, come then if now
Thou still love flowers as thou were wont to do.

Zeb. Ripe apples now hang dangling on the tree
Ready to drop, and only stay for thee.
The Fig of thy delay too does complain
The tender Fig, but let them both remain
'Till thou to thy dear Nazareth return again.

Asor. Return sweet Nymph, and with thee thou shall bring
All the delights and beautys of the Spring.
Fresh grass again shall on the mountains grow,
The Rivers shall with milk and nectar flow.
The woods shall put on their green Livery,
And Nature in her pomp shall wait on thee.
The Country Swains shall flowers and Presents bring,
And I a Violet garland for my Offering.
With me shall Azarias come along
Who with a smooth-wrought Pipe shall play the Song,
The Song that Israel's shepherd as he stood
By Jordan's bank, played to the listening flood.

Alph. But if thou longer should our hopes deceive,
With rushes I Will a basket for thee weave,
Here thy own Nazareth I Will represent,
How all things here thy absence do lament,
The little goats thou wandering here shall see
Mournful and sad, and all for want of thee.
The Rivers which before flowed swift and clear
As glad the image of thy face to bear,
Shall move benumbed and slow, whilst on each hand
Appears the thirsty and forsaken sand.
The Corn shall droop and languish in the field,
The Meadows no fresh grass or herb shall yield,
The Fir Tree which with stately pride before
Her curious shady locks toward heaven spread
Shall now with downcast boughs, and pensive head
Thy absence mourn and thy return implore.
Thou round about shall all things weeping see,
If tears in rush-work may deciphered be.

Zeb. Preserve ye Powers, if you don't us disdain
The Nymph, whilst she runs panting over the plain.
And while she is absent since she once had love
For these our fields, take care ye powers above
That neither rivers do their banks overflow
Nor Storms the pastures spoil, or ripened corn overthrow.

Asor. From night-fires let our stalls (sweet Nymph) be free
Defend from heat the Rose, from cold the Myrtle-tree,
While Rose and Myrtle are beloved by thee.
That if you chance to cast a longing eye
Back on these fields, now naked and forlorn,
We may have still some flowers left to supply
Garlands to express our Joy, and Dresses you to adorn.

Alph. Haste not, if through rough ways thy journey lie,
Have not, the Heat will prove an injury.
Let not the Sun thy brighter Beautys spoil.
Ah! why will thou undo thy self with too much toil?
Take pleasing shelter in some gentle shade
Till the day slacken, and the heat b'allayd.

Zeb. Parthenia why do thou our hopes prolong?
Perhaps too some ill Pipe, and worser song
Now grate thy ears, whilst thy poor Country swain
On the deaf winds bestows sweet lays in vain.
Hang there my Pipe till she return, and be
A silent Monument of my Misery.
For what are songs or mirth without her Company?

Azor. Our hills shall mourn while distant coasts you bless
Anamis shall not dance nor Sabaris.
The fields, the naked fields no songs shall know,
And Brooks their discontent by murmuring streams shall show.
Thus did the Swains the absent Nymph lament,
The neighboring woods to Heaven the doleful Accents sent.

The tenth Ode of the second Book of Horace translated.
I.
It Is much the better way, believe me it is,
Not far to venture on the great Abyss,
Nor yet from storms thy Vessel to secure,
To touch too nigh upon the dangerous shore.
II.
The Golden Mean, as she is too nice to dwell
Among the ruins of a filthy Cell,
So is her Modesty withal as great
To baulk the envy of a Princely seat.
III.
The ambitions Winds with greater spite Combine
To shock the grandeur of the stately Pine.
The height of structures makes the ruin large,
And Clouds against high hills their hottest bolts discharge.
IV.
An even well-pois'd mind an evil state
With Hope, a good with Fear does moderate.
The Summers pride by Winter is brought down,
And flowers again the Conquering season Crown.
V.
Take heart, nor of the laws of fate Complain,
Tho now it is Cloudy, 'twill Clear up again.
The bow Apollo does not always use
But with his milder lyre sometimes awakes the Muse.
VI.
Be life and spirit, when fortune proves unkind,
And summon up the vigor of thy mind.
But when you are driven by too officious gales,
Be wise, and gather in the swelling sails.
The Discouragement.
I.
WHat would the wise men's Censure be
I wonder, should they hear me say
I was resolved to throw my Books away,
How would some scorn, and others pity me!
Sure he is in love, it is for some Charming Eve
That he like Adam Paradise does leave.
This only difference would be
Between my great grandsire and me,
That I my Paradise forgo
For want of appetite to know.
II.
It Is not that Knowledge I despise
No, you misconstrue my design,
Or that to Enthusiasm I incline
And hope by Inspiration to be wise.
It Is not for this I bid my Books adieu
No, I love Learning full as well as you.
And have the Arts great Circle run
With as much Vigor as the Sun
His Zodiac treads, till the other day
A thought surprised me in my way.
III.
Thought I, for any thing I know
What we have stamped for science here,
Does only the Appearance of it wear
And will not pass above, tho Current here below.
Perhaps they have other rules to reason by,
And what is Truth here, with them's Absurdity.
We Truth by a Refracted ray
View, like the Sun at Ebb of day.
Whom the gross treacherous Atmosphere
Makes where it is not, to appear.
IV.
Why then shall I with sweat and pain
Digg Mines of disputable oar?
My labor's certain, so is not my store,
I may hereafter unlearn all again.
Why then for Truth do I my spirits wast,
When after all I may be gulled at last?
So when the honest Patriarch thought
With seven years labor he had bought
His Rachels love, by morning light
He found the error of the night.
V.
O^ grant some Knowledge dwells below,
It Is but for some few years to stay
Till I Am set loose from this dark house of Clay,
And in an Instant I shall all things know.
Then shall I learn to Accumulate Degrees
And be at once made Master of all Sciences.
What need I then great sums lay out,
And that Estate with care forestall,
Which when few years are come about
Into my hands of Course will fall?
The 63 Chap. of Isaiah Paraphrased to the 6 Verse.
A Pindarique Ode.
I.
STrange Scene of glory! am I well awake?
Or is it my Fancy's wild mistake?
It cannot be a dream, bright beams of light
Flow from the Vision's face, and pierce my tender sight.
No Common Vision this, I see
Some Marks of more than Human Majesty.
Who is this mighty Hero, who,
With glorys round his head, and terror in his brow?
From Bozrah lo he Comes, a scarlet die
O'respreads his clothes, and does out-vy
The Blushes of the Morning Sky.
Triumphant and Victorious he appears
And Honor in his looks and habit wears.
How strong he treads, how stately does he go!
Pompous and solemn is his pace
And full of Majesty as is his face,
Who is this mighty Hero, who?
It Is I who to my promise faithful stand,
I who the Powers of Death Hell and the Grave
Have foiled with this all-conquering hand,
I who most ready am, and mighty too to save.
II.
Why wear'st thou then this scarlet die
Say mighty Hero, why?
Why do thy garments look all red
Like them that in the winefat tread?
The wine press I alone have trod
That vast unweildy frame, which long did stand
Unmoved, and which no mortal force could e're command,
That ponderous Mass I plied alone
And with me to assist were none,
A mighty task it was, worthy the Son of God.
Angels stood trembling at the dreadful sight
Concerned with what success I should go through
The work I undertook to do,
Enraged I put forth all my might
And down the Engine pressed, the violent force
Disturbed the universe, put nature out of Course.
The blood gushed out in streams, and checkered over
My garments with its deepest gore,
With Ornamental drops bedecked I stood
And writ my Victory with my Enemy's Blood.
III.
The day, the Signal day is come
When of my Enemies I must vengeance take,
The day when Death shall have its doom
And the Dark Kingdom with its Powers shall shake.
Fate in her Calendar marked out this day with red
She folded down the iron leaf, and thus she said,
This day, if ought I can divine be true,
Shall for a signal Victory
Be Celebrated to Posterity,
Then shall the Prince of light descend
And rescue Mortals from the Infernal Fiend
Break through his strongest Forts, and all his Host subdue.
This said, she shut the Adamantin Volumn Close
And wished she might the Crouding years transpose;
So much she longed to have the Scene display.
And see the vast event of this important day.
And now in midst of the revolving years
This great this mighty one appears,
The faithful Traveller the Sun
Has numbered out the days, and the set Periods run.
I looked, and to assist was none,
My Angelic guards stood trembling by,
But durst not venture nigh,
In vain too from my Father did I look
For help, my Father me forsook.
Amazed I was to see
How all deserted me.
I took my fury for my sole support
And with my single arm the Conquest won,
Loud Acclamations filled all Heavens Court,
The Hymning guards above
Strained to an higher pitch of Joy and Love
The great Iehavah praised, and his Victorious son.
The Elevation.
I.
TAke wing (my Soul) and upwards bend thy flight
To thy Originary Fields of Light.
Here Is nothing, nothing here below
That can deserve thy longer stay,
A secret whisper bids thee go
To purer air, and beams of native Day.
The ambition of the towering Lark outvy,
And like him sing as thou do upward fly.
II.
How all things lessen which my Soul before
Did with the grovelling Multitude adore!
Those Pageant Glorys disappear
Which charm and dazzle mortals eyes.
How do I in this higher Sphere,
How do I mortals, with their joys despise!
Pure, uncorrupted Element I breathe,
And pity their gross Atmosphere beneath.
III.
How vile how sordid here those Trifles show*
That please the Tenants of that ball below!
But ha, I Have lost the little sight,
The Scene's removed, and all I see
Is one confused dark mass of night.
What nothing was, now nothing seems to be.
How calm this Region, how serene, how clear!
Sure I some strains of Heavenly music hear.
IV.
On, on, the task is easy now and light,
No steams of Earth can here retard thy flight.
Thou needst not now thy strokes renew,
It Is but to spread thy Pinions wide
And thou with ease thy seat wilt view
Drawn by the Bent of the Ethereal tide.
It Is so I find; How sweetly on I move
Not let by things below, and helped by those above!
V.
But see, to what new Region am I come?
I know it well, it is my native home.
Here led I once a life divine
Which did all good, no evil know,
Ah who would such sweet bliss resign
For those vain shows which Fools admire below?
It Is true, but don't of Folly past complain,
But joy to see these blessed abodes again.
VI.
A good retrieve: But lo while thus I speak
With piercing rays the eternal day does break.
The Beautys of the face divine
Strike strongly on my feeble sight,
With what bright glorys does it shine!
It Is one immense and everflowing Light.
Stop here my Soul; thou can not bear more Bliss,
Nor can thy now raised palate ever relish less.
Annotations.
THe general Design of the precedent Poem is to represent the gradual Ascent of
the Soul by Contemplation to the Supreme Good, together with its firm adherency
to it, and its full acquiescence in it. All which is done figuratively, under
the Allegory of a Local Elevation from the feculent Regions of this lower World.

Pure uncorrupted Element I breathe
And pity their gross Atmosphere beneath.
By pure uncorrupted Element is meant the refined intellectual entertainments
of the Divine life, which are abstracted from all Corporeal allays. (...) as
the divine Plato calls them, those Pleasures which are proper to man as such.
By gross Atmosphere is meant the more drossy gratifications of the Animal life,
which comes as short in purity of the Divine, as the thick Atmosphere does of
the pure Ether.

No steams of Earth can here retard thy flight etc. The thing intended in this
whole Stanza is to insinuate the great facility and pleasure of the Divine life
to one that is arrived to an habit of it. For as the Magnetic influence of the
earth can have no force upon him that is placed in the upper Regions beyond the
Sphere of its Activity, so (which is the Counterpart of the Allegory) the
inclinations of the Animal nature have little or no power over him who has
advanced to the Heights of habitual Contemplation. He looks down upon and
observes the tumults of his sensitive appetite, but no way sympathizes with it;
He views the troubled Sea, but with the unconcernedness of a stander by, not as
one that sails in it. His Soul tho in Conjunction with his body is yet above
the reach of its gusts and relishes, and from her serene station at once sees
and smiles at its little complacencies. As Lucan says of the Soul of Pompey
when advanced to the Ethereal Regions,*

-- Illic postquam se lumine vero
Implevit, stellasque vagas miratur, and astr^
Fixa polis, vidit quanta sub nocte jaceret
Nostra dies, risitque sui* ludibria trunci.
And here I cannot choose but take notice of a Difficulty which is very incident
to the business in hand, and wherewith I my self was once very much perplexed
when I first applied my thoughts to Moral Contemplations. It Is in short this,
we have a received Axiom that the Difficulty of the performance Commends the
merit of a good Action. Now if so, it seems to follow that he who by a long
habitual course of Piety and Virtue has made his duty easy and natural to
himself, will be less perfect than another who does hardly abstain from vice,
or than himself before the acquisition of that habit. And then that (...) which
Aristotle in the 7th of his Ethics makes only a Semi-vertue because of the
difficulty of its performance, will for that very reason become Virtus Heroica,
and if so, to make a progress in virtue will involve a contradiction. This I
confess appeared to me no inconsiderable intricacy when it first occurred to my
thoughts, and I could not presently unwind my self from it.

But in answer to it I consider, I. That when the Difficulty of the performance
is said to commend the Action, it is not so to be understood as if Difficulty
did in it self as an ingredient add any moment to the excellency of a man's
virtue, but only that it is a sign of it a Posteriori. Because were not a man
endowed with such a degree of virtue he would not be able to conquer the
supposed Difficulty. So that if a man has a stock of Resolution sufficient to
conquer such a difficulty, his virtue is the same tho he never be engaged in
it. For all the virtue is absolved in the degree of resolution, the difficulty
is only a sign or indication of it. And upon this consideration it is that those
whom nature has befriended with such an (...) or happy constitution as carries
with it little or no temptation to vice may yet be accounted virtuous, because
their Resolution to virtue may be so firm and peremptory, that they would
adhere to it notwithstanding any Opposition.

2ly. I consider that we are to distinguish of a twofold difficulty. I. There
is a difficulty which arises from the nature of the work it self. And 2ly there
is a Difficulty which arises from the Disposition of the Agent. Now it is not
this latter Difficulty that commends the excellency of virtue, but only the
former, which is no way diminished by the habit. For after the induction of the
habit the work remains the same in its own nature which it was before, the only
change is in the Agent, who by his habit is rendered more expedite and ready
for the performance of what is good. But as for the latter difficulty which
proceeds from the Agent himself, that is so far from commending the worth of
any good action, that it derogates much from its commendation. It Is easiness of
performance that here gives the value. He that abstains from sensual pleasures
with great abhorrency, and has set himself at a wide distance from it,
discovers more and has more of a virtuous resolution than he whose mind stands
almost in an equipoise, and does but just abstain. For since we become virtuous
by a right application of our wills, the excellency of our virtues must be
measured by the greater or less strength of our resolutions. And consequently
he who by a strong habit has made his virtue most natural and easy to him is
arrived to the greatest Perfection.

Drawn by the bent of the Ethereal Tide; This is in Allusion to the Cartesian
Hypothesis of Vortices or whirl-pools of subtle matter. The Mystic sense is
this, that the higher a Seraphic Soul advances in the Contemplation of the
supreme good, the stronger he will find its Attractions.

I know it well, it is my native home. This Verse with the whole Stanza
proceeds upon the Platonic Hypothesis of Prae-existence. I shall not here
dispute the Problem. Those that desire to be satisfied concerning it, I refer
to the works of that Oracle of profound Wisdom and Learning, the excellent Dr.
More, to an ingenious Treatise called Lux Orientalis, and to the Account of
Origin. In the mean while I hope the most rigid maintainer of Orthodoxy will
allow me the liberty of alluding to it as an Hypothesis, if not, I Am sure the
laws of Poetry will. My Business here was to imitate nature, and to represent
how a Soul would be affected in such a case, supposing it true: which I think I
have not done amiss. For so the Ingenious Platonist Boethius,

Huc te si reducem referat via,
Quam nunc requiris immemor,
Haec dices, memini, patria est mihi,
Hinc ortus hic sistam gradum.
It Is one immense and everflowing light. My business was here to give a
Compendious description of God. Now among all the representations we have of
him I thought none so agreeable to the Genius of Poetry as a sensible one, and
of all those I could not find a better in all the Inventory of the Creation
than this of Light. I shall not here endeavor a Parallel; It may suffice to
say, that the Representation is warranted by Authority both human and Divine.
The School of Plato describes the nature of God by an immense light or Lucid
Fountain ever flowing and diffusing its refreshing beams. And Holy Scripture
goes further, and says in express terms that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all. John I. 5.

The Curiosity.
I.
UNhappy state of mortals here below,
Whom unkind Heaven does inspire
With such a constant, strong desire
And with such slender facultys to know!
And yet we not content to bear the pain
Of thirst unquencht and fruitless love,
With one more curse our ills improve,
And toil and drudge for what we never can gain.
II.
With what strange Frenzy are we all possessed
Contented Ignorance to refuse,
And by laborious search to lose
Not the enjoyment only but our Rest!
Something like Oar does on the surface shine,
We taken with the specious show,
With pains dig in the flattering Mine
But all alas in vain, Truth lies more low.
III.
The greatest Knowledge we can ever gain
From studying Nature, Books or men
Serves just to employ dull hours, but then
It yields less Pleasure than it costs us pain.
Besides, so short and treacherous is our age,
No sooner are we counted Wise
But envious Death shuts up our eyes,
Just our part is learnt; we quit the Stage.
IV.
Could I among the nobler spirits find
One that would lay aside his State
And be my kind confederate
That suddenly I might enrich my mind!
'Twould be some pleasure this, if happy I
Could once at ease sit and survey
And my great victory enjoy,
And not (as now) still labor on and dye.
The 114 Psalm Paraphrased.
I.
WHen conquered by the Plagues of Moses Rod
The Egyptian Tyrant gave command
That Israel should depart his Land
Israel the chosen Family of God.
Among them dwelt the Holy One,
Juda his Sanctuary, and Israel was his Throne.
II.
The Sea beheld this Scene, and did admire,
Each wave stood silently to see
The Power of the Divinity,
They saw, and fled the dreadful guide of Fire.
And Jordan too divided stood,
The Priests the sacred Ark bore through the yielding Flood.
III.
Mount Sinai with great Horror struck and dread
Forgot her weight, and in a trance
Like a light Ram did skip and dance,
She feared, and fain would hide her Palsy Head.
The Hills their Mother Mountain saw,
The little Hills, and like young sheep they stood in awe.
IV.
What made thee to retreat thou Mighty Sea
Tell me, for never any shore
Knew such a wondrous Tide before,
And thou great Jordan say, what ailed thee?
Say sacred Mount what meant thy trance,
And you small under-hills why did you skip and dance?
V.
You need not think it shame to own your fear,
What you dismayed the same would make
The universal Fabric shake,
The cause was great, for Jacob's God was there.
That God who did the Rock subdue,
And made it melt in tears tho harder far than you.
The 148 Psalm Paraphrased.
I.
O Come let all created force conspire
A general Hymn of Praise to sing,
Join all ye Creatures in one solemn Quire,
And let your Theme be Heaven's Almighty King.
II.
Begin ye blessed Attendants of his Seat,
Begin your high Seraphic lays,
It Is just you should, your Happiness is great,
And all you are to give again, is Praise.
III.
Ye glorious Lamps that rule both night and day
Bring you your Allelujahs too,
To him that Tribute of Devotion pay
Which once blind superstition gave to you.
IV.
Thou first and fairest of material kind
By whom his other works we see
Subtle and active as pure thought and mind,
Praise him that is Elder and more fair than thee.
V.
Ye Regions of the Air his praises sing,
And all ye Virgin waters there
Do you advantage to the Consort bring
And down to us the Allelujah bear.
VI.
In chaunting forth the great Jehovah's Praise
Let these the upper Consort fill,
He spoke, and did you all from nothing raise,
As you did then so now obey his will.
VII.
His will, that fixed you in a constant state
And out a track for Natures wheel,
Here let it run said he, and made it fate,
And where is that Power which can this Law repeal?
VIII.
Ye Powers that to the inferior world retain,
Join you now with the Quire above.
And first ye Dragons try an higher strain,
And turn your angry hissings into Praise and Love.
IX.
Let fire, hail, snow and vapors that ascend
Unlocked by Phoebus searching rays
Let Stormy winds ambitiously contend
And all their wonted force employ in Praise.
X.
Ye sacred tops which seem to brave the skies,
Rise higher, and when men on you
Religious rites perform and Sacrifice
With their Oblations send your Praises too.
XI.
Ye Trees whose fruits both men and beasts consume
Be you in Praises fruitful too;
Ye Cedars, why have you such choice perfume
But that sweet Incense should be made of you?
XII.
Ye Beasts with all the humble Creeping train
Praise him that made your lot so high.
Ye Birds who in a nobler Province reign
Send up your Praises higher than you ^ly.
XIII.
Ye sacred heads that wear Imperial gold
Praise him that you with power arrays,
And you whose hands the Scale of Justice hold
Be Just in this, and pay your Debt of Praise.
XIV.
Let sprightly youth give vigor to the Quire,
Each Sex with one another vie,
Let feeble Age dissolved in Praise expire,
And Infants too in Hymns their tender voices try.
XV.
Praise him ye Saints who Piety profess
And at his Altar spend your days,
Ye seed of Israel your great Patron ble^s,
It Is Manna this, for Angels food is Praise.
A Pastoral
On the death of his Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the Second.
Menalcas, Thyrsis and Daphnis.

Thyr. WHat, sad? Menalcas, Sure this pleasant shade
Was never for such a mournful Tenant made.
All things smile round thee, and throughout the Grove
Nature displays a Scene of Joy and Love.
But Shepherd where is thy flock? --
Sure they in some forbidden pastures stray
Whilst here in sighs thou number'st out the day.

Men. Ah Thyrsis, thou could witness heretofore
What strange Affection to my flock I bore.
Thou know my Thyrsis, the Arcadian Plain
Could not afford a more industrious Swain.
But I no longer now that mind retain.

Thyr. What change so great but what Love's power can make?
Menalcas does his kids, and tender lambs forsake.
So I, when slave to Galatea's eyes
Did neither City nor the Country prize,
But all their sports, and my flock too despise.
Hang thou my Pipe (said I) on yonder tree,
For then (alas) I had no taste for melody.
Obscurely in thick woods I sat alone
And sighed in consort to the Turtle's moan.

Men. It Is not fond love that causes my distress
No Thyrsis, you are mistaken in your guess.
The glorious Prize I have in Triumph born,
I am no longer now Alexis scorn.
Or if I were, I now could be unmoved
At every scornful glance, nor care where e're he loved.
A nearer grief preys on my spirits now,
And I beneath a heavier burden bow.
The gentle god of the Arcadian plains
Pan that regards the sheep, Pan that regards the Swains
Great Pan is dead --
Throughout the fields the doleful tidings ran,
A swoon seized all the Shepherds at the death of Pan.
Of Pan -- But see the rest that Tree will show
Which wears the sad inscription of my woe,
Where, with the bark my sorrows too will grow.

Thyr. How Shepherd, is it by Fames trumpet said
That Pan the best of all the gods, is dead?
Whom often w'adored, and whom because we knew
As good as they, we thought him as immortal too?
It Is strange; but Omens now I find are true.
In yonder Copse a shady Oak there stood,
Stately, well rooted, and it self a wood,
Her branches over the inferior trees were spread.
Who all adored her as their sovereign head,
Hither, when heated by the guide of Day
While their young wanton goats did skip amd play
Hither the Swains would constantly repair,
Here sing, and in the ample shade drink fresher air.
This Tree when I my goats to pasture drove
While all was clear above, and still throughout the grove.
Struck by some secret force fall down I saw,
The wood-Nymphs all were seized with wonder, grief (and awe.
Nor had I left this ruin far behind
When lo (strange sight) a Nightingal I find
Which from brisk airs enlivening all the grove
Coo'd on a sudden like the mournful dove.
Amazed I stand, and on my pipe estay
With some brisk song her sorrows to allay.
But all in vain. She from the lofty tree
Kept on her sad complaint, and mourned and drooped (like thee.

Men. And why these slighter things do thou relate?
Nature her self perceived Pan's mighty fate.
She fainted, when he drew his latest breath,
And almost sympathized with him to death.
Each Field put on a languid dying face,
The sheep not minding food, with tears bedewed the (grass.
The Lions too in tears their grief confessed
And savage Bears, peran's enemies professed.
The Nymphs all wept, and all the noble train
Of Deitys that frequent the Court of Pan.
Echo that long by naught but voice was known
In sounds repeated others woes, but wept her own.
The Arcadians mourned, and pressed beneath the weighty care
With cruelty they charged the gods and every star.

Thyr. And well they might; Heaven could not show a Deity
More mild, more good to his Votarys than he.
He was all Love, all Peace, all Clemency.
H' allured the Love, and melted down the hate
Of all, he had no enemy but Fate.
Pan kept the Fields, from wolves secured the Stall,
He guarded both the humble Shrubs, and Cedars tall.
The Summers heat obeyed Pan's gentle hand,
And Winter winds blew soft at his command,
He blessed the Swains with sneep, and fruitful made their land.
Weep Shepherds, and in pomp your grief express,
The ground with flowers, your selves with Cypress (dress.
Let the Arcadians in a solemn train
March slowly on, let mournful accents fill the plain,
Do this at least in Memory of Pan.

Daph. But why this vain expense of tears and breath?
D' ye think Pan lost and swallowed up in death?
He lives, and with a pleased and wondering eye
Contemplates the new beautys of the sky.
Whence on these Fields he casts propitious rays,
Now greater than our Sorrow, greater than our Praise.
I saw (for why may not I rehearse the sight)
Just as the Stars were kindled by the Queen of night
Another new-made milky way appear,
I saw, and wondered what event it might prepare.
When lo great Pan amazed my trembling sight,
As through the Ethereal plains he took his flight
Decked round with rays, and darting streams of light.
Triumphant was his March, a sacred throng
Of gods enclosed him, Pan was all their song,
The sky still brightened as they went along.

Men. Thy vision be all truth --
But who shall now the royal sheep-crook hold,
Who patronize the fields, who now secure the fold?

Daoh. Discharge that care, the royal stock does yield
Another Pan to patronize the field.
An Heir of equal conduct does the Scepter sway,
One who long nurtured in the Pastoral way,
In peace will govern the Arcadian plains,
Defend the tender flocks, and cheer the drooping Swains.

Thyr. Come then, let us tune the pipe to a brisker Key,
Let Us with a dance our sorrows chase away
And to new Pan in sports devote the day.

Satiety.
I.
Have on dull Time thy winged minutes have,
I care not now how soon thou bring'st my last.
By what I Have lived I plainly know
The total Sum of all below.
The days to come, although they promise more,
I know will be as false as those that went before.
II.
The best of life tho once enjoyed, is vain,
And why ye Powers the self same over again?
The Comedy's so dull, I fear
'Twill not a second acting bear.
No, I Have enough; I cannot like the Sun
Each day the self same stage, and still unwearied, run.
III.
What cruel laws are these that me confine
Thus still to dig in a deceitful Mine?
Be just ye Powers, my Soul set free,
Give her her native liberty.
It Is against the Stage's law to force my stay,
I Have seen an Act or two, and do not like the Play.
The Reply.
I.
SInce you desire of me to know
Who Is the Wise man, I Will tell you who.
Not he whose rich and fertile mind
Is by the Culture of the Arts refined,
Who has the Chaos of disordered thought
By Reason's Light to Form and method brought.
Who with a clear and piercing sight
Can see through nicetys as dark as night.
You err, if you think this is He,
Tho seated on the top of the Porphyrian tree.
II.
Nor is it He to whom kind Heaven
A secret Cabala has given
TO unriddle the mysterious Text
Of Nature, with dark Comments more perplexed.
Or to decypher her clean-writ and fair
But most confounding puzling character.
That can through all her windings trace
This slippery wanderer, and unveil her face.
Her inmost Mechanism view,
Anatomize each part, and see her through and through.
III.
Nor he that does the Science know,
Our only Certainty below,
That can from Problems dark and nice
Deduce Truths worthy of a Sacrifice.
Nor he that can confess the stars, and see
What Is writ in the black leaves of Destiny.
That knows their laws, and how the Sun
His daily and his annual stage does run.
As if he did to them dispense
Their Motions, and there sat supreme Intelligence.
IV.
Nor is it he (although he boast
Of wisdom, and seem wise to most)
Yet it is not he, whose busy pate
Can dive into the deep intrigues of State.
That can the great Leviathan control,
Menage and rule't, as if he were its soul.
The wisest King thus gifted was
And yet did not in these true Wisdom place.
Who then is by the Wise man meant?
He that can want all this, and yet can be content.
My Estate.
I.
HOw do I pity that proud wealthy Clown
That does with scorn on my low state look down!
Thy vain contempt dull Earth-worm cease,
I will not for refuge-fly to this
That none of fortune's Blessings can
Add any value to the man,
This all the wise acknowledge to be true;
But know I am as rich, more rich than you.
II.
While you a spot of earth possess with care
Below the notice of the Geographer,
I by the freedom of my Soul
Possess, nay more, enjoy the whole,
To the universe a claim I lay;
Your writings show perhaps you will say,
That Is your dull way, my title runs more high,
It Is by the Charter of Philosophy.
III.
From that a firmer title I derive
Than all your Courts of Law could ever give.
A title that more firm does stand
Than does even your very Land.
And yet so generous and free
That none will e're bethink it me,
Since my possessions tend to no man's loss,
I all enjoy, yet nothing I ingross.
IV.
Throughout the works divine I cast my eye,
Admire their Beauty and their Harmony.
I view the glorious Host above
And him that made them Praise and Love.
The flowery meads and fields beneath
Delight me with their odorous breath.
Thus is my joy by you not understood
Like that of God, when he said all was good.
V.
Nay (what you would think less likely to be true)
I can enjoy what is yours much more than you.
Your meadow's beauty I survey
Which you prize only for its hay.
There can I sit beneath a tree
And write an Ode or Elegy.
What to you care, does to me pleasure bring,
You own the Cage, I in it sit and sing.
The Conquest.
I.
IN Power or Wisdom to contend with thee
Great God, who but a Lucifer would dare;
Our strength is but infirmity,
And when we this perceive our sight's most clear
But yet I will not be excelled thought I
In Love, in Love I Will with my Maker vy.
II.
I viewed the glorys of thy Seat above
And thought of every Grace and Charm divine,
And further to increase my love
I measured all the Heights and Depths of thine.
Thus there broke forth a Strong and Vigorous flame
And almost melted down my mortal frame.
III.
But when thy Bloody Sweat and Death I view
I own (Dear Lord) the conquest of thy love,
Thou do my highest flights outdo,
I in a lower orb, and slower move.
Thus in this strife's a double weakness shown,
Thy Love I cannot equal, nor yet bear my own.
The Impatient.
I.
WHat envious laws are those of Fate
Which fix a gulf (Blessed Souls) 'twixt us and you!
How 'twou'd refresh and cheer our Mortal state
When our dejected looks confess
The emptiness of earthly bliss,
Could we in this black night your brighter glorys view!
II.
Vain comfort when I thus complain
To hear the Wise and Solemn gravely say,
Your grief and curiosity restrain,
Death will e're long this Bar remove,
And bring you to the Blessed above,
Till then with this great Prospect all your longings stay.
III.
But ah the joy peculiar here
Does from the greater excellence arise
'Twill be worth nothing in an equal Sphere.
Let me your noble converse have
Blessed Spirits, on this side the grave,
I shall hereafter be as great as you, as wise.
IV.
Besides when plunged in bliss divine
I shall not taste, or need this lesser joy.
What comfort then does from this Prospect shine?
It Is just as if in depth of night
You robb a Traveller of his light
And promise to restore't when it is clear day.
Content.
I.
I Bless my stars I envy none
Not great, nor wealthy, no nor yet the Wise,
I Have learnt the Art to like my own,
And what I cannot attain to, not to prize.
Vast Tracts of Learning I descry
Beyond the Sphere perhaps of my Activity,
And yet I Am never the more concerned at this,
Than for the Gems that lie in the profound Abyss.
II.
Should I my proper lot disdain
As long as further good eclipses mine,
I may to eternity complain,
And in the Mansions of the Blessed repine.
There shall I numbers vast espy*
Of Forms more excellent, more wise, more Blessed than I.
I shall not then lament my unequal fate,
And why should larger Prospects now molest my state?
III.
Where all in equal stations move
What place for Harmony can there be found?
The lower Spheres with those above
Agree, and dance as free and briskly round*
Degrees of Essences conspire
As well as various notes* to accomplish heaven's Quire.
Thus would I have't below, nor will I care
So the Result be Harmony, what part I bear.
Against Knowledge.
I.
WEll, let it be the Censure of the Wise
That Wisdom none but Fools despise,
I like not what they gravely preach
And must another Doctrine teach.
Since all is so false and vain below
There Is naught so indiscreet as this, to know.
II.
The thoughtless, dull and less discerning mind
No flaws in earthly joys can find,
He Closes with what Courts his sight,
All Coin will pass by his dim light.
Though often baulkt, he hopes for rest,
Sleeps on and dreams, and is in Error Blessed.
III.
But he that has refined and high-rais'd sense
Can nothing taste but excellence.
Nor can he nature's faults supply
By Fancy's happy Imag'ry.
He sees that all Fruition's vain,
Cannot taste the present, nor yet trust again.
IV.
Our Joys like Tricks, do all on cheats depend,
And when once known are at an end.
Happy and Wise two Blessings are
Which meet not in this mortal Sphere,
Let me be ignorant below,
And when I Have Solid good, then let me Know.
Seeing a great Person lying in State.
I.
WEll now I needs must own
That I hate greatness more and more,
It Is now a just abhorrence grown
What was Antipathy before,
With other ills I could dispense,
And acquiesce in Providence.
But let not Heaven my patience try
With this one Plague, left I repine and dye.
II.
I knew indeed before
That 'twas the great man's wretched fate
While with the living to endure
The vain impertinence of State.
But sure thought I, in death he will be
From that and other troubles free.
What e're his life, he then will lie
As free, as undisturbed, as calm as I.
III.
But 'twas a gross mistake,
Honor that too officious ill,
Will Not even his breathless corpse forsake,
But haunts and waits about him still.
Strange persecution, when the grave
Cannot the distressed Martyr save!
What Remedy can there avail
Where Death the great Catholicon does fail?
IV.
Thanks to my stars that I
Am with so low a fortune blessed
That what e're Blessings fate deny,
I Am sure of privacy and rest.
It Is well; thus long I am content,
And rest as in my Element.
Then Fate, if you will appear my friend,
Force me not against my nature to ascend.
V.
No, I would still be low,
Or else I would be very high,
Beyond the state which mortals know,
A kind of Semi-deity.
So of the Regions of the air
The Highest and Lowest quiet are,
But it is this middle Height I fear,
For storms and thunder are ingender'd there.
Second Chap. of the Cant. from the 10. verse, to the 13.
I.
'T Was my Beloved spoke,
I know his charming voice, I heard him say,
Rise up my Love, my fairest one awake,
Awake and come away.
II.
The Winter all is past
And stormy winds that with such rudeness blew,
The heavens are no longer overcast,
But try to look like you.
III.
The flowers their sweets display,
The Birds in short praeludiums tune their throat,
The Turtle in low murmurs does essay
Her melancholy note.
IV.
The fruitful Vineyards make
An odorous smell, the Fig looks fresh and gay,
Arise my Love, my fairest one awake,
Awake and come away.
To a Friend in Honor.
I.
SOme thoughtless heads perhaps admire to see
That I so little to your titles bow,
But wonder not my Friend, I swear to me
You were as great before as now.
Honor to you does nothing give,
Tho from your worth much luster she receive.
II.
Your native glory does so far outdo
That of the Sphere wherein you move,
That I can nothing but your self in you
Observe, admire, esteem or love.
You are a Diamond set in gold,
The Curious the rich stone, not this behold.
III.
All that to your late honor you can owe
Is only that you're brought in view,
You don't begin to have, but men to know,
Your Votarys are increased, not you.
So the Sun's height adds not to his light,
But only does expose him more to sight.
IV.
To some whose native worth more dimly shined
Honor might some improvement give,
As metals which the Sun has less refined
A value from their Stamp receive.
But you like gold, pass for no more
Tho Stamped, than for your weight you would before.
A divine Hymn on the Creation.
I.
AWake my Lyre, and thy sweet forces join
With me to sing an Hymn divine,
Let both our Strains in pleasing numbers flow,
But see, thy strings with tediousness and pain
Arise into a tuneful strain,
How can thou silently?
The universe is Harmony,
Awake, and move by sympathy,
My heart's already tuned, O why art thou so slow.
II.
Jehovah is our Theme, the eternal King,
Whose Praise admiring Angels sing,
They see with steady and attentive eyes
His naked Beautys, and from Vision raise
To wondrous heights their Love and Praise.
We mortals only view
His Back-parts, and that darkly too,
We must fall short, what shall we do,
But neither too can they up to his grandeur rise.
III.
No power can justly praise him but must be
As great, as infinite as he,
He comprehends his boundless self alone,
Created minds too shallow are and dim
His works to fathom, much more him.
Our Praise at height will be
Short by a whole Infinity,
Of his all glorious Deity,
He cannot have the full, and stands in need of none.
IV.
He cannot be less, nor can he more receive
But stands one fixed Superlative.
He Is in himself compendiously blessed,
We acted by the weights of strong desire
To good without our selves aspire,
We Are always moving hence
Like lines from the Circumference
To some more in-lodg'd excellence,
But he is one unmoved self-center'd Point of Rest.
V.
Why then, if full of bliss that never could cloy,
Would he do ought but still enjoy.
Why not indulge his self-sufficing state,
Live to himself at large, calm and secure,
A wise eternal Epicure?
Why six days work, to frame
A monument of Praise and Fame
To him whose bliss is still the same?
What need the wealthy coin, or he that is Blessed Create?
VI.
Almighty Love the fairest gem that shone
All-round, and half made up his throne,
His Favorite and darling excellence,
Whom often he would his Royal virtue style,
And view with a peculiar smile,
Love moved him to create
Beings that might participate
Of their Creator's happy state,
And that good which he could not heighten, to dispense.
VII.
How large thy empire, Love, how great thy sway!
Omnipotence does thee obey.
What complicated wonders in thee shine!
He that to infinity it self is great
Has one way to be greater yet,
Love will the method show,
It Is to impart; what is it that thou
O sovereign Passion can not do?
Thou make Divinity it self much more divine.
VIII.
With pregnant love full-fraught, the great Three-one
Would now no longer be alone.
Love, gentle love unlockt his fruitful breast
And 'woke the Ideas which there dormant lay,
Awaked their Beautys they display,
The Almighty smiled to see
The comely form and harmony
Of his eternal Imag'ry,
He saw 'twas good and fair, and the infant platform blessed.
IX.
Ye seeds of Being in whose fair bosoms dwell
The Forms of all things possible,
Arise, and your Prolific force display,
Let a fair issue in your moulds be cast
To fill in part this empty wast.
He spoke. The Empty space
Immediately in travel was
And soon brought forth a formless mass,
First matter came undressed, she made such have to obey.
X.
But soon a Plastic spirit did ferment
The liquid dusky element.
The Mass harmoniously begins to move
Let there be Light said God, 'twas said, and done,
The Mass dipped through with brightness shone.
Nature was pleased to see
This feature of Divinity,
The Almighty smiled as well as she,
He owned his likeness there, and did his Firstborn love.
XI.
But lo, I see a goodly frame arise,
Vast folding Orbs, and azure skies,
With lucid whirle-pools the vast Arch does shine,
The Sun by day shows to each world his light
The stars stand sentinel by night.
In midst of all is spread
That ponderous bulk whereon we tread,
But where is its foundation laid?
It Is pompous all and great, and worthy hands divine.
XII.
Thy Temple's built great God, but where is he
That must admire both it and thee?
Open one Scene more my Muse, bless and adore,
See there in solemn Council and debate
The great divine Triumvirate.
The rest one Word obeyed,
'Twas done almost before 'twas said,
But Man was not so cheaply made,
To make the world was great, but to epitomize it more.
XIII.
The accomplished work stands his severe review
Whose judgment's most exactly ture.
In natures Book were no Errata's found,
All things are good, said God, they answer well
The Ideas which within me dwell;
The Angelic voices join
Their Praise to the Applause divine,
The Morning stars in Hymns combine,
And as they sung and played, the jocant Orbs danced round.
XIV.
With this thy Quire divine, great God I bring
My Eucharistic Offering.
I cannot here sing more exalted lays,
But what is defective now I will supply
When I enjoy thy Deity.
Then may thou sleep my Lyre,
I shall not then thy help require,
Diviner thoughts will then me fire
Than thou tho played on by an Angels hand, can raise.
Plato's two Cupids.
I.
THe heart of man's a living Butt,
At which two different Archers shoot,
Their Shafts are pointed both with fire,
Both wound our hearts with hot desire.
II.
In this they differ, he that lies
A sacrifice to his Mistress eyes,
In pain does live, in pain expire,
And melts and drops before the fire.
III.
But he that flame's with love divine
Does not in the heat consume, but shine.
H' enjoys the fire that round him lies,
Serenely lives, serenely dies.
IV.
So Devils and damned Souls in hell
Fry in the fire with which they dwell,
But Angels suffer not the same,
Although their Vehicles be flame.
V.
The heart whose fire's divine and chaste
Is like the Bush that did not wast.
Moses beheld the flame with fear,
That wasted not, for God was there.
A Wish..
I.
WHatever Blessing you my Life deny
Grant me kind Heaven this one thing when I dye.
I charge thee guardian Spirit hear,
And as thou love me, further this my Prayer.
II.
When I Am to leave this grosser Sphere, and try
Death, that amazing Curiosity,
When just about to breathe my last,
Then when no Mortal joy can strike my taste,
III.
Let me soft melting strains of Music hear
Whose Dying sounds may speak Death to my ear,
Gently the Bands of life unty,
Till in sweet raptures I dissolve and dye.
IV.
How soft and easy my new Birth will be
Helped on by Music*s gentle Midwifery!
And I who 'midst these charms expire
Shall bring a Soul well tuned to Heaven's Quire.
To Dr. More.
Ode.
I.
GO Muse, go hasten to the Cell of Fame
(Thou kow'st her reverend aweful seat,
It stands hard by your blessed retreat)
Go with a brisk alarm assault her ear,
Bid her her loudest Trump prepare
To sound a more than Human name,
A name more excellent and great
Than she could ever publish yet,
Tell her she need not stay till Fate shall give
A License to his Works, and bid them live,
His Worth now shines through Envys base Alloy,
'Twill fill her widest Trump, and all her Breath employ.
II.
Learning which long like an enchanted Land
Did Human force and Art defy
And stood the Vertuoso's best Artillery,
Which nothing mortal could subdue,
Has yielded to this Hero's Fatal hand,
By him is conquered, held, and peopled too.
Like Seas that border on the shore
The Muses Suburbs some possession knew,
But like the deep Abyss their iuner store
Lay unpossess'd, till seized and owned by you*
Truth's outer Courts were trod before,
Sacred was her recess, that Fate reserved for More.
III.
Others in Learning's Chorus bear their part
And the great Work distinctly share,
Thou our great Catholic Professor art,
All Science is annexed to thy unerring Chair.
Some lesser Synods of the Wise
The Muses kept in Universitys,
But never yet till in thy Soul
Had they a Council Ecumenical.
An Abstract they would a mind to see
Of all their scattered gifts, and summed them up in thee*
Thou have the Arts whole Zodiac run
And fathom'st all that here is known.
Strange restless Curiosity;
Adam himself came short of thee,
He tasted of the Fruit, thou bear away the Tree.
IV.
Whilst to be great the most aspire
Or with low Souls to raise their fortunes higher,
Knowledge the chiefest Treasure of the Blessed
Knowledge the Wise man's best Request
Was made thy choice, for this thou have declined
A life of noise, impertinence and State
And what e're else the Muses hate
And made it thy one business to enrich thy mind.
How calm thy life, how easy, how secure
Thou Intellectual Epicure.
Thou as another Solomon have tried
All Nature through, and nothing to thy Soul denied.
Who can two such examples show?
He all things tried to enjoy, and you all things to know.
V.
By Babel's Curse, and our Contracted span
Heaven thought to check the swift career of man.
And so it proved till now, our age
Is much too short to run so long a Stage.
And to learn words is such a vast delay
That we are benighted e're we come half way.
Thou with unusual have driv'st on
And do even Time it self outrun.
No hindrance can retard thy Course*
Thou rid'st the Muses winged horse,
Thy Stage of Learning ends e're that of Life be done.
There Is now no work left for thy accomplished mind
But to Survey thy Conquests, and inform mankind.
The Passion of the Virgin Mother Beholding the Crucifixion of her divine Son.
1.
NIgh to the Fatal and yet Sovereign wood
Which crowds of wondering Angels did surround
Devoutly sad the Holy Mother stood,
And viewed her Son, and sympathized with every wound.
II.
Angelic piety in her mournful face
Like rays of light through a watery cloud, did shine,
Two mighty Passions in her breast took place
And like her Son sh' appeared, half human, half divine.
III.
She saw a blacker and more tragic Scene
Than e're the Sun before or then would see,
In vain did nature draw her dusky Skreen,
She saw, and wept, and felt the dreadful Agony.
IV.
Grief in the abstract sure can rise no higher
Than that which this deep Tragedy did move,
She saw in tortures and in shame expire
Her Son, her God, her worship and her Love.
V.
That sacred head which all divine and bright
Struck with deep awe the Votarys of the East,
To which a Star paid Tributary light,
Which the ( then joyful) mother kissed, adored and blessed,
VI.
That head which Angels with pure light had crowned
Where Wisdom's Seat and Oracle was placed,
Whose air divine threw his Traitors to the ground,
She saw with pointed circles of rude thorns embraced.
VII.
Those hands whose sovereign touch were wont to heal
All wounds and hurts that others did endure
Did now the peircings of rough iron feel,
Nor could the wounded heart of his sad mother cure.
VIII.
No, No it bled to see his body torn
With nails, and decked with gems of purple gore,
On four great wounds to see him rudely born,
Whom often her arms a happy burden found before.
IX.
It bled to hear that voice of grief and dread
Which the Earths pillars and foundations shook,
Which rent the Rocks, and 'woke the sleeping dead,
My God, my God O why, why have thou me forsook?
X.
And can the tide of Sorrow rise more high?
Her melting face stood thick with tears to view
Like those of heaven his setting glorys dye,
As flowers left by the Sun are charged with evening dew.
XI.
But see grief spreads her empire still more wide,
Another Spring of tears begins to flow,
A barbarous hand wounds his now senseless side,
And death that ends the Son's, renews the Mother's woe.
XII.
She sees now by the rude inhuman stroke
The Mystic river flow, and in her breast
Wonders by what strange figure the Angel spoke
When amongst all the Daughters he pronounced her Blessed.
XIII.
Thus far did Nature, pity, grief and love
And all the Passions their strong efforts try,
But still tho dark below, 'twas clear above,
She had (as once her Son) her strengthening Angel by.
XIV.
Gabriel the chiefest of the Almighty's train
That first with happy tidings blessed her ear,
The Archangel Gabriel was sent again,
To stem the tide of grief, and qualify her fear.
XV.
A large Perspective wrought by hands divine
He set before her first enlightened eye,
''Twas hewn out of the heaven Christalline,
One of whose ends did lessen, the other magnify.
XVI.
With that his sufferings he exposed to sight
With this his Glorys he did represent,
The weight of this made the other seem but light,
She saw the mighty odds, adored, and was content.
Damon and Pythias. Or, Friendship in perfection.
Pyth. I.
It Is true (my Damon) we as yet have been
Patterns of constant love I know,
We have stuck so close, no third could come between,
But will it ( Damon) will it still be so?

Da. II.
Keep your love true, I dare engage that mine
Shall like my Soul immortal prove.
In friendship's Orb how brightly shall we shine
Where all shall envy, none divide our love!

Pyth. III.
Death will; when once (as it is by fate designed)
TO Elysium you shall be removed,
Such sweet Companions there no doubt you will find
That you will forget that Pythias e're you loved.

Da. IV.
No, banish all such fears, I then will be
Your Friend and guardian Angel too.
And tho with more refined Society
I Will leave Elysium to converse with you.

Pyth. V.
But grant that after fate you still are kind,
You cannot long continue so,
When I like you become all thought and mind
By what mark then shall we each other know?

Da. VI.
With care on your last hour I will attend,
And lest like Souls should me deceive
I closely will embrace my newborn friend,
And never after my dear Pythias leave.

The Indifferency.
I.
WHether it is from stupidity or no
I know not, but I never could find
Why I one Thought or Passion should bestow
On Fame, that gaudy Idol of mankind.
Call me not Stoic, no I can pursue
Things excellent with as much zeal as you,
But here I own my self to be
A very lukewarm Votary.
II.
Should thousand excellencys in me meet
And one bright Constellation frame
It Is still as men's phantastic humors hit
Whether I Am written in the book of Fame.
So tho the Sun be never so fair and bright
And shine with free, uninterrupted light,
It Is as the Clouds disposed are,
E're he can paint his image there.
III.
The world is seldom to true merit just
Through Envy or through Ignorance.
True worth like Valor often lies hid in dust,
While some false Hero's graced with a Romance.
The true God's Altar often neglected lies
When Idols have Perfumes and Sacrifice.
And tho the true one some adore
Yet those that do blaspheme are more.
IV.
Yet grant that merit were of fame secure,
What Is Reputation, what is Praise?
Who'd one day's toil, or sleepless night endure
Such a vain Babel of esteem to raise?
Pleased with his hidden worth the great and wise
Can like his God this foreign good despise,
Whose happiness would never be less
Tho none were made to praise o^ bless.
V.
Even I who dare not rank my self with those
Who pleased into themselves retire,
Find yet in great Applauses less repose,
And do Fame less, less than my self admire.
Let her loud trumpet sound me far and near,
The Antipodes will never of me hear.
Or were I known throughout this ball*
I Have but a Point, when I have All.
VI.
Then as for glory which comes after Fate,
All that can then of me be said
I value least of all, it comes too late,
It Is like the embalming of the senseless dead.
Others with pleasure, what me labor cost
May read, and praise, but to me all is lost.
Just as the Sun no joy does find
In that his light which chears mankind.
VII.
Or should I after Fate has closed my eyes
Should I my living glorys know,
My wiser, improved Soul will then despise
All that poor Mortals say or think below.
Even they who of men's ignorance before
Complained, because few did their works adore,
Will then the self same Censure raise
Not from their silence, but their praise.
VIII.
Or grant 'twou'd pleasure bring to know that I
After my death live still in Fame,
Those that admire me too must shortly dye,
And then where is my Memorial, where my name?
My Fame tho longer-lived, yet once shall have
Like me its Death, its Funeral, its Grave.
This only difference will remain,
I shall, that never rise again.
IX.
Death and Destruction shall e're long deface
The World, the work of hands divine,
What Pillars then or Monuments of brass
Shall from the general ruin rescue mine?
All then shall equal be; I care not then
To be a while the talk and boast of men.
This only grant, that I may be
Praised by thy Angels, Lord, and thee.
The Infirmity.
I.
IN other things I never admired to see
Men injured by extremity.
But little thought in Happiness
There might be danger of excess.
At least I thought there was no fear
Of ever meeting with too much on it here.
II.
But now these melting sounds strike on my sense
With such a powerful excellence,
I find that Happiness may be
Screwed up to such extremity,
That our too Feeble facultys
May not be said to enjoy, but suffer Bliss.
III.
So frail's our mortal state, we can sustain
A mighty bliss no more than pain.
We lose our weak precarious breath
Tortured or tickled unto death.
As sprights and Angels alike fright
With too much Horror, or with too much light.
IV.
Alas; I Am over-pleas'd; what shall I do
The painful joy to undergo?
Temper your too melodious song,
Your dose of bliss is much too strong,
Like those that too rich Cordials have,
It don't so much revive, as make me rave.
V.
What Cruelty 'twou'd be still to confine
A mortal ear to Airs divine?
The Curse of Cain you have on me
Inverted by your Harmony,
For since with that you charmed my ear
My Bliss is much too great for me to bear.
VI.
Relieve this Paroxysm of delight,
And let it be less exquisite.
Let down my Soul; it is too high set,
I am not ripe for Heaven yet.
Give me a Region more beneath,
This Element's too fine for me to breath.
The Arrest.
I.
WHither so fast fond Passion do thou rove,
Licentious and unconfined?
Sure this is not the proper Sphere of Love,
Obey; and be not deaf, as thou art blind.
All is so false and treacherous here
That I must love with Caution, and enjoy with fear.
II.
Contract thy Sails, lest a too gusty blast
Make thee from shore launch out too far,
Weigh well this Ocean, e're thou make such have,
It has a nature very singular.
Men of the treacherous shore complain
In other Seas, but here most danger's in the Main.
III.
Should thou my Soul indulge thy forward love,
*And not control its headlong course,
The Object in the enjoyment vain will prove,
And thou on Nothing fall with all thy force.
So the eager Hawk makes sure of's prize,
Strikes with full might, but overshoots himself and dies.
IV.
Or should thou with long search on something light
That might content and stay thy mind,
All good's here winged, and stands prepared for flight,
'Twill leave thee reaching out in vain, behind.
Then when unconstant fate thou'st proved,
Thou Wilt sigh, and say with tears, I wish I ne re had loved.
V.
Well then ye softer Powers that love Command
And wound our breasts with pleasing smart,
Gage well your Lance, and bear a steady hand,
Lest it run in too deep into my heart.
Or if you're fixed in your design
Deeply to wound my heart, wound it with love divine.
To the Memory of my dear Niece M. C.
I.
BY tears to ease my grief I Have tried,
And Philosophic med'cins have applied,
From Books and Company I Have sought relief,
I Have used all spells and charms of Art
To Lay this Troubler of my heart,
I have, yet I Am still haunted by my grief.
These give some ease, but yet I find
It Is Poetry at last must cure my mind.
II.
Come then, to assuage my pain I Will try
By the sweet magic of thy Harmony.
Begin my Muse, but 'twill be hard I know
For thee my Genius to screw
To heights that to my Theme are due,
The weight of grief has set my Soul so low.
To grace her death my strains should be
As far above Mortality as she.
III.
Is she then dead, and can it be
That I can live to write her Elegy?
I hoped, since 'twas not to my Soul denied
To sympathize in all the pain
Which she tho long, did well sustain,
TO have carried on the sympathy, and died.
But Death was so o'rpleas'd I see
At this rich spoil, that she neglected me.
IV.
Yet has sh' of all things made me bare
But Life, nor was it kindness here to spare.
So when the Almighty would to inform mankind
His Eastern Hero's patience try
With the Extremes of misery,
He gave this Charge to the malicious Fiend;
Of all Life's Blessings him deprive,
Vex him with all thy Plagues, but let him live.
V.
Yet I will live (sweet Soul) to save
Thy name, since thee I cannot, from the grave.
I will not of this burden Life complain
Tho tears than verses faster flow,
Tho I am plunged in grief and woe,
And like the inspired Sibylls write in pain.
To dye for Friends is thought to be
Heroic, but I Will Life endure for thee.
VI.
It Is just, since I in thee did live
That thou should Life and Fame from me receive.
But how shall I this Debt of Justice pay?
The Colors of my Poetry
Are all too dead to Copy thee,
'Twill be Abuse the best that I can say.
Nature that wrought thy curious frame
Will find it hard to draw again the same.
VII.
In Council the Almighty sat
When he did man his Masterpiece create.
His Agent Nature did the same for thee,
In making thee she wrought for Fame,
And with slow progress drew thy frame,
As he that painted for Eternity.
In her best Mould she did thee cast,
But thou wast over-wrought, and made too fine to last.
VIII.
Thy Soul the Saint of this fair Shrine
Was pure without Alloy, and all divine.
Active and nimble as Ethereal light,
Kind as the Angels are above
Who live on Harmony and Love,
The Rays thou shott'st were warm, as well as bright.
So mild so pleasing was thy fire,
That none could envy, and all must admire.
IX.
Sickness to whose strong siege resign
The best of natures, did but set forth thine.
Wisely thou did thy passions all Control,
And like a Martyr in the fire
Devout and patient did expire,
Pains could expel, but not untune thy Soul.
Thou bore'st them all so Moderately
As if thou mean to teach how I should mourn for thee.
X.
No wonder such a noble mind
Her way again to Heaven so soon could find.
Angels, as it is but seldom they appear
So neither do they make long stay,
They do but visit, and away,
It Is pain for them to endure our too gross Sphere.
We could not hope for a Reprieve,
She must dye soon, that made such have to live.
XI.
Heaven did thy lovely presence want
And therefore did so early thee transplant.
Not'cause he dared not trust thee longer here,
No, such sweet Innocence as thine
To take a Stain was too divine,
But sure he Coveted to have thee there*
For meaner Souls he could delay,
Impatient for thine, he would not stay.
XII.
The Angels too did covet thee
TO advance their Love, their Bliss, their Harmony.
They Would lately made an Anthem to their King,
An Anthem which contained a part
All sweet, and full of Heavenly Art,
Which none but thy Harmonious Soul could sing.
'Twas all Heaven's Vote thou should be gone
To fill the Almighty's Quire, and to adorn his Throne.
XIII.
Others when gone to eternal rest
Are said to augment the number of the Blessed.
Thou do their very Happiness improve,
Out of the Crowd they single thee,
Fond of thy sweet society,
Thou wast our Darling, and art so above.
Why should we of thy loss Complain
Which is not only thine, but Heaven's gain?
XIV.
There do thou sit in Bliss and light,
Whilst I thy praise in mournful numbers write.
There do thou drink at pleasures virgin Spring,
And find'st no leisure in thy Bliss
Ought to admire below, but this
How I can mourn, when thou do Anthems sing*
Thy pardon my sweet Saint I implore,
My Soul never disconform'd from thine before.
XV.
Nor will I now; My tears shall flow
No more, I will be blessed 'cause thou art so.
I Will borrow Comfort from thy happy state,
In Bliss I Will sympathize with thee
As once I did in misery,
And by Reflection will be Fortunate.
I Will practice now, what is done above,
And by thy happy state my own improve.
The Resignation.
I.
LOng have I viewed, long have I thought,
And held with trembling hand this bitter Draught,
'Twas now just to my lips applied,
Nature shrank in, and all my Courage died.
But now Resolved, and firm I Will be,
Since Lord, it is mingled, and reached out by thee.
II.
I Will trust my great Physitian's skill,
I know what he prescribes can never be ill,
To each disease he knows what is fit,
I own him wise and good, and do submit.
I Will now no longer grieve or pine,
Since it is thy pleasure Lord, it shall be mine.
III.
Thy Medicine put's me to great smart,
Thou'st wounded me in my most tender part,
But it is with a design to cure,
I must and will thy Sovereign touch endure.
All that I prized below is gone,
But yet I still will pray, thy will be done.
IV.
Since it is thy sentence I should part
With the most precious treasure of my heart,
I freely that and more resign,
My heart it self, as its Delight, is thine,
My little All I give to thee,
Thou gav'st a greater gift, thy Son, to me.
V.
He left true Bliss and Joys above,
Himself he emptied of all good, but love.
For me he freely did forsake
More good, than he from me can ever take.
A mortal life for a divine
He took, and did at last even that resign.
VI.
Take all great God, I will not grieve,
But still will wish, that I had still to give.
I hear thy voice, thou bid'st me quit
My Paradise, I bless and do submit.
I will not murmur at thy word.
Nor beg thy Angel to sheath up his sword.
To my guardian Angel.
I.
I Own (my gentle guide) that much I owe
For all thy tutelary care and love,
Through life's wild maze thou'st led me hitherto,
Nor ever wilt (I hope) thy tent remove,
But yet to have been completely true,
Thou should have guarded her life too.
Thou know my Soul did most inhabit there,
I could have spared thee, to have guarded her.
II.
But since by thy neglect, or heavens decree,
She Is gone to increase the pleasures of the Blessed,
Since in this Sphere my Sun I never shall see,
Grant me (kind Spirit) grant me this request.
When I shall ease thy Charge and dye,
(For sure I think thou will be by)
Lead me through all the numerous host above,
And bring my new-flown Soul to her I love.
III.
With what high passion shall we then embrace!
What pleasure will she take to impart to me
The Rites and Methods of that sacred place,
And what a Heaven 'twill be to learn from thee!
That pleasure I shall then I fear
As ill as now my sorrow bear;
And could then any Chance my life destroy,
I should I fear then dye again with Joy.
The Defiance.
I.
WEll Fortune, now (if e're you have shown
What you had in your power to do,
My wandering love at length had fixed on one,
One who might please even unconstant you.
Me of this one you have deprived
On whom I stayed my Soul, in whom I lived,
You Have shown your power, and I resign,
But now I Will show thee Fortune, what is in mine.
II.
I will not, no I will not grieve,
My tears within their banks shall stand,
Do what thou will, I am resolved to Live,
Since thee I cannot, I will my self command.
I will my passions so control
That neither they, nor thou shall hurt my Soul,
I Will run so counter to thy will,
Thy good I Will relish, but not feel thy Ill.
III.
I felt the shaft that last was sent,
But now thy Quiver I desy.
I fear no Pain from thee or Discontent,
Clad in the Armor of Philosophy.
Thy last seized on me out of guard,
Unarmed too far within thy reach I dared,
But now the field I Will dearly sell,
I Am now (at least by thee) Impassible.
IV.
My Soul now soars high and sublime
Beyond the Spring of thy best bow,
Like those who so long on high mountains climb
Till they see rain, and thunder hear below.
In vain thou wilt spend thy darts on me,
My Fort's too strong for thy Artillery,
Thy closest aim will not touch my mind,
Here Is all thy gain, still to be thought more blind.
Superstition.
I.
I Care not tho it be
By the preciser sort thought Popery,
We Poets, can a License show
For every thing we do,
Hear then my little Saint, I Will pray to thee.
II.
If now thy happy mind
Amidst its various joys can leisure find
TO attend to any thing so low
As what I say or do,
Regard, and be what thou wast ever, kind.
III.
Let not the Blessed above
Engross thee quite, but sometimes hither rove,
Fain would I thy sweet image see
And sit, and talk with thee,
Nor is it Curiosity but Love.
IV.
Ah what delight 'twou'd be
Would thou sometimes by stealth converse with me!
How should I thy sweet commerce prize
And other joys despise!
Come then, I never was yet denied by thee.
V.
I would not long detain
Thy Soul from Bliss, nor keep thee here in pain.
Nor should thy fellow-Saints ere know
Of thy escape below,
Before you are missed, thou should return again.
VI.
Sure heaven must needs thy love
As well as other qualitys improve.
Come then and recreate my sight
With rays of thy pure light,
'Twill cheer my eyes more than the lamps above.
VII.
But if Fate's so severe
As to confine thee to thy blissfull Sphere,
(And by thy absence I shall know
Whether thy state be so)
Live happy, but be mindful of me there.
The complaint of Adam turned out of Paradise.
I.
ANd must I go, and must I be no more
The Tenant of this happy ground?
Can no reserves of pity me restore,
Can no atonement for my stay compound?
All the rich Odours that here grow I Would give
To Heaven in incense, might I here but live.
Or if it be a grace too high
To live in Eden, let me there but dye.
II.
Fair place, thy sweets I just began to know,
And must I leave thee now again?
Ah why does Heaven such short-lived Bliss bestow?
A taste of pleasure, but full draught of pain.
I ask not to be chief in this blessed state,
Let Heaven some other for that place create.
So it is in Eden, let me but have
An under-gardener's place, it is all I crave.
III.
But 'twill not do I see, I must away,
My feet profane this sacred ground;
Stay then bright Minister, one minute stay,
Let me in Eden take one farewell round.
Let me go gather but one fragrant bough
Which as a Relic I may keep and show,
Fear not the Tree of Life; it were
A Curse to be immortal, and not here.
IV.
It Is done; Now farewell thou most happy place,
Farewell ye streams that softly creep,
I never again in you shall view my face,
Farewell ye Bowers, in you I never shall sleep.
Farewell ye trees, ye flowery beds farewell,
You never will bless my taste, nor you my smell.
Farewell thou Guardian divine,
To thee my happy Rival I resign.
V.
O whither now, whither shall I repair
Exiled from this Angelic coast?
There Is nothing left that is pleasant, good or fair,
The world cannot recompense for Eden lost.
It Is true I Have here a universal sway,
The Creatures me as their chief Lord obey,
But yet the world tho all my Seat,
Cannot make me happy, tho it make me great.
VI.
Had I lost lesser and but seeming Bliss,
Reason my sorrows might relieve.
But when the loss great and substantial is,
To think is but to see good cause to grieve.
It Is well I Am mortal, it is well I shortly must
Lose all the thoughts of Eden in the dust.
Senseless and thoughtless now I Would be,
I Would lose even my self, since I Have lost thee.
To Sleep.
I.
BReak off thy slumber gentle god
And hither bring thy charming rod
The rod that weeping eyes does close
And gives to melancholy hearts repose,
With that my temples stroke, and let me be
Held by thy soft Captivity.
But do not all my senses bind,
Nor fetter up too close my mind,
Let mimic Fancy wake, and freely rove,
And bring the Idea of the Saint I love.
II.
Her lovely image has been brought
So often to my waking thought
That it is at length worn out and dead,
And with its fair Original is fled.
Or else my working overthoughtful mind
With much intention is made blind,
Like those who look on Objects bright
So long till they quite lose their sight.
Ah Cruel Fates, is it not enough for you
To take my Saint, but I must lose her Image too?
III.
Thee gentle Charmer I implore
This my lost Treasure to restore,
Thy magic virtues all apply,
Set up again my Bank-rupt memory.
Search every Cell and corner of my brain,
And bring my Fugitive again.
To thy dark cave thy self betake
And among thy Dreams enquiry make,
Summon thy best Ideas to appear
And bring that Form which most resembles her.
IV.
But if in all thy store there be
None (as I fear) so fair as she,
Then let thy Painter Fancy limn
Her Form anew, and send it by a Dream.
Thou can him all her lively Features tell
For sure I think thou knew'st her well.
But if description wont suffice
For him to draw a Piece so nice,
Then let him to my Breast and Heart repair,
For sure her Image is not worn out there.
The Grant.
I.
'T Was when the Tide of the returning day
Began to chase ill forms away,
When pious dreams the sense employ,
And all within is Innocence and Joy,
My melancholy, thoughtful mind
Overcome at length to sleep resigned;
Not common sleep, for I was blessed
With something more divine, more sweet than rest.
II.
She who her fine-wrought clay had lately left,
Of whose sweet form I was bereft,
Was by kind Fancy to me brought,
And made the Object of my happy thought.
Clad she was all in virgin white,
And shone with Empyreal light,
A radiant glory crowned her head,
She streamed with Light and Love, and thus she said,
III.
And why this grief and Passion for the Blessed?
Let all your sorrows with me rest.
My state is Bliss, but I should live
Yet much more happy, would you cease to grieve.
Dry up your tears (Dear Friend) and be
Happy in my Felicity.
By this your wisdom you will approve,
Nay (what you would most of all commend) your Love.
IV.
She spoke, dissolved I lay and overcome,
And was with ecstasy struck dumb,
But ah the fierce tumultuous joy
Its own weak being hastened to destroy.
To see that lovely Form appear
My spirits in such commotion were,
Sleep could no more their force control,
They shook their fetters off, and freed my unwilling Soul.
V.
What Bliss do we often to Deluston owe!
Who would not still be cheated so?
Opinion's an Ingredient
That goes so far to make up true content,
That even a Dream of Happiness
With real joy the Soul does bless,
Let me but always dream of this,
And I will envy none their waking Bliss.
The Aspiration.
I.
HOw long great God, how long must I
Immured in this dark Prison lie?
Where at the Grates and Avenues of sense
My Soul must watch to have intelligence.
Where but faint gleams of thee salute my sight,
Like doubtful Moonshine in a Cloudy night.
When shall I leave this magic Sphere,
And be all mind, all eye, all ear!
II.
How Cold this Clime I and yet my sense
Perceives even here thy influence.
Even here thy strong Magnetic charms I feel,
And pant and tremble like the Amorous steel.
To lower good and Beautys less Divine
Sometimes my erroneous Needle does decline
But yet (so strong the sympathy)
It turns, and points again to thee.
III.
I long to see this Excellence
Which at such distance strikes my sense.
My impatient Soul struggles to disengage
Her wings from the confinement of her cage.
Would thou great Love this Prisoner once set free
How would she hasten to be linkt to thee!
She Would for no Angels conduct stay,
But fly, and love on all the way.
The Defense.
I.
THat I am colder in my Friendship grown
My Faith and Constancy you blame,
But sure the inconstancy is all your own,
I am, but you are not the same.
The flame of love must needs expire
If you substract what should maintain the fire.
II.
While to the Laws of Virtue you were true
You had, and might retain my heart,
Now give me leave to turn Apostate too,
Since you do from your self depart.
Thus the Reformed are counted free
From Schism, tho they desert the Roman See.
III.
The strictest union to be found below
Is that which Soul and Body ties,
They all the Mysterys of Friendship know
And with each other sympathize.
And yet the Soul will bid adieu
TO her much distempered mate, as I leave you.
The Retractation.
I.
I Have often charged all sublunary bliss
With vanity and emptiness.
You woods and streams have heard me often complain
How all things, how even your delights were vain.
Methought I could with one short simple view
Glance over all human joys, and see them through.
But now great Preacher pardon me,
I cannot wholly to thy charge agree,
For Music sure and Friendship have no vanity.
II.
No, each of these is a firm massy joy
Which tho eternal will not cloy.
Here may the Venturous Soul love on, and find.
Grasp what she can, that more remains behind.
Such Depths of joy these living springs contain
As man to eternity can never drain.
These Sweets the truth of Heaven prove,
Only there is greater Bliss with Saints above
Because they have better Music there, and firmer love.
The Prospect.
I.
WHat a strange moment will that be
My Soul, how full of Curiosity,
When winged, and ready for thy eternal flight
To the utmost edges of thy tottering Clay
Hovering and wishing longer stay
Thou shall advance, and have Eternity in sight!
When just about to try that unknown Sea,
What a strange moment will that be!
II.
But yet how much more strange that state
When loosened from the embrace of this close mate
Thou shall at once be plunged in liberty,
And move as swift and active as a Ray
Shot from the lucid spring of day,
Thou who just now wast clogged with dull mortality,
How will thou bear the mighty change, how know
Whether you are then the same or no!
III.
Then to strange Mansions of the air
And stranger Company must thou repair:
What a new Scene of things will then appear!
This world thou by degrees wast taught to know
Which lessened thy surprise below,
But Knowledge all at once will overflow thee there.
That world as the first man did this, thou wilt see,
Ripe-grown, in full maturity.
IV.
There with bright Splendours must thou dwell,
And be -- what only those pure Forms can tell.
There must thou live a while, gaze and admire,
Till the great Angel's Trump this fabric shike
And all the slumbering Dead awake,
Then to thy old, forgotten state must thou retire.
This union then will seem as strange or more
Than thy new Liberty before.
V.
Now for the greatest Change prepare,
To see the only Great, the only Fair.
Veil now thy feeble eyes, gaze and be blessed;
Here all thy turns and Revolutions cease,
Here Is all serenity and peace,
You Are to the Center come, the native seat of rest.
There Is now no further change, nor need there be,
When One shall be Variety.
The Return.
I.
DEar Contemplation my divinest Joy,
When I thy sacred Mount ascend
What Heavenly sweets my Soul employ*
Why cannot I there my days for ever spend?
When I have conquered thy steep Heights with Pain
What pity it is that I must down again.
II.
And yet I must; my Passions would rebel
Should I too long continue here,
No, here I must not think to dwell,
But mind the Dutys of my proper Sphere.
So Angels, tho they Heaven's glorys know,
Forget not to attend their Charge below.
The 137 Psalm Paraphrased to the 7 Verse.
I.
BEneath a reverend gloomy shade
Where Tigris and Euphrates cut their way,
With folded arms and heads supinely laid
We sat, and wept out all the tedious day,
Within its Banks grief could not be
Contained, when, Sion, we remembered thee.
II.
Our Harps with which we often had sung
In solemn strains the great Jehovah's praise,
Our warbling Harps upon the Trees we hung,
Too deep our grief to hear their pleasing Lays.
Our Harps were sad, as well as we
And tho by Angels touched would yield no Harmony.
III.
But they who forced us from our seat
The Happy Land, and sweet abode of Rest,
Had one way left to be more cruel yet
And asked a Song from hearts with grief oppressed.
Let Us hear, say they, upon the Lyre
One of the Anthems of your Hebrew Quire.
IV.
How can we frame our voice to sing
The Hymns of Joy, Festivity and Praise
To those who are aliens to our Heavenly king,
And want a taste for such exalted Lays.
Our Harps will here refuse to sound,
An Holy Song is due to Holy ground.
V.
No, dearest Sion, if we can
So far forget thy melancholy state
As now thou mourn'st, to sing one cheerful strain,
This ill be added to our Ebb of Fate.
Let neither Harp nor Voice e're try
One Hallelujah more, but ever silent lie.
The 139 Psalm Paraphrased to the 14 Verse.
I.
IN vain, great God, in vain I try
TO escape thy quick all-searching eye.
Thou with one undivided view
Do look the whole Creation through.
The unshap'd Embryo's of my mind
Not yet to Form or likeness wrought,
The tender rudiments of thought
Thou see, before she can her own Conception find.
II.
My Private walks to thee are known,
In Solitude I Am not alone;
Thou round my bed a guard do keep,
Thy eyes are open, while mine sleep.
My softest whispers reach thy ear.
It Is vain to fancy secrecy;
Which way so e're I turn you are there,
I am all round beset with thy Immensity.
III.
I cannot wade through this Depth, I find,
It drowns and swallows up my mind.
It Is like thy immense Deity,
I cannot fathom that, or thee.
Where then shall I a refuge find
From thy bright comprehensive eye?
Whither, O whither shall I fly,
What place is not possessed by thy all-filling mind?
IV.
If to the heavenly Orbs I fly,
There is thy Seat of Majesty.
If down to Hell's Abyss I go
There I am sure to meet thee too.
Should I with the swift wings of Light
Seek some remote and unknown land,
Thou soon would overtake my flight,
And all my Motions rule with thy long-reaching hand.
V.
Should I to avoid thy piercing sight,
Retire behind the skreen of night,
Thou can with one celestial ray
Dispel the shades, and make it day.
Nor need'st thou by such Mediums see,
The force of thy clear, radiant sight
Depends not on our grosser light,
On Light thou sitt'st enthroned, it is ever Day with thee.
VI.
The Springs which Life and Motion give
Are thine, by thee I move and live.
My Frame has nothing hid from thee,
Thou know my whole Anatomy.
TO an Hymn of Praise I Will tune my Lyre;
How amazing is this work of thine!
With dread I into my self retire,
For tho the Metal's base, the Stamp is all divine.
To Dr. Plot on his Natural History of Staffordshire.
I.
WHat strange Perversity is this of Man!
When 'twas a Crime to taste the inlightning Tree
He could not then his hand refrain
None then so inquisitive, so Curious as He.
But now he has Liberty to try and know
God's whole Plantation below,
Now the Angelic fruit may be
Tasted by all whose arms can reach the Tree,
H'is now by License careless made,
The Tree neglects to climb, and sleeps beneath the shade.
II.
Such drowsy sedentary Souls have they
Who could to Patriarchal years live on
Fixed to Hereditary Clay
And know no Climate but their own.
Contracted to their narrow Sphere
Rest before Knowledge they prefer,
And of this globe wherein they dwell
No more than of the Heavenly Orbs can tell.
As if by Nature placed below
Not on this Earth to dwell, but to take root and grow.
III.
Dull Souls, why did great Nature take such care
To write in such a Splendid character.
If Man the only thing below
That can pretend her hand to know
Her fair-writ Volumn does despise,
And tho designed for Wisdom will not be wise?
The Almighty gets no Praise from this dull kind,
The Sun was never worshipped by the Blind.
Such Ignorance can never Devotion raise,
They will want Wisdom, and their Maker Praise.
IV.
They only can this Tribute duly yield
Whose active Spirits range abroad
Who traverse over all Natures field
And view the great Magnificence of God.
They see the hidden wealth of Nature's store
Fall down, and Learnedly adore,
But They most justly yet this Tribute pay
Who don't Contemplate only, but display
Comment on Nature's Text, and to the sense
Expose her latent excellence,
Who like the Sun not only travel over
The world, but give it light that others may adore.
V.
In the Head of these Heroic Few
Our Learned Author first appears in view,
Whose searching genius like the Lamp of day
Does the Earth's Furniture display,
Nor suffers to lie buried and unknown
Nature's rich Talent or his own.
Drake and Columbus do in thee revive,
And we from thy Research as much receive.
Thou art as great as they, for it is all one
New Worlds to find, or nicely to describe the known.
VI.
On Mighty Hero, our whole Isle survey,
Advance thy Standard, conquer all the way.
Let nothing but the Sea control
The progress of thy active Soul.
Act like a pious Courteous ghost
And to mankind retrieve what is lost.
With thy victorious charitable hand
Point out the hidden Treasures of our Land.
Envy or Ignorance do what they will,
Thou have a Blessing from the Muses Hill.
Great be thy Spirit as thy Work's divine,
Show thou thy Maker's Praise, we Poets will sing thine.
The Exchange.
I.
WHen Corydon had lost his Liberty
And felt the Tyrant's heavy chain;
He swore, could he but once get free
He Would never, no, he would never love again.
II.
But stay dull shepherd, if you quench your fire,
Too dear you will buy your Liberty:
Let not such vigorous heats expire,
I Will teach thee how to love, and yet be free,
III.
Take bright Urania to thy Amorous breast,
To her thy flaming heart resign;
Void not the room, but change the guest,
And let thy sensual love commence Divine.
IV.
The Swain obeyed, and when he once had known
This fore-tast of the joys above,
He vowed, tho he might be his own,
Yet he would ever, yes, he would ever love.
The Refinement.
I.
WEll, 'twas a hard Decree of Fate,
My Soul, to Clip thy pinions so,
To make thee leave thy pure Ethereal state
And breathe the Vapors of this Sphere below,
Where he that can pretend to have
Most Freedom, 's still his body's slave.
II.
Was e're a Substance so divine
With such an unlike Consort joined?
Did ever things so wide, so close combine
As massy Clods and Sunbeams, Earth and mind?
When yet two Souls can never agree
In Friendship, but by parity.
III.
Unequal match! what will thou do,
My Soul, to raise thy Plumes again?
How will thou this gross vehicle subdue,
And thy first Bliss, first Purity obtain?
Thy Consort how will thou refine,
And be again all over divine?
IV.
Fix on the Sovereign Fair thy eye,
And kindle in thy breast a flame,
Wind up thy Passions to a pitch so high
Till they melt down, and rarify thy frame.
Like the great Prophet then aspire,
Thy Chariot will like his, be Fire.
To Melancholy.
I.
Mysterious Passion, dearest Pain,
Tell me, what wondrous Charms are these
With which thou do torment and please,
I grieve to be thy slave, yet would not Freedom gain.
No Tyranny like thine we know,
That half so cruel e're appeard,
And yet you are Loved as well as Feared,
Perhaps the only Tyrant that is so.
II.
Long have I been thy Votary,
Thou'st led me out to woods and groves,
Made'st me despise all other Loves,
And give up all my Passions, all my Soul to thee.
Thee for my first Companion did I choose
First, even before my darling Muse,
And yet I know of thee no more
Than those who never did thy shrine adore.
III.
You Are Mystery and Riddle all,
Like those thou inspirest, thou love to be
In darkness and obscurity,
Even learned Athens thee an unknown God might call.
Strange contrarys in thee combine,
Both Hell and Heaven in thee meet
Thou greatest bitter, greetest sweet,
No Pain is like thy Pain, no Pleasure too like thine.
IV.
It Is the grave doctrine of the Schools
That Contrarys can never be
Consistent in the highest degree,
But thou must stand exempt from their dull narrow Rules.
And yet it is said the brightest mind
Is that which is by thee refined.
See here a greater Mystery;
Thou make us wise, yet ruin'st our Philosophy.
The Discontent.
I.
NOt that it is not made my Fate
To stand upon the dangerous heights of state,
Nor that I cannot be possessed
Of the hidden treasures of the East,
Nor that I cannot bathe in Pleasures Spring
And rifle all the sweets which Natures gardens bring
Do I repine, my Destiny,
I can all these despise as well as you deny.
II.
It shall not discompose my mind
Though not one star above to me prove kind.
Their influence may sway the Sea,
But make not the least change in me.
They neither can afflict my state, nor bless,
Their greatest gifts are small, and my desires are less.
My Vessel bears but little sail,
What need I then a full and swelling gale.
III.
And yet I Am discontented too,
Perhaps ye aspiring Souls as much as you,
We both in equal trouble live,
But for much different Causes grieve.
You, that these gilded joys you cannot obtain,
And I, because I know they are empty all and vain.
You still pursue in hopes to find,
I stand, and dare not flatter on my mind.
IV.
This Tree of Knowledge is, I see,
Still fatal to poor man's felicity.
That which yields others great repast,
Cannot please my now enlightn'd taste.
Before, tho I could nothing solid find,
Yet still with specious Prospects I could please my mind.
Now all at farthest I can see
Is one perpetual Round of Vanity.
Beauty.
I.
BEst Object of the Passion most divine
What excellence can Nature show
In all her various store below
Whose Charms may be compared to thine?
Even Light it self is therefore fair
Only because it makes thy Sweets appear.
II.
Thou streaming Splendor of the face diviue
What in the Regions above
Do Saints like thee adore or love,
What excellence is there like thine?
I except not the Divinity
That great and Sovereign good, for thou art He.
III.
He Is Beauty's vast Abyss and boundless Sea,
The Primitive and greatest Fair,
All his Perfections Beauty's are,
Beauty is all the Deity.
Some streams from this vast Ocean flow,
And that is all that pleases, all that is Fair below.
IV.
Divine Perfection who alone art all
That various Scene of Excellence
Which pleases either mind or sense,
Tho thee by different names we call!
Search Nature through, thou still wilt be
The Sum of all that is good in her Variety.
V.
Love that most active Passion of the mind,
Whose roving Flame does traverse over
All Nature's good, and reach for more,
Still to thy magic Sphere's confined.
It Is Beauty all we can desire,
Beauty's the native Mansion of Love's Fire.
VI.
Those Finer Spirits who from the Crowd retire
To study Nature's artful Scheme,
Or speculate a Theorem,
What is it but Beauty they admire?
And they too who enamored are
Of Virtues face, love her because she is Fair.
VII.
No empire, Sovereign Beauty, is like thine,
Thou reign'st unrivaled and alone,
And universal is thy throne,
Stoics themselves to thee resign.
From Passions be they never so free
Something they needs must love, and that is Thee.
VIII.
He whom we all adore, that mighty He,
Owns thy supreme dominion,
And happy lives in thee alone,
We Are blessed in him, and He in thee;
In thee he is infinitely blessed,
Thou art the inmost Center of his Rest.
IX.
Pleased with thy Form which in his essence shined
The Almighty chose to multiply
This Flower of his Divinity
And lesser Beautys soon designed.
The unformed Chaos he removed,
Tinctured the Mass with thee, and then it loved.
X.
But do not thou My Soul, fixed here remain,
All Streams of Beauty here below
Do from that immense Ocean flow,
And thither they should lead again.
Trace then these Streams, till thou shall be
At length overwhelmed in Beauty's boundless Sea.
Love.
I.
IMperial Passion! Sacred fire!
When we of meaner Subjects sing,
Thou tune'st our Harps, thou do our Souls inspire,
It Is Love directs the Quill, it is Love strikes every string.
But where is another Deity
TO inspire the man that sings of thee?
II.
W' are by mistaken Chemists told
That the most active part of all
The various Compound cast in nature's mould
Is that which they Mercurial spirit call.
But sure it is Love they should have said,
Without this even their Spirit is Dead.
III.
Love's the great Spring of Nature's wheel,
Love does the Mass pervade and move,
What escapes the Sun's, does thy warm influence feel,
The Universe is kept in tune by Love.
Thou Nature giv'st her Sympathy,
The Center has its Charm from thee.
IV.
Love did great Nothing's barren womb
Impregnate with his genial fire,
From this first Parent did all creatures come,
The Almighty willed, and made all by Desire.
Nay more, among the Sacred Three,
The third subsistence is from thee.
V.
The Happiest Order of the Blessed
Are those whose Tide of Love's most high,
The bright Seraphic Host; who are more possessed
Of good, because more like the Deity.
TO him they advance as they improve
Their noble heat, for God is love.
VI.
Shall then a Passion so Divine
Stoop down and Mortal Beautys know?
Nature's great Statute Law did never design
That Heavenly fire should kindle here below.
Let it ascend and dwell above,
The proper Element of Love.
The Consummation. A Pindarique Ode.
I.
THe rise of Monarchys, and their long, weighty fall
My Muse outsoars; she proudly leaves behind
The Pomps of Courts, she leaves our little All,
To be the humble Song of a less reaching Mind.
In vain I curb her towering flight;
All I can here present's too small.
She presses on, and now has lost their sight,
She flies, and hastens to relate
The last and dreadful Scene of Fate,
Nature's great solemn Funeral.
I see the mighty Angel stand
Clothed with a Cloud, and Rainbow round his head,
His right foot on the Sea, his other on the Land,
He lifted up his dreadful arm, and thus he said:
By the mysterious great Three-one
Whose Power we fear, and Truth adore
I swear the Fatal Thread is spun,
Nature shall breath her last, and Time shall be no more.
The Ancient Stager of the Day
Has run his minutes out, and numbered all his way.
The parting Isthmus is thrown down
And all shall now be overflown.
Time shall no more her under-current know
But one with great Eternity shall grow,
Their streams shall mix, and in one Circling chanel flow.
II.
He spoke. Fate writ the Sentence with her Iron pen,
And mighty Thunderings said, Amen.
What dreadful sound's this strikes my ear?
It Is sure the Arch-angel's trump I hear
Nature's great Passing Bell, the only Call
Of God's that will be heard by all.
The Universe takes the alarm, the Sea
Trembles at the great Angel's sound
And roars almost as loud as he,
Seeks a new channel, and would fain run underground.
The Earth it self does no less quake
And all throughout, down to the Center shake,
The Graves unclose, and the deep sleepers there awake.
The Sun's arrested in his way,
He dares not forward go,
But wondering stands at the great hurry here below.
The Stars forget their laws, and like loose Planets stray.
See how the Elements resign
Their numerous charge, the scattered Atoms home repair
Some from the Earth, some from the Sea, some from the Air:
They know the great alarm,
And in confused mixed numbers swarm,
Till ranged, and severed by the Chemistry divine.
The Father of Mankind's amazed to see
The Globe too narrow for his Progeny.
But it is the closing of the Age,
And all the Actors now at once must grace the Stage.
III.
Now Muse exalt thy wing, be bold and dare,
Fate does a wondrous Scene prepare,
The Central fire which hitherto did burn
Dull like a Lamp in a moist clammy Urn,
Fanned by the breath divine begins to glow,
The Fiends are all amazed below.
But that will no confinement know
Breaks through its Sacred Fence, and plays more free
Than thou with all thy vast Pindarique Liberty.
Nature does sick of a strong Fever lie.
The fire the subterraneous Vaults does spoil;
The Mountains sweat, the Sea does boil;
The Sea, her mighty Pulse, beats high.
The waves of fire more proudly roll;
The Fiends in their deep Caverns howl,
And with the frightful Trumpet mix their hideous cry.
Now is the Tragic Scene begun;
The Fire in triumph marches on;
The Earth's girt round with flames, and seems another Sun.
IV.
But whither does this lawless Judgment roam?
Must all promiscuously expire
A Sacrifice in Sodom's fire?
Read thy Commission, Fate; sure all are not thy due,
No, thou must save the virtuous Few.
But where is the Angel guardian to avert the doom?
Lo, with a mighty Host he is come.
I see the parted Clouds give way.
I see the Banner of the Cross display.
Death's Conqueror in pomp appears,
In his right hand a Palm he bears,
And in his looks Redemption wears,
The illustrious glory of this Scene
Does the despairing Saints inspire
With Joy, with Rapture and desire;
Kindles the higher life that dormant lay within.
The awakened virtue does its strength display
Melts and refines their dros^y Clay;
New-cast into a pure Ethereal frame
They fly and mount aloft in vehicles of flame.
Slack here my Muse thy roving wing
And now the world's untuned, let down thy high-set string.
Freedom.
I.
I Do not ask thee Fate to give
This little span a long reprieve.
Thy pleasures here are all so poor and vain,
I care not hence how soon I Am gone.
Date as thou will my time, I shall not complain;
May I but still live free, and call it all my own.
II.
Let my sand slide away apace,
I care not, so I hold the glass.
Let me my Time, my Books, my Self enjoy,
Give me from cares a sure retreat;
Let no impertinence my hours employ,
That Is in one word, kind Heaven, ^et me never be great.
III.
In vain from chains and fetters free
The great man boasts of Liberty.
He Is pinnion'd up by formal rules of state;
Can never from noise and dust retire;
He Is haunted still by Crowds that round him wait,
His lot's to be in Pain, as that of Fools to admire.
IV.
Mean while the Swain has calm repose,
Freely he comes and freely goes.
Thus the bright Stars whose station is more high
Are fixed, and by strict measures move,
While lower Planets wanton in the sky,
Are bound to no set laws, but humoursomly rove.
To his Muse.
I.
COme Muse, let us cast up our Accounts, and see
How much you are in Debt to me;
You Have reigned thus long the Mistress of my heart
You Have been the ruling Planet of my days,
In my spare-hours you have had your part,
Even now my servile hand your sovereign will obeys.
Too great such service to be Free,
Tell me what I Am to have for being thy Votary,
II.
You have Preferments in your gift you say,
You can with gold my service pay;
I fear thy boast, your sacred Hill I Am told
In a *poor, cursed, and barren Country lies,
Besides what is state to me, or gold,
These you long since have taught me to despise.
To put me off with this would be
Not to reward, but tax my ill Proficiency.
III.
But Fame you say will make amends for all,
This you your sovereign Blessing call,
The only lasting good that never dies,
A good which never can be bought too dear,
Which all the wise and virtuous prize,
The gods too with delight their Praises hear.
This shall my Portion be you say,
You Will crown my head with an immortal Bay.
IV.
Give me a place less high, and more secure,
This dangerous good I cannot endure.
The peaceful banks which profound silence keep
The little Boat securely passes by,
But where with noise the waters creep
Turn off with Care, for treacherous rocks are nigh.
Then Muse farewell, I see your store
Cannot pay for what is past, and I can trust no more.
Of the advantages of Thinking.
MAN being the only Creature here below designed for a sociable life, has two
facultys to distinguish him from other Creatures, Thinking and Speaking. The
one, to fit him for the society of others; and the other, to qualify him also
for his own. As to the latter of these Facultys, there is no fear of its
gathering rust for want of use. We are rather apt to speak too much; and the
most Reserved have reason to pray with the Psalmist, Set a watch O Lord before
my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

But the former, is that which generally lies fallow and neglected; as may be
guessed from the intemperate use of the other. There are few indeed, that are
capable of thinking to any great purpose: but among those that are, there are
fewer that employ this excellent Talent. And for ought I know, however strange
it may seem, among the Ingenious and well educated there are as few Thinkers as
among the Herd of the vulgar and illiterate. For either they live a Popular
life; and then what for business, pleasures, Company, visits, with a world of
other impertinencys, there is scarce room for so much as a Morning reflection. Or
else, they live retired, and then either they doze away their time in
drowsiness and brown studys; or, if brisk and active, they lay themselves out
wholely upon devouring books and making Common places, and scarce entertain
their Solitude with a Meditation once in a Moon.

But it is merely for want of Thinking that they can allow themselves in doing
so. For by a little of this, they would soon discover that of all the Methods
of improvement that can be used, there is none so advantageous as Thinking;
either for our Intellectuals or our Morals; to make us wiser, or to make us
better. And first, for our Intellectuals. It Is the perfection of our Rational
part to know; that is, to be able to frame clear and distinct conceptions, to
form right Judgments, and to draw true consequences from one thing to another.
Now besides that the Powers of the mind are made more bright, vigorous, and
active by use, as all other facultys are; there is this further advantage, that
by habitual thinking the object is made more familiar to the understanding, the
Habitudes and relations of Ideas one toward another, by frequent comparing,
become more visible and apparent; and consequently, it is more easy to divide
what ought to be divided, and to compound what ought to be compounded; wherein
consists the sum of all Truth and Science.

Reading is indeed very excellent and useful to this purpose; but Thinking is
necessary. This may do without the other, as appears in the first Inventors of
Arts and Sciences; who were fain to think out their way to the Recesses of
Truth; but the other can never do, without this. Reading without thinking, may
indeed make a rich Common place, but twill never make a rich head; it may,
indeed, bring in a great store of Hyle, but it is yet without form and void,
till Thinking, like the Seminal spirit, agitates the dead shapeless lump, and
works it up into figure and symmetry.

But of what advantage Thinking is to the advancement of Knowledge, will
further appear by considering some of the chief impediments of it; and how they
are removed by Thinking. And the first that I shall mention, is the Prejudice
of Infancy. We form infinite rash judgments of things, before we duly
understand any thing; and these grow up with us, take root, spread and
multiply; till, after long use and custom, we mistake them for common notions
and dictates of nature; and then we think it a crime to go about to unlearn or
eradicate them. And as long as we stand thus affected, we are condemned to
errors and perpetual wanderings. So great reason had the excellent Descartes
to lay the foundation of his Philosophy in an Equipoise of mind; and to make
the removal of these Prejudices the very entrance and beginning of wisdom.

But now when a man sets upon a course of Thinking, nothing will be so obvious
as to consider, that since we come so late to the perfect use of our reason;
among those many judgments we have made, it is very likely the major part are
false and erroneous. And this is a fair step to the shaking off those
infant-Prejudices; at least he will be thereby induced not to believe any thing
the rather, because he had given it such early entertainment. From this general
reflection he proceeds to examine the things themselves. And now he is a capable
Judge, can hear both sides with an indifferent ear, is determined only by the
moments of truth* and so retracts his past errors, and has the best Moral
security against any for the future.

Another great hindrance to knowledge is the wrong perception of things. When
the simple Ideas of our minds are confused, our Judgments can never proceed
without error. It Is like a fault in the first concoction, which is never
corrected in either of the other. For how can I judge whether the Attribute
agree to the subject, it my notion of both be confused and obscure? But now,
the only cause of the confusedness of our notions, next to the natural
inability of our faculties, is want of Attention and close application of mind.
We don't dwell enough upon the object; but speculate it transiently and in
have; and then, no wonder that we conceive it by halves. Thinking therefore is
a proper Remedy for this defect also.

Another great hindrance to knowledge is ambiguity of Terms and Phrases. This
has bred a world of confusion and misunderstanding, especially in controversys
of Religion; a great many of which, if thoroughly sifted and well compared,
will be found to be mere verbal contentions. As may appear from what the
excellent Monsieur Le Blanc has performed in this kind. But now, this is owing
merely to want of thinking. There is a latitude in the Phrase; and one writer
not sufficiently attending to that determinate sense of it which his Adversary
intends, very hastily and furiously denis what the other does not affirm; and
he again as furiously affirms what this does not deny. So that they are really
agreed all along, and yet fight on like Fools in the dark. And there is no
hopes they will ever be reconciled, till either they will take the pains to
think themselves, or some body else will be so kind, as to think for 'em.

Another great hindrance to knowledge is an over-fond and superstitious
deference to Authority, especially that of Antiquity. There is nothing that
cramps the Parts, and fetters the understandings of men like this strait-lac'd
humor. Men are resolved never to outshoot their forefathers mark; but write
one after another, and so the dance goes round in a circle; and the world is
never the wiser for being older. Take an instance of this in the Schoolmen,
and in the best of them, Aquinas. It Is pleasant to see how that great Wit is
oftentimes put to it to maintain some unlucky Authorities, for the salving of
which he is forced to such shifts and expedients which he must needs (should he
dare to think freely) see through and discern to be false; and yet such a slave
was he, that he would rather lose truth, than go out of the Road to find it.
This also makes men, otherwise senseful and Ingenious, quote such things many
times out of an old dull Author, and with a peculiar emphasis of commendation
too, as would never pass even in ordinary conversation; and which they
themselves would never have took notice of, had not such an Author said it. But
now, no sooner does a man give himself leave to think, but he perceives how
abusurd and unreasonable it is, that one man should prescribe to all Posterity:
that men, like beasts, should follow the foremost of the Herd; and that
venerable nonsense should be preferred before new-sense: He considers, that
that which we call Antiquity, is properly the nonage of the world; that the
sagest of his Authoritys were once new; and that there is no other difference
between an ancient Author and himself, but only that of time; which, if of any
advantage, it is rather on his side, as living in a more refined and mature age
of the world. And thus having cast off this Intellectual slavery, like one of
the brave (...) mentioned by Laertius, he addicts himself to no Author, Sect or
Party* but freely picks up Truth wherever he can find it; puts to Sea upon
his own bottom; holds the Stern himself; and now, if ever, we may expect new
discoverys.

There are other notable impediments to the improvement of knowledge, such as
Passion, Interest, fear of being taxed with inconstancy, scorn of being
informed by another, Envy, the humor of Contradiction, and sometimes Flattery
in applauding every thing we hear, and the like. Now as to the manner how all
these are removed by thinking, it may suffice to sav in general, that they are
all obviously absurd and ridiculous; and however unthinking men may be abused
by them, yet a free and close Thinker must needs quickly perceive that they are
so: and there is no better Moral way that I know of to be quit of ill habits,
than the being convinced of their Folly and Mischief.

But the greatest advantage of thinking is yet behind, that it improves our
Morals as well as our Intellectuals; and serves to make us Better, as well as
Wiser. This is in a great measure included in the other. All therefore that I
shall further remark concerning it is this, that considering the great
influence the understanding has upon the will, there are but two things
necessary to preserve us in our duty. First an habitual Theory of what we ought
and ought not to do; and of all the motives and engagements to the one and to
the other. Secondly an actual and clear presence of all this to the mind, in
every Instant of action. And this is for the most part the thinking man's
condition. He does not only Habitually know, but actually attends both to his
Duty, and to all the engagements for its performance. He has those
Considerations almost always present with him which to others are the
Principles of Repentance; and this keeps him in his Duty, which brings others
to it; and makes him live like those Righteous persons of whom our Savior
says, that they need no Repentance.

Of the Care and Improvement of Time.
TO be careful how we manage and employ our Time, is one of the first Precepts
that is taught in the School of Wisdom, and one of the last that is learned.
The first and leading dictate of Prudence is, That a Man propose to himself his
true and best interest for his End; and the next is, That he make use of all
those means and opportunities whereby that end is to be attained. And betwixt
these two there is such a close connection, that he who does not do the latter,
cannot be supposed to intend the former. He that is not careful of his actions,
shall never persuade me that he seriously proposes to himself his best
interest, as his end, for if he did, he would as seriously apply himself to the
regulation of the other as the means. And so he that is not careful of his
Time, cannot in reason be supposed to be careful of his Actions; for if he
were, he would certainly have a special regard to the opportunity of their
performance.

But, as I observed in the beginning, though this Precept be one of the
Elementary dictates of Prudence, and stands written in the first page of the
Book of Wisdom; yet such is the sottishness and stupidity of the World, that
there is none that is more slowly learned. And it is a prodigious thing to
consider, that, although among all the Talents which are committed to our
Stewardship, Time upon several accounts is the most precious, yet there is not
any one of which the generality of men are more profuse and regardless. Tho it
be a thing of that inestimable value, that it is not distributed to us entirely,
and at once, like other Blessings, but is dealt out in minutes and little
parcels, as if man were not fit to be trusted with the entire possession of
such a choice Treasure, yet there are very many that think themselves so
overstock'd with it, that instead of husbanding it to advantage, the main
business of their thoughts is how to rid their hands of it, and accordingly
they catch at every shadow and opportunity of relief; strike in at a venture
with the next Companion, and so the dead Commodity be taken off, care not who
be the Chapman. Nay, it is obvious to observe, that even those persons who are
frugal and thrifty in every thing else, are yet extremely prodigal of their
best Revenue, Time; Of which alone (as Seneca neatly observes) it is a Virtue to
be Covetous.

Neither may this Censure be fastened only upon the unthinking multitude, the
Sphere of whose Consideration is supposed to be very narrow, and their
Apprehension short-sighted; but I observe that many of those who set up for
Wits, and pretend to a more than ordinary sagacity, and delicacy of Sense, do
notwithstanding spend their Time very unaccountably, and live away whole days,
weeks, and sometimes months together, to as little purpose (tho it may be not
so innocently) as if they had been asleep all the while. And this they are so
far from being ashamed to own, that they freely boast of it, and pride
themselves in it, thinking that it tends to their Reputation, and commends the
greatness of their Parts, that they can support themselves upon the Natural
stock, without being beholden to the Interest that is brought in by Study and
Industry.

But if their Parts be so good as they would have others believe, sure they are
worth improving; if not, they have the more need of it. And tho it be an
Argument of a rich mind, to be able to maintain it self without labor, and
subsist without the advantages of Study, yet there is no man that has such a
portion of Sense, but will understand the use of his Time better than to put it
to the trial. Greatness of Parts is so far from being a discharge from
Industry, that I find Men of the most exquisite Sense in all Ages were always
most curious of their Time: Nay, the most Intelligent of all Created Beings
(who may be allowed to pass a truer estimate upon things than the finest Mortal
Wit) value Time at a high rate. Let me go (says the Angel to the importunate
Patriarch) for the day breaks. And therefore I very much suspect the
excellency of those men's Parts, who are dissolute and careless mis-spenders of
their Time: For if they were men of any thoughts, how is it possible but these
should be some in the number? ( viz.) That this Life is wholly in order to
another, and that Time is that sole opportunity that God has given us for
transacting the great business of Eternity: That our work is great, and our day
of working short, much of which also is lost and rendered useless, through the
cloudiness and darkness of the Morning, and the thick vapors and unwholesome
foggs of the Evening; the ignorance and inadvertency of Youth, and the Diseases
and Infirmities of Old Age: That our portion of Time is not only short, as to
its duration, but also uncertain in the possession: That the loss of it is
irreparable to the loser, and profitable to no body else: That it shall be
severely accounted for at the great Judgment, and lamented in a sad Eternity.

He that considers these things (and sure he must needs be a very unthinking
man that does not) will certainly be choice of his Time, and look upon it no
longer as a bare state of duration, but as an Opportunity; and consequently
will let no part of it (no considerable part at least) slip away either
unobserved or unimprov'd. This is the most effectual way that I know of to
secure to ones self the Character of a Wiseman here, and the reward of one
hereafter. Whereas the vain Enthusiastic Pretenders to the Gift of Wit, that
trifle away their Time, betray the shallowness and poverty of their Sense to
the discerning few; or whatever they may pass for here among their fellow
Mortals, do most infallibly make themselves cheap in the sight of Angels.

Of Solitude.
IT has been urged as an Objection, by some Atheistical Persons, against the
existence of a God, that if there had been such a perfect Being, who was
completely happy in the enjoyment of himself, he would never have gone about to
make a World. Now, tho this Objection contributes nothing to the support of
Atheism (the design of God in Creating the World being not to increase his
happiness, but to Communicate it) yet it proceeds upon this true supposition,
That Society is a Blessing. It is so, and that not only respectively, and in
reference to the present circumstances of the World, and the Necessities of
this Life, but also simply, and in its own Nature; since it shall be an
Accessory to our bliss in Heaven, and add many moments to the weight of Glory.
Neither will the truth of this assertion be at all weakened by alleging that
no benefit or advantage accrues to God by it, for that it becomes unbeneficial
to him (tho a Blessing in its own nature) is purely by accident, because God
eminently containing in himself all possible good, is incapable of any New
Accession.

And as Society is in its own nature an instrument of Happiness, so is it made
much more so by the indigencies and infirmities of Men. Man, of all Creatures
in the World, is least qualified to live alone, because there is no Creature
that has so many necessities to be relieved. And this I take to be one of the
great Arts of Providence, to secure mutual amity and the reciprocation of good
turns in the World, it being the Nature of Indigency, like common danger, to
indear men to one another, and make them herd together, like Fellow-Sailors in
a Storm. And this indeed is the true case of Mankind, we all Sail in one
bottom, and in a rough Sea, and stand in need of one another help at every
turn, both for the Necessities and Refreshments of Life. And therefore I am
very far from commending the undertaking of those Ascetics, that our of a
pretense of keeping themselves unspotted from the World, take up their quarters
in Deserts, and utterly abandon all Human Society. This is in short (to say no
more of it) to put themselves into an incapacity either of doing any good to
the World, or of receiving any from it: and certainly that can be no desirable
state. No, this Eremetical way of Living is utterly inconsistent with the
Circumstances and Inclinations of Human Nature; he must be a God,
Selfsufficient and Independent that is fit for this state of absolute and
perfect Solitude, and in this rigorous sense, It is not good for man (tho in
Paradise it self) to be alone.

But tho Society, as it is opposed to a state of perfect and perpetual Solitude,
be a Blessing, yet considering how little of it there is in the World that is
good, I think it advisable for every man that has sense and thoughts enough, to
be his own Companion, (for certainly there is more required to qualify a man
for his own company than for other men's) to be as frequent in his Retirements
as he can, and to communicate as little with the World as is consistent with
the duty of doing good, and the discharge of the common offices of Humanity.
It Is true indeed (as Seneca says) Miscendae and alternandae sunt Solitudo and
frequentia: Solitude and Company are to have their turns, and to be
interplaced. But Wisemen use to dedicate the largest share of their Lives to
the former, and let the best and most of their Time go to make up the Canonical
Hours of Study, Meditation and Devotion. And for this, besides the practice of
Wisemen, we have the Authentic example of our B. Lord himself, Who, as it is
reasonably supposed (for he had passed the thirtieth year of his Life before he
entered upon the stage of Action, and then also sought all opportunities to be
alone, and oftentimes purchased Retirement at the expense of Night-watches)
allotted the greatest part of his little Time here on Earth to Privacy and
Retirement; and it is highly probable, would have lived much more reservedly,
had not the peculiar business of his function made it necessary for him to be
conversant in the World. The inclination of our Lord lay more toward the
Contemplative way of Life, tho the interest of Mankind engaged him oftentimes
upon the Active. And it is very observable, that there is scarce any one thing
which he vouchsafed to grace with so many marks and instances of favor and
respect as he did Solitude. Which are thus summed up by the excellent Pen of a
very great Master The Great Exemplar.
of Learning and Language; It was Solitude and Retirement in which Jesus kept
his Vigils; the desert places heard him pray, in a privacy he was born, in the
Wilderness he fed his thousands, upon a Mountain apart he was transfigured,
upon a Mountain he died, and from a Mountain he ascended to his Father. In
which Retirements his Devotion certainly did receive the advantage of
convenient circumstances, and himself in such dispositions twice had the
opportunities of Glory.

Indeed, the Satisfactions and Advantages of Solitude (to a person that knows
how to improve it) are very great, and far transcending those of a Secular and
Popular Life. First, as to Pleasure and Satisfaction, whosoever considers the
great variety of men's humors, the peevishness of some, the pride and
conceitedness of others, and the impertinence of most; he that considers what
unreasonable terms of Communion some persons impose upon those that partake of
their Society; how rare it is for a man to light upon a Company, where, as his
first Salutation, he shall not presently have a Bottle thrust to his Nose; he,
I say, that considers these and a thousand more grievances, wherewith the folly
and ill nature of men have conspired to burden Society, will find, take one
time with another, Company is an occasion of almost as much displeasure as
pleasure. Whereas in the mean time the Solitary and Contemplative man sits as
safe in his Retirement as one of Homer's Heroes in a Cloud, and has this only
trouble from the follies and extravagancies of men, that he pitties them. He
does not, it may be, laugh so loud, but he is better pleased: He is not perhaps
so often merry, but neither is he so often disgusted; he lives to himself and
God, full of Serenity and Content.

And as the Pleasures and Satisfactions of Solitude exceed those of a Popular
Life, so also do the Advantages. Of these there are two sorts, Moral and
Intellectual; to both which Solitude is a particular friend. As to the first,
it is plain that Solitude is the proper opportunity of Contemplation, which is
both the Foundation and the Perfection of a Religious Life. It is (as the same
excellent Person forecited says elsewhere of a single Life) the huge advantage
of Religion, the great opportunity for the Retirements of Devotion, which being
empty of Cares is full of Prayers, being unmingled with the World is apt to
converse with God, and by not feeling the warmth of a too forward and indulgent
Nature, flames* out with holy Fires, till it be burning like the Cherubim and
the most extasy'd Order of holy and unpolluted Spirits. And for this reason
'twas that the Anciente chose to build their Altars and Temples in Groves and
Solitary* Recesses, thereby intimating* that Solitude was the best opportunity
of Religion.

Neither are our intellectual advantages less indebted to Solitude. And here,
tho I have in a great measure anticipated this consideration (there being
nothing necessarily required to complete the Character of a Wiseman, besides
the knowledge of God and himself) yet I shall not confine my self to this
instance, but deduce the matter further, and venture to affirm that all kinds
of Speculative knowledge as well as practical, are best improved by Solitude.
Indeed there is much talk about the great benefit of keeping Great men company,
and thereupon it is usually reckoned among the disadvantages of a Country life,
that those of that condition want the opportunities of a Learned Conversation.
But to confess the truth, I think there is not so much in it as people
generally imagine. Indeed, were the Souls of men lodged in transparent cases,
that we might read their thoughts; would they communicate what they know, were
it the fashion to discourse learnedly, 'twere worth while to frequent the
Cabals of Great men: But when it shall be counted a piece of errant Pedantry,
and defect of good breeding to start any Question of Learning in Company; when
every man is as shy of his Notions as of a Fairy-treasure; and makes his Head
not a Repository or Exchequer of Knowledge, but a Grave to bury it in: A man may
be a constant attendant at the Conclaves of Learned men all his life long, and
yet be no more the wiser for it than a Book-worm is for dwelling in Libraries.
And therefore, to speak ingeniously, I don't see for my part wherein the great
advantage of great Conversation lies, as the humors of men are pleased to
order it. Were I to inform my self in business, and the management of affairs,
I would sooner talk with a plain illiterate Farmer or Tradesman than the
greatest Vertuoso of The Society; and as for Learning (which is the only thing
they are supposed able to discourse well of) that in point of Civility they
decline: So that I find I must take refuge at my Study at last, and there
redeem the Time that I have lost among the Learned.

Of Courage.
A Ristotle in his Morals begins the Doctrine of Virtues with Courage; which
has found work for his Interpreters to assign the reason of his method. But,
methinks, there is no great need they should either study or differ much about
it. For certainly, among all the Virtues this will justly challenge the
Precedence, and is the most Cardinal and fundamental part of Morality. This
Virtue is pre-required to the susception of all the rest. For the very entrance
into the School of wisdom and a virtuous course is a state of Discipline,
Difficulty and Hardship. And therefore it is sapere aude, a great piece of
daring and boldness to set up for a good man: especially, if to the proper
difficulties and Agonies of a Virtuous engagement, we add those calamities and
straits it oftentimes exposes us to, through the malice and folly of the world.
So that as Plato writ upon his School (...) Let none enter here that
understands not Mathematics, it may be set as a Motto upon the School of
Virtue, Let none enter here that wants Courage.

And as it is necessarily requisite to the susception of all other virtues, so
is it their main support, guardian and establishment. Without this, every other
Virtue is precarious, and lies at the mercy of every cross accident. Without
this, let but a Pistol be held to the breast, and the severest Chastity will be
frighted into compliance, the most Heroic Friendship into treachery, and the
most ardent Piety into renunciation of God and Religion. There is nothing among
all the frailnesses and uncertaintys of this sublunary world so tottering and
unstable, as the virtue of a Coward. He has that within him that upon occasion
will infallibly betray every virtue he has; and to secure him from sin, you
must keep him from Temptation. This was the Principle the Devil went upon in
his encounter with Job, Do but put forth thy hand, (says he to God) and touch
all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face. He was right enough in
the Proposition, tho mistaken in the application.

Having now seen the usefulness of this great Virtue, 'twill be worth while to
enquire a little into its Nature. And that the rather, because it is not only
variously and falsely apprehended by the many, but too confusedly and darkly
delivered even by Moralists themselves.

That which with the Vulgar passes for Courage, is certainly nothing else but
stupidity, desperateness or fool-hardiness; a brutish sort of Knight-errantry
in seeking out needless encounters, and running into dangers without fear or
wit; which is so far from having the forementioned property of Courage, of
being a guardian, and security of our Virtues, that it is in it self a sin.

But are we like to have a better account of it from the Moralists? why they
tell you that it is a Mediocrity between Fear and Boldness; So Aristotle in his
Ethics. But then as for defining what this Mediocrity is (wherein the very
point of the business lies) you are as much to seek as ever.

Others will tell you that it is a firmness of mind in sustaining evils, and
undertaking dangers. Accordingly they assign two parts of Courage Sustinere and
Aggredi. Thus Epictetus and the School of the Stoics. But what it is thus
firmly to sustain or undertake an evil, and what evils are to be thus sustained
or undertaken, they either could not, or have not thought fit to acquaint us.

In order therefore to the settling the Point in hand, I consider 1st in
general, that Courage has evil of Pain for its object, which in some
circumstances is to be chosen or submitted to. Whence I form this general Idea
of Courage that it is a firm and peremptory resolution of Mind to choose evil of
Pain in right circumstances, or when it is truly eligible. This Definition I
confess runs in general Terms, much like one of Aristotle's, but I intended it
for no other. Only it has this advantage above his, that it lays a Foundation
for one that is more particular.

For it is but here to subjoin when an evil is truly eligible, and the Idea of
Courage will be sufficiently determinate and express. Now to make a thing
eligible it is necessary that some way or other it appear good; evil being no
way eligible under its own formality. And to make an evil put on the nature and
appearance of good, two things are necessary. 1st that it be a lesser evil than
some other, and 2ly that the choosing of it be a necessary Medium for the
preventing of that other. Then, and in no other case, is evil truly eligible:
and consequently, we shall not be mistaken in the Idea of Courage, if we define
it to be such a firm and constant (...) or disposition of mind, whereby a man
is fixed and determined never to dread any evil, so far as to decline it when
the choosing it is the only remedy against a greater. And this is most eminently
signalized in the case of Martyrdom, when a man submits to the greatest evils
of Pain to avoid that much greater one of Sin. This is the very summity and
perfection of Courage, that which an Hannibal or a Scipio could never equal in
all their gallantry and feats of war: and I dare venture to pronounce, that he
who would rather dye or part with any worldly interest than commit a sin, can
never be a Coward.

And here I cannot but take notice of a false notion of Honor and Courage
whereby the world has been generally abused; especially those men that make the
highest pretensions to both. According to these men's Measures of things, it is
sufficient reason to post a man up for a Coward if he refuse a Duel; And to
merit a badge of Honor from the Herald's Office if he accept it. These men
would be ready to laugh at me, I know, as a lover of Paradoxes, should I tell
them that their characters must be quite transposed to make them true. And yet
I cannot help it, so it falls out that he who declines the Duel is indeed the
man of Honor and Courage, and he who accepts it is the Coward. For he who
declines it, despises the obloquy and scorn of the world that he may approve
himself to God and his own Conscience, would rather be pointed and hissed at,
than be damned; and so chooses a lesser evil to avoid a greater. But he that
accepts the Duel, so dreads the loss of his credit among those whose good
opinion is of no value, that to avoid it he chooses to incur sin and damnation;
and so chooses a greater evil to avoid a less. And if this be Courage, we must
strike it out of the Catalogue of the Virtues, for nothing is so, that is not
under the direction of Prudence; much less what is downright Folly and the
very exaltation of Madness.

Of Seriousness.
SInce I began to consider so far as to make Reflections upon my self, the most
early and prevailing* disposition which I observed was an Inclination to
Seriousness, and since I considered the nature of things and the circumstances
of Human life, I found I had reason to thank the kind influence of my birth for
making that my Temper, which otherwise I must have been at more cost to acquire.

For tho it be generally reckoned only as a Semi-vertue, and by some as no
virtue at all, yet certainly nothing is of greater advantage both as to
Intellectual and Moral seize than to be of a serious, composed and
recollected spirit. If it be not it self a virtue, it is at least the Soil
wherein it naturally grows, and the most visible mark whereby to know those
that have it. This is that whereby a Man is chiefly distinguished from a Child,
and a Wise man from a Fool. For (as the Son of Sirac observes) a man may be
known by his Eccles. 19.
look, and one that has understanding by his countenance when thou meet'st him.
And again speaking of levity and dissoluteness of behavior, A man's attire,
excess of laughter and gaiety show what he is, that is, it shows he is none of
the wisest. And that this was his true meaning we may be assured from another
Character of his, where he expressly makes the signs of wisdom and folly to
consist in these two propertys, ( viz.) that a Fool lifts up his voice with
Ecclus. 21.
laughter, but a Wise man does scarce smile a little.

There is indeed a near Relation between Seriousness and Wisdom, and one is a
most excellent Friend to the other. A man of a serious sedate and considerate
temper as he is always in a ready disposition for Meditation (the best
improvement both of knowledge and manners) so he thinks without disturbance,
enters not upon another Notion till he is master of the first, and so makes
clean work with it. Whereas a man of a loose, volatile and shattered humor
thinks only by fits, and starts now and then in a Morning interval, when the
serious mood comes upon him, and even then too let but the least trifle cross
his way, and his desultorious fancy presently takes the Scent, leaves the
unfinished and half-mangled notion, and skips away in pursuit of the new game.
So that although he conceives often, yet by some chance or other he always
miscarrys, and the issue proves Abortive.

Indeed nothing excellent can be done without Seriousness, and he that courts
wisdom must be in earnest. St James assures us that it is cap. 1. v. 7.
to no purpose for a wavering and unstable man to pray, because he shall be
sure not to speed. And as it is in vain for such a one to Pray, so is it in vain
for him to study. For a man to pretend to work out a neat scheme of thoughts
with a magotty unsettled head, is as ridiculous and non-sensical as to think to
write straight in a jumbling Coach, or to draw an exact Picture with a Palsy
hand. No, he that will hit what he aims at must have a steady hand as well as a
quick eye, and he that will think to any purpose, must have fix'dness and
composedness of humor, as well as smartness of parts.

And accordingly we find that those among the Philosophic Sects that professed
more than ordinary eminency in wisdom or virtue, assumed also a peculiar
gravity of Habit, and solemnity of Behavior, and the most sacred and
mysterious rites of Religion were usually performed with silence; and that not
only for decency, but for advantage. Thus the Italians who are the gravest are
also the most ingenious people under heaven, and it is a known observation of
Aristotle's concerning melancholy, that it furthers Contemplation and makes
great Wits. Thus again the Discipline of Silence was a considerable part of the
Pythagoric institution, and we have it storied of our B. Lord himself who was
the wisdom of his father, that he never laughed.

But because a solemn deportment may sometimes disguise an unthinking mind, and
grave in some men's Dictionarys signifies the same as Dull, I shall put the
Character a little more home, and define more closely wherein the true Idea of
Seriousness consists, or what it is to be in good earnest a serious man.

And 1st I shall remove it from the neighborhood of those things which by their
symbolizing with it in outward appearance prove oftentimes the occasion of
mistake and confusion. It does not therefore consist in the morosity of a
Cynic, nor in the severity of an Ascetic, nor in the demureness of a Precisian,
nor in the deadness and sullenness of a Quaker, nor in the solemn mien of an
Italian, nor in the slow pace of a Spaniard; It Is neither in a drooping head,
nor a mortified face, nor a Primitive Beard.

It Is something very different and much more excellent than all this that must
make up a serious man. And I believe I shall not misrepresent him if I say he
is one that duly and impartially weighs the moments of things so as neither to
value Trifles, nor despise things really excellent. That dwells much at home
and studys to know himself as well as Books or men; that considers why he came
into the world, how great his business and how short his stay in it, how
uncertain it is when he shall leave it, and whither a sinner shall then betake
himself when both Heaven and Earth shall Rev. 20.
fly from the presence of the Judge. That considers God as always present, and
the Folly of doing what must be repented of, and of going to Hell when a man
may go to Heaven. In one word, that knows how to distinguish between a moment
and eternity.

This is to be truly serious, and however the Pretenders to gaiety and
lightsomness of Humor may miscall and ridicule it by the names of Melancholy,
dullness and stupidity etc. He that is thus affected cannot miss of being wise
and good here, and happy hereafter. And then 'twill be his turn to laugh, when
the others shall mourn and weep.

Of the slightness of all Secular, and the importance of minding our Eternal,
Interest.
IDleness and Impertinence, a doing of nothing or of nothing to the purpose,
are always signs of a vain, loose, and inconsiderate spirit, but they are never
more so, than when there is some very momentous and weighty business to be
done. The man that sleeps away his happy Retirements, or with the Roman Emperor
spends them in killing flies, betrays a great deal of weakness and incogitancy,
but should he do the same at the Bar, when he is to plead for his life, he would
certainly be thought a mere changeling or madman.

And yet this I fear will prove the case of the most of those who style
themselves Rational. For besides that the generality of men live at random,
without any aim or design at all, and those that propose some ends seldom take
up with any that are important and material, or if they do, they seldom
proportion their care to the weight of things, but are serious in trifles, and
trifling in things serious, I say besides all this, there is nothing relating
purely to this world that can deserve the name of Business, or be worth the
serious thoughts of him who has an immortal Soul, and a Salvation to work out
with fear and trembling. The greatest secular affairs and interests are but
Specious Trifles, and all our designs and emploiments about em Excentrical
Motions, and solemn impertinencies.

And yet this is made the Center of all our studys and endeavors, the great
Bent of the world points this way, hence are taken the measures of Wisdom and
Prudence, and Religion it self is forced to truckle to worldly Policy. Whereas
in the mean time there is an Affair of grand importance, and wherein all
mankind are deeply concerned, and such as really deserves all that care and
solicitude, which we lavish away upon other things, and infinitely more (tho
perhaps it might be secured with less) and yet this is the thing which by many
is utterly neglected, by the most is least cared for, and by none sufficiently
regarded. So that considering the general practice of the world, I think there
are very few in it to whom that will not be a very proper and seasonable
admonition, which our B. Lord gave to his sollicitous and overbusy Disciple,
Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing
is needful.

To cure therefore (if possible) this great folly, I have two Propositions to
offer; 1st that no interest relating purely to this present world is of any
great moment or concern to man, 2ly that to be very careful of our final
interest, and to make sure to our selves a happy eternity is indeed a thing of
vast moment and importance.

The first of these I know will seem very strange and paradoxical to one that
takes a prospect of mankind, and contemplates the great stir and hurry of the
world, the Plottings of Statesmen, the Emulations of Courtiers, and the
Ambition of Princes, how busy men are in their several concerns, what variety
of designs are on foot, with what trembling eagerness they are prosecuted, and
what grief attends our disappointments. Sure after such a Scene as this one
would be tempted to think, that there must be something very considerable in
Human life, and that men had notable interests here at stake, it being a
reproach to human nature that the world should so generally combine to make
such ado about nothing.

But yet that this is their folly, not to insist upon that universal vanity
which the wise and great Trier of the world has charged upon it, that Hope
deferred makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.
and yet Fruition does not cure it, that we are disappointed in our enjoyments
as well as in our losses, and yet that it is our hard fate to weep at the
Funeral of our departed Pleasures, tho we were little the happier for them when
we had them; that our greatest pleasures are most transient, and great mirth
always ends in heaviness and demission of spirit, that the more we love or
enjoy the more we venture, and put our selves further within the reach of
Fortune; that the greatest men are not always the most contented, and that they
who are most envied by others think themselves more fit for their Pity; not to
insist I say on these or the like considerations, I shall fix only upon one,
whereby I think twill plainly appear that there can be no interest relating
purely to this world, that is of any great moment or concern to man. And that
is the shortness and uncertainty of our abode here.

The life of man in the Book of Wisdom is compared to a shadow. Now besides
that the resemblance holds in many considerable respects, as in that it is
partly Life and partly Death, as the other is partly Light and partly Darkness,
in that like a shadow wherever it passes it leaves no track behind it, in that
it seems to be something when indeed it is nothing, in that it is always altering
and ends on a sudden, and when at its full height and prime is often nearest
to Declension, as a shadow is to disappear when at full length, there is yet
another instance of resemblance, which has a more particular aptness to our
present purpose. The shadow can continue no longer at the utmost than the light
of the Sun keeps its residence above the Horizontal line, which is but a little
portion of time, but it may fall much short of that period by the interposition
of a cloud, and when that may be is as uncertain as the weather, and depends
upon a thousand accidents.

And thus it is with our lives. No man can lengthen out his days beyond that
natural Term which is set him by the temperament of the first Qualitys, which
yet are of such jarring and unsociable natures that they cannot dwell long
together in a vital amity. But then how far, and how many ways, he may fall
short of that compass, depends upon so many hidden causes, and so many little
accidents that it may be reckoned among the greatest of uncertaintys. So that
there is nothing in all human life so frail and uncertain as life it self.

A consideration sufficient to depretiate and vilify all the entertainments and
interests of the Animal life, and to call off our care from the objects of
secular Happiness tho there were no other vanity in them. For were they never
so good and solid in themselves, yet the Foundation on which they stand is so
weak and rotten, that it is dangerous leaning hard upon them. They would be even
upon this supposition like Nebuchadnezzar's statue, made up indeed of rich
metal, but founded upon feet of clay. And upon this account they are to be
esteemed as vile and contemptible as they are ruinous.

This is a consideration indeed that has but little effect in the world, and
the reason is because few give any serious heed and attention to it. They know
it indeed habitually, and must confess it if put to the question, but it lies
Dormant in 'em, and they seldom actually attend to it. And therefore it is that
the voice bids the Prophet Isaiah, Cry and proclaim it aloud that all flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field. He is bid to
cry aloud, thereby intimating both the importance of the thing, and the general
stupidity of men in not considering it.

But if men would but often and seriously meditate upon the shortness and
uncertainty of life, I persuade my self they would not set their hearts much
upon any thing in it, but would look upon all its Pleasures, Honors and
Profits with the same indifferency that the hasty Traveller does upon the
specious fields and meadows which he passes by. For to what purpose I pray,
should man who holds his Tenement here by such a short and unstable Tenure,
that cannot live long and may dye presently, be so busy and thoughtful about
worldly concerns? The ancient Patriarchs, tho their span was so very much
longer than ours, thought it hardly worth while to build houses, but contented
themselves to grow gray in Tents; and what do we mean who in comparison to them
are but (...) (as Pindar calls us) people for a day, by plunging our selves so
deeply into care and trouble? Is there any thing among the actions of either
Brutes or Madmen so silly and irrational as this?

But to be a little particular, to what purpose should man who walks in a
vain shadow, difquiet himself also thus in vain, and be so greedy in heaping up
riches when he cannot tell who shall gather them? To what purpose should a man
trouble both the world's and his own rest to make himself great? For besides
the emptiness of the thing, the Play will quickly be done, and the Actors must
all retire into a state of equality, and then it matters not who personated the
Emperor, or who the Slave. To what purpose should a man be very earnest in the
persuit of Fame? He must shortly dye, and so must those too who admire him. Nay
I could almost say, to what purpose should a man lay himself out upon study,
and drudge so laboriously in the Mines of Learning? He Is no sooner a little
wiser than his Brethren, but Death thinks him ripe for his sickle, and for
ought we know after all his pains and industry, in the next world an Idiot or a
Mechanic will be as forward as he. To what purpose lastly does a Tyrant oppress
his people, transgress those bounds which wise Nature has set him, invade his
neighbor's Countries, deprive the innocent and peaceable of their Liberty, sack
Cities, plunder Provinces, depopulate Kingdoms and almost put the foundations
of the Earth out of course, to what purpose is all this? Thou Fool, says our B.
Savior, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

There is certainly nothing in all Nature so strange and unaccountable as the
actions of some men. They see, as the Psalmist speaks, that wise men also dye
and perish together as well as the ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches
for others, and yet they think (at least act as if they did) that their houses
shall continue for ever, and that their dwelling places shall endure from one
generation to another, and call their lands after their own names.

This they think is their wisdom, but the Psalmist assures them it is their
foolishness, and such a foolishness too as makes them comparable to the Beasts
that perish, however their Posterity may praise their saying. And certainly the
Learned Apostle was of the same mind, when from this Principle, The time is
short, he deduces the very same conclusion we have hitherto pleaded for, that
we should be very indifferent and unconcerned about any worldly good or evil,
that they that have wives should be as tho they had none, and they that weep as
the they wept not, they that rejoice as tho they rejoiced not, they that buy as
tho they possessed not, and they that use this world as not abusing it, for the
fashion of this world passes away. It does so, and for that reason there is
nothing in this life to be very much loved, or very much feared, especially if
we consider what a grand interest we have all of us at stake in the other
world. For as it is* with the sufferings so is it with the enjoyments of this
present time, they are neither of them worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed.

We have seen how frivolous and unconcerning the greatest affairs of this world
are, how unworthy to be made the objects of our solicitude, much more to be the
Business of our lives, we have weighed them in the Balance, and they are found
wanting. But man is a Creature of brisk and active facultys, and is there no
employment for him? yes, as God has furnished him with Powers, so also has he
assigned him a work, and such a one too as is to be performed with Fear and
Trembling. There is a good fight to be fought, there is a whole Body of sin to
be destroyed, there are Passions to be mortified, Habits to be unlearnt,
Affections to be purified, Virtuous and holy dispositions to be acquired, Acts
of virtue to be opposed against Acts of sin, and Habits against Habits, in a
word there is a Heaven to be obtained, and a Hell to be avoided. This indeed is
a great work, and of great concernment to be done, and such as calls for our
principal, (I could almost say our whole) care and diligence. The great
necessity of which for more distinctness sake, I shall represent in a few
Considerations.

And Is It, it highly concerns us to be very careful concerning our final
interest, because of the vast, the infinite Moment of the thing. For certainly
it can be no less whether a man shall be Damned or Saved, eternally Happy, or
eternally Miserable. No man certainly that thinks at all, can think this an
indifferent matter, or if he does he will one day be sadly convinced of the
contrary, when he shall curse the day of his Birth, and wish for the Mercy of
Annihilation. The lowest conception we can frame of the condition of the
Damned, is an utter exclusion from the Beatific presence of God. And tho the
non-enjoyment of this be no great punishment to sensual men in this state and
Region of exile, who perhaps would be content that God should keep Heaven to
himself, so he would let them have the free use of the Earth, yet hereafter
when the Powers of their Souls shall be awakened to their full vigor and
activity, when they shall have a lively and thorough apprehension of true
Happiness, and of the infinite Beautys of the Supreme good, there will arise
such a vehement Thirst, such an intense longing in the Soul, as will infinitely
exceed the most exalted languishments of Love, the highest Droughts of a Fever.
The Soul will then point to the Center of Happiness with her full bent and
verticity, which yet she shall find utterly out of her reach, and so full of
Desire and full of Despair she shall lament both her Folly and her Misery to
eternal ages. And who is able to dwell even with these everlasting Burnings?

But 2ly as an Argument for our great Care we may consider, that as the
interest is great, so a more than ordinary care is necessary to secure it. And
that upon several accounts. Is It because our Redemption by Christ is not our
immediate and actual discharge from sin, (as the Antinomians would have it) but
only an instating us into a Capacity of Pardon and Reconciliation, which is to
be actually obtained by the performance of Conditions, without which we shall
be so far from being the better for what has been done and suffered for us,
that our Condemnation will be so much the heavier for neglecting to finish so
great Salvation.

2ly, Because the Conditions of our Salvation tho tempered with much mercy and
accommodation to human infirmity, are yet so difficult as to engage us to put
forth our whole might to the work. A great part of Christianity is very harsh
to Flesh and Blood, however to the Habituated Disciple Christ's yoke may be
easy and his burden light. And accordingly the Path that leads to life is
called narrow, and the gate (tho opened by our Savior) is yet so strait that
we are bid to strive to enter in at it. And the Righteous scarcely are saved.

Again, because there is a strong confederacy against us among the Powers of
darkness. We have a very potent and malicious enemy, who envys man should
arrive to those happy mansions from whence himself by transgression fell; And
accordingly, there is a great woe pronounced by the Angel against the
inhabitants of the earth, because the Devil is come down among them having
great wrath. And this is made by the Apostle himself an Argument for more than
ordinary care and circumspection. Be sober, says he, be vigilant, because your
adversary the Devil walks about as a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour.

Again, because we have but a little time for this our great work, and that too
very precarious and uncertain. Our glass holds but very little sand tho 'twere
to be all spent, and drawn out in the running. But there are also several
accidental impediments that may intercept its passage; And therefore as this
was alleged as an argument for indifferency about the things of this world, so
for the same reason, it concerns us to be eminently careful in the grand
business of the next. He that duly considers how many persons dye suddenly,
how many more may, and that none can engage for it that he himself shall not,
must needs confess himself extremely concerned to improve this short, this
uncertain opportunity, this only time of Probation, and to work with all his
might while it is day, before the night come, when no man can work.

Lastly, it concerns us to use a more than ordinary care and diligence in
securing this our great interest, because after all our Care and Vigilance, all
our strictnesses and severitys, we don't know the just and precise measures of
Qualification, and how much Trimming of our Lamps is requisite to fit 'em for
the Sanctuary of God. For tho we are well assured in general from the terms of
the Evangelical Covenant, that if we repent we shall be forgiven, yet there is
a great Latitude in Repentance, and what degree in some cases will be
available, is a secret God has kept to himself. For we don't know the full
heinousness of our Sins, nor how far God was provoked by 'em, nor consequently
by what degrees of sorrow and amendment he will be appeased. And it is most
certain there is a mighty difference. To Simon Magus 'twas almost a desperate
cas e: If peradventure Act. 8. 22.
the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. And some are said to be saved
with fear, and Jud. 22.
as it were pulled out of the fire. And we know what the great Apostle has
said, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. All which
argues a great latitude and variety even in necessary preparations, and how to
state the matter exactly we don't know, and therefore as far as we are able
should be sure to do enough, for we may easily do too little, and can never do
too much in a matter of such high importance.

From all which I conclude, Is It that those who withdraw themselves (as far as
is consistent with charity and the prosecution of the public good) from the
noise, hurry and business of the world, that they may apply themselves more
serenely and entirely to a life of Devotion and Religion, and more freely and
undistractedly attend upon the grand concern of another world, act very wisely
and prudently. For this is wisdom, to take a right estimate of things, to
proportion our care to their value, and to mind that most which is most
concerning. This is what the Apostle commends, to lay aside every weight, that
we may be the surer to win the great prize, and so to run as to obtain. This
lastly is the very part which Mary chose, and which our Lord assures us shall
never be taken away from her.

Again I conclude, that all those who are either wholly negligent of this their
grand interest, or that do not principally regard it, and as our Savior
speaks, in the first place seek the kingdom of God, that are more intent upon
this world than the next, that will venture to play the knave for a little
preferment, that make use of Religion as an instrument for secular designs, in
one word, that in any kind forfeit their great interest in the other world, for
a little in this, are the greatest Fools in nature. This Measure I confess will
take in a great many, and some perhaps who would think it a great affront to be
reckoned of the number. But it cannot be helped, the charge is most
unquestionably true, and they themselves however conceited of their wit and
parts now, will once be of the same opinion, when they shall say, we Fools
thought his life madness.

God grant we may all so number our days, and so compare our two interests, as
to apply our hearts to greater wisdom.

A METAPHYSICAL ESSAY TOWARD THE Demonstration of a GOD, From the Steady and
Immutable nature of Truth.
A Metaphysical Essay etc.
SECT. I. How difficult a thing it is to demonstrate a God by any new medium,
and how far the present Essay may pretend to do so.
1. IT has been the curious emploiment of so many and so excellent Pens to
demonstrate the Existence of a God, and this they have done with such variety
of Arguments, Moral, Physical and Metaphysical, that however easy it may be to
contrive new Postures, and ring other Changes upon the same Bells, it is yet
almost as difficult to find out an Argument for the proof of a God that has not
been used already, as to resist the Cogency of those that have. So that here if
any where, that of Solomon is more than ordinarily verified, The thing that has
been it is that which shall Eccles. 1. 9.
be, and that which is done is that which shall be done, and there is no new
thing under the Sun.

2. The newest indeed that has of late years appeared to the world is that of
the celebrated Descartes, taken from the Idea of God considered both
absolutely in its self, as including all kinds and degrees of Perfection and
consequently Existence, and as it is subjected in the mind of man, which (as he
contends) could never have had such an Idea, were there not something which had
all that Perfection in it Formally or eminently, which is in the Idea
objectively.

3. Now tho this Procedure of his be extraordinarily fine and subtle, and such
as (to the first part at least) will appear no less strong and concluding to
any capable and indifferent Person, that considers it as it is managed at large
by its ingenious Author, yet this was not a Notion newly excogitated but only
revived by him. For Aquinas had before lighted upon the former and refused it,
and he is beholding to St. Austin and the School of the Platonists for the
latter.

4. I speak not this to diminish one ray from the glory of that incomparable
Speculatist. That which I remark here is not the Barrenness of his Invention,
but that of the exhausted Subject. The matter had been squeezed before to the
last drop, and his only fault was that he was not born sooner. Which might be a
sufficient Apology if this Procedure of mine prove not entirely new and unblown
upon. Whether it be or no it is not possible (without examining all the books in
the world) absolutely to determine. This much I believe I may venture to say,
that it is no where universally received, nor by any that I know of
industriously and professedly managed, and that lastly it is as new as the
matter will now afford, and consequently as any man in reason ought to expect.

SECT. II. The various acceptations of Truth, and which that is which is made
the ground of the present Demonstration.
1. HAving undertaken to demonstrate the Existence of God from the steady and
immutable nature of Truth, I am first to distinguish the Equivocalness or
latitude of the word, and then to point out to that determinate part, which I
intend for the ground of my Demonstration.

2. The most general Partition of Truth is into Truth of the Thing and Truth of
the understanding, or (according to the language of the Schools) Truth of the
Object and Truth of the Subject. Both of these again have a double subdivision.
For by Truth of the Object may be understood either that Transcendental verity
which is convertible with Ens, and runs through the whole Circle of Being
whereby every thing is really what it is, which is simple Truth. Or else
certain Relations and Habitudes of things one toward another whether
Affirmatively or Negatively, which is Complex Truth.

3. And so again by Truth of the Subject may be understood either a due
conformity between the understanding and the Object, when I compound what is
compounded, and divide what is divided, which is Logical Truth. Or else a due
conformity between the words and the understanding, when I speak as I think,
which is Moral Truth or Veracity.

4. Now the Truth, upon whose immutable Nature I build the Demonstration of a
God, is not that of the Subject, but that of the Object. Nor that neither
according to its simple and Transcendental acceptance, but as it signifies
certain immutable relations and habitudes of things one toward another by way
of Affirmation and Negation, which is Truth of the Object Complex.

SECT. III. That there are such Relations and Habitudes of things toward one
another, and that they are steady and immutable.
1. TWo things are here asserted, 1st that there are Relations and Habitudes of
things toward one another, and 2ly that they are steady and immutable. First I
say, there are certain relations and habitudes betwixt thing and thing. Thus
there is a certain habitude between some Premises and some Conclusions, for any
thing will not follow from any thing; between some Objects and some Facultys;
between some ends and some means; between some Subjects and some Predicates,
and the like.

2. This is as true as that there is any such thing as Truth. For Truth is
nothing else, but the Composition or Division of Ideas according to their
respective Habitudes and Relations. And without Truth there can be no such
thing as Knowledge, for knowledge is Truth of the Subject; it is a man's thinking
of things as they are; and that supposes Truth of the Object. Which whosoever
denies, contradicts himself, and establishes the Proposition which he designed
to overthrow; and consequently, universal Skepticism is the very extremity of
nonsense and inconsistency.

3. And as there are certain habitudes and relations between things; so aly
some of them are steady and immutable, that never were made by any
understanding or will, nor can ever be unmade or nulled by them; but have a
fixed and unalterable (...) from everlasting to everlasting. And consequently
there are not only Truths, but eternal Truths.

4. As first in general, it is a Proposition of necessary and eternal Truth,
that there must be ever such a thing as Truth, or that something must be True,
for let it be affirmed or denied, Truth thrusts in upon us either way. And so
2ly there are many particular Propositions of eternal and unchangeable Verity,
as in Logic, that the Cause is always before the Effect in order of Nature; in
Physics, that all local motion is by succession; in Metaphysics, that nothing
can be and not be at once; in Mathematics, that all right Angles are equal,
that those lines which are parallel to the same Right line are also parallel to
each other, etc. These and such like are standing and irrepealable Truths, such
as have no precarious existence, or arbitrarious dependence upon any will or
understanding whatsoever; and such as all Intellectual operations do not make,
but suppose; it being as much against the nature of understanding to make that
Truth which it speculates, as it is against the nature of the eye to create that
light by which it sees, or of an Image to make that Object which it represents.

SECT. IV. That since there are Eternal and immutable Veritys or Habitudes of
things, the simple essences of things must be also, eternal and immutable.
1. HAving gained this Point that there are eternal and immutable Veritys or
Habitudes of things, the next will be, that upon this Postulatum it necessarily
follows that the Simple Essences of things must be also eternal and immutable.
For as there can be no Truth of the Subject without Truth of the Object to
which it may be conformable (as was before observed) so neither can there be
Truth of the Object Complex without Truth of the Object Simple.

2. This will appear undeniably true to any one that attends to the Idea of
Objective Truth Complex, which is nothing else but certain Habitudes or
Respects betwixt thing and thing as to Composition or Division. For how can
there be any such Habitudes or Relations without the Simple Essences themselves
from which they result? As for instance, how can any Mathematical Proposition,
suppose that of Euclid, that if two Circles touch one another inwardly they
have not the same common Center, have this habitude, unless there be two such
distinct simple Essences as Circle and Center? These Habitudes can no more
subsist by themselves than any other Relations can, they must have their Simple
Essences as the other have their Subject and Term, upon the position of which
they immediately result.

3. If therefore there can be no Truth of the Object Complex without Truth of
the Object Simple, and there can be no Habitudes and Relations of Composition
and Division without the simple Essences themselves, it follows that whenever
the one does exist the other must exist also, and consequently if the one be
eternal the other must be eternal also, and so (to recur to the former
instance) if it be a Proposition of eternal Truth that if two Circles touch one
another inwardly they have not the same Common Center, the two distinct simple
Essences of Circle and Center must be from Eternity also, and consequently the
simple Essences of things are eternal and immutable, which was the point to be
here demonstrated.

SECT. V. That the Simple Essences of things being not Eternal in their Natural
subsistences, must be so in their Ideal subsistences or realitys.
1. FRom the eternity of essential Habitudes we have demonstrated the necessity
that the simple essences of things should be eternal. And now since they are
not eternal (as is too plain to need Proof) in their natural subsistencys, it
follows that they must be eternal in their Ideal subsistencys or realitys.

2. For there are but two conceivable ways how any thing may exist, either out
of all understanding, or within some understanding. If therefore the simple
Essences of things are eternal but not out of all understanding, it remains
they must have an eternal existence in some understanding, or rather they are
the same with that understanding it self, considered as variously exhibitive or
representative according to the various modes of Imitability or Participation,
which is the true Notion of Ideas as it is generally expressed both by
Platonists and Schoolmen, and as I have more at large explained it in my Letter
of Ideas, to which for brevitys sake I refer.

SECT. VI. That there is therefore an Eternal Mind or understanding,
Omniscient, Immutable and endowed with all possible Perfection, the same which
we call God.
1. THis evidently follows from the Conclusion of the foregoing Section, for if
the simple Essences of things have a real and eternal existence in some
understanding, what consequence can be more plain than that there is a Mind or
understanding eternally existing? An Essence can no more eternally exist in a
Temporary understanding, than a Body can be infinitely extended in a finite
space. The mind therefore wherein it does exist must be eternal; there is
therefore in the first place an Eternal Mind.

2. 'Twill follow also in the next place that this Mind is Omniscient as well
as Eternal. For that Mind which is eternally fraught with the simple Essences
of things, must needs contain also in it self all the several Habitudes and
Respects of them, these necessarily arising from the other by way of Natural
result. For as before, the Argument was good from the Habitudes of things to
their simple Essences, so is it as good backwards from the simple Essences of
things to their Habitudes. But these are the same with Truths. That Mind
therefore which has all these has all Truths, which is the same as to be
Omniscient.

3. 'Twill follow hence also in the next place, that this Mind is Immutable as
well as Omniscient and Eternal. For if that Mind which has existing in it self
from all eternity, all the simple Essences of things and consequently all their
possible Scheses or Habitudes should ever change, there would arise a new
Schesis in this Mind that was not before, which is contrary to the supposition.
It Is impossible therefore that this Mind should ever undergo any mutation,
especially if these eternal Ideas and Habitudes be one and the same with this
Mind, as I have already hinted and elsewhere See my Letter of Ideas.
proved.

4. Lastly 'twill follow that this Mind is not only Eternal, Immutable and
Omniscient, but that in a word it is endowed with all possible perfection. For
to have, and it self to be all the Essences and Habitudes of things is to have
and to be all that can possibly be, to be the rule and measure of all
perfection, to be supreme in the Scale of Being, and to be the Root, and Spring
of all Entity, which is the same as to be God. This Mind therefore so
accomplished is no other than God, and consequently there is a God, which was
the thing I undertook to demonstrate.

Postscript.
THis Essay has lain by me a considerable time, and I have lately reviewed it
with all the coldness and indifferency of a Stranger, and with more severity
perhaps than I am like to meet with from the most Prejudiced Reader. I have
turned it and viewed it on all sides, and, after the most deliberate and
impartial scrutiny that I could make, I must needs own, that I am not conscious
of the least flaw in the whole Procedure.

I know but of one place that is liable to any reasonable exception, and that
is in the fourth Section. The Proposition there maintained is this, that since
there are eternal and immutable Veritys or Habitudes of things, the simple
Essences of things must be also eternal and immutable. Here it may be objected,
that these Habitudes are not attributed absolutely to the simple Essences as
actually existing, but only Hypothetically, that whenever they shall exist,
they shall also carry such Relations to one another. There is you will say only an
Hypothetical Connection between the Subject and the Predicate, not an absolute
Position of either.

But in answer to this I say first, that these Habitudes are not (as is
supposed) only by way of Hypothesis, but absolutely attributed to the simple
Essences as actually existing. For when I say, for instance, that every part of
a Circle is equally distant from the Center, this Proposition does not hang in
suspense, then to be verified when the things shall exist in Nature, but is at
present actually true, as true as it ever will or can be; and consequently, I
may thence infer that the things themselves already are. There is no necessity,
I confess, they should exist in Nature, (which is all that the Objection
proves) but exist they must. For of Nothing there can be no Affections.

But 2ly, suppose I grant what the Objector would have, that these Habitudes
are not absolutely attributed to the simple Essences, but only by way of
Hypothesis; yet I don't see what he can gain by this concession. For thus much
at least is attributed to the simple Essences at present, that whenever they
shall exist, such and such Habitudes will attend them. I say, thus much is
attributed actually, and at present: But now how can any thing be said of that
which is not? There is therefore another way of existing besides that in rerum
Natura; namely, in the Mundus Archetypus or the Ideal world, where all the
Rations rerum or simple Essences of things whereof there are standing and
immutable Affirmations and Negations, have an eternal and immutable Existence,
before ever they enter upon the stage of Nature.

Nor ought this Ideal way of subsisting to seem strange, when even while things
have a Natural subsistence, the Propositions concerning them are not verified
according to their Natural, but according to their Ideal subsistences. Thus we
demonstrate several Propositions concerning a right line, a Circle etc. and yet
it is most certain that none of these are to be found in Nature according to
that exactness supposed in the Demonstration. Such and such Attributes
therefore belong to them not as they are in Nature, but as they are in their
Ideas. This is a Notion very frequently glanced at by Saint Austin, and it is
the Conclusion of Aquinas, that the Soul Omnia vera cognoscit in rationibus
aeternis, Part. 1. Qu. 84. Art. 5. And of late years this Notion has been much
improved by the ingenious Philosopher Du Hamel in his book De Mente humana. And
if this be true in Propositions whose Subjects are in Nature, much more is it
in eternal Propositions, whose simple Essences have not always a natural
existence. These can no otherwise be verified but by the coeternal Existence of
simple Essences in the Ideal world.

One thing I have more to add in the vindication of this Essay; Whereas in the
3d Section it was asserted that the nature of Truth is steady and immutable,
and such as has no precarious existence or arbitrarious dependence upon any
understanding whatever, and yet in the 5th Section it is affirmed that it owes
its existence to some mind or other; lest one part of this Meditation should be
thought to clash against another, I thought it requisite to adjust this seeming
contradiction. For the clearing of which, we must be beholding to that
celebrated Distinction of the Platonic School, of the Divine Mind into (...)
and (...) Conceptive and Exhibitive. Truth does by no means depend upon any
mind as Conceptive, whether Human or Divine, but is supposed by it, which is
the sense of the 3d Section. But upon mind as Exhibitive it may and does
ultimately depend; so that if there were no God or Eternal Mind, there could be
no Truth, which is the sense of the 5th Section. So that here is no
contradiction, but all Harmony and Agreement. See more of this in my Letter of
Ideas.

THE CHRISTIAN LAW Asserted and Vindicated. OR, A general Apology for the
Christian Religion, both as to the Obligativeness and Reasonableness of the
Institution.
THE CHRISTIAN LAW Asserted and Vindicated, etc.
1. I Design here to consider two things concerning Christianity:

1st, That it is a state of Service, 2ly, That it is a Reasonable Service.
The eviction of these two Propositions will contain both the Assertion of the
Christian Law and its Vindication, and be a plenary justification of its Divine
Author from the imputation of two sorts of Adversarys, those that reflect upon
his Wisdom, by supposing that he requires nothing to be done by his servants,
and those that reflect upon his goodness, by supposing him a Hard Master, and
that he requires unreasonable performances.

2. I begin therefore with the 1st Proposition concerning the Christian
Institution, that it is a service. It is most certain that the Christian
Religion according to the genuine sense and design of its Divine Author, is the
most wise and excellent Institution that could possibly be framed, both for the
glory of the Divine Attributes, and the best Interests of Mankind. And without
Controversy (if we take it as it is exhibited to us in the inspired writings) 1 Timothy 5. 16.
great is the Mystery of Godliness. But if we consult the perverse glosses and
Comments of some of our Christian Rabbis, and take our measures of the
Christian Religion from those ill-favored Schemes and Draughts of it we meet
with in Dutch Systemes, as some Christians are the worst of men, so will their
Religion appear to be the worst of Religions, a senseless and ridiculous
Institution, not worthy the Contrivance of a wise Politician, much less of him
who is the Wisdom of the Father. It fares here with Christianity as with a
Picture, that is drawn at so many remote hands, till at length it degenerates
from the Original Truth, and wants an under-title to discover whose it is. And
indeed whatever Declamations are made against Judaism and Paganism, the worst
enemies of the Christian Religion are some of those that profess and teach it.
For if it be in reality as some (who call themselves Orthodox) describe it, I
may boldly say, that it is neither for the reputation of God to be the Author of
such a Religion, nor for the interest of men to be guided by it, and that as
sin took occasion by Romans 7. 11.
the Law, so may it (and that more justly) by the Gospel too, to deceive and
ruin the world; by that Gospel which was intended as the Instrument both of its
temporal and eternal welfare*

3. For if you look upon Christianity as some men are pleased to hold the
Perspective, it is no way accommodated for the promotion of Holiness and
Virtue, but is rather a perfect Discharge from all duty, and a Charter of
Licentiousness. For among other misrepresentations of the Gospel this is one,
(and I think the most pernicious one that the Sophistry of Hell could ever
suggest) that it requires nothing to be done by its Proselytes. A Notion so
ridiculous and mischievous as is fit for none but a profane Epicure to embrace,
who may be allowed to make his Religion as idle and Sedentary as he does his
God. Nay, it is not only ridiculous and mischievous, but in the highest measure
Antichristian. For what greater Antichristianism can there be than that, which
strikes not only at some of the main branches, but at the very Root of
Christianity, and at once evacuates the entire purpose and aim of the Gospel.

4. But to set this mark upon the right forehead, there are three sorts of men
that come in some measure or other under this Charge. The first are the
Antinomians, who are impudent and ignorant enough in express terms to assert,
that the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ does wholly excuse us from all
manner of Duty and Obedience, as if we Libertins of the Gospel were so far from
being bound to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, that we are not
to work at all; and as if the Design of Christ's coming were only to satisfy
for the transgressions committed against the old Covenant, and not at all to
introduce a new one, and to discharge us from the Obligation of the Moral as
well as Ceremonial Law.

5. Nay some there are among them that carry the business yet higher, and
exclude not only the Repentance and good works of men, but even the Mediation
of Christ himself, at least the necessity of it, by supposing an Anticipating
Justification or Pardon from all eternity, which they found upon the secret
decree and Counsel of God.

6. The next that have a share in the forementioned Charge are those, who make
Christianity a matter of bare speculation, and think all Religion absolved in
Orthodoxy of Opinion; that care not how men live but only how they teach, and
are so over intent upon the Creed, that they neglect the Commandments. Little
considering that Opinion is purely in order to Practice, and that Orthodoxy of
judgment is necessary only in such matters, where a mistake would be of
dangerous influence to our actions, that is in Fundamentals. So that the
necessity of thinking rightly is derived from the necessity of doing rightly,
and consequently the latter is the more necessary of the two.

7. I am as ready to grant as the most zealous stickler for Orthodoxy can
desire, that our understandings are under obligation in Divine matters, but
withal I think it absurd that the Obligation should terminate there, since
then 'twould follow, 1st that all Theological Science were merely speculative,
2ly that we are bound to exact Orthodoxy in all speculations, (there being then
no reason why in one and not in another) and 3ly, (which is the greatest
absurdity of all) that we are obliged and tied up to no purpose, because
nothing is effected by it. Whenever therefore we are obliged to soundness of
Judgment, it is purely in order to the regulation of our Practice, and
consequently solitary Orthodoxy does not satisfy its own end, much less that of
Christianity. For to what purpose serves the Direction of the Compass, if there
be neither wind nor sail to carry on the vessel to the Haven.

8. But there are yet another sort of men who are justly chargeable with
expunging all Duty from the Christian Institution; I mean the Solifidians, who
under a pretense of advancing the merits of the Cross, and the freeness of the
Divine Grace, require nothing of a Christian in order to his Justification and
acceptance before God, but firmly to rely on the satisfaction and merits of
Christ, and without any more ado to apply all to himself. And herein, they do
not only contradict the general design and particular expresses of the Gospel,
but trespass against all Logic and common sense. They contradict the Gospel, in
requiring nothing but faith, whereas that (as we shall see anon) equally
requires obedience. And they contradict common sense in requiring such a Faith.
For they put the Conclusion before the Premises, and make that the first act of
faith which supposes others, and in due order ought to be the last. And
besides, they make that act of Faith contribute instrumentally toward the
effecting of Justification, which in order of nature is consequent to it, and
supposes it already effected. For I must be first Justified before I can
rightly believe that I am so, otherwise I shall believe a false Proposition,
since (as the most elementary Logician well knows) the certitude of the subject
does not make but suppose that of the object.

9. But I could dispense with the unphilosophicalness of this their Hypothesis
were it not withal unchristian, and utterly destructive of all Piety and
Virtue. The great mischief is, they unty the cords of Duty, and exclude the
necessity of Obedience as really and effectually, tho not so formally and
expressly as the Antinomians do. For they require nothing but Faith to qualify a
man for Pardon, and tho afterward for modesty's sake they come in halting with
good works, yet it is at such a time when they might as well have left them out.
It Is when the grand business (for which alone they could be necessary) is over,
when the man is numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the
Saints. And to say here that good works are necessary to Salvation tho not to
Justification, is a Mystery above my conception, or rather an absurdity below
my further notice. Nor will it salve the matter to say that they are necessary
to declare our Justification before men, or to ascertain it to our selves and
the like, for alas what does such a necessity amount to? No more than this,
that they are necessary for such ends which themselves are not necessary. And
besides, how can they declare or ascertain our Justification when they are not
the conditions of it? So that it is plain both from the lateness of the time
when, and from the incompetency of the grounds for which they insert good
works, that they put them merely out of Complaisance, not because they think
them necessary, but because they are ashamed to declare expressly that they are
not. Which appears yet further from the nature of those works they are at
length pleased to insert. They are such (for there is nothing that these men
are so much afraid of as meriting) as are much short of that sincerity and
perfection which is required by the Gospel. For it is notorious that they set
the state of Regeneration so low that it is consistent with the dominion and
prevalency of sin. A bare reluctance of the Spirit (tho foiled in the conflict)
against the flesh, is esteemed a sufficient mark of a Regenerate person; and
this every sinner that has the least Remains of Conscience, the least Twilight
of natural light left him must needs have; for no man loves sin for it self,
nay he hates it as it is in it self absolutely an evil, only he chooses and wills
it Comparatively to avoid (as he then thinks) a greater evil.

10. Thus as the Jewish Doctors did Mat. 15. 6.
the Law, do these men make the Gospel, of none effect by their Traditions, and
would questionless, were our Lord now on earth, have a severer woe pronounced
against them as Perverters of a more excellent, a more perfect Institution.
Strange, that men should corrupt and ridicule so admirable a Dispensation, and
turn so great a grace of God into wantonness! That there should be some (...)
in the Gospel which unlearned and unstable men might wrest to their own
destruction is no very hard matter to imagine, but that men should at once
pervert the whole scope and design of it is prodigious as well as
Antichristian, a Mystery of wonder as of Iniquity. And have these men the face
to declaim against the Papists for leaving out one of the Commandments, when as
they draw a black stroke over the whole Table? Nay further, have they the face
to call themselves Christians, and that of the Purer sort too, who thus
evacuate the Mystery of Godliness? By the same figure of speech might the
Heathen Emperors assume that sacred name, when they endeavored to persecute
it out of the world. Nay much more plausibly, for they only lopt off the
Branches, but these strike at the very Root of Christianity, they applied their
forces against the Professors of the Christian Religion, these against the
Religion it self, and (what aggravates the malice) not as open enemies, but as
Treacherous Friends, under the demure pretense of Purity, Orthodoxy and
Saintship. They cancel the laws of Christ and at the same time pretend to
advance his kingdom, call him Master, kiss and betray him. And how can it now
be expected that these men should be more forward than they are to yield
obedience to the King, who have found out an Expedient to slip their necks out
of Christ's yoke, and have made the Gospel in a worse sense, a Dead letter than
the Law?

11. But certainly the gate that leads to Heaven is much straiter than these
men are pleased to make it, otherwise there would be Luke 13. 24.
no need of striving to enter in at it. There are things to be done, as well as
to be believed and understood under the Evangelical dispensation, and
Christianity is a Service as well as a Profession. To the clearing and
establishing of which Proposition I shall consider the Gospel under a double
Capacity, 1st as a Law, and 2ly as a Covenant. And first as a Law. It Is most
certain that Christ was a Lawgiver as well as Moses, only as he was Heb. 7. 19.
an Introducer of a better Hope, so he required better and sublimer Services.
The advantage of Christianity does not consist in having any abatements of
Duty, for Christ was so far from diminishing or retrenching the Moral Law (for
it is of that I speak) that he improved every part of it to higher senses than
the most exquisite of the Jewish Doctors understood, or at least conceived
themselves obliged to; As is evident from his divine Sermon on the Mount, which
for the Perfection and Sublimity of its Precepts St. Chrysostom calls (...) the
Top and Height of Philosophy.

12. And that he thus improved the Law of Moses, besides the evidence of
Comparison, we have his own express word for it: I came Mat. 5. 17.
not to destroy the Law but to perfect, complete or fill it up. For so the word
((...)) properly signifies. The (...) or rude draught was Moses his part, but
the (...) or the painting to the life was Christ's. Moses drew out the main
lineaments, the Skeleton of the Picture (which was therefore Jud. 9.
called the Body of Moses) but 'twas Christ that filled up all its intervals
and vacuitys, and gave it all its graces, Air and Life-touches. And this is no
more than what the Analogy of the Christian dispensation required. The great
end and design of God incarnate was to perfect Holiness, as well as to retrieve
Happiness, to advance the Interests of the divine life, and make us Partakers
of the Divine nature, and 2 Pet. 1. 4.
accordingly as he himself was the express Heb. 1. 3.
image of his Fathers Person, so 'twas requisite he should consign to us an
express image, a correct Copy of his Fathers will. He was to make us better
men, and accordingly, 'twas fit he should give us a better law, a Law that
could not be satisfied but by such a Righteousness, as should exceed even the
strictest among the Jews, that of the Pharisees. So that we are by no means
released, but rather more deeply engaged in Duty by the Gospel, as it is a Law.

13. Nor 2ly are we released by it as it is a Covenant. Here indeed begin the
Abatements of the Gospel, not as to Duty and Obligation, for the Gospel makes
all that our Duty which the Law did and more only (which in short is the true
difference between the two Covenants) it does not make the strict and exact
performance of it the Measure, the ultimate Measure whereby we are to stand or
fall, but admits of Pardon which the Law knew nothing of. Not of absolute
Pardon, for then the Gospel would be a Covenant without a Condition, nor of
Pardon without Repentance and actual reformation of Manners, for then the
Gospel as a Covenant would interfere with it self as a Law, but upon the sole
Conditions of Faith and Repentance. For it is a great mistake to think that we
are actually Justified or pardoned by the satisfaction of Christ; this would be
the most ready expedient to verify the false charge of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and make him in their sense a Friend to Publicans and Sinners, to
encourage all manner of vice and immorality, and to turn the Mystery of
Godliness into a Mystery of Iniquity. No, Christ in this sense has redeemed no
man. All that he either did or could in wisdom do for us as satisfying, was in
short to instate us in a Capacity and Possibility of Pardon and Reconciliation,
by procuring a grant from his Father, that Faith and Repentance should now be
available to Justification, which without his satisfaction would not have been
accepted to that purpose. Whereby it appears that he was so far from
superseding the necessity of Repentance and good works, that he designed only
to make way for the success of them; He did so much that Repentance might not
be in vain, and he did no more that it might not be needless. And thus does the
wisdom as well as the goodness of God lead us to Repentance, by so ordering the
matter, that we may obtain Pardon with it, and not without it, which are the
two strongest engagements to action in any concern, that our Reason either
demands, or our deliberation can suggest.

14. This I conceive to be the true Hypothesis and state of Christianity, which
I might yet further confirm by infinite Authoritys from Scripture, which every
where presses the necessity of good works as Conditions to our Justification
and acceptance before God, but I think the more rational and unprejudiced part
of the world are pretty well satisfied in that Point, and know how to
accommodate St. James and St Paul better then some late Reconcilers. And
besides, the wisdom of the Hypothesis sufficiently approves it self; It Is such
as becomes the Perfections of the Divine Nature to exhibit to the world, and
which the Angels may 1 Pet. 1. 12.
well desire to look into. For it is at once fitted to the necessitys of man,
and to the Honor of God, to the infirmitys of the Animal life, and to the
advancement of the Divine, to the relief of the Sinner and to the suppression
of sin. Here Mercy and Truth meet together, righteousness and peace kiss each
other. The Sacrifice of the Altar does not prejudice the Balance of the
Sanctuary, and the Divine Justice is so satisfied that the necessity of
Holiness and Obedience remains secured. Much is forgiven, and much is to be
done, Duty continues as fast as ever, and even the Law of Liberty is a Service.

15. And now that this may not be thought a Hard saying, and make some of Jesus
his Disciples to go back (as once they did) and walk no more with him when they
hear of Duty and something to be done, I shall now proceed to demonstrate the
Reasonableness of that Service which Christianity requires of us, which was the
2d general Proposition I proposed to speak to.

16. Religion is so very agreeable both to the Inclinations and Discoursings of
Human Nature, that as none is capable of being Religious but a rational
creature, so it is almost impossible for a creature to be endued with Reason and
not to be Religious. Hence it is that there is no Nation so barbarous and
degenerate but what has some Religion or other, and tho ignorant of the true
Object as well as manner of worship, yet rather than wholly abstain from
Religious applications will adore implicitly, and erect an altar (...) to the
unknown God.

17. Nay so great a congruity is there between Religion and the radical notices
and sentiments of a human Soul, that all mankind except only some few distorted
and Anomalous heads (for there are monstrositys in the Soul as well as in the
Body) are unanimously agreed upon the fundamental and substantial Maxims of it,
which for their correspondency to our rational Natures are usually
distinguished by the name of Natural Religion. For there are Practical as well
as Speculative Principles, and that he who does no hurt is to receive none is
as evident a Proposition in Morality, as that the whole is greater than its
part is in the Mathematics, or that nothing can be and not be at once, is in
the Metaphysics.

18. And as Religion and Natural Religion carry such a strict conformity to our
Rational facultys, so does Revealed Religion too. All the lines of this as well
as of the other point all the way at, and at last concentre in the Happiness
and welfare of mankind. It Is a persuance of the same excellent end, only by
more close and direct means. For God in all his intercourses with us does
accommodate himself to our natures, and as he will not forcibly determine us to
good because he has made us free, so neither does he require any thing from us
but what is good and consistent with Reason, because he has made us Rational.
And although we cannot by this Candle of the Lord find out some of Prove. 20. 27.
Hos. 8. 12.
the great and wonderful things of his Law (for herein consists the formal
difference between Natural and Revealed Religion) yet when they are once
proposed to us, they are highly approved by our Intellectual relish, and strike
perfect unisons to the voice of our Reason, so that even the Animal man (for
it is of him the Apostle there speaks) consents to the Law that it is good. Romans
7. 16.


19. And indeed were it not so, it would be as unfit for God to propose, as
hard for man to receive, since even the Prudence of a Nation is by no one thing
either more justified or condemned, than by the good or ill contrivance of its
Laws. Shall not then the lawgiver of the whole world enact that which is
right, Genesis 1^. 25.
as well as the Judge of all the Earth do right? Shall he not be as wise in the
framing of his law, as he is Just in the Execution of it? God in contriving the
Mechanism of the material world displaid the excellency of his Divine Geometry,
and made all things in Number, Weight and Measure. He established the world
Jer. 10. 12.
by his wisdom, and stretched out the heavens by his discretion. And shall he
not govern the Intellectual world with as much wisdom as he made the Natural
one? Questionless he does, and the law, which he has prescribed to us, is as
perfect and excellent, as that whereby he wrought the Beauty and Order of the
universe. For the Lord is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145.
and holy in all his works. He has accommodated his Statutes and Judgments both
to the infinite perfection of his own Nature, and both to the actual perfection
and capacity of ours. God is a spirit and accordingly Romans 7. 14.
(as the Apostle tells us) the Law is Spiritual. Man is Rational, and
accordingly the Homage he is to pay to him that made him so, is no other than
a. Reasonable Service.

20. But to be as compendious, and yet withal as just and distinct as may be
in so copious and plentiful a Subject, I consider, that as the whole rational
nature of man consists of two facultys, understanding and will (whether really
or notionally distinct I shall not now dispute.) So Christianity, whose end is
to perfect the whole man and give the last accomplishment both to our
Intellectual and Moral powers, will be wholly absolved in these two parts,
things to be believed and things to be done. If therefore in both these it can
acquit it self at the Bar of Reason, the Conclusion is evident that it is a
Reasonable Service.

21. First then as to the things which are to be believed. Now these are either
the Authority and Truth of the whole Christian Institution, or the Truth of
particular Mysterys contained in it. The Is It of these will appear to be a
reasonable Object of faith two ways, Is It from the nature of its Design and its
excellent aptness to compass it, and 2ly from extrinsic Arguments and
collateral circumstances. And Is It, it is recommended to us by the nature of its
Design, and its excellent aptness to compass it. It is (according to the
precedent representation) a very wise and rational Hypothesis, above the reason
of man indeed at first to contrive, but such as when proposed it must needs
approve and acquiesce in, as at once the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
Power and Wisdom of God, because (as I first observed, and shall hereafter
more plainly demonstrate) it is so admirably fitted to the Honor of God, and to
the necessitys of man, thereby verifying that double part of the Angelical
anthem at the appearance of its Divine Author, and at once bringing glory to
Luke 2. ^4.
God on high, and on earth Peace to men of good will.

22. And as it appears thus rational in its general Idea or Structure, and
thereby speaks it self worthy of God, so 2ly that it came actually from him no
Rational person can doubt, that considers that conjugation of Arguments, that
cloud of witnesses whereby its divine Original stands attested. Such as are the
variety of Prophecys and Prefigurations, their punctual and exact
accomplishment in the Author of this Institution, his Birth, Life, Miracles and
Doctrine, his Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, with all the
wonderful Arrear and train of Accidents that ensued for the Confirmation of
Christianity, such as the wonderful Sustentation, Protection, increase and
Continuation of Christ's little flock the Christian Church, the miraculous
assistances and miraculous actions of the Apostles, the Harmony of the
Evangelists, the Constancy and Courage of his first Witnesses and Martyrs, the
defeat of the Infernal Powers in the silencing of Oracles, the just punishment
that lighted upon his enemies, and lastly the completion of all Prophecies that
proceeded out of his divine mouth while on earth, which I shall here only point
at in general, and leave to the enlargement of every man's private meditation.

23. Then as for the particular mysterys contained in Christianity, I know but
of three that threaten any distarbance to our Philosophy, and those are the
three Catholic ones mentioned by St. Athanasius, the Trinity, the Hypostatic
union and the Resurrection. Now concerning the two first I observe, that they
are indeed above the adequate comprehension of our Reason, but not contrary or
repugnant to it. For as we cannot conceive how these things can be, so neither
do we positively and clearly perceive that they cannot be, as we do in
contradictions and things contrary to reason. But as to the last, I don't in
the least understand why it should be Acts* 26. 8.
thought a thing incredible that God (whose very notion involves Omnipotence)
should raise the Dead. It Is true, we are as ignorant how this can be as in
either of the former Articles, but that it absolutely may be there is much
plainer evidence, especially to those who think it reasonable to believe a
Creation. Which if taken according to strictness of notion, for a Production of
something out of nothing, is most confessedly a greater and more difficult
performance (as to the nature of the work) than the Raising of the Dead can be.
Or if more largely for producing something out of praeexistent but naturally
unapt matter, yet it is still at least equal with it. He that with the bare
energy of his omnipotent word could inspirit the dead, stupid, void and
formless mass, and make it move into a frame so elegant and harmonious, that
the mere Contemplation of its Beauty and Order has by many Philosophers been
thought a sufficient entertainment of life, may easily be presumed to be able
to do the same in the lesser world, and with effect to say to a rude and
disordered heap of dust, the Chaos of a human body, stand up and live.

24. But after all, were this Article of the Resurrection much more thickset
with difficulties than it is, yet would we, before we venture to determine
against its possibility, sit a while and consider, that we are nonplus'd at a
thousand Phaenomenas in nature, which if they were not done, we should have
thought them absolutely impossible (as for instance to go no further, the
Central libration of the Earth) and now they are, we cannot comprehend Eccles.
43.
'em, that we have seen but a few of Gods works and understand yet fewer, and
lastly that as the possibility of the effect is above the comprehension of our
Reason, so the Power of the Agent is much more so, we should discern great
reason to be cautious how we set limits to the Divine Omnipotence, and should
rather support our Faith against all Objections with that universal Salvo of
the Apostle, I know 2 Timothy 1. 12.
whom I have believed.

25. I descend now from the things that are to be believed to the things that
are to be done in the Christian Religion. And that those may appear to be a
Reasonable Service, I consider first in general, that the Christian Law is
nothing else but the Law of Nature retrieved, explained and set in a clearer
light. Christ indeed added some new Precepts that were not in the Law of Moses,
but not any that were not in the Law of Nature. That he only restored and
rescued from the Sophistications of ill Principles, and the corruptions of
degenerate manners. For the clearer understanding of which Proposition it is to
be observed, that the Law of Nature was twice retrieved, by Moses and by
Christ. Moses did it imperfectly, with a shaking hand, and with a rude Pencil;
He adopted it is true, into his Table as many of Natures Laws as were necessary
to the present state and capacity of the Jewish people, but he did not exhaust
the whole Code and Digest of Nature. For there are many Instances and Branches
of the Natural Law which are no way reducible to the Mosaic Tables, unless
hooked in by long tedious consequences, which as the Law never intended, so
neither is one of a thousand able to deduce them from it, as appears in the
instances of Gratitude to Benefactors, Love to Enemies, Forgiveness of Injurys,
Humility and the like, which are excellences of the first Magnitude in the
Imperial constitutions of Nature, but not transcribed in the Copy and Extract
of Moses, as too refined for the grossness of that Age, for the hardness of the
Jewish people, and for the Infancy of that Dispensation.

26. This therefore was reserved for the work of a Diviner Prophet, who should
retrieve the Law of Nature to the full, and restore it as at the Beginning. For
he came (as he testifys Mat. 5. 17.
of himself, and as was before observed to another purpose) to fill up Moses
his Law, which implies that it was imperfect and deficient; and wherein should
its defectiveness consist, but in wanting something of the Natural Law. The
Christian Law therefore is only the Law of Nature retrieved.

27. This being premised, it is but now to consider what the formal notion of
the Law of Nature is, and we have found out one general measure whereby to
judge of the Reasonableness of the Christian Law. Now by the Law of Nature I
suppose we all understand certain Practical Maxims or Dictates, the observing
or transgressing of which, considering the present system of the universe, have
a natural connection with the well or ill being of man, either as to his private
or political capacity. I say, considering the present system of the universe.
For no question, God might have so contrived the Order and Scheme of the
Creation, as that many of those things which are now for the interest, might
have been for the disinterest of mankind, as he might have so framed the
texture of a human body, that what is now wholesome and sovereign, might have
been poisonous and pernicious; and in this respect I conceive the Law of Nature
may be said to depend upon the arbitrary will of God, and to be mutable at his
pleasure. But yet it still remains immutably true in the general, that
whatsoever has such a natural ordination to or connection with the well or ill
being of mankind, is good or evil respectively. This is the standard of
morality and immorality, and the essential difference between Virtue and Vice.
And it is as immutably true that some particular instances should have such a
natural connection, stante rerum Hypothesi, during the present state and order
of things. Now whatever has so, is an essential branch of the Law of Nature,
and obliges us to act or not to act respectively to the Term of its Ordination.
So that Bonum honestum is that which in the order of things is Bonum utile, and
conduces as a Natural Medium to Felicity, which is the End of man.

28. Hence then it follows, that the Christian Law which is nothing else but
the Law of Nature retrieved, consists only of such practical maxims, which
carry a natural relation to the true interest and well being of mankind, and
consequently contains nothing in it but what is reasonable, very reasonable to
be done. But to evince this more particulary 'twill be requisite to take a
cursory view of the Christian Law. And this I shall consider first, as I find
it summed up in general by our B. Savior in answer to the Lawyers Question,
what he should do to inherit eternal life, and secondly, in some of those
particular instances of it which seem most to cross the present interest of
mankind.

29. As to the Is It, the sum which our B. Savior gave of it was this: Thou
shall Mat. 22. 37. Mark 12. 30. Luke 10. 27.
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy
mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self. These he told him were the two great
Commandments, and that there were none greater than these: and certainly none
more reasonable. For since man is not his own end, but has an Amorous Principle
within him which transports him to good without himself, since he is not a
Central and selfterminating Being, but by the weight of his affections
gravitates and inclines to something further, what is more Reasonable than that
he fix upon God as his Center, who is as well the End as the Author of his
Being? And since whatever portion of his love is not directed hither, will
necessarily light (for it cannot be idle, and must fix somwhere) upon
disproportionate and vain Objects, which neither deserve it nor can satisfy it,
and consequently will but vex and torment him, what can be more Reasonable than
that he unite and concenter all the rays of his affection both Intellectual and
sensitive upon God, and according to the strictest sense of this great
Commandment love him with all his heart, Soul and mind? Vision and Love make up
the full composition of our Celestial Happiness hereafter, and they are the
nearest approach we can make to it here.

30. Nor is the 2d great Commandment less reasonable than the first. The truest
and most effectual way a man can take to love himself, is to love his neighbor
as himself. For since man is a necessitous and indigent Creature (of all
Creatures the most indigent) and since he cannot upon his own solitary stock
supply the necessitys of his nature (the want of Society being one of them) and
since of all Creatures here below none is capable of doing him either so much
good or so much harm as those of his own species, as 'twill be his best
security to have as many Friends and as few Enemies as he can, so, as a means to
this, to hate and injure none, but to love and oblige all, will be his best
Policy. So far is the state of Nature from being (according to the Elements of
the Leviathan) a state of Hostility and war, that there is no one thing that
makes more apparently for the interest of mankind than universal Charity and
Benevolence. And indeed, would all men but once agree to espouse one another
interests and prosecute the public good truly and faithfully, nothing would be
wanting to verify and realize the Dreams of the Golden Age, to anticipate the
Millennial Happiness, and bring down Heaven upon Earth. Society would stand
firm and compact, like a Mathematical frame of Architecture, supported by
mutual dependencys and coherences, and every man's kindnesses would return
again upon himself in the Circle and Reciprocation of Love.

31. But besides this Consideration of Interest, there is another which equally
contributes to recommend this Law of universal Benevolence, and perhaps with
more sweetness of insinuation than the former, and that is Pleasure. These two
are put together by the Psalmist, Psalm. 133. 1.
who tells us, that it is both good and pleasant for Brethren to dwell together
in unity. There is certainly a most Divine pleasure in the acts and expresses
of Benevolence, so that if God may be said to take pleasure in any one thing
besides the richness of his own infinity, it must be in the Communication of
it. Sure I am, no man can do good to another without recreating and feasting
his own spirit; nay, even the most happy and self-sufficient man who as to his
interest has the least need to be kind and obliging, yet as to his Pleasure has
the greatest. For he enjoys his happy state most when he communicates it, and
takes a Partner with him into his Paradise, and receives a more vigorous joy
from the Reflection, than from the Direct incidency of his Happiness.

32. I might here take occasion to show the Reasonableness of Justice and
Honesty, with other particular Branches of this great Law, but the necessity of
these is so notorious (no Society being able to subsist without them) and
withal so attested by the common vote and experience of the world (it being
the business of all human Laws, and the end of all Civil Government, to engage
men to the observance of them) that I shall not need to make any Plea in their
behalf. Instead therefore of lending any further light to what shines already
so conspicuously by its own, I shall now proceed to justify the Christian Law
in some of those instances which seem most to cross the present interest of
mankind.

33. There are some Precepts of the Christian Law which seem directly and in
their whole kind to be against the interest of man. (For as for those which may
accidentally and in some junctures of Circumstances, I shall consider them
afterward.) Now these I shall derive from that Abstract of Christian
Philosophy the divine Sermon on the Mount. The 1st instance shall be in the
Precept of Meekness, which our Divine Lawgiver has extended so far as Mat. 5.
39.
(...) that we resist not evil; which is not to be understood in Prejudice
either of the Civil sword, or of legal Prosecutions for the reparation of
injurys (for this would be to give the worst of men a continual advantage
against the best) nor of public wars between distinct kingdoms (for they being
under no common jurisdiction, have no other expedient whereby to right
themselves when injured) but only as to Private persons, who by virtue of this
Precept are not permitted (unless in apparent danger of life, for then the Law
of self-preservation takes place, the Benefit of other laws being not at hand)
I say are not permitted to retaliate evil, but obliged rather with their Divine
Master to give Isai. 50. 6.
their backs to the smiters, and their cheeks to them that pluck off the hair.

34. Now this may seem a very disadvantagious and inconvenient command, in as
much as it may be said by tying up our hands, to expose us to all manner of
contumelies and affronts, and invite the ill treatments of rude and
disingenious spirits. But whoever seriously considers the matter will find,
that pure and simple revenge is a thing very absurd, and very productive of ill
consequences, and in some respects, worse than the first injury. For that may
have some ends of profit and advantage in it, but to do another man a
diskindness merely because he has done me one, serves to no good purpose, and
to many ill ones. For it contributes nothing to the reparation of the first
injury (it being impossible that the Act of any wrong should be rescinded, tho
the permanent effect may) but instead of making up the breach of my Happiness,
it increases the objects of my Pity, by bringing in a new misery into the world
more than was before, and occasions fresh returns of malice, one begetting
another like the encirclings of disturbed water, till the evil becomes fruitful
and multiplies into a long succession, a Genealogy of mischiefs. And by this
time I think the man has reason to repent him of his Revenge, and to be
convinced of the Equity of the Law which forbids it.

35. The next instance I shall mention, is that of loving enemies. This runs
higher than the former, that being only negative, not to return evil, but this
positive to do good. A strange precept one would think, and highly
contradictory to Reason as well as Nature. But whoever considers the great
usefulness of Love and Benevolence to the interest of Society, will quickly
perceive, that he ought not to be disingaged from the observance of so
necessary a Duty upon so slight a ground as another default in it. I grant
it is neither Reasonable nor possible to love an enemy for being so, (that is no
proper motive of love) but yet it is very reasonable to love the man
notwithstanding his enmity. Because the necessity of Charity is so
indispensable, that it ought to oblige in all cafes. And besides, as by this
means all enmity is certainly prevented on one side (which is of very great
consideration to the public peace) so is it the likelyest method to bring over
the other. Kindnesses will at length prevail upon him, who is proof against all
the sense of Duty and Conscience, and the coals of fire which are heaped upon
his head (when nothing else will do it) will melt him down into Love and
Sweetness.

36. There is one instance more, wherein the Christian Law seems not to consult
the interest of human life, and that is in the matter of Divorce, which our
Savior allows in no case but that of Adultery. Now this also seems to be one
of the hard sayings. For the natural propension to procreation is not to be
satisfied out of marriage, and marriage by this appendage seems to be such a
Burden, that the Mat. 19. 10.
Disciples might well say, if the case of a man be so with his wife, it is not
good to marry. But yet upon consideration, this also will appear to be a very
Reasonable confinement. For 1st, all the supposable inconveniences of this
restraint may be in a great measure prevented by prudent and wise Choice. But
suppose they cannot, yet 2ly, as 'twould be most advisable for some men to
marry tho with this restraint, so is marriage with this restraint better for
Society than without it. For were there liberty of divorce upon other grounds,
every petty dislike would never want a pretense for a Dissolution, and then the
same inconveniences would ensue as if there were no such thing as the
matrimonial Institution, such as diminution of affection to children, neglect
of their education and the like; besides the perpetual quarrels and animositys
between the parties themselves so divided, and their respective relatives, all
which would bring more inconveniencys upon Society, than those which are
pretended to be avoided by distending and enlarging the license of Divorce.

37. Now if to this Apology for the reasonableness of Christianity taken from
its conduciveness and natural tendency to the interest of Human life, we
further add, the Dominion and Right that God has over us, the great Benefits
wherewith he has already prevented us, and the exceeding weight of glory laid
up in Reversion for us; And would we further consider, that Holiness has a
natural Ordination to the Happiness. of Heaven as well as of Earth, that it is
among the (...), Heb. 6. 9.
the things that accompany or are essentially retaining to Salvation, so that
would God in mercy dispense with it as a Conditionary, yet we could not be
happy without it as a natural Qualification for Heaven; Further yet, would we
consider the great easiness as well as manifold advantage of Christianity, that
many instances of Duty are agreeable to the inclinations of Nature, and that
where there is a Law in our members that runs* counter to that of the mind, we
have the aids and assistances of grace; that God has required nothing of us but
what is substantially within the verge and compass of Human nature; For to
believe, repent and love, are all natural acts, we believe some storys, we
repent of some follys, we love some men, and God obliges us but to believe him,
to repent of follys against him, and to love him. The Acts are the same for
their substance, tho not in their determination. Lastly, would we consider how
much all this is confirmed by the Argument of Practice and Experience, that the
Devil has more Apostates than Christ, that the number of those who leave sin,
and come over to virtue, is much greater than of those that leave virtue and
come over to sin, (which is the Apology that the Platonist Simplicius makes for
virtue) the Conclusion would be placed beyond the reach of controversy that
Christianity is a Reasonable Service, and that the Precepts of our excellent
Lawgiver both begin, continue and end with a Beatitude.

38. I can now foresee but one Objection of any moment which the Argument of
this Discourse is liable to, which is, that although virtue and vice have a
natural ordination to the Happiness and Misery of life respectively, yet it may
so happen by the intervening of some accidents, that this connection of things
may be broken off, and that a man may be a loser by virtue, and a gainer by
vice, as in the instances of martyrdom and secure theft. And here the Question
will be, whether it be then reasonable to act virtuously and unreasonable to do
the contrary. To this I answer, 1st that it may be justly questioned
(notwithstanding the intervention of any accidents) whether a man may be
virtuous to his disadvantage, or vicious to his advantage, even as to this
present state, considering the internal satisfaction and acquiescence, or
dissatisfaction and molestation of spirit that attend the practice of virtue
and vice respectively. But supposing he may, then 2ly I reply, that here come
in the rewards and punishments of another life to supply the natural sanction
of the law. Then 3ly, to the second instance I offer this in peculiar, that
although in some circumstances I might be dishonest to my present gain, yet it is
very reasonable that all should be obliged to the law of Justice. Because if
every one should be permitted to use secret Frauds (and all may as well as one)
the evil would come about again, even to him whom we just now supposed a gainer
by his theft, and as to the public 'twould be all one as if there were no
Property, and then for want of encouragement and security, the final issue of
the matter would be an utter neglect and disimprovement of the Earth, and a
continual disturbance of the public peace. So that when all is done Honesty is
the best Policy, and to live most happily is to live most virtuously and
religiously. So true is that of the Psalmist, I see that all things come to an
end, but thy Psalm. 119.
Commandment is exceeding broad.

39. From what has been hitherto discoursed, I shall now briefly deduce some
practical inferences and conclude. Since then our Religion is so Reasonable a
Service, 'twill follow hence in the first place, that there may be a due
exercise and use of Reason in divine matters, and that whatsoever is apparently
contrary to Reason ought not to be obtruded as of Divine Authority, nor be
accounted as any part of the Christian Religion. An Inference wherein the Faith
of the Church of Rome is not a little concerned.

40. 'Twill follow 2ly, that no man ought to be persecuted, or have any
external violence done him for his Religion, supposing that by overt acts he
give no disturbance to the Public. For since God has required nothing of us but
what is agreeable to our Reason, why should man?

41. 'Twill follow 3ly, that sin is the very Height and Extremity of Folly and
Disingenuity. Of Folly, because it crosses and defeats the excellent end of
Man, which is to live happily and commodiously. And of Disingenuity, because
it is committed against him, who when he might by virtue of his supreme Dominion
have imposed upon us arbitrary Laws, (as that given to Adam) or hard and severe
ones (as that to Abraham) has been graciously pleased to make nothing the
Condition of our Happiness, but what upon other accounts would have been most
advisable to be done. This certainly will render sin exceeding sinful, and
leave the sinner without the least shadow of an excuse. We commonly derive the
aggravations of sin from the greatness of God, but without question his
goodness will supply us with as many, and in this sense also 'twill be true to
say, as is his Majesty, so is his Mercy.

42. Lastly hence 'twill follow, that we ought to perform this Rational will of
God with Angelical alacrity and constancy, partly for its own excellency as
it is a persuance of our interest, and partly out of gratitude and generosity to
God, for giving us such excellent Laws, in keeping of which there is so great
Reward. For not only the End of our Religion is Happiness, but even her very
ways are ways of pleasantness, and Prove. 3. 17.
all her paths are peace. Quintilian I remember, inquiring why former ages
afforded better Orators than the latter, resolves the Problem into this,
because there were then greater encouragements and rewards. And if great
encouragements will make good Orators, why should they not make good men? Let
us then make it our daily endeavor as we do our daily Prayer, that this
excellent will of God may be done here on Earth as it is in Heaven, and the
more we do so, the more we shall still be convinced that it is our Reasonable
Service.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING PERSEVERANCE IN HOLINESS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Perseverance in Holiness.
1. ALL that is of any moment for the full Discharging of this Subject, will be
absolved in these three Considerations. 1st, that man has one way or other
sufficient power to persevere in a course of Holiness if he will; otherwise all
exhortations would be in vain. 2ly, that it is also possible for him to fall
from a state of Holiness; otherwise they would all be superfluous. And lastly,
by showing him what vast encouragements, what infinite engagements he has to
stand.

2. I begin with the first, that man has one way or other sufficient power to
persevere in a course of Holiness if he will. Where by Perseverance, I do not
understand a continuedly uniform, equal course of obedience, and such as is not
interrupted with the least act of sin, (for this is a perfection not to be
hoped for, under the disadvantages of mortality) but only such a constancy of
obedience as excludes all contrary Habits, and likewise all such acts of sin as
are said directly to wast the Conscience, those I mean, which are committed
against the clear and express Dictate either of natural Reason, or supernatural
Revelation. And withal (to complete the Character) such an Obedience as is
attended with a sedulous care and hearty endeavor to correct and subdue even
those pittiable infirmitys, which can never be wholly put off in this state,
but will always adhere like spots to the brightest Star in the Firmament. This
I conceive to be all one with that disposition of Soul which with more
compendiousness we usually call sincerity, in opposition to a perfect and
sinless obedience. Now that man has sufficient power to persevere in such a
course of life as is here described, (not to call in the assistance of any
other Argument) seems to me evidently demonstrable from this single
consideration, that to be found in the state above mentioned is the condition
of the New Covenant, upon the fulfilling of which, all our hopes of Pardon and
Salvation depend. I do not say it is the indispensable Condition of our
Salvation, that we persevere uninterruptedly even in this state of Evangelical
Righteousness (it being possible for a man after an interruption of a salvable
state to recover into it again, as is plain from the case of David, St. Peter
and many others) but that we be found finally in this state is the Condition of
our Salvation. For if the Righteous man turns away from his Righteousness,
and commits iniquitys and dies in them, the righteousness that he has done
shall not be mentioned, in the sin that he has sinned shall he dye. Well then,
if Salvation be not to be had out of this state, then it follows, that it must
never become impossible to a man without his own fault to be found in it, since
it is repugnant to the very nature of a Covenant (much more of this great
Covenant of mercy) to have a condition annexed to it, which in some
circumstances, and that without our fault may prove impossible.

3. The Condition then of this new Covenant must be as possible to man in this
state of degeneracy, now his locks are shaven and his great strength is
departed from him, as the Condition of the first Covenant was to him in his
primitive might and vigor. Do this and live, is equally common to both, the
only difference lies in the This that is to be done, not in the possibility of
the performance. Or if there are degrees of possibility, the advantage ought to
lie on this side, this being (as was hinted before) a Covenant of Grace and
Mercy.

4. Well then, if to be found finally in the state above described be the
indispensable condition of our Salvation, and if for that very reason (as it
has been proved) it must not in any circumstance become impossible without our
fault, it unavoidably follows, that it is also possible to persevere in it
without interruption, because otherwise we having not the disposal of our own
lives, it will oftentimes prove impossible for us (and that without our own
fault) to be found finally in that state which is the Condition of Salvation;
which is contrary to the supposition. The short is (to speak all in a word) the
possibility of being found in a salvable state cannot be sufficiently secured,
without a possibility of always persevering in it, and therefore I conclude it
possible for a man to do so, which was the thing I undertook to prove.

5. But now lest man upon a survey of his natural strength, and of the
Auxiliarys of the Divine grace, should pronounce himself absolutely
impregnable, and should begin to say in his heart (as the Psalmist did in
another case) I shall never be removed, thou Lord of thy goodness have made my
hill so strong, it is high time to turn the Perspective, and give him a more
near, full and distinct view of his Condition, that instead of stretching
himself upon the ^ed of security, he may learn to work out his Salvation with
fear and trembling. Which we shall do, by advancing to the 2d thing proposed,
which is, that although man has sufficient power to persevere if he will, yet it is
also possible for him to fall from a state of Holiness. Navigat enim adhuc, for
he is still upon the waters, and tho with the use of diligence and prudent
conduct he may decline both rocks and shallows, yet if he venture to sleep
within the vessel which he should govern, upon a groundless presumption that an
Angel will be his Pilot, and that he shall be infallibly steered to the right
Point by the arm of Omnipotence, he may notwithstanding the past success of his
voyage, and his confidence of the future, be shipwrackt even within sight of
the Haven.

6. I confess, when I consider with what strength and combination of Argument
Christianity both as to Faith and Practice does approve it self to be the most
Rational thing in the world, when I consider the nobleness of its Original (God
being its Author) the excellency of its nature (it being most agreeable to, and
perfective of our best facultys) its wholesome effects and operations (the
interests of Kingdoms and States as well as of private persons depending upon
it) and lastly, the greatness of its End, which is no less than everlasting
Bliss and Happiness, I say when I consider all this, I am ready to conclude it
the most prodigious thing in nature that so very few should be in love with the
Beauty of Holiness, were I not immediately surprised with a greater Miracle,
which is, that many of those few after some considerable progress in virtue
retract their best choice, and after the good Angel has brought them within
sight of the Mountain of Safety, look back upon the Region of wickedness.

7. This certainly is a Condition no less strange than deplorable, and calls
for our wonder as well as our Pity. It Is true indeed, ignorance of the sweets
of Religion may something lessen the wonder of not embracing it, and the Food
of Angels may lie neglected on the ground so long as men wist not what it is,
but for those who are once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift,
and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, one would think it as difficult for such
to fall away, as the Apostle assures us it is to renew them again to Repentance.

8. But such is the imperfection and unsteddiness of Human Nature that from the
beginning of things there have been instances of this kind. Paradise could not
preserve man in his innocence, and the Garden of the Lord degenerated into a
Wilderness. Neither is this to be observed only in man, who sits in the lowest
form of Intellectual Beings, but the very Angels also, who are greater in power
and might Job 4. 18.
are charged with Folly for leaving their own habitation. Those bright sons of
the morning could not long endure to be Happy, but grew giddy with the
sublimity of their station and fell from the Heights of Glory. And although the
blessed inhabitants of that serene and peaceful mansion are now (as it is
piously believed) fully confirmed in Holiness and Happiness, yet man like this
sublunary Region which falls to his lot to inherit, is still nothing else but a
Scene of Changes and Revolutions, but in nothing so changeable, as in that
wherein he ought to be most fixed, the practice of Virtue and Religion. It Is a
narrow and a rugged path, and he that treads surest is not secure from falling.

9. This will plainly appear to him that considers, that no Habit tho
contracted by never so great a repetition of acts does necessitate the faculty,
but only disposes it to act with greater facility, and consequently leaves it
still indifferent to opposite operations. Whence it is easy to conceive, that an
Habit of Holiness may by degrees be abolished by contrary actions. For as this
Habit was at first begotten by frequent acts, so may it be destroyed by
opposite ones, and (what is more) a contrary Habit may be at length produced.

10. This I say is very possible in the ordinary course of things, and that God
should interpose here with an irresistible power to prevent it, we have no
grounds from Scripture or reason to expect, and therefore 'twou'd be a most
intolerable presumption to rely upon it. My grace is sufficient for thee was
the utmost degree of consolation vouchsafed to the chosen Vessel; He had God's
faithfulness engaged for it, that he should not be tempted above his strength,
but yet notwithstanding this sufficiency, it must have been possible for him to
have fallen from his own stedfastness, otherwise I cannot imagine to what
purpose he should (...) keep under his body, and bring it into subjection, and
all for this reason, lest that by any means when he had preached to others, he
himself should be a castaway.

11. What, did the Angels let fall their Crowns of glory, and shall man pretend
to Indefectibility? Indeed the Platonists tell us of an order of Beings called
(...) and (...) minds, units and self-goodnesses, whom they suppose to be the
closest draught of their Maker, and the Masterpiece of the whole Creation. And
these they say are essentially and in their own nature immutable, and the
reason that they assign for it is, because they are pure, uncompounded spirits,
and utterly abstract from matter. And although these are the only Creatures which
they affirm to be essentially immutable, yet they allow a gift or Privilege of
Perseverance to certain men. But then they are such as (according to their
Hypothesis of Pre-existence) were not sent down into these bodies for any faults
committed in another state, but who came hither either out of generosity, or by
divine dispensation to be guides and examples of Heroic virtue in the world.
And these they say are secure of remaining good and virtuous, and of returning
to their native Country again.

12. Now as to the first opinion of theirs, I can by no means make it part of
my Creed. For to be essentially immutable, I take to be the incommunicable
property of the Father of Lights with whom is no variableness or shadow of
turning, and who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever. No Creature how
excellent soever can lay claim to this divine prerogative. And this I find
acknowledged by a Person of great worth, and one who in other points was very
Platonically given; But here he has deserted his Master, as is to be seen in
his Book (...) lib. 1. c. 8.
And the generality of Christian writers seem to conspire with Origin in this,
inasmuch as they hold not only a Lapse of Angels in general, but withal
suppose him who is now the Prince of Devils, to have been once an Angel of the
highest Order.

13. As to their latter opinion (not to meddle with the Hypothesis upon which
it is founded) I do not absolutely deny but that to some men who have for a long
time given excellent proof of their obedience, and with unwearied resolution
fought the Lord's Battles, God may at length vouchsafe such a plentiful portion
of grace and so stablish them with his Free Spirit, that they shall never
depart from him, partly to reward their past fidelity, and partly, that they
may become burning lamps to give constant light in the Temple of God. For since
it is confessed on all hands, that God by way of punishment does withdraw his
grace from some obstinate sinners, and give them up after a long abuse of his
mercy to the fulfilling of their own lusts, it is but what the Analogy of reason
requires, to suppose on the other hand that God may be so favorable to some of
his most eminent servants, who have for a long time well acquitted themselves
in the severest trials, as at length to give his Angels a peculiar charge over
them to keep them in all their ways. And this supposition seems not a little
countenanced from what the Spirit says to the Church of Philadelphia, Because
thou have kept the word of Rev. 3. 10.
my Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.

14. But although this be granted, yet it makes nothing against our present
assertion, as every one must acknowledge that attends to these two
Considerations. 1st, that these are extraordinary instances of the Divine
favor, vouchsafed only to extraordinary persons, and to extraordinary
purposes, and consequently when we treat of Gods ordinary dealings with the
sons of men, must not come into computation. And 2ly, that even these
extraordinary persons whom we suppose to be at length thus highly favored,
were notwithstanding for a great part of their lives in a defectible condition,
and that they are now no longer so, is supposed to be the reward of their past
fidelity, so that they may say with the Psalmist, This I had because I kept
Psalm. 119.
thy Commandments.

15. What hinders then, but that it be concluded possible for t^^ generality of
men at all times, and for all men at some times to fall from a state of
Holiness, and after they have tasted the liberty of the sons of God, to become
again the servants of corruption? And sure those that assert the contrary
destroy not only the excellency, but the nature of obedience, defeat and
evacuate the design of all Scripture exhortations, which would be as
impertinent upon their supposition, as to exhort him to continue to live who is
Immortal, pervert the order of things, arrogating to themselves in this state
of Probation the portion of confirmed Saints, and lastly assume to themselves
more, than many of the great Masters of Theology will allow to our B. Savior
himself in the days of his flesh. Did our Savior seem to shrink at the
apprehension of his sad hour, and to be at a stand whether he should drink off
his bitter cup? Did his danger seem so considerable, that he was fain to betake
himself to his great Antidote Prayer, and borrow courage from the consolation
of an Angel? And does mere man sit careless and unconcerned, secure of the
issues of eternity? See the indecorum, the Lord is in his Agony, and the
Disciples sleep on and take their rest. But I think I have said enough to
awaken them out of their dangerous slumber, and to convince them that all is
not so safe as they dream, and that notwithstanding the present firmness of
their station, there is still left a possibility of falling.

16. But now lest this possibility of falling be reduced to act, I proceed to
consider the vast encouragements, the infinite engagements that he who is Holy
has to be holy still. And these I shall choose to represent to him in these two
general Considerations. 1st, that he has made the best choice that he could
possibly have made, and consequently, it is against all the reason in the world
that he should rescind it. And 2ly, that if notwithstanding he does rescind it,
he will not only lose the advantage of his best choice, but incur an opposite
portion of misery, and that in a greater measure than other sinners. These I
take to be the most proper Considerations to enforce the grand Duty of
Perseverance.

17. The consequence of the first Argument proceeds upon this Principle, that
that choice which is best is not to be rescinded. This Proposition is so
evident that it can hardly admit, much less need any proof, and it is
practically confessed by every man throughout the whole tenor of his life. For
no man retracts his choice 'till he has altered the Dictate of his
understanding (for otherwise he would choose evil under the very Formality of
evil) and has entertained other apprehensions of the object than he had when he
first chose it. And this is that which makes up the entire notion of
Repentance, which is nothing else in its precise Idea, when abstracted from
particular matter, but a Retractation of a former choice, proceeding from the
alteration of the Practical Dictate, disallowing that now, which was before
approved. For this a man never does 'till he thinks he has reason to do so. And
upon this account it is, that God is (...) and cannot properly repent, because
his understanding being infinite and reaching out to all the possibilitys of
things, must needs dictate to his will after one uniform and constant manner,
it being impossible he should either discover something afterward which he did
not comprehend at first, or lose the apprehension of something which he did. But
the understanding of man being finite and imperfect at the best, and oftentimes
corrupted and biased by the Passions, has at several times different
apprehensions of things, and being sometimes under and sometimes out of the
cloud, dictates to the will as the Sun shines upon the Earth, with a disuniform
and unequal light. Whereupon (as it frequently happens in Courts and Senates)
many Decrees are enacted, which at the next Session are repealed again, tho
with this unhappiness, that sometimes her second thoughts are worse than her
first, and that she sometimes retracts that which she should persevere in, as
well as perseveres in that which she should retract. But whatever the
Retraction really be, 'twas always thought for the best when made, so that he
that repents him of his Holiness, as well as he that repents him of his sin,
does it upon the change of his Practical Dictate, judging that not to be best
now, which before was so pronounced, and consequently, they both own the Truth
of the forementioned Principle, that that choice which is best is not to be
rescinded.

18. This being firm, all the business in question now will be, whether he that
is Holy has made the best choice or no. And if it shall appear that he has,
then by the Principle just now laid down he ought not, nay he cannot be so much
a Contradiction to himself as to rescind it. Now to convince him that he has
made the best choice, I desire him to consider, 1st that he has chosen that
which God had chosen for him before, so that his choice stands recommended to
him by the Authority of infinite and unerring wisdom. And this is foundation
enough to warrant a certain (tho implicit) persuasion that it must needs be
best for him. I say best for him, for God being already possessed of all
possible perfection, cannot act any thing for any self-advantage, and therefore
whatsoever he does is for the good of his Creatures. For there is this
difference (as Divine Plato excellently well observes) between the Divine love
and created love, that the one springs from Indigency, and the other from
fullness and redundancy. And therefore as God did not at first speak this world
into being, to raise himself a monument of Power and divine Architecture, so
neither does he govern the Rational part of it by the Precepts of Religion out
of any self-design, as if he feasted his nostrils with the perfumes of the
Altar, or his ears with the accents of an Hallelujah. For can a man be
profitable to Job. 22.
God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any pleasure to
the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him that thou make thy
way perfect? No certainly, and therefore when he chalked out the ways of
Righteousness and Holiness for man to walk in, it could not be for any self
end, but purely for the good of man, and consequently (if infinite wisdom be to
be trusted) it must be his best choice to be Holy.

19. Secondly let him consider, that the Practice of Religion consults a man's
whole interest, and partly of its own nature and partly by divine constitution,
tends to make him happy in all his capacitys, and consequently must needs be
his best choice. As for impious and unjust Practices, if they do at any time
promote a man's private and secular interest, yet it is always both at the
expense of the public, and of his own eternal welfare, and then, what will it
profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? But now this is the
peculiar gain of godliness, that it has the promise both of this life and of
that which is to come, that it conduces to our advantage both here and
hereafter. Interest and Duty are immediately linked together in this life, and
every Virtue has a natural Sanction of Reward and Punishment respectively
attending it, as I could easily demonstrate, but that it has been already done
by many excellent hands, and particularly with Mathematic Dr. Cumberland.
evidence by a late writer of our own. And although it happen sometimes through the
unreasonableness and injustice of men that Duty and Interest interfere, and
that Virtue be defeated of the Portion she is naturally endowed with, yet she
shall recover her own again at the great Assize, at the day of the revelation
of the righteous Judgments of God. And although instead of being rewarded it be
our fortune to suffer for righteousness sake, yet we Christians know that it
entitles us to one of our Saviors Beatitudes, and we are also well assured
from one whose case it was to be so dealt with, that the sufferings of the
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
reveal^d, and that our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for
us (...), a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. So that whatever
difficultys and hardships Religion may sometimes engage a man in, yet when the
whole account is cast up, he will find the Practice of Religion as gainful, as
the belief of it is rational, that to be Holy is his best choice, and that he
has infinite reason to pray in the words of Balaam, Let me die the death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his.

20. And now one would think, that one who has so great and so apparent reason
for his choice as the Religious man has, should not easily be brought to
retract it, and say with those in Malachi, it is vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that I have kept his ordinances? But because it is observed to be
the Nature of Man to be more strongly affected with Punishments than Rewards, I
shall for his better establishment in the purposes of Holiness present him with
the 2d general Consideration, which is, that if notwithstanding the excellency
of his choice he does retract it, he will not only lose the advantages of it,
but also incur an opposite portion of misery, and that in greater measures than
other sinners.

21. That he will lose the advantages of his first and best choice, is plain
from the whole tenor of the Gospel, Perseverance to the end being the express
condition of Salvation. And that he will incur an opposite portion of misery,
is plain from the double Sanction of Rewards and Punishments wherewith God has
bound us to the observance of his otherwise sufficiently profitable Laws. And
although this be sufficient in the severest trials to preserve us from Apostasy,
and when flames of fire surround us to secure our footing in the Holy ground,
yet thus far is but to dye the common death of sinners, and to be visited after
the visitation of the Impenitent. But now if the Lord make a new thing, and the
Desertor of Piety be punished in a greater measure than other sinners, then
shall ye understand that this man has provoked the Lord.

22. And that he shall be so punished is the peculiar consideration which I
shall now insist upon, and which I prove from the heinousness of his crime,
Apostasy having in it many degrees of evil beyond the common state of sin. For
if after they have escaped the Pollutions of the world through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For it had been
better for them not to have kuown the way of Righteousness, than after they
have known it to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them.

23. But to represent the heinousness of Apostasy a little more particularly,
and that this sin above all others may appear to be exceeding sinful, let me
desire the unthinking man to consider, 1st, that he that falls back from a
course of holy living, does in a special manner grieve the holy Spirit of God.
He sacrilegiously takes that from him which he had once most solemnly
consecrated to his service, he defiles the seat of his residence, alienates it
to profane uses, blots out the Tetragrammaton of the Temple, and suffers it to
be no longer Holiness to the Lord. He disinherits his God, disturbs his rest,
and forces him to leave the habitation whereof he had once said, This shall be
my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I have a delight therein. Add to this
affront of the H. Spirit that resided in him, that he grieves the Angels that
attended him, and with much concern and hopes minister'd to his Salvation.
Those disappointed and unsuccessfull Guardians with sorrow cry out to one
another as the Angels did in the Jewish Temple, when through many profanations
it was no longer fit for their charge, (...) Josephus de Bell. Jud. lib. 7.
let us depart hence. Neither does he disappoint the Tutelar Ministers of his
Salvation only, but causes universal grief in Heaven. Those kind and
compassionate Spirits who before rejoiced at his Repentance and Conversion, and
began to reckon upon the new accession they should have to the Quire of Heaven,
now tune their Harps to the strains of sorrow and lament the disappointment of
their hopes.

24. Consider secondly, that to the sin of Apostasy is added the circumstance
of inexcusableness. The man has entered within the veil, has seen the inner
Beautys of the Holy place, and has been taught the secrets of the kingdom, his
understanding has been instructed, and his will has been entertained, he has
given proof of his Powers and abilitys and has conquered the steepest part of
the Mount his difficultys lessen and his strength increases; so that if now he
retreat and slide back to the bottom of the hill, he has nothing whereby to
excuse himself either before God or man, but stands in the highest sense of the
phrase (...) self-condemned. We generally make some allowances for the
miscarriages of those who were never enlightened, and have had no acquaintance
with the substantial delights of Religion, and the satisfaction of sober
counsels, because indeed they knew no better, but when we are told that the
wisest of men after a censure of Vanity passed upon the whole Creation, and a
long application of his mind to the excellent Theories of Moral and Divine
Knowledge, was yet toward the evening of his life when the Sun drove hard and
the shadows increased, drawn aside by strange women, and that his wisdom
departed from him like the Dream wherein it was given him, this indeed we may
lament, but cannot excuse.

25. Consider thirdly, that he who falls from a state of Holiness must needs do
strange violence to his Reason. If he be a new Convert he cannot sure without
great reluctance defile that Temple which he has so lately swept and garnished.
And if he be a Saint of some considerable standing, sure he must be the more
unwilling to break off a long-dated innocence for the unsatisfying pleasure of
a moment. For tho (as it is well observed by Plutarch) men of desperate and
bankrupt fortunes have little regard to their expenses, because should they
save them the tide of their estates wont rise much the higher, and so they
think it impertinent to be frugal, when there is no hopes of being rich. Yet
they that see their heaps begin to swell, and that they are within the
neighborhood of wealth, think it worth while to be saving and improve their
growing stock. But then after a long thrift and sparing, to throw away the hard
purchase of many years in one nights gaming, is one of the Prodigys of Folly
and Indiscretion. And yet this is the very case of him that lets go his
integrity.

26. Consider fourthly and lastly, that the Apostate has the greatest
ingratitude imaginable to aggravate his folly. Indeed every sinner is a very
ungrateful person, because he trespasses against his best Friend and
Benefactor, against him that made him, against him that died for him, and
against him that follows him with the daily offers of his grace and lays
stratagems of mercy for his reformation. But the Back sliding man sins against
greater mercys, endearments and obligations yet. He has lived in the service of
his Lord, has received the earnest of his Spirit, he has been of his Family,
nay more, he has been called his Friend, he has eaten with him at his Table, he
has dwelt under the endearments of familiar converse, he has been with him in
his Banqueting house where the Banner that was over him was Love, he has
plighted his faith, given his heart and said with Passion, My Beloved is mine
and I am his, so that to turn Renegade now is the greatest beseness and
ingratitude conceivable, it is to betray his Lord and Master after the
obligations of Intimacy and Discipleship, it is to break the tables of his law
after he has been with him on the Mount, and seen the back parts of his glory.

27. Since therefore the Apostate has so many peculiar circumstances to
aggravate his crime beyond the guilt of common sinners, of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy who has thus trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace? which
was the last general consideration.

28. What now remains, but that upon a serious consideration of the Premises,
He that is Holy think himself highly concerned to be Holy still. That he lift
up the hands that hang down; and sstrengthen the feeble knees, that he hold
fast that which he has, that no man take his Crown, that he unravel not his
holy vows, nor put himself back in the accounts of eternity, that he be not
frighted or laughed out of his Religion, since it is his best and wisest choice,
and will be found to be so in spite of all the profane drollery of supposed
wits, in the day when wisdom shall be justified of all her wisdom. For then
shall the Righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such as have
afflicted him and made no account of his labors. And they shall say within
themselves, this was he whom we had sometimes in derision and a proverb of
reproach; we fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor.
How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints!
Wherefore again, let him that is Holy be Holy still. Let him but maintain his
station during his short warfare here on earth, and he shall be hereafter
confirmed both in holiness and happiness, and be fixed in that Center where he
shall for ever rest. For so says the Spirit to the Churches, Rev. 3. 1^.
Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING HEROIC PIETY, Wherein its Notion is stated and its
Practice recommended.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING HEROIC PIETY.
1. SInce the Practice of Religion in general is not only the Natural
Instrument of our present Happiness, but also the only and indispensable
condition of our Future, one would think there were but little left for the
Orator to do here, the naked efficacy of Self-love, and a serious consideration
of our true and main Interest, being sufficient to engage us upon Religious
performances. But he that shall undertake to recommend the Practice of Heroic
Piety, has a much heavier task, not only because he persuades to higher degrees
of Virtue, but because he is to address himself wholly to a weaker Principle.
For since our interest is secured by the performance of necessary Duty, there
remains nothing but a Principle of Generosity to carry us on to the higher
advances, the more glorious Achievements in Religion. And what small
probability there is that it will often do so, may appear from the ill success
of the former and more prevailing Principle. For if the greatest interest
imaginable can prevail with so very few to perform what is indispensably
necessary to secure it, sure there is little hopes that Generosity, which is a
much weaker Principle, should engage many upon greater performances.

2. But yet, notwithstanding these discouragements, since our Blessed Savior
has taught us to pray, not only for the performance of God's will in general,
but that it be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; that is, with the greatest
zeal, readiness and alacrity, with all the degrees of Seraphic ardency that
frail Mortality is capable of, I think a Persuasive to Heroic Piety may be a
proper and useful undertaking; it being very reasonable we should make that the
object of our endeavors, which our Savior thought fit to make the matter of
our Prayers.

3. In discoursing upon this subject, I shall proceed in this Method. 1. I
shall state the notion of Heroic Piety, and show what I mean by it. 2. I shall
demonstrate that there is such a thing. And 3. I shall offer some Perswasives
to recommend the practice of it.

4. The Notion of Heroic Piety will be best understood by considering what the
Moralists mean by Heroic Virtue. For the one carries the same proportion in
Religion that the other does in Morality. But before I proceed to explain the
Thing, I suppose it will not be amiss to give some short account of the Name.
That it is derived from the Greek word (...), is very obvious, all the
difficulty is concerning the derivation of the Greek word it self. And here I
find the Grammarians are very much divided; some derive it (...), but that
seems somewhat hard; others derive it from (...), because 'twas supposed by the
Ancients that the Souls of the Heroes had their abode in the Air, where they
had a near prospect of human affairs; and accordingly Xenon in Laertius, lib.
7. calls Heroes the Souls of wise men separated from their Bodies, and ranging
about in the Air; others derive it from (...), because the Heroes are a kind of
terrestrial Gods, according to that definition which Lucian gives of an Hero,
(...), one that is neither God nor man, but a compound of both. Others derive
it from (...), the name of Juno, who was the President Goddess of the Air,
intimating thereby either the Habitation, or the light aereal Nature of the
Heroes. And this Etymology I remember is approved of by St. Austin, lib. 10. de
Civ. Dei, cap. 21. But methinks the most natural and significant one is that of
Plato, who derives it from (...), because of that ardent and passionate Love
which the Heroes are supposed to have for God. And as the word Hero is very
doubtful as to its Etymology, so is it also various in its acceptance.
Sometimes it is attributed to illustrious and eminent Personages while living,
such as act and live above the ordinary strain of Mortality, and render it a
very disputable Point whether they are Gods or men. A Character which Homer
gives of the great Hector, Iliad ^^.

-- (...)
(...).
And in this sense the word Hero is used by Hesiod,

(...)
(...) --
Sometimes by Heroes are meant the Souls of wise and good men departed, as is
evident from the forecited testimony in Laertius. But in the Platonic
Philosophy by Heroes is understood a middle sort of Being, inferior to those
whom they style the Immortal Gods, and superior to Man; as is to be seen at
large in Hierocles.

5. Beyond these three acceptations of the word, I do not know of any other.
But this is certain, that in whatsoever sense it is used, it always denotes
something great and extraordinary. So that from hence it is easy to collect what
is meant by Heroic Virtue, (viz.) Such a vehement and intense pursuance of a
man's last and best end, as engages him upon such excellent and highly
commendable actions, which advance him much above the ordinary level of human
Nature, and which he might wholly omit, and yet still maintain the Character of
a good man. Aristotle in his Ethics l. 7. c. 1. calls it (...), that Virtue
that is above us. By which, I suppose, he does not mean that it is above our
reach and unattainable, but that it is above our obligation, and that when it
is attained, it will elevate us above our selves.

6. In proportion to this Notion of Heroic Virtue, I understand by Heroic Piety
those excellent degrees and eminences of Religion, which, tho to arrive at be
extremely laudable, yet we may fall short of them without Sin, God having not
bound them upon us as parts of Duty, or made them the Conditions of our
Salvation, but only recommended them by way of Counsel, and left them as
instances of Generosity. Of this sort are those high and singular Exercises of
Religion which are the fruits and effects of a profound and steady
contemplation of God: Such as are the passionate applications of Seraphic Love,
acts of ecstatic joy and complacency in the Perfections of the Divine Nature,
holy transports of Zeal and Devotion, Praise and Adoration: earnest contentions
and very numerous returns of Prayer, actual references of our most natural and
indifferent actions to Gods glory, extraordinary works of Charity, great
severities of Mortification and Self-denial, abstemiousness from many lawful
Pleasures, perpetual Celebacy, and whatsoever else are the excellent products
of a contemplative and affectionate Religion.

7. Thus far of the Notion of Heroic Piety. I come now to my second
Undertaking, which was to show that there is such a thing. Tho universality and
sincerity of Obedience be indispensably required of every Christian, and
consequently every part of Religion obliges under the penalty of Damnation as
to its kind, yet that there may be some degrees to the attainment of which we
are not so obliged, will evidently appear from the proof of this one single
Proposition, That every one is not bound to do what is best. The reasonableness
of which Proposition appears from the very nature of the thing; for since that
which is Best is a Superlative, it necessarily supposes the Positive to be
good: And if so, then we are not bound to that which is best, for if we were,
then that which is only good would be evil, (it being short of what we are
bound to) which is contrary to the supposition.

8. This Argument I take to be Demonstrative, and therefore 'twould be a kind
of Supererogation in me to allege any more. But however, for the clearer
eviction and stronger confirmation of this Assertion, I farther consider, that
the Scripture consists of Counsels as Matt. 19. 20. and 21. 1 Cor. 7. 1, 6, 7,
25, 38. 2 Cor. 8. 10. and 9. 6.
well as Commands. Now if some things are matter of Counsel only, it is obvious
to conclude two things. 1. From their being counseled, that they are good
(nothing being matter of Counsel but what is so) and secondly, from their being
only counseled, that they do not oblige, and consequently, that there are some
degrees of good that we are not obliged to.

9. It is farther observable, that in Scripture there is mention made of a
threefold Will of God. Romans 12. 2. (...), That Will which is good, that which
is wellpleasing, and that which is perfect. The first of these denotes absolute
Duty, the two last the various degrees of Perfection and Heroic Excellence.
Thus for St. Paul to preach the Gospel to the Corinthians, was an Act of strict
Duty which he could not leave undone without incurring that woe which he
annexes to the omission of it, 1 Cor. 9. 16. (...). But to preach without
charging them was an instance of Theophylact.
Generosity, and in that respect there was room for boasting. Thus again, for a
Jew to allot the tenth part of his Revenue every third year toward the relief
of the Poor, was an act of express Duty, and in doing of that, he would but
satisfy the obligation of the Law; But now if in his charitable contributions
he should exceed that proportion, according to the degrees of the excess, so
would the degrees of his Perfection be. Thus again in the matter of Devotion,
daily Prayer is generally concluded to be a Duty, and by some Critics that it
be twice performed, in proportion to the returns of the Jewish Sacrifices,
Morning and Evening; But now if a more generously disposed Christian should add
a third time, or out of abundance of zeal should come up to the Psalmist's
resolution of (Seven times a day will I praise thee) this would be a free will
Offering, well pleasing and of sweet savor, but not commanded.

10. From these and many other instances, which, if necessary, I could easily
produce, it plainly appears that Religion does not consist in an indivisible
point, but has a Latitude, and is capable of more and less, and consequently
there is room for voluntary Oblations and Acts of Heroic Piety.

11. I know it is usually objected here, that what is supposed to be thus
Heroically performed, is inclusively enjoined by virtue of those comprehensive
words, ( Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
Soul, etc.) But, I conceive, that all which is intended by that phrase, will
amount to no more than, First, a sincere love of God, as it is opposed to that
which is partial and divided; and secondly, such a degree of loving him, as
admits of nothing into Competition with him. And thus far reach the Boundaries
of indispensable Duty, it being impossible that he who does not love God in
this sense and degree, should keep his Commandments. But beyond this, there are
higher degrees, which, because we may fall short of without sin, are the more
excellent when attained. So that in this Precept of loving God, as in all other
instances of Religion, there is a great latitude, it being very possible for
two Persons to love God sincerely and with their whole Soul, and yet in
different measures (which is observed even among the Angels, the Seraphins
having their name from their excess of Love) nay, for the same Person always to
love God sincerely, and yet at some times to exceed himself, and with his
Savior (who to be sure never failed of necessary Duty) to pray yet more
earnestly.

12. There is another Objection yet behind, which I think my self concerned to
answer, as well in my own defense as that of my Argument. Some perhaps may be
so weak to imagine, that by asserting such a thing as Heroic Piety, and that a
Christian may do more than he is commanded, I too much favor the Doctrine of
Supererogation. But I consider, that for a Man to do more than he is commanded,
is an ambiguous expression, and may denote either that he can perform the whole
Law of God and more, or that, tho he fail of his Duty in many Instances, and
consequently with the rest of Mankind, is concluded under Sin; Yet in some
others he may exceed it, by pressing forward to some degrees of excellency he
is not obliged to. I do not assert the former of these, but the latter. And I
think I have sufficiently proved, that there are certain degrees in Religion,
which we are not obliged to under Pain of Sin, and consequently that he who
arrives so far, does (according to the latter notion of the Phrase) do more
then he is commanded.

13. Having in the foregoing Periods stated the Notion of Heroic Piety, and
demonstrated that there is such a thing, I proceed now to my third and last
undertaking, which was to offer some Perswasives to recommend the Practice of
it. First then, I consider that Religion is the Perfection of a Man, the
improvement and accomplishment of that part of him wherein he resembles his
Maker, the pursuance of his best and last end, and consequently his Happiness.
And will a man set bounds to his Happiness? Will he be no more happy than he is
commanded, no more than what will just serve to secure him from a miserable
Eternity? Is not Happiness desirable for it self, as well as for the avoiding
of Misery? Why then do we deal with it as with dangerous Physic, weighing it by
Grains and Scruples and nice Proportions? Why do we drink so moderately of the
River of Paradise, so sparingly of the Well of Life? Are we afraid of making
too nigh advances to the State of Angels, of becoming too like God, of
antedating Heaven? Are we afraid our Happiness will flow in too thick upon us,
that we shall not bear up against the Tide, but sink under the too powerful
enjoyment? Hereafter indeed, when we are blessed with the Beatific Vision, and
the Glories of the Divine Brightness shall flash too strong upon our Souls, so
that our Happiness begins to be lessened by its greatness; We may then with the
Angels that attend the Throne, veil our Faces, and divert some of the too
exuberant blessedness: But now in this Region we are far enough from being
under the Line, there is no danger of such Extremity, but rather the contrary,
and therefore it would be now most advisable for us to be as Happy, and to that
end, as Religious as we can.

14. Secondly, I consider, that since God, out of the abundance of his
overflowing and communicative Goodness, was pleased to create and design man
for the best of Ends, the fruition of himself in endless Happiness, and since
he has prescribed no other Conditions for the attainment of this Happiness; but
that we would live happily here in this State of Probation, having made nothing
our Duty but what would have been best for us to do whether he had commanded it
or no, and has thereby declared, that he is so far only pleased with our
Services to him as they are beneficial to our selves; this must needs be a most
endearing engagement to one that has the least spark of Generosity or
Ingenuity, to do something for the sake of so good a God, beyond the Measures of
Necessity, and the regards of his main and final Interest. This is the only
Tribute of Gratitude we are capable of paying God for giving us such good, such
reasonable, and righteous Laws. Had the conditions of our eternal welfare been
never so hard, arbitrary, and contradictory to our present Happiness, yet mere
interest would engage us to perform necessary Duty, and shall we do no more out
of a principle of Love to our excellent Lawgiver, for making our present
Happiness the Condition of our future? Shall the Love of God constrain us to do
no more then what we would do merely for the Love of our selves? shall we stint
our Performances to him, who sets no Measures to his Love of us? Can our
Generosity be ever more seasonably employed than in endeavoring to please him
in extraordinary Measures, whose Pleasure is to see us happy even while we
please him? For so is the will of the wise and good Governor of the World,
that in serving him we should serve our selves, and like Adam in his dressing
and cultivation of Paradise, at the same time discharge the Employment which
God sets us about, and consult our own Convenience: So that it fares with us in
our religious Exercises as with the Votary that sacrifices at the Altar, who
all the while he pleases and serves his God, enjoys the perfumes of his own
Incense.

15. Thirdly, I consider, that every man has a restless Principle of Love
implanted in his Nature, a certain Magnetism of Passion, whereby (according to
the Platonic and true notion of Love) he continually aspires to something more
excellent than himself, either really or apparently, with a design and
inclination to perfect his Being. This affection and disposition of Mind all
Men have, and at all times. Our other Passions ebb and flow like the Tide, have
their Seasons and Periods like intermitting Fevers. But this of Love is as
constant as our Radical heat, as inseparable as thought, as even and equal as
the Motions of Time. For no man does or can desire to be happy more at one time
than at another, because he desires it always in the highest degree possible.
It Is true, his Love, as to particular objects, may increase or decrease,
according to the various apprehensions he has of their excellencies; but then,
like Motion in the Universe, what it loses in one part it gains in another; so
that in the whole it remains always alike, and the same. Now this Amorous
Principle which every man receives with his Soul, and which is breathed into
him with the breath of Life, must necessarily have an object about which it may
exercise it self, there being no such thing in Love (if in Nature) as an
Element of Self-sufficient Fire. For tho we may easily and truly frame an
abstract notion of Love or Desire in general, yet if we respect its real
existence, we shall as soon find First Matter without Form, as Love without a
particular Object. And, as it is necessary to the very being of Love that it
have an object, so is it to our content and happiness, that it be a
proportionate and satisfying one; for otherwise that passion which was intended
as an instrument of happiness, will prove an affliction and torment to us. Now
there is but one such object to be found, and that is God. In the application
of our Passions to other things, the advice of the Poet is exceeding necessary,

Quicquid amas cupias non placuisse nimis. Martial. That we should be very
cautious how far we suffer our selves to be engaged in the love of any thing,
because there is nothing but disappointment in the enjoyment, and uncertainty
in the possession. We must needs therefore be miserable in our Love, unless God
be the object of it. But neither is our happiness sufficiently secured by
making God the object of our Love, unless we concenter our whole affections
upon him, and (in the strictest sense of the Phrase) love him with all our
Heart and with all our Soul. For otherwise, whatever portion of our Love does
not run in this Channel, must necessarily fix upon disproportionate and
unsatisfying objects, and consequently be an instrument of discontent to us.
It Is necessary therefore to the completing of our happiness, that that object
should engross all our affections to it self, which only can satisfy them; and
(according to the Marsilius Ficinus, Tom. 2. page 315.
comparison of an ingenious Platonist) that our minds should have the same
habitude to God that the Eye has to Light. Now the Eye does not only love Light
above other things, but delights in nothing else. I confess, such an absolute
and entire Dedication of our love to God as this, is not always practicable in
this Life. It is the privilege and happiness of those confirmed Spirits who are
so swallowed up in the Comprehensions of Eternity, and so perpetually ravished
with the Glories of the Divine Beauty, that they have not the power to turn
aside to any other object. But tho this Superlative Excellency of Divine Love
be not attainable on this side of the thick darkness, it being the proper
effect of open Vision, and not of Contemplation; yet however, by the help of
this latter, we may arrive to many degrees of it, and the more entire and
undivided our love is to God, the fewer disappointments and dissatisfactions we
shall meet with in the World, which is a very strong engagement to Heroie Piety.

16. Fourthly, I consider, that the degrees of our Reward shall be
proportionable to the degrees of our Piety: We shall reap as plentifully as we
sow, and at the great day of Retribution, we shall find, that besides the
general Collation of Happiness, peculiar Coronets of Glory are prepared for
Eminent Saints. Indeed, all hearty and sincere lovers of God and Religion shall
partake of the glories of the Kingdom; but some shall sit nearer the Throne
than others, and enjoy a more intimate perception of the Divine Beauty. All the
true Followers of Jesus shall indeed feast with him at the great Supper, but
some shall be placed nearer to him than others, and still there shall be a
Beloved Disciple that shall lean on his Bosom. I know this Doctrine concerning
different degrees of Glory, is (and indeed what is there that is not) very much
questioned by some, and peremptorily denied by others; but since it is so
highly agreeable to the goodness and bounty of God, and to the Catholic
Measures of Sense and Reason; and is so mightily-favour'd, if not expressly
asserted in many places of Scripture, I shall not here go about to establish
the truth of it, but taking it for granted, do urge this as another
consideration of great moment, toward encouraging the practice of Heroic Piety.

17. Fifthly, and lastly, I consider, that We have indeed but very little time
to serve God in. The Life of man at longest is but short, and considering how
small a part of it we live, much shorter. If we deduct from the Computation of
our Years (as we must do, if we will take a true estimate of our Life) that
part of our time which is spent in the incogitancy of Infancy and Childhood,
the impertinence and heedlesness of Youth, in the necessities of Nature,
Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and other Refreshments; in business and worldly
Concerns, engagements with Friends and Relations, in the offices of Civility
and mutual intercourse; besides a thousand other unnecessary avocations: we
shall find that there is but a small portion left even for the Retirements of
Study, for our improvement in Arts and Sciences, and other intellectual
accomplishments. But then if we consider what great disbursements of our time
are made upon them also, we shall find that Religion is crowded up into a very
narrow compass; so narrow, that were not the rewards of Heaven matter of
express Revelation, 'twould be the greatest Presumption imaginable to hope for
them upon the condition of such inconsiderable Services. Since then our time of
serving God is so very short, so infinitely disproportionate to the rewards we
expect from him, it is but a reasonable piece of ingenuity to work with all our
might, and do as much in it as we can: to supply the poverty of Time by frugal
management and intenseness of affection, to serve God earnestly, vigorously,
and zealously; and in one days Devotion to abbreviate the ordinary Piety of
many years. It Is said of the Devil, that he prosecuted his malicious designs
against the Church with greater Rev. 12. 12.
earnestness and vigor, because he knew he had but a short time. And shall not
the same consideration prevail with a generous Soul to do as much for God and
Religion, as the Devil did against them? It Is a shame for him that has but a
short part to act upon the Stage, not to perform it well, especially when he is
to act it but once. Man has but one state of Probation, and that of an
exceeding short continuance, and therefore, since he cannot serve God long, he
should serve him much, employ every minute of his life to the best advantage,
thicken his Devotions, hallow every day in his Calendar by Religious exercises,
and every action in his Life by holy references and designments; for let him
make what haste he can to be wise, Time will outrun him. This is a
Consideration of infinite moment to him that duly weighs it; and he that thus
numbers his days, will find great reason to apply his heart to more than
ordinary degrees of Wisdom.

CONTEMPLATION AND LOVE. OR, The Methodical Ascent of the Soul to God, by steps
of Meditation.
-- Nisi ad haec admitterer,
Non fuerat operae pretium nasci.
Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 1.
Contemplation the First.
That it is necessary Man should have some end.
1. IN the Depth of Solitude and Silence, having withdrawn my self not only
from all worldly Commerce, but from all thoughts concerning any thing without
my own Sphere; I retire wholly into my self, and there speculate the
Composition of my Intellectual nature.

2. And here besides that faculty of Perception whereby I apprehend objects,
whether Material or Immaterial, without any Material species; (which in the
Cartesian Dialect I call Pure Intellect) and that other of apprehending objects
as present, under a corporeal image or representation; (which I distinguish
from the other power of Perception by the name of Imagination) I say, besides
these two, I observe an Appetitive Faculty, whereby I incline to Apparent good;
and that either by a bare act of Propension, or endeavor to unite with the
agreeable object; which answers to Pure Intellect, and may be called Will or
rather Volition) or by such a propension of the Soul as is also accompanied
with a Commotion of the Blood and Spirits; which answers to Imagination, and is
the same with the Passion of Love.

3. And of this I further meditate, and by self reflection experiment, that
although the Perceptive Faculty be not always in actual exercise, or at least not
in the same degree of it. (For, if according to the Cartesian Hypothesis there
be no intermission of Cogitation, yet it is most certain that its applications
are not always equal and uniform) tho this I say be true as to the Perceptive;
yet, I find by attending to the operations of my nature, that the Appetitive
faculty is not only always in Act, but in the same degree of intension and
Application. As it never has any total intermission, so neither is it subject
(as indeed every thing else in man is) to ebbs and flows, but acts uniformly as
well as constantly. This Amorous Biass and Endeavor of the Soul is like that
stock of Motion which the French Philosopher supposes the Universe at first
endowed with, which continues always at the same rate, not to be abated or
increased. Not that this equality of Love is to be understood in reference to
particular objects, any more than that of Motion in reference to particular
Bodies; but only, that it gains in one part, as much as it loses in another, so
as in the whole to remain equal and uniform.

4. For however various and inconstant I may be in my love of particular
objects, according to the various apprehension I have of their respective
excellencyes; yet certainly I pursue Happiness in general with the same
earnestness and vigor, and do not love or wish well to my self more at one
time, than at another.

5. And indeed since all my inconstancy in the prosecution of particular
objects proceeds from the variety of my Apprehensions concerning their
Excellency; and the only reason why I withdraw my Affection from this or that
thing is, because I discern or suspect that Happiness not to be there which I
expected, it is hence plainly argued a posteriori, that I stand at all times
equally affected toward Happiness it self. As he that is therefore only
variously affected toward the means according as he variously apprehends their
serviceableness to the End, may be truly said to affect the End it self always
alike.

6. Nor can it possibly be otherwise than that I should thus point at Happiness
with an equal Verticity; because I always affect it in the highest degree that
is possible, which admits of no Latitude. For I consider my self here as a
necessary Agent, and accordingly as such can neither suspend the whole Act, nor
any one degree of it, but must needs operate to the utmost stretch of my Power.
This Spring of my Soul (my Appetitive Faculty) is always at its full bent, and
accordingly presses and endeavors with its whole Elasticity.

7. For since Good or Happiness is the utmost object of my Appetitive, it must
needs employ its whole Power, otherwise so much of it as is not in act will be
for ever incapable of being so; (there being nothing left beyond that to bring
it into act) and consequently will be planted in me in vain, which I think
absurd to admit; and therefore find it necessary to conclude that my Appetitive
is wholly employed in the love of Happiness; or that I always love it to the
utmost capacity of my faculty.

8. Since therefore I find in my self an Appetitive Faculty which is always in
actual exercise, and that after an even and equal measure; and not only so, but
also in the very Height of activity and Invigoration; I am by the clue of
Meditation further led to conclude, that there must be some Center for this
Weight; some object or other, either within or without me, of such ample,
copious and solid excellence as may answer to the full extent of my desires,
bear the whole stress of my inclining Soul, and such as may well deserve to be
called the End of man.

9. For I cannot think it any way consistent with the goodness of that great
Being which called me out of the womb of Nothing to what I am, to plant in me
such an Amorous Principle which at no time lies Dormant, but is always equally
awake, and acting with the utmost plenitude of its vigor, supposing there were
no proportionable object in the whole Latitude of Entity for it to fix and
bottom upon. It being only a greater preparation and qualification for misery
to have enlarged Faculties and Appetites when there is nothing to afford them
agreeable satisfaction. Which however some may be justly subjected to for their
after-demerit, can yet never be reasonably supposed to be the Antecedent will
of God.

10. And this I am further induced to believe, when I consider how the great
Author of Nature has made provision for the entertainment of our animal
Faculties and particular Appetites: All our senses, Seeing, Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling and Touching, have their proper objects and opportunities of pleasure
respectively. Which makes it very unlikely that our great and general Appetite
of being Happy, should be the only one that is disinherited and unprovided for.
Especially considering that the enjoyment and indulgence of any of the rest is
then only and in such instances and circumstances restrained, when the greater
interests of Happiness are thereby crossed and defeated. Which argues, that the
true Happiness of Man is the thing chiefly regarded by God; and consequently,
that there is a Provision for that great Appetite of his of being Happy, as
well as for any of the rest.

11. Which is yet further confirmed to me, when I consider, that there is an
exemplification of it in the material part of the universe. The most ponderous
Body that is has its Center toward which it always presses, and in which it
settles with full acquiescence. Now since there is something in Spiritual Beings
which corresponds to weight in Bodies, (according to that of St. Austin, Amor
tuus est Pondus tuum) the Analogy of the thing persuades me to think that there
is also something which shall be to them in the nature of a Center.

12. And as the contrary is inconsistent with the Divine goodness, so neither
can I reconcile it to the Wisdom of him who made all things in Number, Weight
and Measure, to be so much out in his Proportions as to create an Appetite too
high, vigorous, and craving, for the excellency and fullness of any object.
This would be like making a Body too heavy for the Central Poise; or as if the
Spring of a Watch should be made too strong for the wheel, or any other such
disproportionate operations: which neither comports with the Geometry of the
Divine Mind, nor with the exact Harmony of his other works.

13. The Conclusion therefore from these Premises is, that Man is not as a Body
for ever, rolling on in an Infinite vacuity; or as a Needle continually
trembling for an embrace: but that he has his proper end and Center; to which
it is possible for him to arrive, and in which as impossible for him when once
arrived, not fully to Acquiesce.

The Prayer.
MY God, My Creator, who by that active Principle of Love and immense Desire
thou have interwoven with my Nature, have given me fair grounds to conclude
that there must be some End on which I may fix and Center with the full stress
of my Faculties; point out to me by the guidance of thy Spirit this my true
End, direct me in the persuance, and bring me to the attainment of it. Let me
neither mistake my true Center, nor by any irregular or oblique motion decline
from it. But as thou have appointed me for Happiness, and furnished me with
natural Capacitys of receiving it, so let it be thy good pleasure to possess my
Soul with such a serious and diligent Concern for my great interest, that I may
not by any default of mine fail of that excellent good which will fill all the
emptinesses of my Soul, leave no desire unsatisfied, and no trouble I can
undergo in the quest of it unrewarded. O suffer me not to be disappointed of
that excellent, that only good: but as thou have made me aspire toward it
infinitely, so grant I may enjoy it eternally, for thy great love and goodness
sake,

Amen.
Contemplation the Second.
That it is impossible Man should be his own end.
1. BEing from my yesterdays Contemplation of my Intellectual Nature, and the
stock of desires therein implanted, led to this Conclusion, that it is necessary
man should have some end; I now consider that it is but to carry on the thread of
the same Contemplation a little further, and 'twill as evidently appear, that
it is impossible man should be his own end.

2. For while I stand fixed in the Contemplation of my self, I observe that I
have this Appetitive Principle, not only in such a manner as answers to Weight
in Bodies, but also so as to be analogous to gravitation, that is, to Weight
not only in actu primo, but in actu secundo, as it denotes such an inclination
of Body whereby not only one part presses against another, but whereby the
whole leans and endeavors to something beyond the bounds of its own
circumference.

3. For besides Acts of self-complacency, whereby I delight and please my self
in the perfections of my Nature, and turn as it were upon my own Axis; I find
in me a great deal of Extatical Love, which continually carries me out to good
without my self; which I endeavor to close and unite with, in hopes of
bettering my present state, and of supplying from without what I seek, but
cannot find within.

4. Hence therefore I conclude that I am not (whatever complacencies I may
sometimes take in my self) a Central or self-terminative Being, it being as
impossible that what is so should love any thing without, (as love is taken for
Desire or Aspiring to good) as that a Body should gravitate in the Center. That
which loves any thing without, wants something within. If therefore I gravitate
I am off from the Center, consequently not my own Center.

5. And that I cannot ever Center in my self and be my own End, is yet further
evidenced to me, when I contemplate the great Disproportion between my
Appetitive and all my other Perfections whether of Body or of Mind. I desire
both more kinds of pleasure than they all can afford, and more Degrees of
pleasure in the same kind. Which must necessarily be, because my Desires are
extended to all possible good, but my real endowments and perfections are
infinitely short of that extent. And by consequence, my Desires cannot be
cramped within the narrow bounds of my own Sphere, but will of necessity run
out farther, even as far as there is good without it.

6. And as there is a manifest disproportion between my stock of
self-perfection and my Appetitive, as to its objective Latitude (viz.) the
kinds and degrees of Happiness; so is there no less as to the intenseness of
its Acts. This Appetitive of mine (as was remarked in the preceding
Contemplation) is always in an equal invigoration, and burns with an even and
uniform heat; but I have not within my self fuel enough to maintain this flame
in an equal height. I always equally desire, but I am not always equally
desirable: partly because I am sometimes (even in my own partial judgment) in a
Condition of less excellence both as to my Morals and Intellectuals than at
other times; and partly, because the stock of my Perfections tho 'twere
possible they could be always alike as my Desires are, yet being both Finite in
Nature; and Few in Number, cannot bear a long and uninterrupted enjoyment, and
appear still equally grateful under it, any more than a short Poem tho in it
self equally excellent, can please equally after a Million of Repetitions.

7. Hence it comes to pass, that I do not always take an equal Complacency in
my self, but am oftentimes (especially after long retirements) apt to be
melancholy and to grow weary of my own company; so that I am fain to lay aside
my self (as it were) for a while, and relieve the penury of Solitude with the
variety of Company, and so whet my appetite toward my self as I do toward my
meat, by Fasting and abstemiousness.

8. Since therefore I always desire equally, but not my self; (being not upon
the two accounts before mentioned always equally desirable) it follows, that
the steddiness and evenness of this my Flame must depend upon some other Fuel,
good which is without me. And consequently, I do not terminate in my self, and
so am not my own End.

The Prayer.
MY God, my Creator, who have in thy great wisdom furnished me with Desires too
large and vehement for the other Perfections of my Nature, and have thereby
made it impossible that I should ever be my own End; grant me effectually to
consider the Barrenness and insufficiency of my own Nature, and how unable I am
upon my own solitary stock to satisfy the importunity of my Soul: that so I may
not be transported with vain complacencies* nor endeavor to bottom my self
upon such a Center as will moulder away under me and deceive me. Let me ever
weigh my self in a true Balance, and be as observant of my imperfections as of
my excellencies. Let me be ever thankful for the one, and humble for the
other. What ever else I am ignorant of, O grant me a true understanding of my
self; that I may not to the vanity of my Nature add levity of Spirit, nor
become despicable in thy eyes by being too precious in my own.

Amen, Amen.
Contemplation the Third.
That it is impossible that any other Created good should be the end of man.
1. HAving by the light of Contemplation discovered the necessity of man's
having some end, and the utter impossibility of his ever being his own End; I
am now concerned to look beyond the Orb of my own Perfections, and to consider,
whether the whole Latitude of the Creation can afford any good that will
terminate the Amorous Bent of my Soul, and wherein I may sweetly and securely
rest as in my end or Center.

2. And this I am the more induced to enquire into, first, because I observe
that the generality of men and those some of the most sagacious, thinking, and
inquisitive, do pursue many interests in this visible and sublunary world
(which yet is the most cheap and inconsiderable part of the Creation) with as
much fervency, vigor and assiduity, as they could possibly do were it the true
End of man. So that one would think by the quickness of their motion they were
nigh the Center.

3. Secondly, because I observe concerning my self, that there are some few
things in the world which I love with great passion, and delight in with
something like satisfaction and acquiescence. Such as are Conversation with
select Friends, or men of harmonical and tunable dispositions; reading of close
and fine-wrought Discourses, solitary walks and Gardens, the magnificence of
the Heavens, the Beauty of the Spring; and above all, majestic and well
composed Music. Which last, could I enjoy it in its highest perfection and
without interruption, would, I am apt to fancy, terminate my desires and make
me happy; at least I am well assured I should pity more than I should envy.

4. Thirdly, because I consider that the great Author of Nature is brought in
by Moses commending upon a deliberate review all the works of his hands. That
which before the divine Incubation was (...) Solitude and inanity, after the
Spirit had moved upon the waters he pronounced (...) Superlatively good. So
very Superlatively good, that even the glory of Solomon, in the judgment of him
who was both greater and wiser than he, was not comparable to one of Nature's
meanest flowers. And if the Beauty and variety of the Creature was so
considerable as to merit approbation from him that made it, what is there of
our Love and Complacency that it may not challenge? That which can but please
God, may well be supposed able to satisfy man: That wherein the Creator
delights, the Creature one would think might fully rest and acquiesce in.

5. By such considerations as these when solely attended to, I have been
sometimes almost prevailed upon to think that there is good enough in the
Creation of God, if amassed together and fully enjoyed, to employ the whole
activity of my Love, and fix the entire weight of my Soul. But yet when I
consider experience, and compare the Aspirations of my Nature with the goodness
of the Creation, I am driven to conclude, that although the Creatures of God
(whatever the Manichees say to the contrary) are all good enough to afford
matter for entertainment and praise, yet they cannot detain and give Anchorage
to the Soul of man. The motion of the Appetite may be somewhat resisted by
created good, and its force a little broken, but it will soon sink through,
like a stone through a watery medium. Some repast may be found in the Creature;
but as for complete satisfaction and termination of desires the Sea says it is
not in me, and the Depth says it is not in me. All that God ever did or ever
can make will prove insufficient for this purpose, and come under that
decretory Sentence of the wise Preacher, Vanity of Vanitys, all is Vanity.

6. And this is first confirmed to me from experience, and that not my own
only, but of all mankind. For as the weight of my affections (as was observed
in yesterdays Contemplation) is extatical and inclines to good without my self;
so does it press beyond that which is created too; and consequently argues,
that the Creation without me can no more be my Center, than I can be to my self.

7. For not to insist upon the great Emptiness of Fruition, that every flower
in this Paradise of God shrinks as soon as touched; that whatever Reversions and
Prospects of happiness we may have, it is yet seldom known that any man
pronounces himself tolerably happy in the present; that men are not pleased
with that themselves, for which they envy another: not to insist, I say, on
these and the like, did every any man, tho never so fortunate in his designs
and never so well pleased in his seize, find himself able to confine his
desires within the sphere of that good he was possessed of? It Is true indeed,
he may desire no more of the same, he may have so much of Riches as to desire
no more Riches, so much of Honor as to desire no more Honor; but he cannot
have so much of any thing as not simply to desire on further. That is in short,
he may be satiated, but not satisfied.

8. And this we have confirmed by the ingenuous confession of one, who dug as
low for this Treasure as ever man did or could, that ransacked the whole
Creation, and seemed to make it his professed business to extract if possible
this divine Elixir, not as a Voluptuary but as a Philosopher, for Experiment
and Curiosity more than for sensuality and pleasure. But what was the issue?
Why, after the chargeable Operation the deluded Chemist sits down, recounts his
gains, and finds this to be the sum of them, that his judgment indeed was
informed, but not that his desires were satisfied; that he had with all his
cost bought only this piece of wisdom, to know the vanity of the Creation so
far as to give over all further search, and lose no more time, cost and labor
in a fruitless experiment.

9. And that what this great Enquirer after Happiness experimented is every
man's case, I am further assured, when I contemplate that the greatest Favorites
of Fortune, those who have had the world at command, and could enjoy all that
is good in it with almost as little trouble as 'twas created, at a words
speaking, have yet all along been subject to melancholy, especially after some
notable enjoyment, as the Grecian Hero wept when he had conquered the world.
Now what should the cause of this be, but that they find themselves empty in
the midst of their fullness; that they Desire further than they enjoy; that
however every sense about them be feasted to the Height, yet their remains a
general Appetite, that of being Happy, which is not satisfied; and not only so,
but because they suspect withal (as indeed they have very good reason, having
tasted the utmost of Natures entertainment) that it never shall be. And from
this Desire and Despair proceeds their melancholy and dejection of Spirit. And
to this purpose I call to mind a very remarkable story recorded by Eusebius
Nierembergius, in his book De Art Voluntatis, concerning an Eastern lib. 6. p.
537.
Emperor, who was minded to try the same experiment upon his son as Solomon
did upon himself, and to see how far the accommodations of Life might go
toward true Felicity. He accordingly trained him up from his infancy in
magnificent Apartments, studiously removed from him all pitiable objects that
he might not have so much as a Notion of misery, humored him in every
Punctilio, and furnished him with whatsoever he either did wish for, or might
be supposed to take pleasure in; till at length the unfortunately Happy young
man observing himself to be still in Desires, and that in a state of all
possible worldly affluence, could no longer flatter himself with imaginary
Prospects, but concluded that no condition would ever mend the matter, and so
fell into extreme Melancholy and Despair.

10. Now I consider, that if mean Persons only were subject to Melancholy, the
Desire from whence it proceeded might be accounted for another way; namely,
from their not having so much of created good as if possessed might be thought
sufficient to satisfy. But when men that sit on the top of Fortune's wheel, and
drink at the head fountains of Nature, are yet liable to melancholy dejections,
it is to me a plain argument that the cause of this melancholy, their Desires,
proceeds from a Deficiency in the things themselves; not that they are
straightened in their possessions, but that the things which they possess are
weighed in the Balance and found wanting.

11. Thus far is this Truth attested to by Experience. But I am yet further
assured of it when I compare the Aspirations of my Nature with the goodness of
the Creation; for when I do so, I find they are very disproportionate. 'Twas a
Celebrated Problem among the ancient Mythologists, what was the strongest
thing, what the wisest, and what the greatest? Concerning which 'twas thus
determined, that the strongest thing was Necessity, the wisest was Time, and
the greatest was the Heart of Man. And well may that be called the greatest
thing whose capacity can take in the whole Creation, and yet like the immense
space, remain still an unreplenish'd Emptiness.

12. For my Desires are circumscribed with no limits, but run on indefinitely
to all possible good. But now the good of the Creation, like the Creation it
self, is bounded; the very notion of a Creature involving imperfection, as much
as Body does Circumscription and termination. Hence therefore I conclude, that
not only all the good of the Creation tho collected together into Extract and
Spirit by the Chemistry of its great Author, would be insufficient to afford me
perfect Satisfaction; but that it is not in the Power of him that is Omnipotent
to Create any good that can satisfy my Desires, any more than to create a Body
that shall fill Immense space. And consequently, that it is impossible that any
created good should be the end of man.

The Prayer.
MY God, My Creator, who have made all things for the present Entertainment,
but nothing for the End of Man; grant I may ever justly discern between the
goodness and the vanity of thy Creatures, that I may not either by not heeding
to the former become unthankful, or by not heeding to the latter, become
Idolatrous. O keep this Conviction still awake in me how insufficient all
created good is toward true Felicity; that I may not any longer with the
mistaken Votaries of thy Son's Sepulcher, seek the Living among the Dead, Light
in the Regions of Darkness; and that I may no longer labor for that which is
not bread. Let me not add care, labor and toil to the misery of unquench'd
Thirst and unsatisfied Desires: but since I am certain never to find Rest in
the bosom of thy Creation, grant I may be so wise at least, as not to weary my
self more in the fruitless persuit of it. Withdraw, I beseech thee, my
expectations of Happiness from all the works of thy hands: and fix them there
only, where there is no disappointment or delusion, even in the true Center of
all Desire: for the sake of thy tender compassions,

Amen.
Contemplation the Fourth.
That God who is the Author of man, is likewise his true End and Center.
1. WHen I Contemplate the Nature of man, and consider how the Desire of
Happiness is interwoven with it; that Love is strong as Death and importunate
as the Grave; that there is a vehement and constant Verticity in the Soul
toward perfect good, which begins as soon, and is as immortal as her self; and
withal, how disproportionately this Amorous disposition of the Soul is
gratified by any entertainment whether domestic or foreign she can meet with
in the Circle of created good: I find it necessary to conclude, that the great
Being who commanded me to exist, is so every way perfect and all-sufficient as
to answer that vast stock of desires our Natures come fraught withal into the
world; since otherwise (which is absurd to suppose) of all the Creatures in it
Man would be the most miserable.

2. For what man of thoughts is there, who after a thorough Conviction that he
can neither get rid of his desires, nor among the Provisions of Nature have
them fully gratified, would not immediately throw up his Title to Immortality,
if he thought himself arrived to the Meridian of his Happiness, and that he
must never expect to be in a better Condition than he is? For to have enlarged
desires and nothing to satisfy them, is such a contrivance for misery, that
it is thought by some to be the Portion of Hell, and to make up the very
Formality of Damnation.

3. But to our great Consolation it is wholly in our own power whether it shall
be always so with us, or no. There is a Being whose perfections are answerable
to our Desires. He that made us can satisfy every Appetite he has planted in
us, and he that is Happy in reflecting upon himself can make us so too, by the
direct view of his Glory. He can entertain all our facultys; our understandings
as he is Truth, and our wills as he is goodness; and that in the Highest
degree, because he is infinite in both. He can more than employ all our Powers
in their utmost Elevation, for he is every way Perfect and all-sufficient, yea
he is altogether Lovely.

4. But to evince more particularly and distinctly that God is the true End of
man, I shall consider, whether the conditions requisite to his being so are
found in him. Now these can be no other than these two in general, 1st, that he
be absolutely good and perfect in himself, so as to be able to fill and satisfy
the whole capacity of our Desires; and 2ly, that he be willing that man shall
partake of this his Transcendent Fullness, so as actually one time or other to
fix the weight of his Appetite and become his Center. If therefore these two
conditions are found in God, he has all that is requisite to make him our End.
And that they are, is now to be made appear.

5. First then, that God is absolutely good and perfect in himself, so as to be
able to fill and satisfy the whole capacity of our desires. There are several
Topics in the Metaphysics from whence I might infer this, but I shall confine
my present speculation to this one, that God is the First Being. This is a very
reasonable Postulatum; it being too obvious to need any proof, that there is a
First Being, or, that by the First Being is meant God. It remains therefore,
that we try what advantage may be made of it.

6. When therefore I consider God as the First Being, I am from thence in the
first place led to conclude, that he has eminently and in a most excellent
manner in himself all kinds and degrees of perfection, that exist loosely and
seperately in all second Beings. And that, not only because the Effect cannot
possibly exceed the virtue of the cause, any more than it can proceed from no
cause: (which is the ground Cartesius builds upon, when he proves the existence
of God from the objective reality of his Idea) but because I further observe
that in the Scale of Being all ascension is by addition, and, that what is
dispersed in the Inferior, is collected, and that after a more excellent
manner, in the Superior. Thus in Vegetables there is bare life, in Sensitives
Vegetative life and sense, in Rationals Vegetative life sense and reason: and
all this either formally or eminently with Intelligence in Angels. And since
there is such an Harmonical Subordination among second Beings, so that the
Superior contains all the perfection of the Inferior, with a peculiar
excellence of its own superadded; I think I have fair grounds to conclude, that
the absolutely First Being has in his rich Essence all the scattered
excellencies of the subordinate ones in a more perfect manner than they
themselves have, with some peculiar excellence of his own besides.

Now tho a Being thus accumulatively perfect and excellent, would be beyond all
Conception, great and glorious, and would employ an Eternity in Contemplation
and Love; we have yet seen but an Arm of this Sea of Beauty, and been
enlightened only with the Back-parts of his Glory. For if God be the First
Being, as is here supposed, I may further conclude that he is also the First
Good: ( Good and Being being convertible, and every thing having so much Good
in it as it has of Entity and no more) and if he be the First Good, I cannot
see how this Conclusion can be avoided, that he is Infinitely Good.

8. For I consider, that the First Good can have no Cause of that Goodness
which it has: otherwise, it being necessary that the Cause of Good should be
Good, it would not be the First. And if the First Good can have no cause of its
Goodness, it can likewise have no cause of the Termination of it, since what
has no cause absolutely and simply, cannot have a cause in any particular
respect; and if it has no cause of its Termination it must necessarily be
interminate or infinite, and Consequently God, who is the First Good, is
infinitely Good.

9. And now breath a while my Soul; and consider what a rich Mine of Good thou
have Sprung. Thou have found out a Being, who is not only the Ideal as well as
Efficient cause of all created excellence; but who is Infinitely Good and
excellent. This is he whose great Perfection not only contains and infinitely
exceeds, but Eclipses and quite Extinguishes all the Beauty of the Creature; so
that (as the express Image of this great Excellence informs us) there is none
Good, but one, which is God. This is he whose Good is incomprehensible by the
understanding, and inexhaustible by the will and affections of man. This is the
celebrated (...) of Aristotle, the (...) of Plato, and the El Shaddai of the
Hebrews. This is the great (...) the universal Plenitude, whose Happiness is
consummated within his own Circle; who supports himself upon the Basis of his
own All Sufficiency, and is his own End and Center.

10. And now what is there more requisite to qualify him for being mine also
but this only; that he be willing that man shall partake of this his
transcendent fullness, so as actually one time or other to fix the Weight of
his Appetite; which was the second Condition.

11. And that this is also found in God, I think I have sufficient assurance
from these two things; the Absolute Perfection of his Nature; and those express
Revelations he has made of his Will, as to this particular. As for the Nature
of God, it involves, as in Notion and Conception, so likewise in Truth and
reality, (as was above demonstrated) absolute and infinite Perfection; and
consequently, includes a Beneficent and Communicative disposition; this being a
Perfection.

12. Nor does the Superlative eminency of the Divine nature only argue him to
be Communicative, but to be the Most Communicative and Selfdiffusive of all
Beings. For, as all Kinds, so all degrees of excellency must of necessity be
included in a Being absolutely and infinitely perfect, such as God is. Whence
it will also follow, that he is not only the most Communicative of all Beings,
but that he will also Communicate himself: and not only so, but in such an
ample and liberal measure too, as entirely to satisfy the most aspiring and
reaching Appetite of man; Since Otherwise some degrees of Communicativeness and
consequently of Excellence would be wanting; which is absurd to suppose in a
Being absolutely perfect. Especially considering, that those importunate
desires of Human nature are of his own planting, which as it firmly assures us
of his being able, so is it no less cogent an Argument for his being willing to
be our Center; it being incredible that so infinite an Excellence should plant
in man such desires, as either he could not or would not satisfy.

13. And of this willingness of God that man should partake of his fullness, so
far as to bottom upon it, and acquiesce in it, there is yet further assurance
from many express Revelations of his good pleasure to that purpose. Which
consist of two kinds, express words, wherein he professes himself passionately
desirous of the Salvation and happiness of man; and two very notable and signal
Acts; namely, the consigning to the world a copy of his Will, as a Chart to
direct us to the true Haven of Rest and Anchorage; and the sending his Beloved
Son from the mansions of glory to dislodge the angry Guardian of Paradise, and
re-open for us an Entrance into the joy of our Lord. By both which kinds of
revelation he has given us the highest assurance imaginable, that he designs
not to engross and monopolize the Perfections of his rich essence, but that he
is heartily willing to admit man to a participation of that excellent good,
wherein he himself is Happy; to give him (as the Psalmist expresses it)
everlasting felicity, and make him glad with the joy of his countenance.

14. To which Considerations I might further add, that this excellent
communicativeness of the Divine nature is typically represented and
mysteriously exemplified by the Porphyrian Scale of Being. For as there the
lower degrees are determined and contracted, but the Higher more common and
extensive, so is it in the real Scale of Being. The inferior, which are either
matter, or complicated and twisted with matter, are more contracted, narrow,
selfish and illiberal; but the superior as they are less immersed in and
allayed with matter, so are they more open, diffusive and free. For indeed all
contraction and consinement is from matter, but it is Form and Spirit that is
the Root of all freeness and enlargement. And thus we see in bodies; the more of
kin they are to Spirit in subtilty and refinement, the more spreading are they
and self-diffusive. Whereupon Light, which of all Bodies is nearest allied to
Spirit, is also most diffusive and self-communicative. God therefore, who is at
the very top of all Being, who is an absolute, mere and Spiritual Act, and who
lastly is such a pure Light as in which there is no darkness at all, must needs
be infinitely selfimparting and Communicative; and consequently, wants nothing
to qualify him to be the true End and Center of Man.

The Prayer.
MY God, my Happiness, who art as well the End as the Author of my Being; who
have more perfection than I have desire, and art also seriously willing to
quench my great Thirst in the Ocean of thy Perfection; I beseech thee show me
thy Glory. Withdraw thy hand from the Clift of the rock, and remove the bounds
from the Mount of thy Presence, that I may see thee as thou art, face to face,
and ever dwell in the light of thy Beauty. I have long dwelt with Vanity and
Emptiness, and have made my self weary in the persuit of Rest. O let me not
fail at last, after my many wanderings and disappointments, to be taken up into
this true and only Ark of repose and security, where I may for ever rest, and
for ever bless the Author of my Happiness. In the mean time strike, I beseech
thee, my Soul with such lively and ravishing apprehensions of thy excellencies,
such bright irradiations of thy divine light, that I may see enough to love
thee infinitely, to depend on thee for my happiness entirely, to live upon holy
hopes and comfortable expectations, and to bear up my Spirit under the greatest
Ariditys and dejections with the delightful prospect of thy Glorys. O let me
sit down under this thy shadow with great delight, till the fruit of thy Tree
of life shall be sweet to my taste. Let me stay and entertain my longing Soul
with the Contemplation of thy Beauty, till thou shall condescend to kiss me
with the kisses of thy mouth, till thou shall bring me into thy banqueting
house, where Vision shall be the support of my Spirit, and thy Banner over me
shall be Love. Grant this O my God, my Happiness, for the sake of thy great
love, and of the Son of thy love, Christ Jesus.

Amen.
Contemplation the Fifth.
Two Corollaries hence deduced: the first whereof is, that God is therefore to
be loved with all possible application and elevation of Spirit, with all the
heart, soul and mind.
1. AMong the Perfections of human nature the faculty of desiring or reaching
out after agreeable Objects is not the least considerable, and it is the
peculiar glory of man to be an Amorous, as well as a Rational Being. For by
this he supplies the defects of his nature, not only enjoys the good he unites
with, but digests it as it were into himself and makes it his own, and relieves
his domestic poverty by foreign negotiation.

2. But tho the Pathetic part of man be one of the noblest perfections he is
furnished with, yet so generally faulty are we in the due application and
direction of this noble faculty, that to be pathetically and amorously disposed
is looked upon by some not as a Perfection but as a Disease of the Soul, and is
condemned by a whole order of men as inconsistent with the Character of wisdom,
according to that Stoical Aphorism, Amare simul and sapere ipsi Jovi non datur.

3. But certainly, Eve was intended as a Help for Adam, tho in the event she
proved the instrument of his seduction; and our Passions were given us to
perfect and accomplish our natures, tho by accidental misapplications to
unworthy objects they may turn to our degradation and dishonor. We may indeed
be debased as well as innobled by them, but then the fault is not in the large
Sails, but in the ill conduct of the Pilot, if our Vessel miss the Haven. The
Tide of our love can never run too high, provided it take a right Channel; our
Passion then will be our highest Wisdom: and he was no Stoic that said, as the
Heart pants after the water Psalm. 42.
brooks, so pants my Soul after thee O God. And again, my Soul is athirst for
God. And again, my Soul breaks out for fervent desire. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 73.
24.
And again, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire in comparison of thee.

4. Being therefore from the foregoing Periods arrived to this Conclusion, that
God is the true End and Center of man, I think I ought now to let loose the
reins of my affections, to unbay the current of my Passion, and love on without
any other boundary or measure than what is set me by the finiteness of my
natural powers.

5. It Is true indeed, whenever we turn the Edge of our desire toward any
Created good, it is Prudence as well as Religion to use caution and moderation,
to gage the Point of our affections lest it run in too far; there being so much
emptiness in the enjoyment, and so much hazard in the Possession. When we
venture to lean upon such objects we are like men that walk upon a Quagmire,
and therefore should tread as lightly as we can, lest it give way and sink
under us.

6. But how excellent a Virtue soever Moderation may be in our concernments
with other objects, we have nothing to do with it in the love of that Being who
is our End and Center. There is here danger but of one Extreme, and that is of
the defect. We can love but finitely when we have loved our utmost; and what is
that to him who is infinitely lovely? Since therefore our most liberal
proportions will be infinitely short and scanty, we ought not sure to give new
retrenchments to our love, and cut it yet shorter by frugal limitations.

7. For if God be our End and Center he must necessarily have all that good in
him which we can possibly desire; and if so, then he is able to stay and
satisfy all our Love; and if so, then nothing so reasonable as that he should
have it all. We are therefore to love him with all possible application and
elevation of Spirit, with all the heart, Soul and mind. We should collect and
concenter all the rays of our love into this one Point, and lean toward God
with the whole weight of our Soul, as all that is ponderous in nature tends
with its whole weight toward the Center. And this we should do as directly as
may be, with as little warping and declension the Creature as is possible. For
so also it is to be observed in nature, that not only all weight or Pondus tends
toward the Center, but that also it moves thither as nigh as it can in a direct
and perpendicular line.

The Prayer.
MY God, my Happiness, who art fairer than the Children of men, and who thy
self art very Love as well as altogether lovely, draw me and I will run after
thee. O wind up my Soul to the highest pitch of Love that my facultys will
bear, and let me never alienate any degree of that noble Passion from thee its
only due object. Quench in me all terrene fires and sensual relishes, and do
thou wound me deep, and strike me through with the arrows of a divine Passion,
that as thou art all Beauty and Perfection, so I may be all Love and Devotion.
My heart is ready O God, my heart is ready for a Burnt offering; send down then
an holy fire from above to kindle the Sacrifice, and do thou continually fan
and keep alive, and clarify the flame, that I may be ever ascending up to thee
in devout breathings, and pious Aspirations, till at length I ascend in Spirit
to the Element of Love, where I shall know thee more clearly and love thee more
Seraphically, and receive those peculiar coronets of glory thou have reserved
for those that eminently love thee,

Amen.
Contemplation the Sixth.
The second Corollar: that therefore God is ultimately to be referred to in all
our actions, and that he is not to be used by us, but enjoyed.
1. AS there is nothing of greater and more universal moment to the regular
ordination of human life, than rightly to accommodate the Means and the End,
and to make them uniform and Symbolical; so is there nothing wherein men are
more universally peccant and defective, and that not only in Practice, but also
in Notion and Theory.

2. For although to do an ill action for a good End, and to do a good action for
an ill End, are generally acknowledged alike criminal, yet concerning this
latter it is observable, that men usually think the morality of their actions
sufficiently secured, if the End proposed be not in its own nature specifically
evil. Whereas indeed there is yet another way whereby an End may become evil,
namely, by being rested in when it is not the last, without any further respect
or reference. By this undue and ill-plac'd Acquiescence, an End that is
otherwise in its own intrinsic nature good, upon the whole commences evil. For
tho it be good to be chosen, it is yet ill to be rested in.

3. For indeed it is against the order and economy of things as well as against
the perfection of Religion, that any End should be ultimately rested in but
what is truly the last. Now the last end of action can be no other than that
which is the last end of the will which is, the Spring of action. This
therefore being God (as appears from what I have already contemplated) it
follows, that he ought to be the ultimate End of all our actions, that we ought
not in any of our motions to stop short of this Center, but in all our actions
to make a further reference either actual or habitual, and according to that of
the Apostle, whether we eat or drink to do all to the glory of God.

4. For what can be more absurd and incongruous than to turn the Means into the
End, and the End into the Means, to enjoy what ought to be only used, and to
use what ought to be enjoyed? God is our last End, and therefore must not be
desired for any thing but himself, nor used as a means to accomplish any other
Design. Which also concludes against all those who make Religion a Point of
Secular interest, and a tool of State Policy, whereas that ought to prescribe,
and not receive measures from any Human affairs.

The Prayer.
MY God, my Happiness, who art the last end of my Desires, the very utmost of
all Perfection, and beyond whom there is no good, be thou the last end of my
Actions too, and let them all meet and unite in thee as lines in their Center.
Grant I may set thee before me in all my thoughts, words and actions, let my
eye of Contemplation be always open, and whatever intermedial designs I may
have, let my last aim be thy glory. And O let me never be so low sunk, base and
wicked, as to make Religion an instrument of worldly policy, nor to dishonor
thee and my own Soul by such a mercenary Piety. But do thou always possess my
mind with such a due value for thy infinite excellency, that I may refer all
things to thee, and thee and thine to nothing, but love and embrace thee for
thy own self, who in thy self alone art altogether lovely,

Amen, Amen.
A DISCOURSE UPON ROMANS. 12. 3.
-- Not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; But to think
soberly according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith.
1. THERE is nothing wherein men are so much divided from one another as in
Opinions, and nothing wherein they more unanimously conspire than in thinking
well of themselves. This is a Humor of so Catholic a Stamp, and universal
Empire, that it may seem to challenge a place among those Elements of our
Constitution, those Essentials of our nature which run throughout the whole
Kind, and are participated by every Individual. For should a man take the Wings
of the Morning, and travel with the Sun round the Terrestrial Globe, he would
hardly find a man either of a Judgment so difficult to be pleased, or of
accomplishment so little to recommend him, that was not notwithstanding
sufficiently in love with himself, however he might dislike every thing else
about him; And without question that arrogant and peevish Mathematician who
charged the grand Architect with want of skill in the Mechanism of the World,
thought he had played the Artist well enough in himself, and as to the Harmony
of his own frame acquitted the Geometry of his Maker.

2. And as men are thus naturally apt to think well of themselves in general,
so there is nothing wherein they indulge this Humor more than in the Opinion
they have of the Goods of the Mind, and among these there is none which has so
great a share of their Partiality, as their Intellectual faculty. The Desire of
Knowledge is not more natural then the Conceit that we are already furnished
with a considerable Measure of it, and tho a particular Sect were Uncharacterized
by that Appellation, yet all mankind are in reality, Gnostics. For as it is
(ingeniously observed by the excellent Cartesius) nothing Disser^. ^e Method.
p. 1.
is more equally distributed among men than the Intellectual Talent, wherewith
every one fancies himself so abundantly stockt, that even those who have the
most unsatiable Desires, and whom Providence could not satisfy in any one thing
else, are notwithstanding as to this Dispensation of Heaven well enough
content, complain not of the dull Planet that influenced their Nativity, or
wish their minds more richly endowed than they are. And although there are a
generation of men who use to be very eloquent in setting out the degeneracy of
human nature in general, and particularly in decyphering the Shortness of our
Intellectual Sight, and the defects of our now diminished understanding, yet
should a man take them at their word, and apply that Verdict to themselves in
particular which they so freely bestow upon the whole Species, no men in the
world so full of resentment and impatience as they; and I dare affirm
notwithstanding their Harangues upon the Corruption of Human Nature, could all
mankind lay a true claim to that Estimate which they pass upon themselves,
there would be little or no difference betwixt lapsed and perfect Humanity, and
God might again review his image with paternal Complacency, and still pronounce
it good.

3. Nor is it at all to be wondered that Self-Conceitedness should be of such
an unlimited and Transcendental Nature as to run through all Sorts and Classes
of men, since the cause of it, Self-love, has such an universal Jurisdiction in
our hearts. It Is most natural and necessary for every man (and indeed for every
Intelligent Being) to be a Lover of himself, and to covet whatsoever any way
tends to the perfection of his Nature. And as it is necessary for every man to
be thus affected toward himself, so is this the only Disposition of mind
wherein Man acts with Constancy and Uniformity. Our other Passions have
sometimes their total intermissions, and at best their increases and decreases,
but this is always at Full, and stands drawn out to the utmost Stretch of its
Capacity. No man loves himself more at one time than at another, and that
because he always loves himself in the highest Degree that is possible. More
than all good he cannot wish to himself, and less than all he will not, nay I
had almost pronounced it impossible for Omnipotence it self which stays the
proud waves of the Ocean, and blocks up its Job 38. 10.
violent efforts with bars and doors, to say unto this Passion, hitherto shall
thou come but no further, or to set any other bounds to it besides those of all
possible good.

4. Now Man being such an infinite Lover of himself, is easily brought to
believe that he is really Master of many of those excellencies and perfections,
which he so passionately wishes among the inventory of his possessions. For
there is this notorious difference betwixt Self-love and the Love of others,
that whereas the Love of others supposes an opinion of their excellency, the
love of our selves begets it. We love others because we think well of them, but
(so preposterous is the method of Self-love) we think well of our selves
because we first love our selves. So that now upon the whole, considering how
necessarily and vehemently every man is carried on to the love of himself, and
what a natural product Self-conceit is of Self-love, it is much to be feared,
that as we cannot set any bounds to the love of our selves, so we shall hardly
set due ones to our Opinions of our selves, and consequently the most mortified
and resigned Man of us all, has no reason to think himself unconcerned in this
Admonition of the Apostle. -- Not to think of himself more highly than he ought
to think; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith.

5. It Is supposed that the Apostle in these words had respect to the then
prevailing Heresy of the Gnostics, a sort of men that pretended to great
Heights of divine Knowledge, to close intimacies and familiarities with God, and
upon that presumption grew so haughty and insolent as to despise dominions, and
speak evil of dignities, and withal so careless and secure, as to defile the
flesh, and indulge themselves all manner of Sensuality, as you may see their
Character in the Epistle of St. Jude. Nay of such turbulent ungovernable
Principles and profligate manners were these men, that some of the Learned (and
particularly an eminent Divine Dr. Hammond.
of our own Church) have adventured to write upon their Foreheads, Mystery,
and to place them in the Chair of Antichrist. As an Antidote therefore against
this 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Poison, the Apostle who through the Abundance of Revelation had himself been
in danger of being exalted above Measure, and experimentally knew how prone
human nature is to swell and plume upon a Conceit of its own excellencies,
thought it expedient to advise his Charge at Rome (the place which Simon Magus
the Author of that proud Sect had (as Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 13.
Eusebius tells us) made choice of to be the Scene of his Magical Operations)
to moderate and sober thoughts of themselves, and being to teach them a Lesson
of Humility, he modestly ushers it in with a Preface of his Commission and
Authority. For I say (says he) through the grace given unto me to every man
that is among you not to think of himself more highly, etc.

6. The Discourse which I design upon these words shall be comprised within
these limits.

First, I observe that we are not at our own liberty to entertain what Opinions
we please concerning our selves, but that we ought to regulate them by some
Standard. Which I collect from the former part of the Text, Not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly.

7. Secondly, I observe that the Standard whereby we are to regulate our
Opinions concerning our selves are those excellencies and perfections which we
are really endowed with, which I collect from the latter part of the Text,
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith.

8. And in the third place I shall consider the Absurdities and ill
Consequences of transgressing this Standard, whereby it shall appear how highly
reasonable this Admonition of the Apostle is, and so conclude with a practical
Application of the whole in relation to our selves, and the present occasion.

9. I begin with the first Proposition, That we are not at our own liberty to
entertain what Opinions we please concerning our selves, but that we ought to
regulate them by some Standard.

10. The Acts of the understanding are by some men thought as free from all Law
as the Acts of the will are from all necessity, and accordingly they give every
one a Toleration to abound in his own sense and (provided his actions be
conformable to the Rule) to think what he please. Now since a Man cannot be
accountable for an Opinion of himself in particular, unless it be first granted
that he is under a Law as to the Acts of his understanding in general, before I
can proceed any farther I find it necessary to lay down this Preparatory
Position, That we are under an Obligation as to the Acts of our understanding,
or (which is all one) that we are accountable for them. Nay I believe I may
venture higher, and affirm that the understanding is not only under Obligation,
but that it is the Primary and immediate Subject of it. For the proof of which
Paradox, I desire the Patrons of the Intellectual Libertinism to consider, that
that must be the Primary and immediate subject of all Obligation which is so of
Liberty. Now that this cannot be the Will, I suppose will be acknowledged a
clear consequence, if the Will necessarily follows the Practical Dictate of the
Understanding. And that it does so, I think there is Demonstration.

11. It Is an unquestionable Axiom in all the Schools of Learning in the world,
that the Object of the Will is apparent good; Now apparent good in other words,
is that which is apprehended or judged to be good, and if so, then it follows
that the Will cannot but conform to the Dictate of the Understanding, because
otherwise something might be the object of the Will that is not apprehended
good, which is contrary to the supposition. In short, the Will (as Aquinas has
well expressed it) is the Conclusion of an Operative Syllogism, and follows as
necessarily from the Dictate of the Understanding as any other Conclusion does
from its Premises, and consequently cannot be the immediate subject of Liberty,
and consequently not of Obligation.

12. But then are we not involved in the same difficulty as to the
understanding? Does not that act with equal (if not more) necessity than the
Will? So I know it is ordinarily taught. But if this be absolutely and
universally true, I must confess it above the reach of my Capacity to salve the
Notion of Morality, or Religion, or to find out an expedient how the
Foundations of the Intellectual world should not be out of course. For since
it is evident both from the preceding Demonstration, and from experimental
Reflection, that the Will necessarily acts in Conformity to the Dictates of the
Understanding, if those very Dictates are also wholly and altogether necessary,
there can be no such thing as a (...), the man is bound hand and foot, has
nothing left whereby to render him a Moral Agent, to qualify him for Law or
Obligation, Virtue or Vice, Reward or Punishment. But these are Absurdities not
to be endured, and therefore I conclude according to the Rules of right
Reasoning, the Principle from which they flow to be so too.

13. To clear up then the whole Difficulty with as much Brevity and Perspicuity
as in a matter of this intricacy is possible, I shall no longer consider the
Understanding and Will as Faculties really distinct either from the Soul it
self, or from one another, but that the Soul does immediately understand and
will by it self, without the intervention of any Faculty whatsoever. And that
for this demonstrative reason in short, because in the contrary Hypothesis,
either Judgment must be ascribed to the Will, and then the will immediately
commences Understanding, or the Assent of the will must be blind, brutish, and
unaccountable, both which are as great Absurdities as they are true
Consequences. This being premised, I grant that as the Soul necessarily wills
as she understands, so likewise does she necessarily understand as the Object
appears. And thus far our sight terminates in Fatality, and Necessity bounds
our Horizon. That then that must give us a Prospect beyond it, must be this,
that although the Soul necessarily understands or judges according to the
Appearance of things, yet that things should so appear (unless it be in
Propositions that are self-evident, as that the whole is greater than any one
part, or the like) is not alike necessary, but depends upon the degrees of
Advertency or Attention which the Soul uses, and which to use either more or
less is fully and immediately in her own power. And this indifferency of the
Soul as to attending or not attending I take to be the only (...) the bottom
and foundation into which the Morality of every action must be at length
resolved. For a farther proof as well as Illustration of which Hypothesis let
us apply it to a particular case and try how well it will answer the
Phenomenon. In the case then of Martyrdom, I look upon sin as an evil, and not
only so but (while I attend fully to its Nature) the greatest of evils. And as
long as I continue this Judgment it is utterly impossible I should commit it,
there being according to my present apprehension no greater evil for the
declining of which I should think it eligible. But now the evil of Pain being
presented before me, and I not sufficiently attending to the evil of Sin, this
latter appears to be the lesser evil of the two, and I accordingly pro hic and
nunc so pronounce it, and in Conformity to that judgment necessarily choose it.
But because 'twas absolutely in my power to have attended more heedfully there
was Liberty in the Principle, the mistake which influenced the action was
vincible, and consequently the action it self imputable. This Hypothesis
however strange it may seem to those that have sworn Faith and Allegiance to
the Dictates of the Schools, I believe will be the more approved the more it is
examined, and that not only as rational and consistent in it self, but also as
a refuge from those Absurdities which attend the ordinary Solutions. Neither is
this account wholly unlicens'd by Authority, for I find some hints and
intimations of it in the Sea Hierocles upon the Golden Verses of Pythagoras.
School of Plato, where the reason why those middle sort of Beings called
Heroes are not so uniformly pure as the (...) or (...), is assigned to be
because they do not so equally attend to the Beauty of the Supreme Good.

14. From what has been said it appears plainly that the Morality of every
human action must be at length resolved into an immediate indifference that the
Soul has of attending or not attending, and consequently that we are not only
under Obligation as to the acts of the Understanding, but that all Obligation
begins there.

15. Having thus cleared the way by the Proof of this Preparatory Position,
that we are under Obligation as to the acts of the Understanding in general, I
may now proceed to consider that our opinion of our selves is one of those acts
of the Understanding which are subject to Law, or in other terms, that we are
not at our own liberty to entertain what Opinions we please concerning our
selves, but that we ought to regulate them by some Standard. Now the general
reason of this is, because it is of great moment and influence in relation to
our Practice, what Opinion we entertain concerning our selves. Indeed there are
many acts of the Understanding which tho originally free, yet fall under no
Obligation by reason of the Indifferency of the Matter, as in things of pure
and naked Speculation. These are the unforbidden Trees of the Garden, and here
we may let loose the Reins and indulge our thoughts the full Scope. Thus there
is no danger of Heresy in asserting or denying the Antipodes, nor is Orthodoxy
concerned whether the Moon be habitable. But although to mistake a Star be of no
consequence to the Theorist that sits immured in his Study, yet it may be to
the Pilot that is to Steer his Course by it. There are other things which have
a practical Aspect, and here it is not indifferent what we think, because it is
not indifferent what we do. Now among these the Opinion of our selves is to be
reckoned, as having a great influence upon our well or ill demeaning our selves
respectively, as will more minutely and particularly appear when we come in the
third and last place to consider the absurdities and ill consequences of
transgressing the Standard prescribed, and therefore I shall defer the farther
prosecution of it till then, and in the mean while proceed to the second
Observable, Namely,

That the Standard whereby we are to regulate our Opinions concerning our
selves, are those excellencies and perfections which we are really endowed
with. Which is collected from these words, according as God has dealt to every
man the measure of Faith.

16. In the former part of the Text there was indeed a Restraint laid upon our
Opinions concerning our selves, but it was general only and indefinite. But
here the ground is measured out, and the Boundaries precisely set. (...) that is
the great Ecliptic Line which is to bound the Career of our most forward and
Selfindulging Opinions. If we keep within this compass our motion is natural
and regular, but if we slide never so little out of it, it is unnatural and
portentous. Or to speak with greater Simplicity, he that judges of himself
according to those excellencies, whether Moral or Intellectual, which he really
has, does (...) thinks soberly, and he that thinks himself endowed with any
Kind or Degree of Excellence which really he has not, does (...) (...), thinks
of himself more highly than he ought to think.

17. Here then are Two things to be considered.

First that we may proceed so far as this Standard. And Secondly, That we may
not go beyond it. First, That we may proceed so far.
18. It has been taught by some of the severe Masters of Spiritual
Mortification, That we ought to take up the most low and abject thoughts of our
selves that are possible, to be conscious of no manner of excellency in our
selves, and consequently not to be affected with the least Selfcomplacency;
That we ought to account our selves to be Nothing, to have nothing, to be worth
nothing, but to be very refuse and 1 Cor. 4. 13.
offscouring of all things. And this they call the Mystical Death, or the
Spiritual Annihilation. Now whatever degrees of excellency this may have (which
I shall not now dispute) it is most certain it can have nothing of Duty. For tho
it may, and oftentimes is required of a man to think the Truth, yet he can
never be under an Obligation to be mistaken. Besides, It Is hard to conceive how
any man (especially one that dwells much with himself, and heedfully reflects
upon the actings of his own mind) should be master of any considerable
excellency, and yet not be conscious of it. And besides, That very degree of
Attention which is required that a man should not think himself more
accomplished than indeed he is, will also infallibly hinder him from thinking
he is less. It Is true indeed Moses knew not that his Face shone, after he had
been conversing with God on the Mount. He saw not the Orb of glory that
streamed from him, and wondered what it was that made him so dreadful to the
people. But it is not so with the Soul, whose reflexive faculty will not fail to
give her information of her most retired and reserved accomplishments. It Is not
with the Lesser, as with the Greater World, where whole Tracts and Regions (and
those some of the best too) lie undiscovered. No, Man cannot be such a Stranger
to his own Perfections, such an America to himself. For who can know the things
of a man, if not the Spirit of man which is in him. And accordingly we find
that the ignorance of our selves with which Mankind has been hitherto so
universally taxed, runs quite in another Channel, and does not consist in
overlooking any of those indowments which we have, but in assuming to our
selves those which we have not.

19. I confess (were it possible) I should think it advisable for some persons
to be ignorant of some of their excellencies, and like the Sun not to reflect
home to their own Sphere of light; Not that I think in the least unlawful to be
fully conscious of ones own worth, but only I consider that some men have not
heads strong enough to endure Heights, and walk upon Spires and Pinnacles. But
if they can stand there without growing vertiginous, they need not question the
lawfulness of the station, they are still within the Region of Humility. For
it is not every thinking well of ones self that falls in with the notion of
Pride, but only when there is more of Opinion than there is of Worth. 'Twas
this that was the Condemnation of the Apostate Angel, not that he took a just
complacency in the eminency of his Station, but that he vainly arrogated to
himself what was not his due, in that he said, I will ascend into Heaven, I
will exalt my Isai. 14. 13.
throne above the Stars of God, I will sit upon the sides of the North, I will
ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most High. 'Twas for
this that the Angel of Death drew upon Herod, not because he was pleased with
the sineness and success of his Oratory, but because he was not so just to God
as the People were to him, but looked upon himself as the Headfountain of his
own perfections, and so Acts 12. 23.
gave not God the glory.

20. But now if we take care to proportion our estimation of, and our
Complacencies in our selves to the measure of our endowments, and if we look
upon those very endowments not as originary and independent but as derivative
from the Father of lights from whom James 1. 17.
every good and perfect gift descends, and accordingly refer all to Gods glory,
and with the Elders in the Revelations take off our Crowns from our Heads and
cast them Rev. 4. 10.
at the foot of the Throne, we have not only the express words of the Text, but
likewise all the reason in the world to warrant the Sobriety of our Opinions.
For, this is but to have a right and exact understanding of ones self. And why
may not a man be allowed to take a true Estimate of himself as well as of
another man? Or why should a man think an excellency less valuable because it is
in himself? The Happiness of God consists in seeing himself as he is; he
reflects upon the Beauty of his Essence, and rejoices with an infinite
Complacency. Now certainly that wherein consists the Happiness of the Creator,
cannot be a Sin in the Creature. Besides, I would fain know why a man may not
as lawfully think well of himself upon the Score of his real worth, as desire
that others should think well of him for the same reason? And that he may do
the latter is confessed as well by the Practice, as by the common Suffrage of
Mankind. For otherwise what becomes of that good Reputation which Solomon says
is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and of which Prove. 22. 1.
the Best and Wisest men of all ages had ever such a tender, such a passionate
Regard? Nay it is looked upon as a very Commendable thing to be so affected, and
the contrary is censured as the mark of a dissolute and unmoraliz'd temper.
Only there is a (...) to 2 Cor. 10. 13.
be observed in this as well as in the former, and as we are not to stretch out
our selves 2 Cor. 10. 13.
beyond our measure, so must we take care with the great Apostle, not to give
others occasion to think of us above that which 2 Cor. 12. 6.
they see us to be. Besides, if we may not be allowed to take the full Height
of our own Excellencies, how shall we be able to give God thanks for them? The
Elders must know they wear Crowns before they can use them as Instruments of
Adoration, and Herod must be conscious of the right Genius of his Oratory,
before he can give God the Glory. Again in the last place, if a man may not
have leave to take Cognizance of his own Deserts and to value himself
accordingly, what will become of that (...) which the Apostle speaks of, the
answer of a good 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Conscience toward God, which is nothing else but a Sentence of Approbation,
which a man passes upon himself for the well managing of that Talent of Liberty
which God has entrusted him with? Now this is the Reward of Virtue, and
therefore certainly not contrary to it.

21. Neither is this Self-esteem only the Reward of Virtue but also the Cause
of it too, and consequently it is not only allowable, but also highly needful
that we should think Honorably of our selves. It Is a frequent Observation among
Moral and Divine Writers, That most if not all the Sins which men commit,
proceed from want of a due sense of the Dignity of their Nature. And
consequently a due reflection upon a man's own Worth, must needs be a strong
Preservative against whatsoever would stain its Glory. Shall such a man as I
flee? was the powerful Neh. 6. 11.
consideration that buoyed up the sinking Spirits of Nehemiah. And it is one of
the Capital Precepts of Pythagoras's Morals (and perhaps one of the best too
that was ever given to the World) -- (...) Above all things reverence thy self.
And 'twas the Saying of another of the Sons of Wisdom, Let not the Reverence of
any man cause thee to sin. Which it certainly will do, unless we observe the
former Rule, and reflect with due Reverence upon our own Worth and Dignity.

22. From these Considerations (not to urge any more) it seems to me very
evident, that it is not only lawful but in some respects highly Expedient, that
our Opinions of our selves should rise up so as to be of a Level with our
Excellencies, whatsoever they are. Let one of the Scales be mounted never so
high, yet if there be a proportionable Weight in the Other, the Balance moves
regularly, and as it should do. We may then proceed so far as this Standard.

23. But Secondly, We must not go beyond it. For all beyond this is Pride.
Pride, that turned the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, and levelled
the great King of Babylon with the Beasts that perish; and which D^^. 4. 33.
is nothing else but an Intemperate Opinion of our selves, which consists
either in assuming to our selves any Excellency which we have not, or in
Over-rating what we have. Tho indeed in Strictness of Notion this latter falls
in with the former, For to Over-rate what we have, is indeed to assume some
Degree of good which we have not. Here then begins our Restraint, the
Reasonableness of which will appear from the Absurdities and ill Consequences
which attend the transgressing of this Standard, and which in the third and
last place I come now to consider.

24. I shall observe only the most notorious; and these I shall reduce to these
Three general Heads.

First, That it unqualifies us for the performance of many Duties.

Secondly, That it betrays us into many sins.

And Thirdly, That it frustrates all methods of Reformation. Of these very
briefly.

25. First an excessive opinion of our selves (and that is so which surpasses
the measure of our real worth) unqualifies us for the performance of many
Duties; and that both in relation to God, our Neighbor and our Selves.

First in relation to God.

26. As Folly leads to Atheism, so does an overweening opinion of our own
Wisdom or any other excellency to Profaneness. For as the Fool has said in his
heart there is no God, so it is said in another place That the ungodly is so
Psalm. 10. 4.
Proud that he cares not for him. Pride then is altogether inconsistent with
that Subjection, Honor and Veneration which we owe to God. For how can he
submit his passions to the Authority of the Divine Will who has made a Law of
his own? And as it indisposes us for all active, so likewise for all passive
Obedience, for how can he suffer that with Patience, which he thinks he does
not deserve in Justice? Or how can he submit with resignation to the seeming
unevennesses of Providential Dispensations, the equality of which because he
cannot discern, he must in honor to his own understanding deny? And upon the
same ground it unqualifies us for Faith in many of the Divine Revelations. For
how can he Captivate his understanding to Mysteries, who thinks it a dishonor
to own any, and is resolved to believe no farther than he can comprehend?

27. Lastly, It unqualifies us for Gratitude toward God, and consequently puts
a Bar to all those good actions which we would otherwise perform upon that
Principle. And by this it becomes a Multiplied, a Legion evil. For how can he
acknowledge an Obligation passed upon him by Gods Favors, who calls them not by
that name, but esteems them as Rewards and Payments, and inverting the
Protestation Genesis 22. 10.
of the good Patriarch, thinks himself worthy of the greatest of his mercies.

28. Then Secondly, In relation to our Neighbor, it unqualifies us for
Obedience to Civil Government. For how can he submit to the Wisdom of his
Superiors, and pay an implicit deference to the Occult reasons of State, who
thinks himself wiser than a whole Senate, and disputes even the ways of
Providence? Pride was ever observed to be the Mother of Faction and Rebellion,
and accordingly St. Jude makes it part of the Character of the Proud Gnostics,
To despise Dominions and speak evil of Dignities.

29. Again, It unqualifies us for those acts of Justice which consist in a due
observation of our Neighbors Merits, and a deference of external Respect
proportionable to that observation. For how can he be at leisure to take notice
of another worth, who is so wholly taken up in the contemplation of his own?
Let the Reputation of his best Friends (if it be possible for a Proud man to
have any) be in never so great danger, he like Archimedes, is so overbusie in
admiring the Creatures of his own brain, those Draughts and Ideas which he has
formed of himself there, that he regards not the Ruin that is about him. Or if
he does, he is so far from appearing in their defense (as in Justice he ought)
that he rather rejoices at their Spots as Accessions to his own brightness.

30. Again, It unqualifies us for the Offices of Humanity, and Civil Behavior,
and all kinds of Homilitical virtue: for how can he treat those with any
tolerable Civility, whom he looks down upon as a whole Species below him?

31. Lastly, it unqualifies us for Gratitude toward our Benefactors. For how
can he think himself obliged by man, who counts God his Debtor?

32. Then Thirdly, In relation to our Selves, here is this grand ill
consequence of an immoderate self-esteem, that it unqualifies us not only for
higher seize, but even for the very endeavors of improvement, and so
cuts short and bedmarfs all our excellencies. It Is the Observation of Cicero,
Multi ad scientiam pervenissent nisi se jam pervenisse credidissent, The
Opinion of the Proud man has so far got the start of the real worth, that the
latter will never overtake the former.

33. And as the immoderate esteem of our Selves unqualifies us for the
performance of many Duties, so does it also in the second place Betray us into
many Sins.

34. First, Into all those sins which are contrary to the forementioned Virtues
respectively. And besides them into many more, such as are presumption and
security, vexation and discontent, contempt of others (tho at the same time it
exposes us to theirs) Anger and Contention, Malice and Revenge. For the Proud
man is not content to be his own private Admirer, but quarrels with all others
that are not of his persuasion, and with the Tyrant of Babylon kindles a fire
for those who will not fall down and worship the Image which he has set up.

35. Neither does the Leprosy stop here. But as it betrays us into many sins,
so in the Third and last place (which is the most dismal Consequence of all) It
frustrates all Methods of Reformation. Gods judgments will but exasperate and
inrage him, because he thinks he does not deserve them, and his Mercies will
not indear him, because he thinks he does. Advice he thinks he does not need,
and Reproof he cannot bear. Besides he thinks so well of himself already, that
he wonders what you mean by advising him to become better, and therefore as he
does not endeavor after any of those excellencies which he thinks he has, so
neither can he dream of mending those faults which he thinks he is not guilty
of: Thus is the man Sealed up to iniquity, and deeply lodged in the strong
holds of sin, where nothing that has a Salutary Influence can come nigh him.
And in this he resembles the first Presidents of his Folly, who from Angels
transformed themselves into Devils, and fell beyond the possibilities of
recovery.

36. These are some of the fruits of this Root of Bitterness, and tho more
might be named, yet these I think sufficient to justify this Admonition of the
Apostle to every man, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith. Let us then all endeavor to conform our opinions concerning
our selves to this Standard. Let us not stretch our selves beyond our natural
dimensions, but learn to entertain modest and sober thoughts of our own
excellencies and endowments, and mortify our understandings as well as our
sensitive affections. And thus shall we complete our Lent Exercise by joining
the mortification of the Spirit to that of the flesh, without which the
greatest Austerities wherewith we can afflict the latter, will not be such a
Fast as God has chosen. For what will it avail to macerate the Body, while the
principal part the Soul remains unmortify'd? The Humility of Moses must
conspire with his Forty days Fasting to qualify a man for Divine Intercourses,
to make him the Joy of Angels, the Friend of God. Thus then let us accomplish
the Refinings of our Souls, and fill up the Measure of our Mortifications. To
which end let us add this one further Consideration to what has been already
said, that Humility in the Judgment even of the High and Lofty one that
inhabits Eternity, is a Virtue of such great Excellency, and singular advantage
to the happiness of Mankind, that our Blessed Savior came down from Heaven to
teach it, that his whole life was one continued Exercise of it, and that he has
dignified it with the first place among his Beatitudes. Let us then, as many as
profess the Religion of the Humble and Crucified JESUS, make it our strict Care
that we neglect not this his great Commandment, nor omit to Copy out this
Principal Line, this main stroke of the Pattern he has set us. Especially let
us of this place who are set among the greater Lights of the Firmament, and
whose profession and business is to contemplate Truth, and to think of things
as God made them, in Number, Weight and Measure, labor in the first place to
take just and true Measures of our Selves, that our Knowledge puff us not up,
nor our Height become our Ruin.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE NATURE OF SIN. Accommodated to the ends both of
Speculation and Practice.
Considerations upon the Nature of Sin, etc.
SECT. I. Of the division of Sin into Material and Formal, and of the reality
and necessity of that Distinction.
1. TO make this our Discourse about Sin more clear and distinct, before we
enter upon its Nature 'twill be requisite to premise something concerning the
double acceptance of the word. For nothing can be defined before it be
distinguished.

2. I observe therefore, that Sin may be considered either abstractedly, for
the bare act of Obliquity, or concretely with such a special dependence of it
upon the will as renders the Agent guilty, or obnoxious to punishment. I say
with such a special dependence of it upon the will; for not every dependence of
an action upon the will is sufficient to make it imputable, as shall be shown
hereafter. The former of these, by those that distinguish more nicely, is
called transgressio voluntatis, the latter transgressio voluntaria, or
according to the more ordinary distinction the former is the material, the
latter the formal part of Sin.

3. This distinction is both real and necessary. 1. it is real, because the
Idea or conception of material sin is not only distinct from the Idea of formal
sin (as it may be in things really the same) but when considered as alone does
positively exclude the other. For this notion, a bare act of Obliquity, does
not only prescind from, but also positively deny such a special dependence of
it upon the will as makes it imputable for punishment.

4. Now as it is a certain sign of Identity when the Idea of one thing
necessarily includes the Idea of another, so is it of real distinction when the
Idea of one thing in any case positively excludes the Idea of the other. There
may indeed be distinct conceptions of one and the same thing, whereof there are
different Propertys or Degrees, but then one does only abstract from, and not
in any case positively exclude the other. Which when it does it is an evident
sign of real distinction.

5. But the greatest Argument of real distinction is separability and actual
separation. For nothing can be separated from it self. And this also has place
here. For the material part of sin may actually exist without the formal. That
is, there may be an act of obliquity, or an irregular act without any guilt
derived upon the Agent, or to speak more strictly, without that special
dependence of the act upon the will which is the foundation of that guilt. This
is evident in the case of fools and mad men.

6. And as this Distinction is real, so also is it very useful and necessary.
1st in the notion, to prevent ambiguitys and fallacys, that might arise from
the use of the word (sin). As when St. John says, he that commits sin is of the
John 3. 8.
Devil, certainly 'twould be a fallacy to argue hence that every mere act of
obliquity is Diabolical, because a sin, since not material but formal sin was
the thing intended in Saint John's Proposition.

7. 2ly in the thing, for the honor and vindication of the Divine Attributes.
Particularly from the damning of Infants merely for the corruption of nature,
commonly called Original sin; It being repugnant to the measures of Justice and
the Dictates of Common Sense, that the bare doing an irregular act, or the bare
having an irregular propension should be punishable at all, much more with
eternal damnation, as it must be if every dependence of an action upon the will
be enough to render it imputable, that is, if every material be also a formal
sin. This I say would be very unjust, because such irregular acts are no more a
man's own than those committed by another man.

8. But it is certain that God does not proceed by such measures; as may be
gathered from the Economy of his severest dispensation, the Law. For when he
forbad murder with such strictness and severity, as to order the murderer
(...)

SECT. II. A more particular and explicit consideration of Material sin, and
what it adds to the general nature of evil.
1. AFter our Distinction of sin into Material and Formal, and our
justification of that distinction, it follows that in the next place we give
some more particular and explicit account of the nature of Material sin. That
it is an irregular act in general, was intimated before, but to speculate its
nature more thoroughly we must set it in a clearer light, and define what it is
that makes an action irregular. And the account which I shall give of this, I
shall ground upon that Definition of St. John, who tells us that sin is a
transgression of the Law. So that transgression of the Law is the irregularity
of an action, and is more explicitly the Material part of sin.

2. Thus far in general. But now to make Transgression of the Law fully
adequate and commensurate to Material sin, so as to extend to all kinds of it,
it concerns us in the next place to enquire, what is here to be understood by (
Law) and upon the right stating of this, will depend the whole Theory of
Material sin.

3. By Law therefore in the first place, is to be understood that which is
Positive, that is, any rule of action prescribed to us by God, considered only
as prescribed. Any action so prescribed, be it otherwise never so indifferent
for the matter, puts on the force of a Law from the Authority of the
Prescriber, and every transgression of such a Rule is Sin.

4. But the Transgression of Law in this narrow sense of the word will not
comprehend all the kinds of Material sin. For although Positive Law creates the
first difference in some things, yet it does not in all. For had God never made
any Positive Law yet the doing of some actions would have been sin, nay there
was sin where there was no Positive Law, as may be probably collected from the
fall of Angels. But where there is no Law there is no Transgression. There must
be therefore some other law besides Positive Law.

5. By Law therefore 2ly is to be understood the Law of Reason, that Candle of
the Lord that lights every man that comes into the world in his passage through
it. This is twofold. For 1st, by the Law of Reason may be understood that
Original stock of rational Tendencys or practical sentiments which prevent all
Discourse and reasonings about what is to be done, and answer to Speculative
Principles. For as the Animal and sensitive Nature is not only furnished with
Sense and Perception, but also with certain connatural instincts and
impressions, whereby Animals are directed and inclined to sensitive good, so
for the guardianship and security of Virtue, against the danger either of
ignorance or inadvertence* God has furnished the Rational nature not only with
the faculty of reasoning, but with certain common Principles and Notions,
whereby it is inclined to the good of the Reasonable life. This is the (...) so
much talked of, and that which men generally mean by the Law of Nature.

6. Or else 2ly, by the Law of Reason may be understood a Power, which a
Rational Creature has of finding out by discoursing from first Principles what
is fit to be done, and of reflecting upon the reasonableness of those Moral
Anticipations and impressions, which he before entertained, tho he knew not
upon what ground.

7. These two make up the adequate notion of the Law of Reason, but we are not
yet come to the adequate notion of Law. For if the Law of Reason be taken in
the first sense for a stock of Moral Anticipations implanted by God in the
Soul, this will be but another branch of Positive Law. For Light of Nature and
Light of Scripture are but different modes of Divine revelation, and neither of
these can be the ultimate Reason, into which the Morality of every action is to
be resolved.

8. But if the Law of Reason be taken in the latter sense, for a Power which a
Rational Creature has of finding out by discourse what is reasonable to be
done, this will of necessity lead us higher, namely to consider that there are
certain antecedent and independent aptnesses or qualitys in things, with
respect to which they are fit to be commanded or forbidden by the wise
governor of the world in some positive Law, whether that of internal or
external Revelation, or both.

9. We are therefore in the next place to resolve these antecedent aptnesses of
things into their proper ground, or to assign what that is which makes an
action fit to be commanded or forbidden. Which when we have done we are
advanced as high as we can go, and have found out that supreme, eternal and
irreversible Law, which prescribes measures to all the rest, and is the last
Reason of good and evil.

10. That therefore which makes an action fit to be commanded or forbidden by
the wise governor of the world, can be nothing else in general, but its
respective tendency to prompt or hinder the attainment of some certain end or
other, which that governor proposes. For all action being for some end, and
not the End it self, its aptness to be commanded or forbidden must be founded
upon its serviceableness or disserviceableness to some end. So much in general.

11. I further consider, that this end must be that which is simply and
absolutely the best and greatest. For no other is worthy of God. Now certainly
there is none better or greater than the universal good of the whole Sisteme of
things, which is therefore to be regarded and prosecuted to the utmost both by
God and all other Intelligent Beings.

12. And hence arises this first and great Canon or Law, that whatever
naturally tends to the promotion of the common interest is good and apt to be
commanded, and whatever naturally tends to the disinterest of the public, is
evil and apt to be forbidden. This is the great Basis of Morality, the fixed and
immutable standard of good and evil, and the fundamental Law of Nature.

13. And because there are some actions in specie, which with relation to the
present systeme both of the Material and Intellectual world, have such a
natural connection with the furtherance or prejudice of this great end,
therefore these by way of Assumption under the two general Propositions are
intrinsecally and naturally good or bad, and are thereby differenced from those
that are made so only by arbitrary Constitution. Tho yet in one respect these
are arbitra^ry too, in as much as they depend upon such a particular Hypothesis
of the world which was it self arbitrary, and which if God should at any time
change, the relations of actions to the great end might change too; that which
now naturally makes for the common advantage, might as naturally make against
it, and consequently, that which is now good might have been then evil. But
still the two great Hinges of Morality stand as fixed and as unvariable as the
two Poles; whatever is naturally conducive to the common interest is good, and
whatever has a contrary influence is evil. These are propositions of eternal
and unchangeable verity, and which God can no more cancel or disanull than he
can deny himself.

14. So that now to analyze the immorality of any action into its last
Principles; If it be enquired why such an action is to be avoided, the immediate
answer is, because it is sin: if it be asked why it is sin, the immediate answer
is, because it is forbidden, if why forbidden, because 'twas in it self fit to
be forbidden, if why fit, because naturally apt to prejudice the common
interest: if it be asked why the natural aptness of a thing to prejudice the
common interest should make it fit to be forbidden, the answer is, because the
common interest is above all things to be regarded and prosecuted: if farther a
reason be demanded of this, there can no other be given but because it is the
best and greatest end, and consequently, is to be desired and prosecuted not
for the sake of any thing else, but purely for it self.

15. So that now the last Law whereof sin is a Transgression, is this great and
Supreme Law concerning the prosecution of the common interest. And every sin is
some way or other, directly or indirectly a transgression of this Law. Those
against any Moral Precept, directly, and those against a Precept merely
Positive, indirectly, because it is for the common good that the Supreme
Authority be acknowledged and submitted to, let the instance wherein Obedience
is required, be in it self never so indifferent.

16. If it be now objected that according to these measures there will be no
difference between Moral and Physical evil, contrary to the common distinction
between malum Turpe and malum Noxium, the one as opposed to bonum utile, and
the other as opposed to bonum honestum; I answer, that I know of no good or
evil but of the end and of the means. Good of the end is what we call bonum
jucundum, good of the means is what we call utile. Evil of the end there is
properly none, but that only is evil which is prejudicial to it. Indeed the old
masters of Morality discoursed of moral good and evil as of absolute natures,
and accordingly, nothing so common among them as to talk of Essential
Rectitudes, and Essential Turpitudes. But I think it greater accuracy to say,
that Moral good and evil are Relative things, that bonum honestum is one and
the same with that which is truly utile, and that Malum Turpe is that which is
naturally against the profit of the Community. And herein I assert no more than
what the great master of the Latin Philosophy and Eloquence professedly
contends for throughout the whole third book of his Offices. And therefore
instead of evading the Objection, I freely own its charge, and affirm that
there is no difference between Moral and Physical evil, any otherwise than that
Physical evil extends to all things in nature which obstruct Happiness, whereas
Moral evil is appropriated to Actions that do so.

SECT. III. The second part of the Discourse, which briefly treats of Formal
sin, with the requisites* necessary to its constitution. Where also it is
enquired, whether the Nature of sin be positive or privative.
1. WE are now come to the second part of our Discourse, where we are to treat
of the nature of Formal Sin, that is, of Sin considered not abstractedly for
the mere act of Obliquity, but Concretely with such a special dependence of it
upon the will as serves to render the Agent guilty, or obnoxious to punishment.

2. And here the first thing to be observed is, that although material sin does
neither in its notion nor in its existence include formal sin, yet formal sin
does always include the other. Tho there may be a transgression of the Law
without formal sin, yet the latter always supposes the former, and as St. John
says, whosoever John 3. 4.
commits sin, transgresses also the Law.

3. But that which formal sin adds over and above to material, and under whose
respect we are now to consider it, is the connotation of that special
dependence of it upon the will which derives guilt upon the Agent. So that for
a Definition of formal sin we may say, that it is an irregular action, or a
transgression of the law, so depending upon the will, as to make the Agent
liable to punishment. This is in the Phrase of St. John (...) to have sin, that
John 1. ^.
is, so as to be accountable for it, for he speaks of that sin which upon
confession God is faithful and just to forgive, and consequently not of
material, (for where there is no guilt there can be no Remission) but of formal
sin.

4. From this general notion of formal sin, proceed we to enquire what that
special dependence is that makes an irregular action formally a sin. And here
it is in the first place supposed, that not every dependence of an action upon
the will is sufficient to make it imputable. And with very good reason. For
otherwise the actions of Infants, Fools and Madmen would be imputable, for
these (as indeed all actions) have some dependence upon the will, at least as a
Physical Principle.

5. To be positive therefore, that an irregular action may so depend upon the
will as to derive guilt upon the Agent, it is necessary first, that it proceed
from the will as from a free Principle; Free not only in opposition to coaction
(for so all the actions of the will are free) but in opposition to necessity or
determination to one part of the contradiction. That is in one word, it is
necessary to the imputableness of an action that it be avoidable. To this
purpose is that common saying of St. Austin, Nemo peccat (that is formaliter)
in eo quod vitare non potest. And great reason the Father had to say so, for he
that cannot avoid transgressing the Law is not so much as capable of being
obliged by it (because no man can be obliged to what is impossible) and if he
be not obliged by it, certainly he cannot Morally and Formally break it. A
thing which the Patrons of Physical Predetermination would do well to consider.

6. But when I make it necessary to the imputableness of an action that it be
freely exerted, I would not be understood of an immediate Freeness. For
certainly those rooted and confirmed sinners, who have by long use reduced
themselves under a necessity of sinning, are never the more excusable for the
impotence they have contracted. If there was Liberty in the Principle it is
sufficient.

7. The next requisite, and that which gives the last and finishing stroke to
Formal sin is, that it proceeds from the will sufficiently instructed by the
understanding. That is, to make a man sin formally it is requisite that he has
not only a Power of avoiding that action, which is a transgression of the Law,
but that he also know it to be a Transgression of the Law, at least that he be
in a capacity so to do, that so he may be induced to exert that Power. And it is
also necessary that he know that he commits it, that is, he must have or at
least be in a capacity of having, both notitia Juris and notitia Facti.

8. The former of these depends upon that common Principle that Laws do not
oblige till they are published, according to that known Maxim of the Canon
Law, Leges constituuntur cum promulgantur, and that of the Civilians, Leges
quae constringunt hominum vitas intelligi ab omnibus debent. And the latter
also depends upon the equity of the same Principle, tho somewhat more remotely,
for without this the Law, with relation to that particular instance, cannot be
said to be properly known. For although I know such a species of action (suppose
Adultery) to be a transgression of the Law, yet if I know not that by such a
particular instance I commit it, I cannot be said to know that this my action
is a Transgression of the Law; and consequently (supposing this my ignorance
invincible) am wholly excusable; as appears in the case Genesis 20.
of Abimelech when he took Abraham's wife.

9. So that to the Constitution of Formal sin these two things are required,
1st, that the Transgressor have a Power either immediately, or at least in the
Principle of not doing that action which is a Transgression: 2ly, that he
either do or may know that act to be a Transgression of the Law, and likewise,
that he know when he commits it. And thus have I shown the rise, progress and
maturity of sin; I have presented to view both the imperfect Embryo and the
full proportioned and animated Monster. All which I shall briefly comprize in
that compendious description of St. James, Lust when it is conceived James 1.
15.
brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death.

10. There is one thing behind relating to the nature of sin in common, which I
shall briefly consider, and that is, whether its nature be Positive or
Privative. The latter is generally held both by Metaphysitians, Moralists and
Divines, but upon what sufficient grounds I could never yet understand. The
Formal part of sin without all Question is Positive, as is plain from the very
notion of it. For it denotes only that special Dependence which an irregular
act has upon the will, which is the same (as well as the common substance of
the act) both in good and bad actions, and consequently alike Positive.

11. All the controversy therefore remains concerning the Material part of sin,
whether that be Positive or Privative. And this too, not with respect to the
mere Act (for that without question is positive) but with respect to the
irregularity of it.

12. Here then I consider, that according to the foregoing measures the
irregularity of an action is not only its aberration from the Rule, but its
crossing or going contrary to it. For it is not only its not promoting, but its
opposing, or at least its natural aptness to oppose the greatest and best of
ends. So that it is not so properly an irregularity, as a contra-regularity. And
therefore good and bad actions are not privatively but contrarily opposed, and
consequently both positive, for contrarys are always so.

13. For as to be in pain is not Privatively but contrarily opposed to being
Happy (for Pain is something more than want of Happiness) so that action which
causes Pain or misery is not Privatively but contrarily opposed to that which
is effective of Happiness, and consequently is as Positive as the other.

14. Those sins which bid the fairest for Privation are sins of Omission. But
even these, if we consider their Nature, will appear to be also Positive. For
to speak properly, their irregularity does not lie in the not doing or the not
willing to do what ought to be done, but in the willing not to do it. But to
will the not doing of a thing is as positive as the willing to do it, as being
not contradictorily or privatively, but contrarily opposed to it. The sins
therefore of Omission are as Positive as those of Commission. The only
difference is, that the Positiveness of sins of Commission lies both in the
Habitude of the will, and in the executed act too, whereas the Positiveness of
sins of Omission is in the Habitude of the will only.

15. And what is here determined concerning Moral evil, will, I suppose, hold
equally true in all evil, except only that which is Absolute, that is, whose
evil is not its noxiousness to any thing else, but only the want of some
constituent Perfection due to its self, according to that distinction mentioned
by Suarez in his Disputation de Malo, of Malum in se and malum alteri. This
indeed does import no more than a Privation. And this I suppose might be the
occasion of mistake to those who first thought Moral evil to consist in a
Privation only; for Absolute evil does so, and they (as I intimated above) took
Moral evil to be a kind of absolute Nature.

16. Many things I know might be and are commonly objected against the
Positiveness of sin, but I can think but of one that is worth considering, which
is, that if Sin be positive it will be a real Entity, and if so, then we are
pressed with a double absurdity, 1st that God will be the Author of it, as
being the efficient cause of all Entity. 2ly, that it will be good, goodness
being a necessary Affection of Ens.

17. To this I answer, 1st that I not only freely acknowledge, but contend that
sin is a real Entity. But then I distingush of Entity. There are Physical, and
there are Moral Entitys. By the latter (which alone needs explication) I
understand certain modes of determination, superadded to Physical things or
motions by intelligent Beings, in order either to the interest or disinterest
of the universe.

18. This being premised, I answer to the first part of the objection by
denying that it hence follows that God is the Author of sin. God indeed is the
Author of all Physical Beings and Motions, but not of those modes of
determination superadded by Intelligent Beings, which I call Moral Entitys. As
to the second, I grant the consequence, but deny the absurdity of it. For it is
no absurdity that Moral evil should be Metaphysically good. For this
Metaphysical, transcendental goodness, which is the affection of Ens, is
nothing else but a Being's having that essence whereof it is capable, or (as
Suarez expresses it) its having that perfection which is convenient to it. But
this is very consistent with the nature of Moral evil, for this may have what
belongs to its Idea as well as good, and it is the Perfection of sin to be
exceeding sinful.

SECT. IV. Corollarys deduced from the whole. The foulness and deformity of sin
represented. That it is the greatest of evils. That no Formal sin can be in its
self Venial. That in all probability Vindicative Justice is essential to God,
hence deduced. A new Hypothesis for the reconciling of eternal Punishments with
the Divine Justice. That he who thoroughly understands and actually attends to
the Nature of sin cannot possibly commit it.
1. HAving thus far carried on the Theory of sin, we may now sit down, and take
an estimate of its Foulness and Deformity. And methinks I am affrighted at the
ugliness of the face which I have unmasked, and am ready to start back from the
distorted and illboding monster. For however the magic of Self-love may
reconcile men to their own faults, yet if we set the object at a more
convenient distance from the eye, and consider the Nature of sin irrespectively
to our selves, 'twill certainly appear according to the precedent measures, to
be the most deformed, monstrous thing, that can either be found or conceived in
Nature.

2. For if we consider it in its full latitude, it is the highest (...) or
Habitude of the will to the worst of objects; than which what can be imagined
more monstrous and absurd? If we consider it as a violation of Positive Law,
what can be more indecorous than for a Creature to violate the commands, and
trample upon the Authority of that awful excellence to whom he owes his life,
his motion and his very being? If we consider it as a violation of the Law of
Reason, what can be more monstrous and unnatural than for a man to rebel
against the vicarious power of God in his Soul, to refuse to live according to
that part of him whereby he is a man, to suffer the ferine and brutish part to
get the Ascendent over that which is rational and Divine, to refuse to be
governed by those sacred Digests which are the Transcripts of the Moral Nature
of God, and to act against the very frame and contexture of his being. Lastly,
if we consider it as a Transgression against that great and Sovereign Law of
promoting the common Happiness, what a monstrous evil must that be which
crosses and opposes the best of ends, and which is also proposed by the best of
Beings; that for the interest of an inconsiderable part (commonly ones self)
justles the great wheel of Society out of its proper track, that by persuing a
lesser in prejudice to a greater good, disturbs the order of things, dislocates
the frame, and untunes the Harmony of the universe!

3. We may also hence conclude, that sin is the greatest evil that is, or that
can possibly be. For it is contrarily opposed to the greatest possible good,
and consequently, must needs be the greatest evil. And besides, it is that which
in no case or juncture whatsoever is to be committed, and therefore must be the
greatest evil; because otherwise it might happen to come into competition with
a greater, and so commence eligible, which is contrary to the supposition.
Moreover, the greatness of this evil above all others is a posteriori further
confirmed from the greatness of the Sacrifice required for its atonement. God
could not, or at least thought not fit to remit it without the shedding of
blood, and that too of the blood of God. So great a Fool is he, so little does
he consider, that makes a mock at sin.

4. Again it may be hence collected, that no Formal sin can be in its own
nature venial. For according to the former measures every Formal sin tho never
so small, is a sin against the greatest Charity imaginable. For it is against
that Charity whereby I ought to promote the ends of God, and prosecute the
great interest of the universe. And consequently, cannot be in its own Nature
venial, or pardonable without Repentance.

5. Nay may I not further conclude according to the preceding measures, that
it is very probable that no sin could have been pardoned even with Repentance,
had there not been also satisfaction made for it, and that vindicative Justice
is essential to the nature of God? For when I consider sin, I find it so
diametrically contrary to the essential sanctity of God, and so destructive of
that great End which he cannot but propose, that he must needs hate it with an
infinite hatred. But how he should do so, and yet not punish for it, is hard to
understand.

6. Upon these measures we may also find out a way of reconciling eternal
punishments with Divine Justice. The great Objection is, what Proportion is
there between a transient act of sin and eternal misery? And if there be none,
how is it consistent with divine Justice to inflict the one for the other? This
has been a great difficulty, and has for a long time stood proof against all
solutions. But now if we consider sin as contrarily opposed to the greatest
possible good, the good of the universe, and consequently as the greatest
possible evil, its demerit will be such that we need not fear 'twill be
over-punish'd even with eternal misery. For if any misery is to be endured
rather than one sin to be committed, it is also just that any may be, when it is
committed. For the equity of both depends upon sin's being the greatest evil.

7. The last Deduction which I shall make from the Premises is this, that he
who thoroughly understands and actually attends to the nature of sin, cannot
possibly commit it. For as long as he does so, he must look upon it as the
greatest evil, otherwise he cannot be said rightly to understand it. And if he
look upon it as the greatest evil he cannot choose it, so long as he continues
in that judgment, because the then choosing it would be the choosing of all that
whereby it exceeds other evils, gratis, which is the choosing of evil as evil,
which is impossible.

8. Whosoever therefore consents to the commission of sin passes first a wrong
judgment upon it, has the light of his understanding darkened, and intercepted
by a cloud of Passion, loses the present Conviction of sin's being the greatest
evil, and so commits it to avoid (as he then foolishly thinks) a greater. So
that the cause and origin of all sin is ignorance, folly and inadvertence:
there is a false Proposition in the understanding before there is any
misapplication in the will, and it is through the swimming of the head that the
feet slip and lose their station. And yet the sinner is no way excusable for
this his deception, because it is the ignorance of that which he habitually
knows, and he might have attended better, and 'twas his fault that he did not.

9. And it is the recovering and awaking up into this Conviction, that is the
Principle of Repentance and reformation of life. When a man by the aid of grace
and the use of due attention, resumes his interrupted Judgment of Sins being
the greatest evil, he then comes again to himself, forms new resolutions never
to commit it, and returns to the wisdom of the just. Psalm. 119.
So great reason had the Psalmist to pray, O grant me understanding and I shall
live.

THE PRAYER.
O My God, who art pure light and in whom there is no darkness at all, who art
pure Love, and hate nothing but sin, and hate that infinitely, give me an
heart after thine own heart, that I may also abhor it without measure, and
without end. Open thou mine eyes that I may see those two wondrous things of
thy Law, the Beauty of Holiness, and the deformity of sin. Inspire me with that
Charity which seeks not her own, that I may ever propose and follow that
great and excellent end which thou proposest, that I may ever adhere to that
which is simply and absolutely best, and never for any self-advantage disturb
the order of thy Creation. O let me never so far abuse those facultys thou have
given me, as to thwart the designs of thy goodness and wisdom, and to interrupt
that Harmony wherein thou so delightest. But let all my designs be generous,
unselvish and sincere, so as chiefly to rejoice at the good of thy Creation, at
whose very material Beauty the Morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of
God shouted for joy. Holy Father, it is thy will that this thy great Family
should be prosperous and happy, and the better part of it thy Angels, strictly
conform to it; O let this thy will be done here on Earth as it is in Heaven,
and grant that every member of this great Body may so study the good of the
whole, that thou may once more review the works of thy hands, and with a
Fatherly complacency pronounce them good. Grant this for the sake of him who
gave his life for the Happiness of the world, thy Son Jesus,

Amen.
II.
GIve me wisdom that sits by thy throne, and reject me not from among thy
children. That wisdom which was with thee from the Beginning, which knows all
thy works and was present when thou made the world, and knew what was
acceptable in thy sight and right in thy Commandments. O send her out of thy
holy Heavens and from the throne of thy glory, that being present she may
labor with me, that I may know and thoroughly consider what an evil it is to
affront thy Authority, to break through the bounds which thou have set, to
rebel against the most excellent and divine part of my nature, and to oppose
that which thou love, and which is of all things the most lovely. O let thy
wisdom dwell with me, let my loins be always girt, and this my Light always
burning, that I may never be deceived through the deceitfulness of sin, nor
seek death in the error of my life. Thy words have I hid within my heart that
I might not sin against thee, O grant me understanding and I shall live. Keep I
beseech thee this conviction still fresh and fully awake in me that Sin is the
greatest of all evils, that so the fear of none may ever drive me to do the
thing which thy Soul hates. Consider and hear me O Lord my God, lighten mine
eyes that I sleep not in death.

Amen, Amen.
AN IDEA OF HAPPINESS, IN A LETTER to a FRIEND: ENQUIRING Wherein the greatest
Happiness attainable by Man in this Life does consist.

-- Sollicitis vitam consumimus annis,
Torquemurque metu caecaque cupidine rerum,
Aeternisque Senes curis dum quaerimus aevum,
Perdimus, and nullo votorum fine beati,
Victuros agimus semper, nec vivimus unquam.
Manilius lib. 4. OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER 1687.

An Idea of Happiness, etc.
SIR,
1. THO you have been pleased to assign me the Task of an Angel, and in that
Respect have warranted me to disobey you; yet, since a considerable part of
that experimental Knowledge which I have of Happiness is owing to the Delight,
which I take in your virtuous and endearing Friendship, I think it is but
reasonable I should endeavor to give you an Idea of that, whereof you have
given me the Possession.

2. You desire to know of me wherein the greatest Happiness attainable by man
in this Life does consist. And here, tho I see my self engaged in a work
already too difficult for me, yet I find it necessary to enlarge it: For, since
the greatest Happiness, or Summum Bonum of this Life is a Species of Happiness
in general, and since it is called (Greatest) not because absolutely perfect
and complete; but inasmuch as it comes nearest to that which indeed is so, it
will be necessary first to state the Notion of Happiness in General, and then
to define wherein that Happiness does consist which is perfect and complete,
before I can proceed to a Resolution of your Question.

3. By Happiness, in the most general Sense of the word, I understand nothing
else but an Enjoyment of any Good. The least Degree of Good has the same
Proportion to the least Degree of Happiness as the greatest has to the
greatest, and consequently as many ways as a man enjoys any Good, so many ways
he may be said to be happy: neither will the Mixture of Evil make him forfeit
his Right to this Title, unless it either equals the Good he enjoys, or exceeds
it: And then indeed it does; but the Reason is, because in strictness of
Speaking, upon the whole Account the man enjoys no Good at all: For if the Good
and the Evil be equal-balanc'd, it must needs be indifferent to that man either
to be or not to be, there being not the least Grain of good to determine his
Choice: So that he can no more be said to be happy in that Condition, than he
could before he was born. And much less, if the Evil exceeds the Good: For then
he is not only not happy, but absolutely and purely miserable: For after an
exact Commensuration supposed between the Good and the Evil, all that remains
over of the Evil is pure and simple Misery; which is the Case of the Damned:
And when it is once come to this (whatever some Men's Metaphysics may persuade
them) I am very well satisfied, that it is better not to be than to be. But now
on the other side, if the Good does never so little outweigh the Evil, that
Overplus of Good is as pure and unallay'd in its Proportion, as if there were
no such Mixture at all; and consequently the Possession of it may properly be
called Happiness.

4. I know the Masters of Moral Philosophy do not treat of Happiness in this
Latitude; neither is it fit they should: For their Business being to point out
the ultimate End of Human Actions, it would be an impertinent thing for them to
give any other Idea of Happiness than the highest: But however this does not
hinder but that the General Idea of Happiness may be extended farther, even to
the Fruition of any Good whatsoever: Neither is there any reason to find Fault
with the Latitude of this Notion, since we acknowledge Degrees even in Glory.

5. In this General Idea of Happiness two things are contained. One is, some
Good, either real or apparent, in the Fruition of which we are said to be in
some measure or other happy. The other is the very Fruition it self. The first
of these is usually called Objective Happiness, and the latter Formal. Some I
know divide Happiness into these as distinct Species; but I think not so
artificially: For they are both but constituent Parts, which jointly make up
one and the same Happiness: Neither of them are sufficient alone, but they are
both equally necessary. That the last of these is a necessary Ingredient, I
think no doubt can reasonably be made: For what would the greatest Good
imaginable signify without Fruition? And that the former is likewise necessary
is no less certain: For how can there be such a thing as Fruition without an
Object? I grant it is not at all necessary that the Object be a real substantial
Good; if it appear so, it is sufficient.

6. From this Distinction of real and apparent Good, some have taken occasion
to distinguish of Happiness likewise into two sorts, real and imaginary: But I
believe, upon a more narrow Scrutiny into the matter, 'twill be found, that all
Happiness, according to its Proportion, is equally real; and that that which
they term Imaginary, too well deserves the Name, there being no such thing in
Nature: For let the Object of it be never so Phantastic, yet it must still
carry the Semblance and Appearance of Good (otherwise it can neither move the
Appetite nor please it, and consequently be neither an Object of Desire nor of
Fruition;) and if so, the Happiness must needs be real, because the Formality
of the Object, tho 'twere never so true and real a good, would notwithstanding
lie in the Appearance, not in the Reality: Whether it be real or no is purely
accidental: For, since to be happy can be nothing else but to enjoy something
which I desire, the Object of my Happiness must needs be enjoyed under the same
Formality as it is desired. Now since it is desired only as apparently good, it
must needs please me when obtained under the same Notion. So that it matters
not to the Reality of my Happiness, whether the Object of it be really good, or
only apprehended so, since if it were never so real, it pleases only as
apparent. The Fool has his Paradise as well as the Wiseman, and for the time
is as happy in it; and a kind Delusion will make a Cloud as pleasing as the
Queen of Heaven. And therefore I think it impossible for a man to think himself
happy, and (during that Persuasion) not really to be so. He enjoys the Creature
of his own Fancy, worships the Idol of his Imagination, and the happiest man
upon Earth does no more: For let the Circumstances of his Life be what they
will, it is his Opinion only that must give the Relish. Without this, Heaven it
self would afford him no Content, nor the Vision of God prove Beatific. It Is
true, the man is seated at the Springhead of Happiness, is surrounded with
excellent Objects; but alas, it appears not so to him; he is not at all
affected with his Condition, but, like Adam, lies fast in a dead Sleep in the
midst of Paradise.

7. The Sum of this Argument is this; Good is in the same manner the Object of
Fruition, as it is of Desire; and that is not as really good in its own Nature,
but as it is judged so by the Understanding: And consequently, tho it be only
apparent, it must needs be as effectual to gratify the Appetite as it was at
first to excite it during that Appearance. So long as it keeps on its Vizor and
imposes upon the Understanding, what is wanting in the thing, is made up by an
obliging Imposture, and Ignorance becomes here the Mother of Happiness as well
as of Devotion: But if the man will dare to be wise, and too curiously examine
the superficial Tinsel-Good, he undeceives himself to his own Cost, and, like
Adam, adventuring to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, sees himself naked, and is
ashamed. And for this reason I think it impossible for any man to love to be
flattered: It Is true, he may delight to hear himself commended by those who
indeed do flatter him; but the true reason of that is, because he does not
apprehend that to be Flattery which indeed is so; but when he once thoroughly
knows it, it is impossible he should be any longer delighted with it. I shall
conclude this Point with this useful Reflection, That since every Man's
Happiness depends wholly upon his own opinion, the foundatiou upon which all
envious men proceed, must needs be either false or very uncertain. False, if
they think that outward Circumstances and States of life are all the
Ingredients of Happiness; but uncertain however: For since they measure the
Happiness of other Men by their own Opinion, it is mere Chance if they do not
misplace their Envy, unless they were sure the other Person was of the like
opinion with themselves. And now what a vain irrational thing is it to disquiet
our selves into a dislike of our own Condition, merely because we mistake
another Man's?

8. Thus fa^ of the Notion of Happiness in General; I now proceed to consider
that Happiness which is (...) (as Plato speaks) sound and entire, perfect and
complete. Concerning the general Notion of which, all men, I suppose, are as
much agreed as they are in the Idea of a Triangle. That it is such a State than
which a better cannot be conceived: In which there is no Evil you can fear, no
Good which you desire and have not; That which fully and constantly satisfies
the Demand of every Appetite, and leaves no possibility for a desire of Change;
or to sum it up in that comprehensive Expression of the Poet, Quod sis esse
velis, nihilque malis. When you would always be what you are, and (as the Earl
of Roscommon very significantly renders it) do Rather nothing.

9. This I suppose is the utmost that can be said or conceived of it, and less
than this will not be enough. And thus far we are all agreed. For I suppose,
the many various Disputes maintained by Philosophers concerning Happiness,
could not respect this general Notion of it, but only the particular causes or
means whereby it might be acquired. And I find Tully concurring lib. 3. de Fin.
with me in the same Observation, Ea est beata vita (says he) quaerimus autem
non quae sit, sed unde. The difficulty is not to frame a conception of a
perfectly happy State in the general, but to define in particular wherein it
confists.

10. But before I undertake this Province, I think it might not be amiss to
remove one Prejudice, which, because it has gained upon my self sometimes in my
Melancholy Retirements, I am apt to think it may be incident to other men also.
It is this, Whether after so many Disputes about, so many restless endeavors
after this state of perfect Happiness, there be any such thing or no. Whether
it be not a mere Idea, as imaginary as Plato's Commonwealth, as fictious as
the Groves of Elysium. I confess, this suspicion has oftentimes overcast my
mind with black thoughts, damped my Devotion, and as it were, clipped the Wings
of my Aspi^ing Soul. And I happened to fall into it upon a serious reflection
on the nature of Fruition in the several Periods and Circumstances of my Life.
For I observed according to my Narrow experience, that I never had in all my
Life the same thoughts of any good in the very time of the enjoying it as I had
before. I have known when I have promised my self vast Satisfactions, and my
imagination has presented me at a distance with a fair Landscape of Delights,
yet when I drew nigh to grasp the alluring Happiness, like the Sensitive Plant
it contracted it self at the touch, and shrink'd almost to nothing in the
Fruition. And though after the Enjoyment is past, it seems great again upon
Reflection as it did before in Expectation, yet should a Platonical Revolution
make the same Circumstances recur, I should not think so. I found 'twas ever
with me as with the Traveller, to whom the Ground which is before him, and that
which he has left behind him seems always more curiously embroidered and
delightsome, than that which he stands upon. So that my Happiness, like the
time wherein I thought to enjoy it, was always either past or to come, never
present. Methought I could often say upon a Recollection, How happy was I at
such a time! Or when I was in expectation. How happy shall I be if I compass
such a design! But scarce ever, I am so. I was pretty well pleased methought
while I expected, while I hoped, till Fruition jogged me out of my pleasing
slumber and I knew it was but a Dream. And this single Consideration has often
made me even in the very pursuit after Happiness, and full career of my
Passions, to stop short on this side of Fruition, and to choose rather with
Moses upon Mount Nebo to entertain my fancy with a remote Prospect of the Happy
Land, than to go in, and Possess it, and then Repine. How then shall Man be
happy, when setting aside all the Crosses of Fortune, he will complain even of
Success, and Fruition it self shall disappoint him!

11. And this melancholy reflection bred in me a kind of Suspicion, that for
all that I knew it might be so in Heaven too. That although at this distance I
might frame to my self bright Ideas of that Region of Bliss; yet when I came to
the Possession of it, I should not find that perfect Happiness there which I
expected, but that it would be always to come as it is now, and that I should
seek for Heaven even in Heaven it self. That I should not fully acquiesce in my
condition there, but at length desire a Change. And that which confirmed me the
more in this unhappy Skepticism, was, because I considered that a great number
of excellent Beings who enjoyed the very Quintessence of Bliss, who were as
happy as God and Heaven could make them, grew soon uneasy and weary of their
State and left their own Habitation. Which argues that their Happiness was not
perfect and complete, because otherwise they would not have desired a Change,
since that very desire is an Imperfection. And if Happiness be not complete in
Heaven, sure it is impossible to be found any where else.

12. Before therefore I proceed to define wherein perfect Happiness does
consist, I think it necessary to endeavor the removal of this Scruple, which,
like the flaming Sword, forbids entrance into Paradise. In order to which, I
shall enquire into the true Reason why these Sublunary good things when enjoyed
do neither answer our expectations, nor satisfy our Appetites. Now this must
proceed either from the nature of Fruition it self, or from the Imperfection of
it, or from the Object of it, or from our selves. I confess, did this defect
proceed from the very nature of Fruition (as is supposed in the Objection) it is
impossible there should be any such thing as perfect Happiness, since 'twould
faint away while enjoyed, and expire in our embraces. But that it cannot
proceed thence, I have this to offer, Because Fruition being nothing else but
an Application or Union of the Soul to some good or agreeable Object, it is
impossible that should lessen the good enjoyed. Indeed it may lessen our
estimation of it, but that is because we do not rightly consider the nature of
things, but promise our selves infinite Satisfactions in the enjoyment of
finite Objects. We look upon things through a false Glass, which Magnifies the
Object at a distance much beyond its just Dimensions. We represent our future
enjoyments to our selves in such favorable and partial Ideas which abstract
from all the inconveniences and allays which will really in the Event
accompany them. And if we thus over-rate our Felicities beforehand, it is no
wonder if they baulk our Expectations in the Fruition. But then it must be
observed, that the Fruition does not cause this Deficiency in the Object, but
only discover it. We have a better insight into the Nature of things near at
hand, than when we stood afar off, and consequently discern those defects and
imperfections, which, like the qualities of an ill Mistress, lay hid all the
time of Courtship, and now begin to betray themselves, when it is come to
enjoyment. But this can never happen but where the Object is finite. An
infinite Object can never be overvalued, and consequenty cannot frustrate our
Expectations.

13. And as we are not to charge Fruition with our disappointments but our
selves (because we are accessory to our own delusion by taking false measures
of things) so neither is the Vnsatisfactoriness of any condition to be imputed
to the Nature of Fruition it self, but either to the imperfection of it or to
the finiteness of the Object. Let the Object be never so perfect, yet if the
Fruition of it be in an imperfect measure there will still be room for
Vnsatisfactoriness, as it appears in our enjoyment of God in this Life. Neither
can a finite Object fully satisfy us though we enjoy it never so thoroughly.
For since to a full satisfaction and acquiescence of Mind it is required that
our Faculties be always entertained and we ever enjoying: it is impossible a
finite Object should afford this Satisfaction, because all the good that is in
it (being finite) is at length run over, and then the enjoyment is at an end,
The flower is sucked dry, and we necessarily desire a Change. Whenever
therefore our enjoyment proves unsatisfying, we may conclude, that either the
Object is finite, or the Fruition imperfect. But then how came the Angels to be
dissatisfied with their Condition in the Regions of light and immortality, when
they drank freely of the Fountain of Life Revel. 26.
proceeding out of the Throne of God, with whom is fullness of Joy, and at whose
Right hand are Pleasures for evermore. Here certainly there is no room either
for the finiteness of the Object, or the imperfection of Fruition. And
therefore their dissatisfaction can be imputed to no other Cause, than the
Nature of Fruition in general, which is to lessen the good enjoyed, as was
supposed in the Objection. This I confess presses hard, and indeed, I have but
one way to extricate my self from this difficulty, and that is by supposing a
State of Probation in the Angels. That they did not immediately upon their
Creation enjoy an infinite Object, or if they did, yet that 'twas in an
imperfect measure. For should it be granted that they were at first confirmed
in Bliss and completely happy both in respect of Fruition and Object, as we
suppose they are now, I cannot conceive it possible they should be dissatisfied
with their Condition. This being repugnant to the Idea of Perfect Happiness.

14. Since then this dissatisfaction must be derived either from the
imperfection of the Fruition, or the finiteness of the Object, and not from the
Nature of Fruition in the general, to infer the possibility of perfect
Happiness, there needs no more to be supposed than the existence of a Being
full fraught with infinite inexhaustible good, and that he is able to
Communicate to the full. There may be then such a thing as Perfect Happiness.
The possibility of which may also be further proved (tho not explicated) from
those boundless Desires, that immortal Thirst every man has after it by Nature:
Concerning which I observe, that nothing does more constantly, more inseparably
cleave to our Minds than this Desire of perfect and consummated Happiness:
This, as Plato pathetically expresses it, is, (...), the most excellent end of
all our Endeavors, the great Prize, the great Hope. This is the Mark every Man
shoots at, and tho we miss our Aim never so often, yet we will not, cannot give
over; but, like passionate Lovers, take Resolution from a Repulse. The rest of
our Passions are much at our own Disposal; yield either to Reason or Time; we
either Argue our selves out of them, or at least outlive them. We are not
always in Love with Pomp and Grandeur, nor always dazzled with the glittering
of Riches; and there is a Season when Pleasure it self shall Court in vain: But
the desire of perfect Happiness has no Intervals, no Vicissitudes, it out-lasts
the Motion of the Pulse, and survives the Ruins of the Grave. Many Waters
cannot quench it, neither can the Floods Drown it: And now certainly God would
never have planted such an Ardent, such an importunate Appetite in our Souls,
and as it were interwoven it with our very Natures, had he not been able to
satisfy it.

15. I come now to show wherein this perfect Happiness does consist, concerning
which, I affirm in the first place, that it is not to be found in any thing we
can enjoy in this Life. The greatest Fruition we have of God here, is
imperfect, and consequently unsatisfactory. And as for all other Objects they
are finite, and consequently, though never so fully enjoyed, cannot afford us
perfect Satisfaction. No; Man knows not the price thereof: Neither is it Job
28.
to be found in the Land of the Living. The Depth says, it is not in me, and
the Sea says, it is not in me. The Vanity of the Creature has been so
copiously discoursed upon, both by Philosophers and Divines, and is withal so
obvious to every thinking man's Experience, that I need not here take an
Inventory of the Creation, nor turn Ecclesiastes after Solomon. And besides, I
have already anticipated this Argument in what I have said concerning Fruition.
I shall only add one or two Remarks concerning the Objects of Secular
Happiness, which are not so commonly insisted upon, to what has been there
said. The first is this, that the Objects wherein Men generally seek for
Happiness here, are not only finite in their Nature, but also few in number.
Indeed, could a Man's Life be so contrived, that he should have a new Pleasure
still ready at hand as soon as he was grown weary of the Old, and every day
enjoy a Virgin Delight, he might then perhaps like Mr. Hobbs his Notion, and
for a while think himself happy in this continued Succession of new
Acquisitions. But alas, Nature does not treat us with this Variety. The compass
of our enjoyments is much shorter than that of our Lives, and there is a
Periodical Circulation of our Pleasures as well as of our Blood.

-- Versamur ibidem atque insumus usque.
Nec nova vivendo procuditur ulla voluptas.
Lucretius.

The Enjoyments of our Lives run in a perpetual Round like the Months in the
Calendar, but with a quicker Revolution; we dance like Fairies in a Circle, and
our whole Life is but a nauseous Tautology: We rise like the Sun, and run the
same Course we did the day before, and to morrow is but the same over again: So
that the greatest Favorite of Fortune will have Reason often enough to cry out
with him in Seneca, Quousque eadem? But there is another Grievance which
contributes to defeat our Endeavors after perfect Happiness in the Enjoyments
of this Life; Which is, that the Objects wherein we seek it, are not only
finite and few; but that they commonly prove occasions of greater Sorrow to us
than ever they afforded us Content. This may be made out several ways, as from
the Labor of Getting, the Care of Keeping, the fear of Losing, and the like
Topics, commonly insisted on by others; but I wave these, and fix upon another
Account less blown upon, and I think more material than any of the rest. It is
this, that although the Object loses that great appearance in the Fruition which
it had in the expectation, yet after it is gone it Resumes it again. Now we,
when we lament the loss, do not take our measures from that appearance which
the Object had in the Enjoyment (as we should do to make our sorrow not exceed
our Happiness) but from that which it has in the reflection, and consequently we
must needs be more miserable in the loss then we were happy in the enjoyment.

16. From these and the like Considerations, I think it will evidently appear,
that this perfect Happiness is not to be found in any thing we can enjoy in
this Life. Wherein then does it consist? I answer positively, in the full and
entire Fruition of God. He (as Plato speaks) is (...), the Proper and Principal
end of Man, the Center of our Tendency, the Ark of our Rest. He is the Object
which alone can satisfy the appetite of the most Capacious Soul, and stand the
Test of Fruition to Eternity. And to enjoy him fully is perfect Felicity. This
in general, is no more than what is delivered to us in Scripture, and was
believed by many of the Heathen Philosophers. But the manner of this Fruition
requires a more particular Consideration. Much is said by the Schoolmen upon
this Subject, whereof, in the first place, I shall give a short and methodical
account, and then fix upon the Opinion which I best approve of. The first thing
that I observe, is, that it is generally agreed upon among them, that this
Fruition of God consists in some Operation; and I think with very good Reason.
For as by the Objective part of perfect Happiness we understand that which is
best and last, and to which all other things are to be referred; So by the
Formal part of it must be understood the best and last Habitude of Man toward
that best Object, so that the Happiness may both ways satisfy the Appetite,
that is, as it is the best thing, and as it is the Possession, Use, or Fruition
of that best thing: Now this habitude whereby the best thing is perfectly
possessed, must needs be some Operation, because Operation is the ultimate
perfection of every Being. Which Axion (as Cajetan well observes) must not be
so understood as if Operation taken by it self were more perfect than the thing
which tends to it, but that every thing with its Operation is more perfect than
without it.

17. The next thing which I observe, is, that it is also farther agreed upon
among them, that this Operation wherein our Fruition of God does consist, is an
Operation of the Intellectual part, and not of the Sensitive. And this also I
take to be very reasonable. First, because it is generally received, that the
Essence of God cannot be the Object of any of our Senses. But Secondly, Suppose
it could, yet since this Operation; wherein our perfect Happiness does consist
must be the perfectest Operation, and since that of the Intellectual part is
more perfect than that of the Sensitive, it follows that the Operation whereby
we enjoy God must be that of the Intellectual part only.

18. But now whereas the Intellectual part of man (as it is opposed to the
Sensitive) is double, viz. That of the Understanding, and that of the Will,
there has commenced a great Controversy between the Thomists and the Scotists,
in which Act or Operation of the Rational Soul the Fruition of God does
consist, whether in an Act of the Understanding, or in an Act of the Will. The
Thomists will have it consist purely in an Act of the Understanding, which is
Vision. The Scotists in the Act of the Will, which is Love. I intend not here
to launch out into those Voluminous Intricacies and Abstrusities, occasioned by
the management of this Argument: It may suffice to tell you, that I think they
are both in the extreme, and therefore I shall take the middle way and resolve
the perfect Fruition of God partly into Vision and partly into Love. These are
the two arms with which we embrace the Divinity, and unite our Souls to the
fair one and the good. These I conceive are both so essential to the perfect
Fruition of God, that the Idea of it can by no means be maintained if either of
them be wanting. For, since God is both Supreme Truth and infinite Goodness, he
cannot be entirely possessed but by the most clear knowledge and the most ardent
love. And besides, since the Soul is happy by her Faculties, her Happiness must
consist in the most perfect Operation of each Faculty. For if Happiness did
consist formally in the sole Operation of the Understanding (as most say) or in
the sole Operation of the Will (as others) the Man would not be completely and
in all respects Happy. For how is it possible a Man should be perfectly Happy
in loving the greatest good if he did not know it, or in knowing it if he did
not love it? And moreover, these two Operations do so mutually tend to the
promotion and conservation of one another, that upon this depends the
perpetuity and the constancy of our Happiness. For while the Blessed do (...),
Face to Face contemplate the Supreme Truth and the infinite Goodness, they
cannot choose but love perpetually; and while they perpetually love, they cannot
choose but perpetually contemplate. And in this mutual reciprocation of the
Actions of the Soul consists the perpetuity of Heaven, the Circle of Felicity.

19. Besides this way of resolving our fruition of God into Vision and Love,
there is a famous Opinion said to be broacht by Henricus Gandavensis, who, upon
a Supposition that God could not be so fully enjoyed as is required to perfect
Happiness, only by the Operations or Powers of the Soul, fancied a certain
Illapse whereby the Divine Essence did fall in with, and as it were penetrate
the Essence of the Blessed. Which Opinion he endeavors to illustrate by this
Similitude. That as a piece of Iron, red hot by reason of the Illapse of the
fire into it, appears all over like fire, so the Souls of the Blessed by this
Illapse of the Divine Essence into them, shall be all over Divine.

20. I think he has scarce any followers in this Opinion, but I am sure he had
a leader. For this is no more than what Plato taught before him, as is to be
seen in his Discourses about the refusion of the Souls of good men into the
Anima Mundi, which is the self-same in other terms with this Opinion. And the
Truth of what I affirm may farther appear from an expression of that great
Platonist Plotinus, (viz.) that the Soul will then be Happy when it shall
depart Enn. 6. lib. 9. cap. 10.
hence to God, and as another and no longer her self shall become wholly his,
(...), having joined her self to him as a Center to a Center.

21. That such an intimate Conjunction with God as is here described is
possible, seems to me more than credible from the Nature of the Hypostatic
Union, but whether our Fruition of God after this Life shall consist in it,
none know but those happy Souls who enjoy him, and therefore I shall determine
nothing before the time. This only I observe, that should our Fruition of God
consist in such an Union or rather Penetration of Essences, that would not
exclude but rather infer those Operations of Vision and Love as necessary to
Fruition; but on the other hand, there seems no such necessity of this Union to
the Fruition, but that it may be conceived entire without it. And therefore why
we should multiply difficulties without cause, I see no reason. For my part I
should think my self sufficiently happy in the clear Vision of my Maker, nor
should I desire Exodus 33. 18.
any thing beyond the Prayer of Moses, I beseech thee show me thy Glory.

22. For what an infinite Satisfaction, Happiness and Delight must it needs be
to have a clear and intimate perception of that Primitive and Original Beauty,
Perfection and Harmony, whereof all that appears fair and excellent either to
our Senses or Understandings in this Life is but a faint imitation, a pale
Reflection! To see him who is the Fountain of all Being, containing in himself
the perfection, not only of all that is, but of all that is possible to be, the
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and Rev. 1. 8.
the ending, the first and the last, which is, and which was, and which is to
come, the Almighty! To see him of whom all Nature is the Image, of whom all the
Harmony both of the visible and invisible World is but the Echo! To see him,
who (as Plato divinely and magnificently expresses it) is (...). The immense
Ocean of Beauty, which is it self by it self, with it self, uniform, always
existing! This certainly will affect the Soul with all the pleasing and
ravishing Transports of Love and Desire, Joy and Delight, Wonder and Amazement,
together with a settled Acquiescence and Complacency of Spirit only less
infinite than the Loveliness that causes it, and the peculiar Complacency of
him who rejoices in his own fullness, and the Comprehensions of Eternity. We see
how strangely our Sense of Seeing is affected with the Harmony of Colors, and
our sense of Hearing with the Harmony of Sounds, insomuch that some have been
too weak for the enjoyment, and have grown mad with the Sublimate of Pleasure.
And if so, what then shall we think of the Beatific Vision, the pleasure of
which will so far transcend that of the other, as God who is all over Harmony
and Proportion exceeds the sweetest Melody of Sounds and Colors, and the
perception of the Mind is more vigorous, quick and piercing than that of the
Senses? This is perfect Happiness, this is the Tree of Life which grows in the
midst of the Paradise of God, this is Heaven, which while the Learned dispute
about, the Good only enjoy. But I shall not venture to Soar any longer in these
Heights, I find the Ether too thin here to breath in long, and the Brightness
of the Region flashes too strong upon my tender Sense; I shall therefore hasten
to descend from the Mount of God, lest I grow giddy with speculation, and lose
those Secrets which I have learnt there, the Cabala of Felicity.

23. And now, (Sir) I come to consider your Question ( viz.) Wherein the
greatest Happiness attainable by Man in this Life does consist. Concerning
which, there is as great variety of Opinions among Philosophers, as there is
among Geographers about the Seat of Paradise. The Learned Varro reckons up no
less than 288 several Opinions about it, and yet notwithstanding the number of
Writers who have bequeathed Volumes upon this Subject to Posterity, they seem
to have been in the dark in nothing more than in this, and (excepting only a
few Platonists, who placed Man's greatest End in the Contemplation of Truth)
they seem to have undertaken nothing so unhappily, as when they essayed to
write of Happiness. Some measure their Happiness by the high-tide of their
Riches, as the Egyptians did the Fertility of the Year by the increase of the
River Nile. Others place it in the Pleasures of Sense, others in Honor and
Greatness. But these and the like were Men of the common Herd, low grovelling
Souls, that either understood not the Dignity of Human Nature, or else forgot
that they were Men. But there were others of a Diviner Genius and Sublimer
Spirit,

Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan. Who had a more generous blood
running in their Veins, which made them put a just value upon themselves, and
scorn to place their greatest Happiness in that which they should blush to
enjoy. And those were the Stoics and the Peripatetics, who both place the
greatest Happiness of this Life in the Actions of Virtue, with this only
difference, that whereas the former are contented with Naked Virtue, the latter
require some other Collateral things to the farther accomplishment of
Happiness, such as are Health and Strength of Body, a Competent Livelihood, and
the like.

24. And this Opinion has been subscribed to by the hands of eminent Moralists
in all Ages. And as it is Venerable for its Antiquity, so has it gained no
small Authority from the Pen of a great Modern Writer ( Descartes) who resolves
the greatest Happiness of this Life into the right use of the Will, which
consists in this, that a Man have a firm and constant purpose always to do that
which he shall judge to be best.

25. I confess, the Practice of Virtue is a very great instrument of Happiness,
and that there is a great deal more true satisfaction and solid content to be
found in a constant course of well living than in all the soft Caresses of the
most studied Luxury, or the Voluptuousness of a Seraglio. And therefore I have
oftentimes been exceedingly pleased in the reading of a certain Passage in that
Divine Moralist Hierocles, where he tells you, that the Virtuous Man lives much
more pleasantly than the Vicious Man. For (says he) all Pleasure is the
Companion of Action, it has no Subsistence of its own, but accompanies us in
our doing such and such things. Hence it is that the worser. Actions are
accompanied with the meaner Pleasures. So that the good Man does not only
excel the wicked Man in what is good, but has also the advantage of him even
in Pleasure, for whose sake alone he is wicked. For he that chooses Pleasure
with Filthiness, although for a while he be sweetly and deliciously entertained,
yet at last through the Eilthiness annexed to his Enjoyment, he is brought to a
painful Repentance. But now he that prefers Virtue with all her Labors and
Difficulties, though at first for want of use it sits heavy upon him, yet by
the Conjunction of good be alleviates the Labor, and at last enjoys pare and
unallay'd Pleasure with his Virtue. So that of necessity that Life is most
unhappy, which is most wicked, and that most pleasant which is most virtuous.

26. Now this I readily submit to as a great truth, that the degrees of
Happiness vary according to the degrees of Virtue, and consequently that that
Life which is most Virtuous is most Happy, with reference to those that are
Vicious or less Virtuous, every degree of Virtue having a proportionate degree
of Happiness accompanying it, (which is all, I suppose, that excellent Author
intends.) But I do not think the most Virtuous Life so the most Happy, but that
it may become Happier, unless something more be comprehended in the Word
(Virtue) then the Stoics, Peripatetics, and the generality of other Moralists
understand by it. For with them it signifies no more but only such a firm (...)
or habitude of the Will to good, whereby we are constantly disposed,
notwithstanding the contrary tendency of our Passions, to perform the necessary
Offices of Life. This they call Moral or Civil Virtue, and although this brings
always Happiness enough with it to make ample amends for all the difficulties
which attend the practice of it: Yet I am not of Opinion that the greatest
Happiness attainable by Man in this Life consists in it. But there is another
and a higher Sense of the Word, which frequently occurs in the Pythagorean and
Platonic Writings, ( viz.) Contemplation and the Vnitive way of Religion. And
this they call Divine Virtue. I allow of the distinction, but I would not be
thought to derive it from the Principle, as if Moral Virtue were acquired, and
this infused (for to speak ingeniously, infused Virtue seemed ever to me as
great a Paradox in Divinity, as Occult qualities in Philosophy) but from the
nobleness of the Object, the Object of the former being Moral good, and the
Object of the latter God himself. The former is a State of Proficiency, the
latter of Perfection. The former is a State of difficulty and contention, the
latter of ease and ferenity. The former is employed in mastering the Passions,
and regulating the actions of common Life, the latter in Divine Meditation and
the ecstasies of Seraphic Love. He that has only the former, is like Moses with
much difficulty climbing up to the Holy Mount, but he that has the latter, is
like the same Person conversing with God on the serene top of it, and shining
with the Rays of anticipated Glory. So that this latter supposes the
acquisition of the former, and consequently has all the Happiness retaining to
the other, besides what it adds of its own. This is the last Stage of Human
Perfection, the utmost round of the Ladder whereby we ascend to Heaven, one
Step higher is Glory. Here then will I build my Tabernacle, for it is good to
be here. Here will I set up my Pillar of Rest, here will I fix, for why should
I travel on farther in pursuit of any greater Happiness, since Man in this
Station is but a little lower than the Angels, one remove from Heaven. Here
certainly is the greatest happiness, as well as Perfection attainable by Man in
this State of imperfection. For since that Happiness which is absolutely
perfect and complete consists in the clear and intimate Vision and most ardent
Love of God, hence we ought to take our Measures, and conclude that to be the
greatest Happiness attainable in this State, which is the greatest
participation of the other. And that can be nothing else but the Vnitive way of
Religion, which consists of the Contemplation and Love of God. I shall say
something of each of these severally, and something of the Vnitive way of
Religion, which is the result of both, and so shut up this Discourse.

27. By Contemplation in general ((...)) we understand, an application of the
Understanding to some truth. But here in this place we take the word in a more
peculiar sense, as it signifies an habitual, attentive, steady application or
conversion of the Spirit to God and his Divine Perfections. Of this the Masters
of Mystic Theology commonly make fifteen Degrees. The first is Intuition of
Truth, the second is a Retirement of all the Vigor and Strength of the
Faculties into the innermost parts of the Soul, the third is Spiritual Silence,
the fourth is Rest, the fifth is Union, the sixth is the Hearing of the still
Voice of God, the seventh is Spiritual Slumber, the eighth is Ecstacy, the
ninth is Rapture, the tenth is the Corporeal Appearance of Christ and the
Saints, the eleventh is the Imaginary Appearance of the Same, the twelfth is
the Intellectual Vision of God, the thirteenth is the Vision of God in
Obscurity, the fourteenth is an admirable Manifestation of God, the fifteenth
is a clear and intuitive Vision of him, such as St. Austin and Tho. Aquinas
attribute to St. Paul, when he was wrapped up into the third Heaven. Others of
them reckon seven degrees only, ( viz.) Taste, Desire, Satiety, Ebriety,
Security, Tranquillity, but the name of the seventh (they say) is known only to
God.

28. I shall not stand to examine the Scale of this Division, perhaps there may
be a kind of a Pythagoric Superstition in the number. But this I think I may
affirm in general, that the Soul may be wound up to a most strange degree of
Abstraction by a silent and steady Contemplation of God. Plato defines
Contemplation to be (...) a Solution and a Separation of the Soul from the
Body. And some of the severer Platonists have been of Opinion, that it is
possible for a Man by mere intention of thought not only to withdraw the Soul
from all commerce with the Senses, but even really to separate it from the
Body, to untwist the Ligaments of his Frame, and by degrees to resolve himself
into the State of the Dead. And thus the Jews express the manner of the Death
of Moses, calling it Osculum Oris Dei, the Kiss of God's Mouth. That is, that
he breathed out his Soul by the mere Strength and Energy of Contemplation, and
expired in the Embraces of his Maker. A Happy way of Dying! How ambitious
should I be of such a conveyance, were it practicable? How passionately should
I join with the Church in the Canticles? (...) Let him Kiss me with the Kisses
of his Mouth. Cant. 1. 2.

29. But however this be determined, certain it is, that there are exceeding
great Measures of Abstraction in Contemplation, so great, that sometimes whether
a Man be in the Body or out of the Body, he himsel can hardly tell. And
consequently the Soul in these Praeludiums of Death, these Neighbourhoods of
Separation, must needs have brighter glimpses, and more Beatific Ideas of God,
than in a state void of these Elevations, and consequently must love him with
greater Ardency. Which is the next thing I am to consider.

30. The love of God in general may be considered either as it is purely
intellectual, or as it is a Passion. The first is, when the Soul, upon an
apprehension of God as a good, delectable, and agreeable Object, joins her self
to him by the Will. The latter is, when the motion of the Will is accompanied
with a sensible Commotion of the Spirits, and an estuation of the Blood. Some I
know are of Opinion, that it is not possible for a man to be affected with this
sensitive Love of God, which is a Passion, because there is nothing in God
which falls under our imagination, and consequently (the imagination being the
only Medium of conveyance) it cannot be propagated from the Intellectual part
to the Sensitive. Whereupon they affirm, that none are capable of this
sensitive passionate Love of God but Christians, who enjoy the Mystery of the
Incarnation, whereby they know God has condescended so far as to cloth himself
with Flesh, and to become like one of us. But it is not all the Sophistry of the
cold Logicians that shall work me out of the belief of what I feel and know,
and rob me of the sweetest entertainment of my Life, the Passionate Love of
God. Whatever some Men pretend, who are Strangers to all the affectionate heats
of Religion, and therefore make their Philosophy a Plea for their indevotion,
and extinguish all Holy Ardours with a Syllogism; yet I am firmly persuaded,
that our love of God may be not only passionate, but even Wonderfully so, and
exceeding the Love of Women. It Is an Experimental and therefore undeniable
Truth, that Passion is a great Instrument of Devotion, and accordingly we find,
that Men of the most warm and pathetick Tempers and Amorous Complexions
(Provided they have but Consideration enough withal to fix upon the right
Object) prove the greatest Votaries in Religion. And upon this account it is,
that to heighten our Love of God in our Religious Addresses, we endeavor to
excite our Passions by Music, which would be to as little purpose as the
Fanatic thinks it is, if there were not such a thing as the Passionate Love of
God. But then as to the Objection, I Answer with the excellent Descartes, that
although in God who is the Object of our Love, we can imagine nothing, yet we
can imagine that our Love, which consists in this, that we would unite our
selves to the Object beloved, and consider our selves as it were a part of it.
And the sole Idea of this very Conjunction is enough to stir up a heat about
the Heart, and so kindle a very vehement Passion. To which I add, that although
the Beauty or Amiableness of God be not the same with that which we see in
Corporeal Beings, and consequently cannot directly fall within the Sphere of
the imagination, yet it is something Analogous to it, and that very Analogy is
enough to excite a Passion. And this I think sufficient to warrant my general
division of the Love of God into Intellectual and Sensitive.

31. But there is a more peculiar Acceptance of the Love of God proper to this
place. And it is that which we call Seraphic. By which I understand in short,
that Love of God which is the effect of an intense Contemplation of him. This
differs not from the other in kind, but only in degree, and that it does
exceedingly, in as much as the thoughtful Contemplative Man (as I hinted
before) has clearer Perceptions and livelier Impressions of the Divine Beauty,
the lovely Attributes and Perfection of God, than he whose Soul is more deeply
set in the Flesh, and lies grovelling in the bottom of the Dungeon.

32. That the nature of this Seraphic Love may be the better understood, I
shall consider how many degrees there may be in the Love of God. And I think
the Computation of Bellarmin, lib. 2. de monachis, cap. 2. is accurate enough.
He makes four. The first is to love God proportionably to his Loveliness, that
is, with an infinite Love; and this degree is peculiar to God himself. The
second is to Love him, not proportionably to his Loveliness, but to the utmost
Capacity of a Creature, and this degree is peculiar to Saints and Angels in
Heaven. The third is to love him not proportionably to his Loveliness, nor to
the utmost capacity of a Creature, absolutely considered; but to the utmost
capacity of a Mortal Creature in this Life. And this (he says) is proper to the
Religious. The fourth is to love him not proportionably to his Loveliness, nor
to the utmost capacity of a Creature, considered either absolutely or with
respect to this Life, but only so as to love nothing equally with him or above
him. That is, not to do any thing contrary to the Divine Love. And this is
absolute indispensable duty, less than which will not qualify us for the
enjoyment of God hereafter.

33. Now this Seraphic Love which we here discourse of is in the third degree:
When a Man, after many degrees of Abstraction from the Animal Life, many a
profound and steady Meditation upon the Excellencies of God, sees such a vast
Ocean of Beauty and Perfection in him, that he loves him to the utmost stretch
of his Power; When he sits under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
is sweet to his Taste. Cant. 2. 3. When he Consecrates and Devotes himself
whollly to him, and has no Passion for Inferior Objects. When he is ravished
with the delights of his Service, and breaths out some of his Soul to him in
every Prayer. When he is delighted with Anthems of Praise and Adoration more
than with Marrow and Fatness, and Feasts upon Alleluiah. When he melts in a
Calenture of Devotion, and his Soul breaks out with fervent Desire, Psalm.
119. When the one thing he delights in is to converse with God in the Beauty of
Holiness, and the one thing he desires to see him as he is in Heaven. This is
Seraphic Love, and this with Contemplation makes up that which the Mystic
Divines style the Vnitive way of Religion: It is called so because it Unites us
to God in the most excellent manner that we are capable of in this Life. By
Union here I do not understand that which is local or presential, because I
consider God as Omnipresent. Neither do I mean a Union of Grace (as they call
it) whereby we are reconciled to God, or a Union of Charity, whereof it is
said, he that dwells in love, dwells in God and God in him, Jo. 4. 16. The
first of these being as common to the inanimate things as to the most Extasi'd
Soul upon Earth. And the two last being common to all good men, who indeed love
God, but yet want the excellency of Contemplation and the Mystic Union. The
Union then which I here speak of, is that which is between the Faculty and the
Object. Which consists in some Habitude or Operation of one toward the other.
The Faculties here are the Understanding and Will, the Object God, and the
Operations Contemplation and Love. The result of which two is the Mystic Union.
Which, according to this complex Notion of it that I have here delivered, is
thus most admirably represented by the excellent Bishop Taylour. It is (says
he) a Prayer of quietness and silence, and a Meditation extraordinary, The
Great Exemplar, page 60.
a Discourse without variety, a Vision and Intuition of Divine Excellencies, an
immediate entry into an Orb of light, and a resolulution of all our Faculties
into Sweetness, Affections, and Starings upon the Divine Beauty. And is carried
on to Ecstasies, Raptures, Suspensions, Elevations, Abstractions and
Apprehensions beatifical.

34. I make no doubt but that many an honest Pious Soul arrives to the heavenly
Canaan, who is not fed with this Manna in the Wilderness. But though every one
must not expect these Antepasts of Felicity that is virtuous, yet none else
must. Paradise was never open but to a State of Innocence. But neither is that
enough. No, this Mount of God's Presence is fenced not only from the profane,
but also from the moderately virtuous. It Is the Privilege of Angelical
Dispositions, and the Reward of eminent Piety and an excellent Religion, to be
admitted to these Divine Repasts, these Feasts of love. And here I place the
greatest Happiness attainable by Man in this Life, as being the nearest
Approach to the State of the Blessed above, the outer Court of Heaven.

35. These (Sir) are my thoughts concerning Happiness. I might have spun them
out into a greater length, but I think a little Plot of ground thick-sown is
better than a great Field which for the most part of it lies Fallow. I have
endeavored to deliver my Notions with as much Perspicuity and in as good
Method as I could, and so to answer all the ends of Copiousness, with the
advantage of a shorter Cut. If I appear singular in any of my Notions, it is not
out of an industrious affectation of Novelty, but because in the composing of
this discourse (the Meditation of a few broken hours in a Garden) I consulted
more my own experimental Notices of things and private Reflections than the
Writings of others. So that if sometimes I happen to be in the Road, and
sometimes in a way by my self, it is no wonder. I affect neither the one nor the
other, but write as I think. Which as I do at other times, so more especially
when I subscribe my self

SIR, Yours most affectionately, J. N.
All Souls College Apr. 18. 1683.
A Letter of Resolution concerning some Passages in the foregoing Treatise, to
the same Person.
SIR,
1. THE kind Entertainment which you gave my Idea of Happiness, does not only
encourage, but oblige me to endeavor the satisfaction of that Scruple, which
the Perusal of it has occasioned. I cannot but highly commend your searching
Curiosity, in desiring farther satisfaction concerning a matter of so sublime
and excellent a Nature (for the Tree of Paradise is good for food, pleasant to
the Eye, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise) tho you must give me leave
to wonder that you would not enquire at a better Oracle. But since you are
pleased to be of the Opinion, that few have made this Subject so familiar to
their Meditation as I have, I cannot with any pretense decline your Request,
tho perhaps by my performing it I shall work you into a contrary persuasion.

2. Sir, You say you should like my Notion concerning the r^ality of that which
is usually called Imaginary Happiness, that is, (as you well explain both your
own and my meaning) that although the Object may be an Imaginary Good, yet the
Happiness which consists in the Fruition of that Object, will not be Imaginary
too, but real, and consequently, that it is impossible for a man to seem to
himself to be happy, and not to be really so, all Happiness consisting in
Opinion. This Notion, you say, you should like rarely well, could you free your
self from one difficulty which it engages you upon; ( viz.) That hereafter, in
the state of Glory, either one Saint shall think himself as happy as another,
or not; if not, this must needs occasion Envy or Discontent, but if one shall
think himself as happy as another, then, according to my Hypothesis, that
Opinion is the Measure of Happiness, 'twill follow that he will really be so;
and this brings in Equality of Happiness, which you look upon (and I think
justly too) as another absurdity.

3. I confess, Sir, this Argument is pretty subtle and surprising, but I
conceive the Knots of it may be untied by this Answer. First, it may be justly
questioned, whether the first part of your Dilemma be necessarily attended with
the appendant absurdity. It Is true indeed, not to think ones self as happy as
another, is the Spring of Envy or Discontent among Men in this World, but
whether this be he genuin and constant effect of that Consideration, or whether
it ought not rather to be ascribed to the present Infirmities and Imperfections
of Human Nature, may admit Dispute. But in case this absurdity does inseparably
cleave to the first part, then I be take my self to the latter, and affirm,
that in Heaven one Saint shall think himself as happy as another. Then,
according to my own Notion ( say you) it will follow that he is really so. No,
I deny the consequence, the invalidity of which will plainly appear by
distinguishing the ambiguity of the Phrase. For this Expression, One Saint
thinks himself as happy as another, may be taken in a double sense, either that
he thinks himself as happy as he himself thinks that other, or that he thinks
himself as happy as that other thinks himself. I grant, should one Saint think
himself as happy as another in this latter sense of the Phrase, he would,
according to my Hypothesis, really be so; so that this would bring in equality.
And therefore in this Sense I deny the Proposition, and that without the least
danger of splitting upon the first absurdity. But for the former Sense, that
has no such levelling quality, for to say that I think my self as happy as I
think another, amounts to no more than this, that in my apprehension another
does not exceed me in Happiness: but tho he does not in my apprehension, yet he
may in reality, for tho my Opinion gives measures to my own Happiness, yet it
does not to another Man's. So that one Saint may be said to think himself as
happy as another in the former sense, without equalling the Happiness of the
Blessed, tho, I confess, I should much rather adhere to the contrary
proposition, ( viz.) that one shall not think himself as happy as another, in
case such an Opinion be not necessarily attended with Envy or Discontent.
Because it seems unreasonable to make them ignorant of the degrees of one*
another Bliss, unless that ignorance be necessarily required to prevent the
alleged absurdities. But I determine nothing in this point, my business was
only to break the force of your Dilemma, and to show that my Notion does not
involve you in the difficulty supposed. This, Sir, is all that I think
necessary to say to a Person of your apprehension, and therefore I end these
nice Speculations with this profitable reflection, that although the Notion of
Happiness be intricate and obscure, yet the means of attaining it are plain,
and therefore 'twould be most advisable both for you and me chiefly to apply
our selves to the latter here, and we shall understand the former with the best
sort of Knowledge, that of Experience, hereafter.

Yours J. N.

Another Letter to the same Person, concerning the true Notion of Plato's
Ideas, and of Platonic Love.
Tanta vis in Ideis constituitur, ut nisi his intellectis, sapiens esse nemo
possit. Augustinus Tom. 4. Page 548. Q. 46.
SIR,
1. WERE I not as well acquainted with your singular modesty, as I am with your
intellectual accomplishments, I should readily conclude, that your directing
your enquiries to me proceeded not so much from a Curiosity to improve your own
Knowledge, as to try mine. But when I consider that you are ignorant of nothing
so much as of your own Worth and Abilities, I begin to think it possible that
you may propose these Questions even to me out of a desire to be informed.
Which way soever it is, I acknowledge my self to be obliged to you for
affording me an opportunity of serving you, especially in such an Instance,
where I cannot gratify your Request without humouring my own Genius at the same
time. For indeed to my apprehension, there is not a finer or more Sublime piece
of Speculation in all Plato's Philosophy, than that of his Ideas* and that of
his Love, tho it has undergone the same hard Fate with many other excellent
Theories, first, to be either ignorantly misunderstood, or maliciously
misrepresented, and then popularly vilify'd and decry'd.

2. To do right therefore to the name of this great Man, as well as to satisfy
your Demands, I shall first propose the general mistake, and then rectify it,
first present you with the supposed Opinion of Plato, and then with the true
and genuin one. I begin with his Ideas, by which it is taken for granted by the
generality of Writers, especially those of the Peripatetic Order, that he
understood universal Natures or abstract Essences subsisting eternally by
themselves, Separate both from the mind of God and all singular Beings,
according to which, as so many patterns, all Singulars are formed. As for
instance, that a Man, not this or that in particular, but a universal Man, or a
Man in general, should exist by it self eternally, according to which all
particular Men were made. Sir, I suppose you can hardly forbear smiling at the
odness of the Conceit, but as ridiculous as you may think it, it is said to be
maintained by no less a Man than Plato, and has been thought of that moment
too, that Multitudes of great Men have set themselves very seriously to confute
it as a dangerous Heresy, and have opposed it with as much zeal as ever St.
Austin did the Manichees or the Pelagians.

3. But now, that this Opinion was not only for its Absurdity and
Contradictiousness unworthy of the contemplative and refined Spirit of Plato;
but was also apparently none of his, I dare say any capable Person will be
convinced that shall heedfully and impartially examine and compare the Works of
Plato; And this Aristotle himself must needs have known (he having been his
constant Auditour for twenty years together) but only he wanted a Shadow to
fight with, and so fathered this monstrous Opinion upon his Master. And of this
disingenuity of Aristotle, together with other abuses, Plato himself
complained, while alive, in these words; (...) as is recorded by Laertius in
the Life of Aristotle.

4. And now, that the grossness of this Abuse may the more fully appear, I will
in the next place present you with another Sense of Plato's Ideas, and such as
by a more than ordinary acquaintance with his Works, I know to be the true and
genuin one. Know then that Plato considering the World as an effect of an
intellectual Agent, and that in the Operations of all other Artificers or
rational Efficients there must be some form in the Mind of the Artificer
presupposed to the Work (for otherwise what difference will there be between a
fortuitous effect and an intended one, and how comes the effect to be of this
Species rather than another?) thought it necessary to suppose (...) Eternal
Forms, Models or Patterns, of all the Species of being in Nature existing in
the Mind of God. And these he calls Ideas. I say existing in the Mind of God,
for there is not the least Intimation in all Plato's Works of any such Ideas
existing separately from the Divine intellect, nor do the great Masters of
Platonic Philosophy, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Procles, or any other that I know of
make mention of any such Specter and Ghosts of Entity. No, this Monster was
hatched in Aristotle's Brain, and I believe did never enter Plato's Head so
much as in a Dream. For he is not only silent about it, but does in several
places expressly assert the contrary; Particularly in his Timaeus, where, of set
purpose, he describes the Origin of the World, he says that God made the
World according to that Pattern or Idea which he had in his Mind. The same you
will find more amply confirmed in his Hippias, his Parmenides, and his sixth
Book of Repub. and many other places. And these Ideas he calls (...), the first
Intelligibles, and (...), the Measures of the things that are, implying, that
as all things were formed according to these specifical Platforms; so their
truth must be measured from their Conformity to them. And in this Sense must be
taken that Common Axiom of the Schools, that the Truth of a thing is its
Conformity with the Divine Intellect, for it is in no other Sense Intelligible,
as you will discern in the Process.

5. But now, lest you should imagine, that this Platonic Hypothesis of Ideas
existing in the Divine Mind should ill comport with the Simplicity of God, or
clash with that approved Doctrine of the Schools, Nihil est in Deo quod non sit
Deus, (which is another cavil of the Antiplatonists) you are to understand that
Plato by his Ideas does not mean any real Essence distinct from the Divine
Essence, but only the Divine Essence it self with this Connotation, as it is
variously imitable or participable by created Beings, and consequently,
according to the multifariousness of this imitability, so are the possibilities
of Being. Which is as fine a Notion as was ever framed by the Mind of Man, and
that it is his, you will find, if you consult his Parmenides. And this will
serve to help us out with another difficulty, for whereas Plato makes his
Divine Ideas not only the exemplary causes of things, but also (which is a
consequent to the former) the measure of their Truth, this may seem to fall in
with their Opinion who make all Truth dependent upon the Speculative
understanding of God, that is, that God does not understand a thing so because
it is so in its own Nature, but that a thing is therefore so because God is
pleased so to understood it. Which is an Opinion full of mischief and
absurdity, as you may see compendiously, and yet evidently demonstrated, in Dr.
Rust's little Discourse of Truth. Now for the clearing this Difficulty, it is to
be observed, that the Essence of God, according to Plato, is distinguished into
(...) and (...) the Counterpart whereof in English is Conceptive and
Exhibitive. By the Mind of God Exhibitive is meant the Essence of God as thus
or thus imitable or participable by any Creature, and this is the same with an
Idea. By the Mind of God Conceptive is meant a reflex act of God's
Understanding upon his own Essence as Exhibitive, or as thus and thus imitable.
Now if you consider the Divine Understanding as Conceptive or Speculative, it
does not make its Object but suppose it, (as all Speculative Understanding
does) neither is the Truth of the Object to be measured from its Conformity
with that, but the Truth of that from its Conformity with its Object. But if
you consider the Divine Understanding as Exhibitive, then its Truth does not
depend upon its Conformity with the Nature of things, but on the contrary, the
Truth of the Nature of things depends upon its Conformity with it. For the
Divine Essence is not thus or thus imitable, because such and such things are
in being, but such and such things are in being, because the Divine Essence is
thus and thus imitable, for had not the Divine Essence been thus imitable, such
and such Beings would not have been possible. And thus is Plato to be
understood when he founds the Truth of things upon their Conformity with the
Divine Ideas, and thus must the Schools mean too by that forementioned Axiom
concerning Transcendental Truth, if they will speak Sense, as I noted above.

6. And now, Sir, from Plato's Ideas thus amiably set forth, the Transition
methinks is very natural to Love. And concerning this I shall account in the
same Method, first, by pointing out the popular Misapprehensions about it, and
then by exhibiting a true Notion of it. Platonic Love is a thing in every
bodies Mouth, but I find scarce any that think or speak accurately of it. The
mistakes which I observe are chiefly these. Some of the grosser Understanders
suppose that Plato by his Love meant (...), the Love of Males, but the Occasion
of this Conceit was from a passage in his Convivium, where he brings in
Aristophanes speaking favorably that way. But he that shall from hence
conclude Plato a prostitute to that vile Passion, may as well conclude a
Dramatic Poet to be an Atheist or a Whore-master, because he represents those
of that Character. But that Divine Plato intended nothing less than to
countenance any such thing, is evident from the whole scope and purport of that
Dialogue, and from other places where he expressly condemns it, and rejects it
with great abhorrence; particularly in the first of his de legibus, where he
calls it (...), an unnatural attempt. Others by Platonic Love understand the
Love of Souls, and this indeed has something of truth in it, only it is much too
narrow and particular.

7. Others take Platonic Love to be a desire of imprinting any excellency,
whether moral or intellectual, in the Minds of beautiful young men by
Instruction, and so likewise of enjoying your own Perfections reflected from
the Mind of another, mixed with and recommended by the Beauty of the Body.
According to the usual saying, Gratior e Pulchro, etc. And thus Socrates was
said to love his beautiful Pupils Phaedrus and Alcibiades. Others measure the
Nature of Platonic Love, not from the Object (to which they suppose it
indifferent) but from the manner of the Act. And according to these, that man
is said to love Platonically, that does Casso delectamine amare, love at a
distance, that never designs a close fruition of the Object what ever it be,
whether Sensual or Intellectual, but chooses to dwell in the Suburbs, pleasing
himself with remote Prospects, and makes a Mistress of his own Desire. And this
is the received Notion, and that which People generally mean when they talk of
Platonic Love. But this too is far enough from the right, for tho Platonic Love
does not aim at the fruition of sensual Objects, yet it designs the fruition of
its own Object as much as any other Love does. That therefore which
distinguishes Platonic Love, is not the manner of the act abovementioned, but
the peculiarity of the Object. And what that is must be collected from the
Design of Plato in that Dialogue, where he treats purposely of it, his
Convivium. Which is briefly to show the manner of the Souls ascent to God by
love. For Plato makes the Happiness of Man to consist in the Contemplation and
Love of God, whom he calls the Idea of Beauty. But now because this Idea of
Beauty (God) is of too sublime and refined excellency to be immediately fastened
upon by our Love, he recommends to us (...), a Method of Ascent, which is from
loving the Beauty we see in Bodies, to pass on to the Love of the Beauty of the
Soul, from the Beauty of the Soul to the Beauty of Virtue, and lastly from the
Beauty of Virtue, (...), to the immense Ocean of Beauty, etc. For so have I
observed a tender Infants Eye not enduring to gaze directly upon the too
powerful Excellence of the Meridian Sun, choose to entertain it self with the
abatements of corrected and reflected Light, and take up with the feebler
refreshments of lesser Beauties for a while, till at length the faculty grows
more confirmed, and dares encounter the Sun in his Strength. And these are the
Steps of the Sanctuary. So that Platonic Love is the Love of Beauty abstracted
from all sensual Applications, and desire of corporal contract, as it leads us
on to the Love of the first original Beauty, God; or more plainly thus, The
Ascent of the Soul to the Love of the Divine Beauty, by the Love of abstracted
Beauty in Bodies. This Love of abstracted Beauty in Bodies he calls (...),
Celestial Love, in opposition to that which he calls (...), which is the same
with that Passion commonly signified by the name of Love, ( viz.) a desire of
corporal contact arising from the sight of Beauty. This last indeed is a very
vile, brutish, unmanly affection, and such as considering the vileness of our
Bodies, one would think a man could never be charmed into without the Magic of
a Love-potion. But the former is an Angelical Affection, for certainly Beauty
is a Divine thing; It is (as the Platonic Author says of Wisdom) the pure
Influence flowing from the Glory of the Almighty, and the Brightness of the
Everlasting Light: or in Plato's own Words, A Ray of God. And therefore the
Love of abstract Beauty must needs be a very generous and divine Affection.
Sir, I could be more large in my account, but I consider what it is I write, and
to whom, and therefore I think it high time to remit you to your own Thoughts,
some of which I hope will be, that I am in a very eminent degree of Friendship,

Yours J. Norris.

A Letter concerning Love and Music.
SIR,
TO the first of your Enquiries concerning the true Idea of Love, and
particularly that between Man and Woman, and wherein it stands distinguished
from Lust, my Answer in short is this. That Love may be considered either
barely as a Tendency toward good, or as a willing this good to something capable
of it. If Love be taken in the first Sense it is what we call Desire, if in the
second, it is what we call Charity or Benevolence.

2. Then as to Desire, there is either an Intellectual or a sensual desire,
which denomination is not here taken from the Faculty, but from the Quality of
the Object. That I call here an Intellectual Desire whose object is an
Intellectual good, and that a sensual desire whose object is a sensual good.
And this is that which Plato meant by his two Cupids. The latter of these is
what we call Lust.

3. But then this again signifies either abstractly and indifferently ( viz.) a
bare desire of Corporeal pleasure, or else concretely and immorally ( viz.) a
desire or longing after corporeal pleasure in forbidden and unlawful instances.

4. These things being thus briefly premised my next Resolution is this. That
the Ordinary Passion of Love, that which we mean when we say such a man or such
a woman is in Love, is no other than plain Lust, if Lust be taken according to
the first signification, namely, for a sensual Desire, or a Tendency toward a
sensual good. But if Lust be taken in the latter sense, as a Tendency to
corporeal pleasure in unlawful instances, that which our Savior meant when he
said He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, etc. then it is not necessary
that the Passion we here speak of should be Lust, because then 'twould be a sin
to be in Love, and consequently, there would be a necessity of sinning in order
to Marriage, because no man is supposed to marry but whom he thus Loves.

5. And now to your 2d Enquiry, whether Music be a Sensual or Intellectual
pleasure, before this can be determined, the Idea of a Sensual and Intellectual
pleasure must be stated.

6. And 1st I observe that the precise difference of a sensual pleasure cannot
consist in this, that the Body be pleased or gratefully affected, nor of an
Intellectual that the Mind be pleased. For by reason of the strict union of
Soul and Body, one so sympathizes with the other, that these pleasures are
always Mutual and complicated. So that there is no pleasure of mind that does
not also recreate the Body, and no pleasure of Body but whereof the Mind has
its share. And thus far there is agreement and reciprocation. That then which
is peculiar and discriminative must be taken from the Primaryness or
Secondaryness of the Perception. That Pleasure therefore is an Intellectual
Pleasure when the Soul is primarily and immediately affected, and the Body only
secondarily and by participation. And that is a sensual pleasure when the Body
is primarily and immediately affected, and the Soul only secondarily and by
participation.

7. Now according to this Measure we must of necessity define the pleasure of
hearing Music to be properly Intellectual. Because the Soul is the part that is
then primarily and immediately affected, and the Body only by result. And that
for this evident Reason, because Music consisting formally in Proportion, and
Proportion pleasing only as understood, that part must be primarily and
directly pleased which is capable of understandiug. But this is not the Body
but the Soul. It Is true indeed the ear may be directly pleased by a single
sound, as the eye is recreated by a single Color (suppose green) and this I
grant to be a pleasure of sense as much as smelling or tasting, tho not so
gross. But the Ear may no more properly be said to be pleased with the
Proportion of sounds, or with sounds as proportionate, than the eye is with a
Picture.

8. If it be here objected, that Music is a pleasure of Sense because it is
conveyed by the Ear, I reply that if this be sufficient to make a Pleasure
Sensual, the most Intellectual pleasures we are here capable of may be called
Sensual, as reading fine discourses, contemplating the Beauty of the Creation,
attending to Mathematical Diagrams and the like, because all these as well as
Music are enjoyed by the Mediation of the Senses.

9. But it matters not tho the Senses be the Instruments of conveyance, so the
Soul be the part directly and primarily affected, which is the case here. For
tho the Ear may be pleased with those single sounds which with relation to each
other are really Harmonical, yet it is not, it cannot be pleased with them as
such, or in that Formality. This is the sole Privilege of the Mind, which as
it can only judge of, so is it only capable of being pleased with Harmony.

10. And thus Sir you have my sentiments with as much Brevity and Clearness as
I could use, and it may be, as the Matters would bear. I have now nothing
further to add, but to renew the assurances of my being

Your Friend and Servant J. N.

A Letter concerning Friendship.
SIR,
1. TO your Question whether in propriety of speaking there may be strict
Friendship between a man and his wife, I answer first that the solution of this
Question depends upon another, ( viz.) what are the Requisites essentially
necessary to the Exercise of Friendship, and this Question likewise depends
upon another, ( viz.) what is the true Notion or Idea of Friendship. This being
rightly stated, 'twill be easy to discern what are the essential Requisites,
and consequently whether Man and Wife are capable Terms in this Relation or no.

2. Now as to the Idea of Friendship, I answer first in general, that
Friendship is nothing else but Benevolence or Charity under some certain
Modifications or accidental circumstances. Accidental I mean as to Charity, tho
necessary and essential to Friendship. And thus far I think all Moralists are
agreed. But now what these certain Modifications are, here they begin to be
divided. 'Twould be too tedious a work to insist here upon the variety of other
men's Opinions, and therefore I shall only briefly deliver my own, which is,
that all the Modifications of Charity necessary to the constitution of
Friendship may be well enough reduced to these three. 1. That it be in a
special manner intense, 2ly, that it be mutual, and 3ly that it be manifest or
mutually known. Charity when clothed with these three Modifications immediately
commences Friendship. More than these it need not have, but of these not one
may be spared, as will easily appear if you examine them severally.

3. Now from this Idea of Friendship it is very obvious to deduce what are the
Requisites necessary to Friendship, not in reference to its Idea (for that is
already stated) but in reference to its Existence or actual Exercise, that is
in one word, what are those Dispositions or Aptnesses in the Subject whether as
to person, state or condition, which may render it capable of Friendship
according to the forementioned Idea. Now I say what these are may be easily
collected from the Idea it self, as will appear if we consider it distinctly
according to those three Modifications, and by applying the genus to each of
them. For 1st whereas Friendship is said to be Charity in a special manner
intense, hence I collect 1st, that it cannot be but between good men, because
an ill man cannot have any true Charity, much less such an intense degree of it
as is requisite to Friendship. So that Virtue in general is one Requisite. 2ly,
hence I collect that a Friend must not be only according to the Character Lucan
gives of Cato -- rigidi servator honesti, rigidly virtuous and honest, but he
must be also (...), a man of a liberal, sweet, obliging temper, one of those
good men of whom it is said in Scripture (by way of contradistinction to the
Righteous or rigidly honest) that some would even dare to dye for them. For tho
I may have common Charity, nay more, a great Esteem for a man of plain honesty
and integrity, yet I can never love him with that special intenseness of
Affection which belongs to Friendship, unless he be also of a beneficent, kind
and obsequious temper. So that good nature is another requisite. 3ly, hence I
collect that there must be also (at least in a competent proportion) an
agreeableness of humors and manners, for unless the materials be of an apt and
correspondent figure, the building can neither be compact nor lasting, so that
likeness of disposition is another Requisite. 4. hence I collect that true
Friendship cannot be among many. For since our faculties are of a finite
energy, it is impossible our love can be very intense when divided among many.
No, the rays must be contracted to make them burn. So that another Requisite
is, that the Terms of* this Relation be few in Number.

4. These are all the Requisites that I can think of at present deducible from
the first part of the Idea ( viz. Charity in a special manner intense) As for
fidelity in retaining secrets, constancy of Adherence and the like, I think
they are vertually included in the first Requisite, it being hardly conceivable
how a man can be good and virtuous that wants them. But if you think the
Reduction not so obvious, you may if you please add them here in the fifth
place as distinct Requisites, 'twill be all one. Thus far of the Requisites
deducible from the first part.

5. To proceed. Whereas it is further said that Friendship is a Benevolence
that is Mutual, there is but one general Requisite deducible from this, which
is, that all the other be found in both (or if more) in all the persons
supposed to be Friends. The third of which importing Relation will of necessity
be so, for all Similitude is mutual. Lastly, whereas it is said that Friendship
is a Benevolence mutually known, all that will be Requisite upon this head is,
that the Persons who are to be confederated in this union, have such
opportunities of Converse or Correspondence, that they may be satisfied of the
Degree and Reality of each others love.

6. Having thus stated the Idea of Friendship, and from thence deduced all the
necessary qualifications in the subject for its entertainment, I think I may
now from the Premises venture to affirm that there may be strict Friendship
between Man and Wife. For which of these Requisites is it that they must
necessarily want? As for your Objection taken from their inequality, I grant
Equality is wanting both as to Sex and as to Conjugal Relation, but neither is
all Equality necessary. It Is not absolutely necessary that Friends should stand
upon a Level, either in respect of Fortune, State or Condition. This sort of
Equality I grant is a good Preparative for a more easy Introduction of
Friendship, and it is also advantageous to the lastingness of it, but yet it is
dispensable. It Is like levelling the ground betwixt two rivers, it makes way
for a more easy union, but yet it is possible from Earthquakes, Floods or other
contingencies they may be united without it. The only equality that is
necessary is an equality of dispositions, an harmony of affections, but this
may be in persons of unequal fortunes and conditions. I confess, there can be
no such thing as Friendship between persons of different quality if the
Superior takes advantage of his pre-eminence or Authority, for then it is true
what the Poet says, Si vis Sexte coli, non amabo.

7. But then it is not the being invested with superiority that is inconsistent
with Friendship (for then Kings who have no equals but those of other Kingdom's
with whom they cannot intimately converse, would be the miserablest Creatures
alive) but the habitual use and exercise of it, and the standing upon its
privileges.

8. But there is no necessity that it should be so. Friendship may level those
whom Fortune has made unequal, and the greatest Monarch in the world may find
Opportunities to descend from the throne of majesty to the familiar Caresses of
a dear Favorite, and unking himself a while for the more glorious title of
Friend. It Is but to apply this to the particular case in hand, and you have a
Solution to your Question. And now Sir from the Theory of Friendship I shall
most readily descend to the Practice of it when ever you please to employ the
service of

(Dear Sir) Your most real Friend and Servant J. Norris.

The Copy of a Letter written to my Friend F. B. concerning the death of my
dear Niece M. C.
My dear Friend,
1. SInce it is one of the happinesses of Friendship to Communicate sorrow as
well as to share in joy, that the one may be increased and the other
diminished, I cannot but betake my self to this easy refuge, being at present
in such a condition, as will need more relief and support than I can either
give to my self, or receive from others.

2. The truth is, should I indulge my passion, I might find perhaps as much
cause as he that did it, to curse the day of my Nativity. My pretty little dear
Niece and Scholar, she whom I loved, admired and delighted in, she for whose
sake I once thought life, as now I think death a Blessing, she (how shall I
bring out that dismal word) -- is dead.

3. She is, and has left a strange emptiness in my Soul (so large was the room
she took up there) which nothing of this world's good can ever fill. I must
needs own that I never was so deeply affected with any trouble in my life, nor
did I ever think that it could be in the power of any temporal loss so much to
discompose and unspirit my Soul. It is not a transient gust of passion, which
like a little cloud would either soon blow over, or spend it self in a
momentary shower, but it is with my mind as with the face of the sky when it is
all set to rain. Were it only an affection of the sensitive and Animal part, it
would soon vanish like the phantastic colors of the Rainbow, but my grief is
of a more malignant kind, and penetrates even into the very Center of my Soul.
It Is lodged (as Lipsius I remember emphatically phrases it) in ipsa animi
mente, it is an ingrain'd, rational and Judicious sorrow.

4. I lament not on her account (for I cannot, without reflecting upon the
divine goodness, question the happy state of one who was nothing but innocence
and sweetness) but purely upon my own. And that I do in such a measure that --
but it is in vain to go about to express it, for I loved her as I loved my own
Soul, and however my sorrow may be blamed for her now, yet I Am sure my love for
her could not.

5. For she was a person (and you know I am not over-prone to admire) so
peculiarly accomplished, as if Nature had designed nothing else in her
composition but to make one on purpose to be beloved. As for her outward form,
she was one of the studied and elaborate pieces of Nature, and by the very air
of her Countenance was marked out for an extraordinary Soul to inhabit in. Nor
was the Jewel unworthy of the case, for certainly she had as excellent a Spirit
(one only excepted) as ever condescended to wear human flesh. Her parts were
miraculous and extraordinary, so extraordinary, that had not the youth and
verdancy of her face contradicted the ripeness of her discoursings, you would
have thought her well in years.

6. And tho Art had little more to do where Nature had been so eminently
liberal, yet so Covetuous was she as well as Capable of improvement, as if she
meant to grasp all manner of knowledge, and leave nothing to a future state to
add to her accomplished Soul. And indeed it is too incredible to be related,
considering the shortness of the time (for her pulse had not beat thirteen
years) what a wondrous progress her active Soul had made. Thus far only I shall
venture in general, that had she lived to be as ripe in years as she was in
parts and ingenious seize, she would have been the envy of her Sex, and
the wonder of Mankind.

7. But yet the former of these would have been much abated by her admirable
sweetness and good nature. A Quality as of it self most excellent, so that
wherein she most excelled. And here I must beg leave of all that I ever
conversed with to declare, that I never observed in any, such a free, generous,
obliging and disinteress'd temper, which mightily sweetened and recommended her
parts, and made her not only admirable, but lovely.

8. And besides all this there were in her (as in Poetry) many errantes
abditaeque veneres, wandering and hidden graces that want a name, and
unexpressible Prettinesses, which yet were strangely moving, and of a charming
influence. I am not conscious to my self of any partial fondness, or Rhetorical
affectation in any one part of this Character, but as near as I can do speak
the genuin, unprejudiced sense of my Soul. I hate to flatter the living, much
more the dead, whose names are as sacred to me as their sepulchers. My only
fault here (if any) is in the defect, for she was as much too good to be
sufficiently commended, as to be long enjoyed.

9. And now (setting aside that particular respect which she ever blessed and
honored me with) how can I choose but be very passionately concerned for the
loss of such a rare and every way accomplished person! I cannot, and methinks
when I survey the sudden ruin of my pleasant, but shortliv'd gourd, I can
hardly forbear justifying my grief as the enraged Prophet did his Anger, and
like him am tempted to say, I do well to be sorrowful.

10. But I must not be so ill a Pilot as now the floods of Passion arise to
throw away my tackling, commit my Vessel to the winds, and run along with the
tempest; satis naturae datum est, jam and Ratio suum asserat Principatum. For
my ship begins to be covered with the waves, and therefore it is now high time
to awake Reason from her dead sleep, that she may rebuke the winds and the Sea,
that they may be calm and still. It Is dangerous to indulge any longer, the
tumult of the Passions runs high, and the unruly Faction presses hard upon the
gate of the Palace, it is therefore time for the Sovereign Faculty to come forth
in her imperial robes, and suppress the mutiny.

11. In order therefore to the quieting of my passions, and the resettlement of
my discomposed Soul, I consider, First, that grief is the most absurd and
senseless of all the Passions, yea of all the things in the world, and utterly
unbecoming a Creature that makes the least pretension to Reason. Because it is
resolvable into no rational Principle; for whatever is so must be, or at least
appear to be either an End or a Means. But this can pretend to neither. Not to
be end, for nothing is so but what is good, but this is in no respect good, and
in many respects evil. Not to be a Means, because it effects nothing, but is
altogether vain and fruitless. And indeed it cannot but be so, because it is of
a thing past, which even to Omnipotence it self is impossible to be altered.
Our other Passions are to some purpose, and aim at some end. Love to enjoy,
Anger to revenge, Fear to avoid, and the like; But this Passion, grief, serves
to no end or purpose in the world, and it cannot be its own end because (as I
said before) it is in no respect good. It is therefore utterly absurd and
unreasonable.

12. Again I consider, that suppose grief were not so vain and ineffective a
thing as it is, but that it could make some alteration in things, yet it cannot
alter any one event for the better, and therefore to what purpose should I
indulge it? For since we acknowledge a Being of an infinite Wisdom, Power and
Goodness to sit at the Helm of the universe, it must be conseq^uently
acknowledged that the course of this world is steered to the best advantage of
the whole, and however ignorant we may be how to justify particular
Phenomena's, yet we must (if we will be consistent with our former concession)
at least implicitly believe that all things are as well as they can possibly
be. Certain it is (whatever some Malcontents may think) the world is governed
with as much wisdom as 'twas made, and as the natural world stood the test of
the divine Criticism, so will the Moral one too. God upon review would
pronounce this as good as he did the other, and why should not we? yea we
should, if we could see this excellent Drama from end to end as he does; we
should then discern that all those dispensations which separately taken appear
harsh and unequal, yet in Concatenation and together conspire to the Beauty and
Interest of the whole. This will be our portion hereafter, in the mean time
'twill be our greatest wisdom to trust that of God, and believe that implicitly
as to the thing, which we cannot discern as to the manner. And this I take to
be the most rational foundation of Resignation and Acquiescence in the divine
pleasure, which is grounded upon a Consideration of his infinite Wisdom and
Goodness. When we resolve our wills into his merely for this reason, because we
pay so much deference to his perfections, as to think, that if we knew as much
as he, we should not wish things to be otherwise than they are. And this is
highly specified in the Saints in Heaven, who through that near and intimate
view which they have of God's perfections are so entirely conformable to his
will, that they can dispense not only with the eternal loss but damnation of
their friends without the least grief or resentment. I confess, this eminency
of resignation is no more attainable in this life than any other part of
Celestial happiness, but yet an heedful and attentive meditation of this
Argument may do much toward it; And however difficult it be to reduce it to
Practice, yet it is most certain in the Theory that granting the superintendency
of an infinite and unprejudiced understanding, and that every calamity is (as
Euripides somwhere calls it) (...) sent from God, to grieve at any misfortune
is to grieve that things are as they should be. Which is one would think, too
absurd for him to be guilty of who is defined to be a Rational Creature.

13. Again I consider, that as that which I call an affliction is (as certainly
as God is Wise and Good) for the best in reference to the whole Systeme of
things, so for all that I know it may be most conducive to my interest in
particular. In as much as by it I may either obtain a greater good, or avoid a
greater evil. Thus a Shipwreck made Zeno a Philosopher, and the Messenger of
Satan proved and Antidote to the great Apostle against pride and vanity of
Spirit. And perhaps there was in me some evil and unmortify'd quality or other
of so malignant a nature that it could not be cured by a less severe
Application. For certainly God is not so ill a Physician as not to weigh the
Ingredients of his bitter Cup, before he mingles it into a draught, that it may
be proportionable to the strength of the disease as well as of the Patient.

14. Again I consider, that as this affliction may be one of the Arrows of
love, and in the designation of God be intended for my particular good, so it is
most certain that by wise conduct I may extract good out of it if I will, and
turn it to my greater advantage. Plato I remember somwhere compares the life of
man to a game at Tables. And indeed the comparison is worthy the wisdom of its
Author, and full of mystic and important truth. For as there what Cast we shall
have is not in our power, but to manage it well, that is. So is it with man in
the concerns of life. 'Twas not in my power whether this Affliction should
befall me or not, but it is in my power to manage it for my advantage now it has
befallen me. I can use it as an Opportunity of showing my Virtue, as an
Occasion of withdrawing my affections from the world confidering the
uncertainty of the best objects in it, of increasing my love to God, and his
love to me here, and his rewards to me hereafter. And to this purpose I
consider the story of Abraham, who for his readiness to part with his beloved
Son at the demand of God, became the Favorite and Friend of his maker, and
obtained this emphatical promise from him, In blessing I will bless thee.

15. Again I consider, that although by the loss of this excellent Creature a
great breach be made upon my happiness, yet the remainder of what I enjoy is
much greater than the evil which I suffer, so that upon the whole the Scale
weighs down for happiness. My Condition is still better than that of many
others, who yet think themselves happy. And therefore for me to pine and lament
because I am not so happy as I was, or may be, becomes neither the Philosophy
of a Scholar, nor the Humility of a Christian, and upon the same Principle I
may continue to lament even when I am in Heaven. Rather let me adore the bounty
of God for filling my Cup so full, than be discontented because it does not run
over.

16. Again I consider with the great Apostle that the time is short, and that
therefore I should weep as if I wept not. 'Twill not be long e're I shall enjoy
the Beatific Vision of God and (if after that the fruition of any Creature can
be of any moment) the Society of even this dear person. In the mean while I
have one Artifice more whereby to solace my self, and that is, by entertaining
the same apprehension of what I enjoy as I should do if I did not enjoy it. I
think with my self, how miserable I should be if I wanted several of those
Blessings which I have, particularly if I had not been bred a Scholar, and
thereby been qualified to be my own Comforter. And by virtue of this
Consideration I set a higher value upon what I enjoy, and consequently find the
less miss of what I do not.

17. This is my Consolatio Philosophica, whereby I allay and fix the violent
fermentation of my Passions. To which I might add many popular Arguments, as
that it is as natural to dye as to be born, that it is incident not only to man
but to the whole Creation, the fashion of this world passes away, that it is
envious to think that our loss which is our friend's gain, that occasions of
grief in this world are many, and therefore not singly to be much lamented,
that it is a shame for Reason not to be able to conquer that which must at
length yield to time, and the like. But these I shall be content only to
mention, partly because I don't fancy much to be Topical, and partly because I
think my other supports strong enough to bear the stress of the most weighty
sorrow.

18. And now the result of all these considerations is this. I am fully and
entirely satisfied with the accomplishment of the divine pleasure, and tho
before 'twas my hearty prayer that (if possible) this Cup might pass from me,
yet I now as cheerfully subscribe to the other clause, Nevertheless not as I
will but as thou will. I am thoroughly convinced both of the absurdity and
undecency of my former sorrow, and tho not so much a Stoic as to condemn all
the passions, yet I do this of grief as freely as any of that rigid School, and
therefore will no longer defile my self for the Dead. Lev. 21. 1. If any grief
can be now reasonable, it must be because I have grieved so much, for I am
conscious that I have thereby exceedingly betrayed the greatness of my Soul.
Homer indeed thought it not unworthy the Character of his great Hero Achilles
to bring him in passionately bewailing the death of Patro^clus. His expression
(as I remember) is (...) he wept hideously. But certainly our Savior was of
another mind, when he said to his Disciples upon the occasion of his own death
(and certainly if any thing could justify sorrow that would) Let not your
hearts be troubled.

19. But yet after all I must needs say, tho I have pretty well by this time
argued my passions into a Calm, that it is a great venture to love any thing
well in this world, and that I am resolved for the sake of this dear person
never to engage my passions very far in the love of any thing again. Quicquid
amas cupias non placuisse nimis shall be my Motto as long as I live, and I will
follow the excellent rule of the Royal Philosopher M. Antoninus, (...), and
reduce my self as near as I can to a simplicity, and delight in as few things
as may be. So shall I more undividedly adhere to my last and best end, and lie
less at the mercy of fortune.

20. But (Sir) however I contract my love, you may assure your self of the same
room you ever had in the affections of

Your true Friend J. Norris.

FINIS.

