AN ANSWER TO A LATE SCVRRILOVS AND SCANDALOVS PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The
Downfall of old Common Council men.

NOR a tun

printer's device of one of the Nortons

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

An Answer to a late scurrillous and scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, The
Downfall of old Common Council men, etc.
THe unparaleld Liberty assumed in Printing Unlicenced Pamphlets is of late
grown so exorbitant, that many take it for granted, that it is even lawful
for them to vent by the Press, whatsoever they think may please their own,
and other men's Fantasies, that are ejusdem farinae, of the like condition with
them; of which sort (among the rest) they conceive, that nothing will be more
acceptable to such kind of people, then that which traduceth Governors or
Government.

Of this kind, lately has been published a most base and scurrillous (I might
well have said a Libellous and scandalous) Pamphlet, under the Title of The
Downfall of old Common Council men. The Title page whereof, together with the
Pamphlet it self, contains as many untruths as lines; the difference in Title
and Pamphlet being only this, that the first has all that malice can utter,
bare-ly set down in it; and the other is flourished with sustian words, and
some shreds of the Latin, but more of the lying tongue, in which it seems the
Author is best versed: both of them being fitter for the draught then the
Stationers stall.

And indeed this Answer to it had been better spared then framed ( a clean
whip being the proper Answer for him) but that perhaps, if the Pamphlet had
been permitted to pass in silence, it might have been taken (by some of his
strain that made it, or by strangers to the Government of this City) pro
confesso, that all which the Pamphleter had said, were true: whereas there is
not one word in it that has any alliance with Truth.

It may be well and truly averred, that this Pamphleter is true heir to his
father, that from the beginning was a liar: and brother to him that for 30.
pieces of silver betrayed his Master, though they were of more value then those
30. which this poor conditioned fellow received for betraying his own malice
and the Cities government, being but pence at the most, and they too much too.

But not to spend more pains and paper upon him, let us take a view of this h^s
good^y piece, for to bestow much time or labor to answer a fool in his folly,
were but folly, as the Wiseman speaks. Were it ^ot therefore, more to vindicate
the government of the City, and the credit of those upon whom his foul
aspersions and scandals are laid by him, this labor might well have bin
spared: yet seeing his impudence in averring such falsities is so great, as
that perhaps some of his own garb, and strangers to the state of the City, may
be too much possessed by him, we shall descend a little lower then otherwise
might be thought fit.

To begin then with him, and first with his Title page, wherein first he has
prefixed his Title, which he calls, The downfall of old Common Council men,
which (for our better conceiving what he means by it) he tells us, that it was
their great Repulse at Guild Hall upon a Friday (I take it the 34. of January)
by the Committee, who extruded the Old out of their corrupted Offices, and
elected new in their Places. And in the next place promises (much and performs
nothing) to show their manifold corruptions and unequal Taxations, which they
imposed chiefly on their poor Parishioners, and connived on the Rich, being
too common an abuse by them. Then exactly describing, how they have oft-times
robbed the poor of their due, and deteyned the Charity of other men from them,
and have put it up in their own purses. And in the last place, (because there
were not untruths sufficient before) he will show the manner of their
Arraignment at Guild Hall, with the Cause of their downfall, and the others
uprising.

Certainly here is a grievous Charge, and I doubt not but we shall have it
abundantly proved in the ensuing discourse, if it prove not like the German
Mercury, whose Title page contains more, or as much as the book it self. But
if you will be a little patient, you shall hear the Pamphlets charge, with a
brief answer, as also the proofs, which are so many, that I fear they will
never be disproved.

In the Preamble of his Pamphlet, this shameless fellow is so arrogant, as to
call men of good and unspotted reputation, and that have well deserved of the
City for their industry, counsel and integrity, Corrupt streams, that either
have hindered the pure current, or at least have contaminated the clear
fountain of Justice, and (as if this had not been enough) the Beetle head has
bestowed upon them the name of Beetles, (for so is his Scarabeus in the Latin.)
So that in the very front he has placed two of his Lyveries for them,
Corruption and Ignorance.

Now the Multiformity of their vices (as he is pleased to speak) he has most
Methodically contracted into three Branches;

1. The cause of their Corruptions, 2. The variety of their Corruptions. 3. The
cause of those numerous Varieties.
I. The cause of the first he impudently assigns to their Ambition and
Arrogance. Now wherein their Ambition consisted, neither he expresses, nor can
it be well conceived. If labor, time, or charge (the three Concomitants of a
Common Council man) be incitements or provocations to make a man Ambitious,
then I will not deny this man to be in the right: but neither of these
certainly can be any allurements to m^ke a man ambitious (especially of such a
place, or when he is in it to make a man corrupt) therefore we may well free
them from that scandal. But yet arrogant they may be: and I pray why? He
tells us, they did tyrannically insult over others, who if they would not
submissively subscribe to their opinions, were immediately involved in the
Catalogue of their inveterate malice. Truly Tenterden steeple was the cause of
Goodwin sands. And if this learned Latinist can make this Conclusion; They are
malicious, therefore Arrogant, he has a new Logique which Ramus nor Seton
never heard of.

II. Now because (as he says) the variety their of corruptions are manifold,
nay infinite, and because he will not trespass upon the readers patience, he
will (most learnedly) compendiate the multiplicity thereof, and collect them
into some few branches of their abuses.

1. The unpardonable abuse of the poor Parishioners, which cries loud in the
ears of God and man, especially it being grounded upon spleen in assessing,
and against law in prosecuting them.

2. Their second abuse in assessing (tending to Emulation) the poor, equal
with the rich, and sometimes more, against Equity and Ju^^ice.

3. Their common practice in the disparity of their impositions, e^^cting most
where they pleased, without any respect of Justice, even to insulting
perfection.

4. Their connivence to the Rich, in excusing them, and making the poor to pay
for them, Which cries for necessary and urgent Justice against them; because
they take from those that have nothing or very little, and adding to those that
have all, or a^ least the greatest. Nay, their offense is so vicious in this
regard, that he blusheth, or at least is ashamed to add any further a
constructive addition to their contriving Malignity.

5. The last. In saving themselves from all payments whatsoever, and whosoever
poor or rich paid, they themselves paid nothing: Yea, sometimes they would
deteyne money too, and put it into their purses, being content pocket up such
wrongs. So that the meanest of the Parish did yearly pay more then the
chiefest of them.

3. In the last place you shall have him tell you, what was the Cause of those
numerous varieties of corruptions.

1. The general and prime cause was their too licentious liberty in committing
them without contradiction.

2. The second was the non-annuall election of them: So that within these fair
branches of his, are contained the Charge. The particulars whereof are crying
sins, Spleen, Injustice, evil Conscience, Partiality and Connivence, Cruelty
to the poor, Malignitie, Robbing the poor, and favoring themselves, even to
the saving of all charges and taxes.

Could either Impudence or Malice it self have said more and proved less,
then this scurrilous Pamphleter has? Has he all this while alleged any
particular ptoose, or so much as given any one instance to prove that which he
has thus impudent-ly affirmed? Truly, No. And why? Because Dolosus versatur in
generalibus. He that intends to raise slanders, and cast aspersions upon them
that deserve them not, has no other way to evade, then by traducing in
generals: If he had meant to have dealt fairly and heartily, he would at
least have instanced one example, to prove every several imputation. But this
he knew he could not do.

Let us come a little nearer to him. I would feign know of him, what
Assessments there are, wherein any Common Council man has more power then
many other in each Ward that are joined with them. Sure I am, that neither in
Subsidies not Fifteenes he has not any. And for the Assessments to the poor,
he that has less Latin then this Pamphleter would seem to have, can tell,
that the laws of the Land have appointed others, and not Common Council men,
to assesse them. As for exempting themselves from paying that which they are
assessed at, I believe he would be as far short in proving it, if he were put
to it, as he would be to prove himself an honest man. For it may be boldly
affirmed, and as easily proved by all Records of the City, public and private,
that all Common Council men ever paid their full proportion to all taxes and
levyes whatsoever, Nay, more then many better men of estate then themselves;
and why? eo nomine, because they were Common Council men, as if some revenues
were annexed to their places: for him therefore to aver, that whosoever paid,
Common Council men paid nothing, what can be more impudent? What Charity they
have received, quatenus Common Council men from others, and put it into their
own purses, he might have instanced, but it may well be affirmed, that he
knows of none; If he do, he should have nominated him, that he might have
been branded nigro Carbone: and if there be any such, he did it not in
relation to the Common Council, but as a private man, upon private trust, and
therefore not to be imputed to his Office.

Will you look back upon his learned and juditious assignment of the Causes
of the numerous varieties of corruptions? They are two. 1. Their too licentious
committing them without contradiction. This indeed is a true conjecture, for if
they have been so corrupt as he would make them, and they have been so far
from correction, as not to be contradicted, Certainly if they were bad one
year, they would be much worse the next, for vitia transmittit ad posteros,
qui praesentibus culpis ignoscit. But they having not so much as any tentations
to corruption incident to their places, nor having committed the least offense
which this Pamphleter impudently upon his own bare assertion lays to their
charge, for what should they be contradicted?

The second cause is, their Non-annuall Election of them, he would have said of
others in their rooms. To this they may be answered; That if they were faulty
in any of the Crimes objected by him, there were great reason for it, but if
they be clear, then none so fit to serve the City as they, which are
experienced and versed in the affairs of it.

To come briefly to his Close, which is; That these precedent particulars being
ma^urely and s^riously considered and revolved by the City, All the old Common
Council men were arraigned by the Citizens, and a select Committee appointed
to regulate these abuses. And being accused, they were found so inexcusable
delinquent and peccant, that they were incontinently excluded from their
corrupt Offices, and new Common Council men elected in their places.

To this I say, That his Conclusion comes not short of his premises. It is a
short one, but stuffed with as many untruths as lines, as the rest of his
Pamphlet. As first, There was no Arraignment of any; and I doubt of the power
of that Committee (he speaks of) to arraigne men; neither are any of the
Crimes he scandalously alleges Capital, and so out of compass of
arraignment. Secondly, by his own words, they were but to regulate abuses; nor
do I conceive they had so much power: They were (in this case) but to examine
and report the validity of Elections, to the Common Council, not to examine
and regulate abuses, of any Old Common Council men. Thirdly, if all the old
were delinquent and peccant, how comes it that some continue in their places
still, and are upon that Committee which he mentions? Fourthly, There were none
accused or found delinquent, nor excluded from their corrupt Offices, nor new
chosen in their places: where by the way one learned passage of the Pamphleter
is to be observed (excluded from their corrupt Offices) whereby it appears
that it was not the persons only, but the Offices which were corrupt too, and
then the New had little cause to thank them for putting them into them.

To conclude all (being sorry I have troubled you and my self so much already)
I shall say no more, but that it is much to be feared, that this fellow, either
out of need, distemper of brain, or a natural inclination to rail against
Authority, will be so far transported e're leng, that he will not rest
here, but do some further Act, for which he will be exalted further upward,
then any Common Council man has yet fallen downward. And in the mean time it
is to be hoped, that the Justice of the State will take some order with him,
(not to his liking) for that which he has most scandalously done in this.

FINIS.

