MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS To be used before, at, and after the Receiving of the
HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER.

LONDON: Printed for N. W. Anno Dom. 1682.

PRAYERS To be used at the HOLY SACRAMENT.
At your first kneeling down, say,
O LORD, I am not fit nor worthy thou should come under that filthy Roof of
the House of my Soul, because it is wholly Desolate and Ruinous, neither have
thou with me a fit place to lay thy Head; but as thou did vouchsafe to be
laid in a Stable and Manger of Unreasonable Beasts, as thou did not disdain
to be entertained in the house of Simon the Leaper, as thou did not reject
the Harlot coming, nor yet the Thief on the Cross confessing thee; even so
Vouchsafe to admit me also a miserable, and out of measure sinful Creature, to
the Receiving of the most pure and saving Mysteries of thy Holy Body and
precious Blood: and the Good Lord pardon every one that prepares his Heart to
seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. O My God, I know my own unworthiness, yet in the
multitude of thy Mercies I humbly approach thine Altar, beseeching thee not to
behold me with a severe, but Gracious Eye; thou know the earnest desire of
my Soul, be thou pleased to pass by the weakness of the Flesh, and assist me
with thy most Holy Spirit, and grant that I may Receive this Sacrament to the
Honor and glory of thy great Name, and the good Comfort and Salvation of my
own Soul.

Grant this Holy Father for the sake of thy Blessed Son my only Savior, in
whose name and Words I beg this mercy, and what else thou know needful for
me;

OUR Father etc. A Confession.
O Almighty God, I thy poor sinful Creature, full of Anguish and Confusion for
my Offenses against thy Majesty, do make bold to come to thee, because thou art
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and for his sake inclinable to show us
Mercy; Thou art the Maker of me and of all things, and thou hate nothing that
thou have made; Thou have pity on all the works of thy hands, so that I am
encouraged to make my Supplications unto thee, O thou Judge, of all men, for it
is in thy Power for ever to acquit or condemn me; I tremble and am ashamed to
be found a Sinner against so infinite Power and Goodness; but I must not add
Hypocricie to my Disobedience; Therefore I acknowledge freely, and bewail most
bitterly my manifold offenses of all kinds, from the least of my Sins, to the
greatest of my Crimes and wickednesses; all and every one of which I long, and
frequently from time to time, with many provoking aggravations most grieviously
have committed: Lord, who can tell how often I have offended by Thoughts, in vain
and Evil Imaginations? by Words, in false and uncharitable Speeches? In Deed,
by ungodly intemperate Actions; For alas! by all and every one of these ways I
have daily Sinned against thy Divine Majesty, turning thereby thy loving
kindness into displeasure, and provoking thee to Anger; I have given thee cause
most Justly to let loose thy wrath and Indignation against me to my utter
ruin; If thy Mercy do not help me, my Guilt is evident, my Danger apparent,
and my estate is most deplorable; wherefore, I do most passionately and
earnestly Repent that ever I did commit them, and I am heartily sorry with all
my Soul, for these my so many, and so abominable misdoings. When I look upon
the baseness and the presumption of these vile offenses, the remembrance of
them does pierce my heart, with shame and sorrow, and is most grievous unto me;
when I behold thy Favor which I have forfeited, and Eternal Damnation which I
have deserved thereby, the burden of them presses down my Soul with a load of
terror and amazement that is intolerable; yet since thou call all who are
heavy laden, I must not despair of thy pity; but in this great distress I do
beseech thee to have Mercy upon me; and since my necessity forces me to be
Importunate, I will cry again have Mercy on me. I know thou art a most Merciful
Father, though by my Sins I am much unworthy to be called thy Child, yet I hope
thy Bowels will yern upon me, I Lie prostrate and helpless, begging of thee for
thy Dearly Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and by the Merits of
his Cross and Passion, to forgive me freely and fully all that is past from the
beginning of my Life till this very moment; Lord make me an instance of thy
Mercy, and grant when I have received so excellent and so undeserved a favor,
that I may be so engaged thereby, as that for ever hereafter, I may beware of
falling back into the like sin and misery. Convert me I beseech thee, as well
as pardon me, and enable me most obediently to serve, and most entirely to
please thee, by spending the rest of my Life in newness of Life and all Holy
conversation; which through the help of thy Grace, I do here Vow and Resolve
upon, That this mighty change may tend to the Honor and Glory of thy Name who
have so wonderfully delivered me; all which I most heartily beg, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whose intercession for me do thou say, Amen, and it shall
be according to thy Word,

Amen.
The ADDRESS.
HOly God, thou might justly wonder to see such a grievous sinner daring to
come so near, but I do not impudently rush upon these dreadful Mysteries, nor
do I presume to come to this thy Table where Angels do attend, as if I'deserved
this honor; O merciful Lord God, I do not approach, trusting in my own
Righteousness, for alas, I have done nothing which can bear that name; but that
which drew me hither was my confidence in thy Manifold and Great Mercies, which
exceed my Manifold and Great Offenses; and now that I am before thee, I must
still confess what ever Favors thy Goodness heaps upon me, that I am not
worthy by reason of my sinfulness and backslidings, so much as with the Dogs,
to gather up the Crumbs that fall under thy Table, nor fit to receive the least
Mercies or Measure of Grace from thee, much less to sit as a Guest, before thy
Majesty, at this Heavenly Feast; but yet I make bold to do this, because thou
art not to be changed by our sins, being ever the same Lord, whose property is
to be unwearied in well-doing, and never wanting in Mercy. Thou art wont always
to have Mercy on those who confess their Offenses, grant unto me gracious Lord,
by the present assistance of thy holy Spirit, so to Eat the Flesh of thy dear
Son Jesus Christ, Spiritually, in this Sacrament, and so to Drink his Blood, as
that I may receive all the benefit of his Cross and Passion, even that my
sinful and defiled Body may be made clean with his Holy and Immaculate Body,
and my Soul which is polluted in every faculty, washed, through his most
precious Blood which takes away the Sins of the World. Let me be so wholly
purified, that I may now begin to be inseparably united to Jesus, and that I,
by Faith, may evermore dwell in him, abiding in his Love, and that by his
Spirit he may dwell in me always,

Amen.
A Prayer for Purity.
O Almighty God, whose power is Terrible to all that approach thee with
polluted Souls, because thou art the Majesty unto whom the Thoughts and
Imaginations of all hearts are open and apparent, all desires and Wishes after
any evil are known and evident, and the God from whom no secrets in word or
deed are hid, or by any policy can be concealed. The Remembrance of my Impurity
makes me fear to draw near to thee till I have Implored thee (who alone art
able to keep me therein) to cleanse and purge out all the evil, which are so
commonly the Guests of my Heart, lest they provoke thy pure Eyes to pass me by
with this abhorrence, and deprive me of the comfort and benefit of this
Communion.

Blessed Lord, prepare thy Lodging in my Soul, by the Inspiration of those pure
thoughts and Heavenly desires which are the fruit of thy Holy Spirit, and the
Harbingers of the King of Glory, that I may, as it is my unfeigned desire, at
all times, and above all things, most sincerely and perfectly to love thee, and
not suffer any secret Sin to be thy Rival in my Heart; and that I may also,
especially in this Sacrifice of praise, worthily Magnify, and agreeably set
forth the Glory of thy Holy Name, in giving so Illustrious a Salvation to us
through Christ Jesus, for whose sake I beseech thee to hear me, for he is thy
Son, and shall be my Lord for ever.

Amen.
A Meditation at the Offering.
O Lord, I give thee a small part of thine own, who have given me all my
Earthly Comforts; yea, thy own Son out of thy bosom to become my Salvation: O
that I could give a thousand times more, thy Love deserves it; for this I give
not (alas) as a Requital of thy favor, but a testimony how much more I owe
unto thee; my Charities cannot extend to thee who need nothing, only Holy
Jesus, I do gladly embrace my Poor Brethren and thy Friends, whose Souls thou
have purchased with thy dearest Blood, and made them Heirs with me of the same
Salvation. I rejoice that thou acceptest so small a matter to them, as done to
thy self; behold therefore a soul I beseech thee, so Sick and Leprous, poor and
naked, that it needs thy Mercy more than the most miserable Creature in all the
whole World, my Charity. O how many, and how earnest prayers do I need! could I
engage all the poor on Earth, (whose prayers soonest pierce the Clouds) I need
all this and as much more to make way for mine acceptance; But, O my Savior,
this is a day in which thou Scatterest thy Bounties; Wherefore Remember thou my
Soul which is undone without thy pity; and since thy Mercies are infinitely
greater than ours, Lord, do not pass me by, far be it from me to think so
meanly of thy Love, as to esteem mine Alms the purchase of it. No, no, I do
only by this small token give thee, Livery and seisin of me and mine; and
having vowed to purchase a more glorious Interest, and to seek thy Kingdom, I
do renounce the Riches of this World. O happy Exchange, and admirable way of
Gain; but so thou art wont to deal with us, O God! to accept trifles from us,
and give Glories to us, great and endless and Inexpressible; I adore thee, O my
Lord, and Love thee, and because there is no Earthly gift that can bear
proportion with such unspeakable Goodness, I will give thee my Soul also, and
it shall be thine for Ever,

Amen.
Just after the Prayer of Consecration, Say,
A MEN, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and I doubt not but the
Mystery is Rightly accomplished; I am persuaded here is It that my Soul longs
for, a Crucified Savior Communicating himself to poor penitent Sinners. O let
me be but reckoned amongst that number, and then I shall assuredly receive the
Holy Jesus. Amen.

Lord thou have set open this fountain, and will thou suffer a wretched
creature to dye for thirst in thy presence? have thou prepared such a Balm to
heal me, and shall I languish here before thee? I know, if thou will, thou
can make me clean, here is the very Instrument in thy Hand. Grant me
therefore, Holy Jesus, that I may rightly apply it, and duly use it, and it
shall prepare me for Thee, and unite me to thee with such inseparable bonds as
can never break, unless Eternity can have an End.

Blessed are they that so eat thy Flesh, and so drink thy Blood as thou
requirest, and so as thy Saints of Old have done; for they have been cleansed
at this Fountain, and here their Union with thee first began; O happy season,
Excellent Opportunity, Lord let me do it well this Once, and I am thine for
Ever.

Amen.
A Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Most Merciful God, who have in thy great goodness prepared this Spiritual
Feast for sick and famished Souls, make my desires and gaspings after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have with the Prodigal wasted that portion of
Grace thou bestowedst upon me, and therefore do infinitely want a supply out of
this Treasury. But, O Lord, how shall such a Wretch as I dare to approach this
Holy Table? I am a Dog, how shall I presume to take the Childrens Bread? or how
shall this spiritual Manna, this Food of Angels be given to me, who have chosen
to feed on Husks with Swine? nay, to one who has already so often trampled
these precious things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or unworthily
receiving these Holy Mysteries? O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes me tremble
to come, and yet makes me not dare to keep away; For where, O Lord, shall my
polluted Soul be washed, if not in this Fountain which thou have opened for sin
and for uncleanness? hither therefore I come, and thou have promised that he
that comes to thee, thou will in no wise cast out. This is, O Lord, the Blood
of the New Testament, Grant me to receive it, that it may be to me for
Remission of Sins; and though I have so often and so wretchedly broken my part
of that Covenant whereof this Sacrament is a Seal, yet be thou graciously
pleased to make good thine, to be Merciful to mine unrighteousness, and to
remember my sins and my iniquities no more; and not only so, but to put thy
Laws into my heart, and to write them in my mind, and by the power of thy
Grace, dispose my Soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may
never again provoke thee. Lord Grant that in these Holy Mysteries, I may not
only commemorate, but effectualy receive my Blessed Savior, and all the
benefits of his Passion, and to that end, give me such a preparation of Soul as
may qualify me for it. Give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden, I may be capable of his Refreshings, and by being
Supled in my own tears, I may be the fitter to be washed in his Blood. Raise up
my dull and Earthly mind from grovelling here below, and inspire it with a Holy
Zeal, that I may with Spiritual affection approach this Spiritual Feast, and
let, O Lord, that infinite Love of Christ, in Dy-Dying for so wretched a
Sinner, Inflame my frozen benumbed Soul, and kindle in me that Sacred Fire of
Love to him, and that so vehement, that no waters may quench, no floods drown
it, such as may burn up all my dross, and not leave one unmortified Lust in my
Soul, and such as may also extend it self to all whom thou have given me
command and Example to love, even Enemies, as well as Friends. Finally, O Lord,
I beseech thee to cloth me in the wedding Garment, and make me, (though of my
self a most unworthy, yet by thy Mercy) an acceptable Guest at this Holy Table,
that I may not eat nor drink my own condemnation, but may have my Pardon
sealed, my weakness repaired, my corruptions subdued, and my Soul inseperably
united to thee, That no Temptations may ever be able to dissolve the Union; but
that being begun here in Grace, it may be consummated in Glory. Grant this, O
Lord, for thy Dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Another.
O Blessed Jesus, who once offeredst thy self for me upon the Cross, and now
offerest thy self to me in the Sacrament, Let not, I beseech thee, my
impenitence and unworthiness frustrate these so inestimable Mercies to me, but
qualify me by thy Grace to receive the full benefit of them; O Lord, I have
abundant need of thee, but am so clogged with guilt, so holden with the cords
of my Sins, that I am notable to move toward thee; O loose me from this Bond,
wherewith Satan and my own Lusts have bound me, and draw me that I may run
after thee: Lord, thou see daily how eagerly I pursue the paths that lead to
Death, but when thou invitest me to Life and Glory, I turn my back, and forsake
my own Mercy. How often has this Feast been prepared, and I have with
frivolous excuses absented my self? or if I have come, it bath been rather to
defy than adore thee; I have brought such troops of thy professed enemies,
unrepented Sins along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but to renew
thy Passion, Crucifying thee afresh, and putting thee to open shame: and now of
what punishment shall I be thought worthy, who have thus trampled under foot
the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing? Yet, O
Merciful Jesus, this Blood is my only refuge; O let this make mine atonement,
or I perish Eternally. Wherefore did thou shed it, but to save Sinners?
neither can the merit of it be overwhelmed, either by the greatness or number
of my Sins; I am a Sinner, a great one, O let me find its saving efficacy; be
merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me, for my Soul trusts in thee, and in
the clefts of thy Wounds shall be my refuge, until thy Fathers indignation be
overpast. O thou who have, as my High Priest, sacrificed for me, intercede for
me also, and plead thy meritorious sufferings on my behalf; and suffer not, O
my Redeemer, the price of thy Blood to be utterly lost; and grant, O Lord, that
as the Sins I have to be forgiven, are many, so I may love thee much; Lord thou
see what faint, what cold affections I have toward thee, O warm and enliven
them, and as in this Sacrament, that Transcendent Love of thine in dying for me
is shed forth, so I beseech thee, let it convey such Grace into me as may
enable me to make some returns of Love; O let this Divine fire descend from
Heaven into my Soul, and let my Sins be the Burnt-offering for It to consume,
that there may not any corrupt affection, any cursed thing be sheltered in my
heart, that I may never again defile that place thou have chosen for thy
Temple; thou dyedst, O Holy Jesus, to redeem me from all Iniquity, O let me not
again sell my self to work Wickedness, but grant that I may at this time
approach thee with most sincere and fixed Resolutions of an Entire Reformation,
and let me Receive such Grace, and strength from thee, as may enable me
faithfully to perform them. Lord there are many Old habituted Diseases my
Soulgroans under. (Here mention thy prevailing Corruptions) and though I lie
never so long at the pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy Holy Table,
yet unless thou be pleased to put forth thy healing Virtue, they will still
remain uncured. O thou blessed Physician of Souls, heal me, and grant that I
may now so touch thee, that every one of those loathsome Issues may immediately
stench, that these sicknesses may not be unto Death, but unto the Glory of thy
Mercy in pardoning, and to the Glory of thy Grace in purifying so polluted a
wretch. O Christ hear me, and grant I may now approach thee with such Humility
and Contrition, Love, Faith and Devotion, that thou may Vouchsafe to come to
me and abide with me, Communicating to me thy self, and all the merits of thy
Passion, and then, O Lord. let no accusations of Satan, or my own Conscience
amaze or distract me; but but having peace with thee, let me also have peace in
my self, that this Wine may make glad, this Bread of Life may strengthen my
heart, and enable me cheerfully to run the way of thy Commandments; Grant this
Merciful Savior, for thine own Bowels and Compassions sake,

Amen.
Before the Bread.
O Blessed Lord God, who have given us thine only Son to lay down his Life for
our Sins, and his Flesh for the food and nourishment of our Souls, purge and
purify my vile and sinful Soul, that it may be a fit habitation, for his pure,
unspotted, and precious Body, and that no unclean thing may presume to enter
where his Holy Feet have trod, from henceforth for Ever, Amen.

Thou have said that he that Eareth thy Flesh and drinks thy Blood, has
Eternal Life.

Behold the Servant of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy Word.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
By thy Crucified body deliver me from this body of Death.

After the Bread.
BLessed be thy Holy Name, O Lord my God, who have vouchsafed to feed me with
that Holy-Bread from Heaven, the Flesh of thy dear Son, grant that in the
strength of this Food, I may walk before thee in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of my Life, till I come to the Mount of God, the Holy Hill, where
thine Honor and our Rest dwells,

Amen.
If you have time, use this Meditation.
O My Soul, behold how thou have incensed the Majesty of Heaven! see how he
gives up the most Innocent and most Holy Jesus, thy best, thy only Friend, and
his own Dear Son, to be trampled and tormented for thy Sins! Oh! how cruelly
was he scourged with Whips, wounded with Thorns, laden with the Cross, torn
with Nails, pierced with a Spear, and racked on the most painful Instrument of
Death! his lovely Face defiled with Blood and Spittle, his Ears filled with
Taunts and Curses, his Eyes drenched in Tears for the ruin of his Enemies, and
his Soul amazed at the terrors of the Divine Wrath, till at length all wounded,
broken and bloody, with many groans, yet with admirable patience, he breaths
out his Holy Soul! and yet what ever he suffered was my Portion, my pleasure
has been his pain, my wicked Life has caused his bitter Death; wretch that I
am, to live in such a manner, that nothing else could satisfy or make my
peace. But here I come this day to call my Sins to remembrance; I will look on
thee (whom I have pierced) with a most tender and sympathizing affection, and
reflect, that as I break this Holy Bread with my Teeth, so wast thou bruised
for our Iniquities, and our Offenses did grind thee with grief and pain. Holy
Savior, I am angry at my self, and full of anguish, to see what I have brought
upon thee I am sorry with all my Heart, that I have given harbor to thy
Murderers; but I hope this most dismal Spectacle, shall mortify in me all
desires after evil, and make me ^^hor all those desperate pleasures which must
so much Offend thee, which must be Cleansed by thy most precious Blood or else
stand charged upon m^ account for ever; No, no, I will never crucify thee again
by renewing my disobedience, for I have done too much already.

Before the CVP.
O Blessed Lord, who have, given the Blood of thine only Son to be shed for our
Sins and to Refresh and Restore our weary gasping Souls, Cleanse and Sanctify
me, O Lord, that I may receive this Cup with a pure Heart, and not with
polluted Lips, to the Eternal Comfort and Refreshment of my Soul. Amen.

Methinks, O my Redeemer, while thou art pouring forth thy most precious Blood,
thou may Look upon me with a Countenance mixed with pity, and Upbraiding,
that I should take so little care to save this Soul which thou have bought at
such a rate; Is not here represented those drops and streams of blood that have
sealed the Covenant of peace, and confirmed all the promises of the Gospel? why
then am I not swallowed up with admiration? why do I not breath and pant after
it? I am not come to quench my bodily thirst, but to wash my Soul in this
Salutory fountain; O how freely it flows, how perfectly it cures! Lord let me
taste thereof, make it unto me the Blood of Jesus for it is that my Soul
Thirsts after; and now that powerful word has hallowed it, Let me not by
evil thoughts or unbelief, Malice or Impenitence, make it to my self an
unhallowed thing; but as thou have fitted it for the Mystery, O fit me also to
receive it. I cannot now have any low or Common thoughts about it; I will by
faith esteem it as my Saviors Blood, and though I am unworthy of so Divine a
Cordial, yet my Soul gaspeth for it, and without it I must dye, and Perish.

At the Receiving of the C V P.
O Let this blood of thine Purge my Conscience from dead works to serve the
Living God. Lord if thou will thou can make me clean. O touch me, and say, I
will be thou Clean.

After the C V P.
Blessed be thy Holy Name, O Lord my God, who have Vouchsafed me to drink of
this fountain of Living water, the precious Blood of thy dear Son, Grant that
this holy Cup may be an Antidote and preservative against all sin and evil, and
may keep my Soul in health and strength to the end of my days.

LORD, what is Man that thou art thus mindful of him, or the Son of Man that
thou thus Visitest him? what is thy servant that thou should look upon such a
dead dog as I am? the dogs eat of the Crumbs which fall from their Masters
Table, but thou have fed me with the bread of thine own Children, and given me
to drink of thine own Cup; Thou have fed me in a green pasture, and Ledst me
forth beside the waters of Comfort. O taste and see how gracious the Lord is,
Blessed is the man that trusts in him, what reward shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits toward me? Lord, I offer up to thee my self, my Soul
and Body, all that I am and have, humbly beseeching thee Graciously to receive
me for thy Servant, to dwell in thy House, and to Praise thy Name for evermore.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Honor, and Glory, and Power; for thou
have Created all things, and for thy Pleasure, they are and were created; thou
art worthy to take the book and open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain,
and have Redeemed us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall Reign with
thee for ever.

Salvation to our God which fitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb. Amen.

Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and
Might be unto God for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after Receiving.
O Thou Fountain of all Goodness, from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, and to whom all Honor and Glory should be returned; I desire, with all
the most fervent, and inflamed affections of a grateful heart, to bless and
praise thee for those inestimable Mercies thou have vouchsafed unto me; Lord,
what is man that thou should so regard him, as to send thy beloved Son to
suffer such bitter things for him? But Lord, what am I thy most sinful
Creature, that I should have any part in this atonement, who have so often
been wretchedly ungrateful for his sufferings? O the height and depth of this
Mercy of thine, that art pleased to admit me to the Renewing of that Covenant
with thee, which I have so often and so perversely broken, that I am not worthy
of that daily bread which sustains the body, should be made partaker of this
Bread of Life which nourishes the Soul, and that the God of all purity should
vouchsafe to unite himself to so polluted a wretch! O my God, suffer me no
more; I beseech thee, to turn thy Grace into wantonness, to make thy Mercy an
Occasion of security; but let this unspeakable Love of thine constrain me to
Obedience, that since my blessed Lord has dyed for me, I may no longer live
unto my self but to him, O Lord, I know there is no concord between Christ and
Belial, therefore since he has now been pleased to enter my heart O let me
never permit any Lust to chase him thence, but let him that has so dearly
bought me, still keep possession of me, and let nothing ever take me out of his
hand. To this end, be thou graciously ly pleased to watch over me, and defend
me from all assaults of my Spiritual Enemies; but especially deliver me from my
self, from the Treachery of my own heart, which is too willing to yield it self
a prey; and where thou see I am either by Nature or Custom most weak, there
do thou, I beseech thee, magnify thy power in my preservation, (Here mention
thy most dangerous Temptations) and Lord let my Saviors Sufferings for my
sins, and the Vows that I have now made against them, never depart from my
mind, but let the Remembrance of the one, enable me to perform the other, that
I may never make truce with those lusts which nailed his Hands, pierced his
Side, and made his Soul heavy to the Death; but that having a new listed my
self under his banner, I may fight manfully and follow the Captain of my
Salvation, even through a Sea of Blood. Lord lift up my hands that hang down,
and my feeble knees that I faint not in this Warfare; O be thou my strength,
who am not able of my self to struggle with the slightest Temptations: How
often have I turned my back in this day of Battle? how many of these
Sacramental Vows have I violated? and Lord I have still the same unconstant
deceitful heart to betray me to the breach of this. O thou who art yea and
Amen, in whom there is no shadow of Change, Communicate to me, I beseech thee,
such a stability of mind, that I may no more thus start aside like a broken
bow, but that having my heart whole with thee, I may continue steadfast in thy
Covenant, that not one good purpose which thy Spirit, has raised in me this
day may vanish, as so many have formerly done, but that they may bring forth
fruit unto life Eternal. Grant this, O Merciful Father, through the Merit and
Mediation of my Crucified Savior, Amen.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy Name,
for now I find the Mercy and the Peace, the Comfort and the Grace, which flows
from the death of Christ; let all the world know what he has done for my soul,
he has Rescued me, and many of my poor Brethren round about me from the
nethermost Hell; wherefore I Love thee Holy Jesus more than I can express, and
I will love them for thy sake; and since thou have given thy self, thy Merits,
and thy Graces to me, and sealed a new Covenant with me in thine own Blood, I
do here bind my self by that Sacred Ordinance to be sincerely thine, I will
spend my time and strength in thy Service; and Lord I beseech thee, give me
grace to shed my blood, to bear witness to the truth, if ever thou call me
to such a Trial; I will never; eave thee nor forsake thee, but live and die
with thee, for I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Righteous
judgments. O let me never unhallow that Body nor defile that Soul in which the
Lord Jesus delights to dwell; let no lying or uncharitable speeches profane
those Lips, no Intemperance pollute that Mouth by which those Holy Symbols have
passed. Grant me to find new desires and new hopes, Grant my nature may be
renewed, my blood Refined. O fit my Soul with such a Holy Vigor, that through
thy Mercy I may accomplish all my Resolutions. Amen.

O Blessed Jesus, I have Vowed my self thy servant, but yet I fear, in
expectation of the most furious assaults, which will be made upon me by the
Enemy from whom I have withdrawn, and alas! I have too often Returned again to
folly? but if thou please to plant thy Grace within me, and send thy Blessing
upon me, I fear not his Policy nor power, I have Received that Heavenly food
which is the means to convey this Grace, and I know that by this Celestial
Remedy, many of thy Servants have been dreadful to the powers of Darkness; and
thou did never cast off any humble Soul, O bless then this Life-giving
Mystery unto every one of us, that we may find such power and strength, such
courage and resolution flowing from thence, that we may all stand firm to the
purposes which we have made. Holy Savior, we are now thy servants, and O what
quiet and comfort, what Safety and Joy, what Honor and Pleasure have we under
so gracious a Lord! how happy shall I be in enjoying a freedom from anger, etc.
O mark us all for thine own, and deny us not that grace which is necessary to
make thee ours, and us to be thine; If we feel not some Effects thereof we
shall sink for fear, Lest thou have rejected us and our oblation; but who did
ever seek thee and did not find? who ever trusted in thee and was forsaken? we
are sure that in thee all fullness of Grace does dwell, O let it now overflow,
that of thy fullness we may all receive, so shall we daily and always perform
our Vows. Amen.

O thou Allseeing and most Holy Lord God, I have beheld the Esficacious and
all-saving Sacrifice which thy Son has offered for us, I have remembered it,
and blessed thy Name for it as much as I was able, though not so highly as I
ought, for the benefits thereof are inestimable; O let them not all be lost to
us for want of faith to believe and receive them, there is no want of merit in
Jesus to Deserve, no want of Mercy in thee to bestow remission; O let there not
want in us, or in any of those for whom Christ dyed, Grace to accept this
pardon. Behold, Lord, how we struggle under a load of guilt, a troubled
Conscience does perplex us, our remaining corruptions oppose us, the decay of
our Graces does deject us, and lo here is an Effectual Remedy for all these
evils; help us every one, I humbly beseech thee, so to apply it, that both we
and our Brethren, whom we love, as our selves, may find a blessed cure. Who was
ever reconciled to thee but by Jesus? or who was ever so much thine Enemy, but
this Sacrifice has made their peace? and shall it be ineffectual only to us?
Dear father, let us find the Efficacy thereof in our selves, and discern the
fruits thereof in all the Members of thy Church, so shall we be engaged to
praise thee more and more, for this great Salvation through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A Prayer of Intercession.
O Most gracious Lord, who so tenderly lovedst mankind, as to give thy dear Son
out of thy bosom, to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole World, grant
that the effect of this Redemption may be as universal as the design of it,
that it may be to the Salvation of all. O let no person by impenitence and
willful sin forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy Grace bring all,
even the most obstinate Sinners to Repentance, enlighten all that sit in
Darkness, all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, take from them all
blindness, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home
blessed Lord unto thy fold, that they may be saved among the number of the true
Israelites. And for all those upon whom the Name of thy Son is called, grant O
Lord, that their conversation may be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
that his name may be no longer blasphemed among the heathen through us. O
Blessed Lord, how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the World,
a sink of those abominable pollutions which even Barbarians detest? O let not
our profession and our practice be always at so wide a distance, let not the
Disciples of the Holy and Immaculate Jesus, be of all others the most profane
and impure, Let not the Subjects of the Prince of peace, be of all others the
most contentious and bloody, but make us Christians in Deed as well as in Name,
that we may walk worthy of that Holy vocation wherewith we are called, and may
all with one mind and one mouth Glorfy thee, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Have mercy on this Church, look down upon it from Heaven, the
Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory; Pour forth thy Mercies upon it;
though our backslidings are many, and we have grievously rebelled, yet
according to thy goodness let thy anger be turned away from us, and cause thy
face to shine upon thy Sanctuary for the Lords sake, and so separate between us
and our sins, that they may not separate between our God and us, Save and
defend all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors, Especially those to whom we
owe subjection; plead thou there cause, O Lord, and so guide and assist them in
the discharge of that Office whereunto thou have appointed them, that under
them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty;
bless them that wait at thine Altar, open thou their lips that their mouths may
show forth thy praise. O thou Father of Mercy and God of Comfort, succor and
relieve all that are in any affliction, deliver the outcasts and poor, help
them to right that suffer wrong; let the sorrowful sighings of the prisoners
come before thee, and according to thy power and mercy, preserve those that are
appointed to dye; grant ease to those that are in pain, Supplies to those that
suffer want, give to all presumptious sinsinners a sense of their sins, and to
all dispairing, a sight of thy Mercies; and do thou, O Lord, for every one
abundantly above what they can ask or think, pour down thy Blessings on all my
Friends and Benefactors, all that have commended themselves to my Prayers (Here
name particular Persons) And grant, O Merciful Father, that through this Blood
of the Cross, we may all be presented pure and unblamable, and unseparable in
thy sight, that so we may be admitted into that place of purity, where no
unclean thing can enter, there to sing eternal Praises Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost for ever, Amen.

O most Holy Lord God, I have been addmited to make an oblation of my praises
and my self to thee, and I am infinitely concerned that thou should accept
me therein, not for any merit in me, but for thy own Mercies, and thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ his sake. O my God, thou know I have been polluted with
Sin, and undutiful to thy Commands, unfaithful to my promises, unmindful of my
obligations, Confederate with thy Enemies, yea, even in the time of these Holy
mysteries, so obdurate and confused, that I might justly fear least my
wretchedness should make my Sacrifice an abomination; I am ashamed that I am no
fitter, I Lament that I should bring so many defilements, where the purity of
an Angel is scarce sufficient, but I Sanctuary take in thy most obliging
Condesentions, and because I am so unworthy, I will endeavor to esteem my self
as vile as I really am in thy sight. O do not look upon the deserts of a
wretched sinner, but remember thine own Mercies, so shall thy favor be more
ilustrious, because it is bestowed upon so undeserving a Creature, and the
sense of my unworthiness shall enlarge my thankfulness, and make me praise thee
more. O grant me thy acceptance, for the sake of the crucified Jefus, Amen.

When I compare thy Acts with mine, Holy Jesus, I am exceedingly ashamed to
behold so vast a disproportion; thou give me thy Merits and thy Graces, thy
Life and thy love at present, and have promised me thy Kingdom in Reversion,
and I have scarce returned this with the entire devotion of one half hour. Oh
how little is my obdurate heart affected with the sense of my own Guilt, the
fears of the Divine wrath, or the apprehensions of thy sufferings; yet Lord, I
do desire and endeavor to praise thee, so

that hope thou will consider mine Infirmities, with much compassion, and
measure my services not by the exactness of the performance, but by the
sincerity of my wishes; so that I may through thy merits, be accepted by thy
Heavenly Father, and by thy mercy of that acceptance, be oblidged to praise
thee, Holy Savior, for ever,

Amen.
An Act of Oblation of our Selves.
O Most merciful Lord God, I am amazed at the mighty Favors thou have showed
unto me, a sinful wretched Creature, I cannot but acknowledge thy Goodness,
although I can make no retribution; but it is not mine, O Lord, but me thou
seek, sinful and miserable though I am, yet am I that purchase for which
Jesus has left his Glory, and laid down his life, and suffered many and great
things for me. O mavelous condescension, I am nothing, I have nothing, I am
void of all good, full of evil, and deserving thy wrath, so that I abhor my
self; and can thou delight in me? be it so then, for I will dispute no more
with unsearchable mercy, I believe, O my God, and wonder I can no more resist
thy condescending and Almighty Love, I will with all the joy imaginable give my
self up entirely to thee, who have lately restored me to my self. Alas! I have
been a Prisoner to Satan, a slave to Sin, and marked out for destruction; but
thou have procured my Pardon, Liberty, and my Life, requiring no more for so
unexpressible bounty, but only that I will entirely become thine; I do freely
surrender my self to thee, both Soul and Body, avowing, that I would be no more
my own, but thy Servant in all things; my understanding shall enquire after
thee, my will shall choose thee, my affections embrace thee, my senses shall
obey thee, my Passion shall be at thy commands, and my thoughts; shall be of
thee; O be thou pleased to take possession of my Heart and Soul, and if now
thou will accept of me, I hope I shall never be so unjust and ungrateful, so
foolish and absurd, so perjured and Sacriligious as to rob thee of my self
hereafter, or wilfully to profane my Body or Soul any more, it is indeed a
miserable gift that I offer, a defiled body, a strained Soul, and corrupt
affections I am heartily sorry it is no better, but it is all I have to give,
and all thou requirest, and it will be freer and better by being thine; O let
me never have other master, let me never fully that which the Blood of Christ
has washed, nor sell that to Satan which the Holy Jesus has redeemed at so
great a price; grant me therefore, gracious Lord, to find by the amendment of
my life that thou have accepted me this day; give me such help from thee to
confirm my hope, that I may always perform my vows, and never rob thee of that
which I have dedicated to thee in the sincerity of my Soul; I have sworn, and
am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Righteous Judgments; I am thine, O save me
for thy Mercies, and for thy Son Christ Jesus sake,

Amen.
An act of Acknowledgment.
THere are many, O Lord, who are most Importunate to obtain thy favor, and
unquiet till they receive some testemonies thereof, and yet when their desires
are granted, they are unmoved and ungrateful; but I will endeavor to praise
thee as heartily for these manifestoes of thy Love, as I desired them
servently; I acknowledge therefore, that I am full of wonder, to find my self
honored with the highest privileges, and remarked with the most illustrious
signals of thy Love: I begged the Mercy of gathering up the Crumbs under thy
Table, and behold thou have placed me among thy Children, and fed me with the
choicest of thy preparations: O Lord, let all my enemies, the powers of
Darkness be confounded, to behold me a poor sinful wretch, whose ruin they
gaped for, thus to be made a guest at thy Table, to be treated as one of thy
dearest Children or best beloved Friends; I was far from deserving this Honor,
but I will rejoice in it, and bless thy name for it, because it has revived my
hope, and cheered my drooping Soul; and I am persuaded this fresh testimony of
thy favor will engage me to love thee with an unalterable affection; there was
nothing I desired in comparison with thy love, nor conld I have wished a more
certain pledge of it than thy Son and my Savior; welcome art thou to me, O my
Redeemer, for thy own sake, and welcome, as thou art the Evidence of thy
Heavenly Fathers love to me a miserable sinner; I will acknowledge it at
present as much as I am able, and my whole life hereafter shall show how deep a
sense I have of this Enestimable Goodness; and whenmy Life does fail, it shall
be the Subject of my Halelujahs,

Amen.
Almighty God, who of thy tender Mercy did give thine only Son Jesus Christ,
to suffer Death upon the Cross for our Redemption, and did institute, and in
thy Holy Gospel command us to continue a perpetual Memory of that his precious
Death, until his coming again: Hear me most merciful Savior, I most humbly
beseech thee, and make my Groanings, and Disires after this Holy Sacrament,
answerable to my needs of it. But, O Lord: How shall such a Wretch as I dare to
approach thy Holy Table? How shall I presume to take the Childrens Bread who am
as a vile Dog in thy sight? I have often trampled those precious things under
foot, either carelessly neglecting, or unworthily receiving these Holy
Mysteries! O Lord, my horrrible Guiltiness makes me tremble to come, and yet
makes me not dare to stay away; for where shall this polluted Soul be washed
but in the Fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness; Hither then I come;
and thou have promised him that comes to thee, thou will in no wise cast out.
Grant me therefore Gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy Dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink his Blood, that my sinful body, may be made clean by his
body and my Soul washed through his precious Blood.

Amen.
I will not presume to come to thy Table. O merciful Lord, trusting in my own
Righteousness but in thy manifold and great Mercies declared unto Mankind in
our Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake give me I pray thee, such a preparation
of Soul, as may qualify me for a worthy Approach thereunto: To this end make me
heartily sensible of my Sins and unworthiness; raise up my dull and earthly
mind from grovelling here below, and also inspire it with a holy zeal to seek
those things that are above: Let that infinite Love of Christ in dying for so
wretched a sinner, inflame my soul, and kindle in me that Sacred fire of Love
to him again, and to all those whom he has given me, Command an Example to
Love, Enemies as well as Friends, and that for his sake: Cloth me O Lord, in
the Wedding Garment; and make me, though of my self, a most unworthy, yet by
thy mercy, an acceptable Guest at thy Table, that I may not eat or drink my own
Damnation, but Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
I said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my Tongue, O God
who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great Dangers, that by
reason of the frailty of our Nature, we cannot always stand upright; grant to
me such strength, and protection as may support me in all Dangers, and carry me
through all Temptations; through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
O God to whom Vengeance belongs, O God to whom Vengeance belongs show thy
self, but let it be in pity and compassion to thy wretched and unworthy
Servant, who in all humility consess my self a wicked and sinful creature, I
acknowledge those sins, which if I would, I cannot hide from thee; my sins of
Pride and vain glory, of Hatred and Envy, of Gluttony and Wantonness? I accuse
my self of my wicked desires and thoughts which I have conceived, At these
marks have recourse to those sins noted in your Paper.
my wanton and evil words which I have spoken, * of my naughty and ungodly
deeds which I have committed. * I acknoledge and bewail these my manifold sins
and wickednesses, which I from time to time most grievously have committed by
thought, word and deed, against thy Divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy
wrath and indignation against me. I do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry
for these my misdoings; the remembrance of them is grievous unto me; the burden
of them is intolerable; have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful
Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, forgive me all that is past; and grant
that I may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FOrgive me my sins, O Lord, forgive me the sins of my Age, and the sins of my
Youth; the sins of my Soul, and the sins of my Body; my Secret and my
Whispering sins; my presumptious and my Crying sins, the sins that I have done
to please my self, and the sins that I have done to please others.

Forgive my wanton and idle Sins; forgive me my serious and deliberate sins;
forgive me those sins which I know, and those sins which I know not; the sins
which I have labored so long to hide from others, that now I have even hid
them from my own Memory: Forgive me them, O Lord, forgive me them all; of thy
great mercy let me be Absolved from all my offenses, and of thy bountiful
goodness, let me be delivered from the bands of those sins, which by my frailty
I have committed. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake our
Blessed Lord and Savior,

Amen.
Prayers to be said after the receiving of the Holy Sacrament.
O Blessed Jesus, who did take upon thee our Nature, and did suffer Death
upon the Cross for our Redemption, and have commanded us to continue the memory
of this thy precious Death till thy Coming again: Oh! let not the inestimable
Benefits of it be frustrated by my Manifold and grievous sins, but inspire my
Soul with those Graces which may qualify me to receive them tendered unto me
in this Blessed Sacrament, O Lord, thou see that I have no power of my self
to help my self! Oh Let the pitifulness of thy great Mercy loose me from the
chains of those sins wherewitth I am tied and bound; that being thus set at
liberty, I here with cheerfulness run the ways of thy Commandments, and
hereafter enter into thy Joy, O blessed Savior and Redemer.

Amen.
2. THou O God and Saviour' know how vile I am, and with what eagerness I
have purchased the paths that lead unto everlasting Death! How often has this
Feast been prepared, and lovingly Bidden, there to; but have with frivolous
excuses absented my self? Or, If I have come I have brought such troops of thy
profeffed enemies, unrepented Sins along with, me as if I came not to adore,
but to defy thee; not to commemorate, but renew thy Passion! I am not worthy,
O Lord I am not worthy to come into thy presence much less, to eat the Flesh of
the Sacrificed Lamb: For, my sins, O Blessed Jesu, went along with me in
confederation with the High Priests, in Treachery with Judas, in Injustice with
Pilate, in Malice and Cruelty with the People: Oh! what punishment then shall I
be thought worthy of, who have thus trampled under foot the Son of God, and
counted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; Where shall I vile Wretch
appear, who have put my Lord to Death! who have crucified to my self the Son of
God afresh, and put thee to an open shame! where should I appear, but before a
Savior, who has loved and ed for me, though I have hated and murdered him?
thy Blood O Jesu is my only Refuge! Oh! Let the Cry of it speak on my behalf?
and may it speak better things than the Blood of Abel, be merciful unto me, O
God, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in thee, and in the Clefts of
thy wounds shall be my Refuge, until thy Fathers Indignation be over-past! O
Blessed Advocate and Mediator, intercede for me with thy Father and Ours, thy
God and Ours? and grant, that by the Grace which thou have found, by the
Prerogative which thou have deserved by the Mercy which thou have purchased for
me as thou have been partaker of my sufferings and Infirmities, so I by thy
Death and Resurrection, and by thy infinite gracious Intercession may be made
partaker of thy Holiness and thy Glory, even for thy own Merits sake.

Amen.
3. O Lord, who have promised, that if I open my mouth wide, Thou will fill it,
I pray thee, to open it; and not my mouth only, but my heart also: Oh! create
in thy Servant a great hunger and thirst after the things of thy Kingdom, and
the Righteonsness of it, after all the holy Graces, and all the holy
Ministeries of Grace; that I may long for the Bread of Heaven, thirst after the
Fountain of Salvation; and as the Heart pants after the Water-brcoks, so my
Soul may desire thee, O Lord: Oh! kindle such an holy flame in my Soul, that it
may consume all my sins and cursed affections, that I may never again defile
the place which thou have chosen for thy Temple. Thou did O dear Jesu, to
redeem me from iniquity; Oh! let me not sell my self again to work wickedness:
I am a sinner, a grievous one, not worthy to look up to Heaven; but be thou
pleased to look down into the dust, and lift up a sinner from the Dunghill; let
me not perish in my folly, or be consumed in thy heavy displeasure: Give me
time and space to repent, and give me power of Grace, that as by thy holy
Inspiration I do sincerely and fixedly resolve on an entire Reformation, so by
thy merciful guidance I may faithfully perform the same.

Amen.
4. O Thou great Physician of Souls; heal me of those many, and foul Diseases
which my Soul groans under; Grant that I may now so touch thee that every one
of those loathsome issues may immediately stanch, that these sicknesses may not
be unto Death; but to the glory of thy mercy in pardoning, to the glory of thy
Grace in purifying so polluted a wretch. O Christ hear me! inspire me with an
holy Zeal to mortify my sins, support me with an holy hope, confirm me with an
excellent and unreprovable Faith, and inkindle in me a never-failing Charity:
Let me judge my self, that I be not judged by thee; condemn my self, that I be
not condemned with the world but receiving this Holy Sacrament with a penitent
heart, and a lively Faith, I may partake the great benefits of it; I may dwell
in Christ, and Christ in me; I may be one with Christ, and Christ with me, the
Lord be merciful unto me, and grant this for his own Bowels and Compassion sake,

Amen.
ALmighty Lord, who have of thine infinite mercies vouchsafed to ordain this
Sacrament for a perpetual memory of that Blessed Sacrifice which once thou
made for us upon the Cross; grant me with such diligent remembrance, and such
due reverence, do participate of this so holy and wonderful a mystery, that I
may be made worthy by thy Grace to obtain the virtue and fruits of the same,
with all the benefits of thy precious Death and Passion, even the Remission of
all my sins, and the fullness of all thy Graces, which I beg for thy only
Savior, God from everlasting, and world without end

Amen.
O Lord, our Heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, regard, we beseech
thee the devotions of thy humble Servants who do now celebrate the Memorial
which thy Son and our Savior has commanded to be made in remembrance of his
most blessed Passion and Sacrifice; that by the merits and Power thereof, now
represented before thy Divine Majesty, we, and all thy whole Church may be made
partakers of all other the Benefits of his most precious Death and Resurrection
from the Earth, and glorious Ascension into Heaven, who lives and reigns
with thee, and the Holy Spirit, ever one God, World without end.

Amen.
BE pleased, O God, to accept this our bounden duty and service and command
that the Prayers and Supplications, together with the Remembrance of Christ's
Passion, which we do now offer up unto thee, may by the Ministry of the holy
Angels be brought up into thy Heavenly Tabernacle; and that thou not weighing
our merits, but looking upon the blessed Sacrifice of our Savior, which was
once fully and perfectly made for us all, may pardon our offenses, and
replenish us with thy Grace and heavenly benediction, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect
gift proceeds; and to whom all glory and honor should be returned: I do
desire most heartily to thank thee, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed me,
who have received these Holy mysteries, with the spiritual food of the most
precious Body and Blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ; and do assure me
thereby of thy favor and goodness toward me, and that I am a very member
incorporate in the mystical Body of thy Son, which is the blessed Company of
all faithful people; and am also an Heir through hope of thine everlasting
Kingdom, by the merits of the most precious Death and Passion of thy dear Son.
O the height and depth of that unspeakable mercy of thine, who art pleased to
admit me a sinful wretch to have any part in those inestimable benefits, which
I have so often despised and trampled under foot! I am not worthy, O Lord, of
that daily Bread which sustains the body; But thou have made me partaker of
that living Bread which came down from Heaven, which nourishes the Soul, and,
of which whosoever eats, shall live for ever. O grant that my Soul may relish
this Divine Food with Spiritual ravishments, and love, great as the flame of
Cherubims; and grant that what thou have given me for the Remission of my sins,
may not by any fault become the increase of them; that this Holy Communion
prove not unto me, unto Judgment and Condemnation, but may support and
preserve me in every Temptation, rejoice and quiet me in every trouble,
enlighten and strengthen me in every good word and Work; Comfort and defend me
in the hour of my death against all oppositions of the Spirit of Darkness, and
further me in the attainment of everlasting Salvation, through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
MOst Holy God, who art of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity, grant, I pray
thee, that no unclean thing may be in me, who have now Received thee into my
heart and soul; but let this Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to thee, purge my Conscience from dead works to
serve thee the living God: Give me Grace, that from henceforth I put off
concerning my former conversation the Old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the Spirit of my mind, and put on the
New Man; which after thee is created in Righteousness and true Holiness to
which purpose be pleased to watch over me for good, to keep me both outwardly
in my Body, and inwardly in my Soul, O God thou see I nave no power of my
self to help my self; thou know me also to be set in the midst of so many
and great dangers, that by reason of the frailty of my Nature, I cannot always
stand upright, grant to me such strength and protection, as may support me in
all dangers, and carry me through all Temptations, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
O Thou with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning let thy holy Spirit
direct me in all things, let thy Grace always always prevent and follow me, and
preserve me against all assaults of my Spiritual enemies, Especially of my own
treacherous heart, which is deceitful above all things, wicked, desperately
wicked, O Lord, thou know it: how often has it betrayed me to the breach of
thy holy Laws, to the violation of all these Vows and promises which I have
made to thee? How often have I turned my back in the day of battle? O let me no
more thus start aside like a broken bow, but be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, resisting the Devil that he may flee from
me, subduing my flesh, and bringing it into subjection; crucifying and
overcoming the world. And therefore let those solemn Vows, which I have now
made to forge my sins, never depart from my mind but let the remembrance of
them excite me to fight manfully under thy banner, and continue thy faithful
servant and Soulder unto my lives end,

Amen.
O Lord I do here humbly present unto thee my Soul and Body, to be a living,
holy, and reasonable Sacrifice unto thee; I beseech thee sanctify my Body,
that from a polluted Dunghill, it may become the Temple of God. Sanctify my
Soul, and receive it for thy dwelling place the Seat of thy Spirit, and an
house of Prayer and holy Meditation: Sanctify me throughout, that both my
Body, and Soul, and Spirit, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory, World without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

