A Murnival of Knaves: OR, WHIGGISM Plainly Displayed, AND (If not grown
shameless) Burlesqu't out of Countenance.

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum,
Sivis esse aliquis, Probitas laudatur and alget.
Juv. Satyr. 1.

London: Printed for James Norris, at the Kings-Arms without Temple Bar. 1683.

TO THE Worshipful Mr. P. D. B.
Most Worthy Patriots,
I Presume to Dedicate this Pamphlet to you, (for I can call it no more, and I
presume you will style it no less) considering your coupled Loyalty; and withal
to inform you, that there is nothing contained herein, against the Loyal Party
of that Emporium of Christendom, and Metropolis of London, but only the
Dissenters: which I think I am in duty bound to do, and requires the Pen of a
Cleveland, though never so Sarcastick, to reduce them to Obedience. I beseech
you be not offended at my Endeavors, because they are honest, and no ways
injurious, and little offensive, but what may pass the censure of a Scholastic
tick without blame; at least, under the notion of a Licentia Poetica, if
Burlesque Rhythme may be allowed it. I do not in the least question your
approbation prima facie; but if you disrelish any thing herein, I am so much a
Stoic, that I value not your Censure or Opinion: yet however, with permission,
give me leave to acquaint you, that if you disapprove of it, I know who will
not. This is all at present from

Your Humble Servant, PHIL ANAX.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF the Author's Name in the close of the Epistle cramps your Understanding,
let me advise you, as a friend, to consult the Worshipful Dr. OATS, (who has
been of most (I had almost said all) Religions:) and if he has not forgot his
Greek and Latin, as much as he has forfeited his Religion and Honesty, I
believe he may be your Interpreter.



A Murnival of Knaves, etc.
WHen that the poor oppressed Press
Groaned under the Cacoethes
Of Scribbling; when Baboon and Pug
Skirmisht in Paper-Dialogue;
When Vile Tom's son did disembogue
At one another Ruffian, Rogue,
Profligate Villain, Fiddler, Knave,
Buffoon and Rascal, rail and rave
In such foul terms as these; a Pack
Enuf to break a Porters back,
Or sham at the sharpest scolding rate
The Wastcoteers of Beline's-gate:
When one of these loose Pamphleteers
Was very near losing his Ears,
And did through Wood-loop-hole survey
The Market on a welcome day;
Nay, had he not begged off close-keeping.
And Fine, good faith, had paid for's peeping:
Then 'twas. I blush in Burlesque Rhyme
To think on it; but I Will tell the time,
(Lest that the Whiggs should sneer and prate,
And say this story is sans Date.)
New style (to make no more ado,)
It was in the year Fourscore and Two,
The Ape of five times eight and one;
And this to our stark shame was done,
By Pladded Blow-Cap and Bog-Trotter,
Whilst Resident here Haddu Ben Otter.
Then Whig and Tory took the Field,
Fought briskly, but would neither yield;
The one of Caledonian Race,
The Other has an Hibernian Face;
True English Guelphs and Gibelines,
Darting their Quils, like Porcupines.
O how the Moor and Turk will fleer
At Christians, when as once they hear,
At one another how they jeer,
And raunt and taunt and domineer!
Nay, Teaze and Scold, and Rail downright
At Hodge and smiling Heraclite,
When half a quarter of their Sense,
Will baffle Whiggs Impertinence;
And all that Gang, except these two,
Deserve to Hang, had they their due.
Of these Dissentions what is the Cause?
In truth a second Good old Cause,
Started by some of Vxbridge-strain.
(May it be never started again)
Persons and Names of Men I Will spare,
But blame their Vices, that is Play fair:
As to their Tone, their Garb, their Gate,
I Will such a story true relate,
And give Jack such a Character,
That you will need no Interpreter.
Have you not heard a squeaking Ape,
Tire the Gods with shril-mouth'd gape,
As if the Heavens could not hear,
Unless he rend the Hemisphere,
Or that the Gods are now grown old,
Or thick of hearing by caught cold?
It Is Prodigy all over, yet true,
Listen, you will hear what he can do.
He can outgape banged unbrac'd Drums
With sticks two, fingers eight, two Thums,
Thunder- outnoise with his deep-mouthed Bass,
Outbray the Phlegmatic dull Ass;
With a strange noise laying Hens outcackle,
Gossips Out-chat in Prittle-prattle,
(Whose Music, if compared to thee,
Is pretty, taking Harmony;)
Outgrunt the Babe of Farrowing Sow,
Outlow little Irish Runt or Cow,
Outbellow too her Consort-Bull,
Out-scold the strong-lung'd Drab and Trull,
Outbay in full cry Packs of Dogs,
Outcroak the ugly Toads and Frogs,
The Inhabitants of Fens and Bogs;
Outhollow Huntsmen in full speed,
Outhum the Bittern in a Reed,
Outroar the Waves dashing against Rock,
Outscreak the gay-plum'd Bird Peacock,
Outbawl Ships Crew in Storms at Sea,
Without a Peripneumonie;
Outhowl Hell's Hound with triple sconce,
Outshout Routs yelping all at once;
Outsqwaul, by help of potent Tipple,
The froward Infant weaned from Nipple;
The Lion and great Gun outrore,
Through his large, wide-mouthed Cannon-bore;
Outscream a Holy, Zealous Sister,
When with lips sanctified has kissed her,
And tap'd and spigoted her Bung-
Hole, neighbor to Confines of Dung;
Outmew grim Malkin can this Fop,
Making Amors on the house top;
Outsqueak unoyl'd door, ungreas'd Cart-
Wheel, in Gend Balads bearing part;
Outsound the Cataracts of Nile,
Deafning all round they say a Mile;
Outyawn a wide Hiatus too
With ease which you or I cannot do.
Nay this Clerks bawling, harsh-nos'd Tones,
Are far more dismal than the Groans
Of Men dying of the Foul Disease,
(Whose aching Bones disturb all ease)
The Racking Gout, the Stone or Colic;
But this in him's a holy Frolic.
Should a Turk hear't, by's Fathers Beard
He Would swear 'twas the worst voice e're heard;
By Alla and by Mahomet,
He Would not that hideous noise forget;
Papists by the Mass; the wandering Jew
Pawns Tetragrammaton it is true;
And with true Christians, all conclude,
The Gentry, Commons, Multitude,
It Is but an hypocritick Tone,
Mixed with a feigned Sigh and Groan,
To gain their Parties great Applause,
And to maintain the Good old Cause,
Contrary to established Laws.
And wonder too how it can be,
They don't, who hear him constantly,
Lose the otocoustick Faculty.
Thus you have all the various Notes,
Warbled through Puritanick Throats,
As deep-mouthed Bass, soft Mean, shrill Treble,
And all not worth small stone called Peble.
It Is the Dissenters new Sol Fa,
And every Note above Ela;
Or if you please, it is nothing but
The Presbyterians Gamut.
Now Railing Rabshakeh surcease,
Leave off your Flouts for shame, Peace, Peace.
His Auditors it plainly appears,
Have all of them Sanctified ears.
I Have done with his Stentorian voice,
And glad I am out of the noise.
But now I Will launch into the Seas
Of his rare other Qualities,
His rich Endowments and his Arts,
His Corporal and mental parts:
He has Fingers Ten, and eke Ten Toes,
(A French Twang in an English Nose)
If not Adonibezeckt by
Just Judgment for his villainy.
Spits forth in Pulpit Superstition,
Bauls out Rebellion and Sedition,
Belches more Flames and Fire too,
Than Mongibel and Strombolo;
A Kirk-Buffoon, can wink and pray,
And blindfold teach to Bliss the way:
Heaven's Newsmonger, can tell a Tale,
And bang't about with his Tong-flaile,
Strengthened by Female-Candles, and
Fortified with the fat of the Land;
Has good Church-vailes, but yet no sense,
By white-apron'd Benevolence.
Can squeeze his Eyes close; shrivle up Nose,
Th'Organ through which he sings in Prose;
Whose Canting makes some laugh, some weep,
And some oft-times fall fast asleep.
His Preachments stuffed with Hums and Haws,
And patcht up with the Good old Cause,
(That Babe of Grace, Brat of their Loins,
Got 'twixt Scotch and Geneva Groins)
With Lord! in Prayer, O Lord thou know
We know naught, Lord, Great Lord of Hosts!
Thus breaking off, leaves sense and Wit
To be found out by th'Hearers; yet,
Let the Profane say what they will,
He makes a Moving-Sermon still,
And before the end is left in the lurch,
And People all drop out of the Church,
But some awd Wives, 'bout six or seven,
Just by the Pulpit, bound for Heaven,
But God know's when, who all things know's,
No body else (as I suppose)
If they have none but such Guides blind,
As these, to Cultivate the Mind;
Crying through zeal, Ah Precious Man!
How plain, when as he first began,
He made the Text and Context too,
Both to weak me, and eke poor you?
What work he made on it? Oh such work,
As might convert a Jew or Turk!
How he did tumble o'r the Text,
Tho in the Original perplexed;
And mine'd it small, to the end it might
Digest with the weakest Appetite?
What Comforts, nay, what Truths Soul-Saving
Flow from him, worth hearing and having!
It pierced my heart, and made me Groan,
As well as Goody Such-a-one.
But Aged Dames, go to, go to,
You over-do, in truth you do;
For It has been said b'unlucky spittle,
You could not hear one word or tittle;
For you were all born, or deaf grown,
By Sickness not fit to be known.
He, when the Spirit moves, can Pray
Extrumpore three hours per day;
And if in all that time, of Sense
One word drops from him, I from thence-
Forth to hear him will b'always bound,
Tho I Would first be set quick in the ground.
He can en cuerpo Prate, when Zeal
Has warmed him thoroughly, and then ree^
Cross Diameter of the Pulpit, role
From the Arctic to the Antarctic Pole
Of his Suggestum, teach you the way
Unto Terra Incognita.
He Is the walking Monument or Gin
Of Actual and Original Sin,
Who with starcht Gravity and Grace
Moves to a holy Cinque-a-pace:
Nay he can dance Geneva-Jigs
To Bagpipes that outsqueak stuck Pigs;
Yet thinks it is not when he does do it,
The Sensuality of the foot;
If you judge so, you're much in the dark,
It Is a Zealous Frisk before the Ark,
Lavalto, Capriol or Kick,
No Mimies or Jack-Puddings Trick;
He Is no such Person, Sir, I ll vouch ye,
But a Religious Mammamouchie.
Bishop in Surplice, worse him scares
Than Spirits in sheets, or Garden-Bears;
Hates Choristers with sweet Sol, Fa,
His Tones being ten Notes 'bove Ela;
But twangs through the Nose, like unset Chimes,
Hopkins and Sternholds grovelling Rhymes.
The Organ well-tuned brings him to Fits,
And stare like one quite out of's Wits;
Or in plain language, Sir (a sig
For gaudy words) glares like dead Pig.
His upper-Garment's Cap Calot,
Tipped with white like black Jack or Pot,
And lined with loggerheaded Sot:
Sergeant Divine of the Cois that can
Outspawl, outspit Asthmatic Man.
The outer's a black Cloak to hide
Knavery, Else two long, three wide,
Which swathes the Corpse of Bigot Lad,
Like Mangie Scot lapt up in Plad.
Cloak, whose base Tenant never was Loyal,
Nor can endure Duke that is Royal!
Cloak, that do all Rebellion shroud,
In one that is Spiritually Proud!
Cloak, that does walking Treason wrap,
And sometimes too a Swinging Clap!
Cloak, whose Jack-Pudding-Tricks we know
Makes Monarchy a Puppet-Show!
Cloak, who do hate each Ruling Thing,
And would set up a Grand-Dogue King!
Cloak, where all Vices crowded dwell!
Cloak, only for the Devil of Hell!
Therefore I leave thee sans farewell.
Round Railing Throat he ever wore
A Band, like that 'bout neck of Moor,
Which by that Crew is called Round-Robin;
With Bandstrings small dangling like Bobin,
Wherewith he play's all is Prattling while,
Enuf to make your Worship smile;
Nay more, were not before the Altar,
Enuf to make Towzer break Halter.
The ornaments round top of Fist,
Which some more properly term Wrist,
Are Cuffs, so called, in number twain,
Just and no more, without Lace, Plain,
Of Sleasy Holland so deep and wide,
They Would serve for Muckender hung by's side,
To wipe him in's hot fit (no harm,
I hope) and reach to keep him warm
Fro' the Carpus to the middle arm.
I think I need not make more stir
About this Linsey-Wolsey Sir,
You Will know him by this Character.
I think I promised it before,
And therefore I will do it no more.
But now I Am come unto the A --
Of this untoward Balad-Farse,
He shall not dye the death of Dog,
Sans Epitaph, or Epilogue,
Called which you please, I don't much matter,
I Will say as Taffy does, Have at her.
He is a Foe to Profane people,
And goes to Houses yclep'd Steeple;
A Skittish Jade, but he will not tire,
Tho as Stew -- Wh -- he swinks for hire.
A Pulpit-Boutefeu, Church-Cracker,
A Fervid, painful Cushion-Thwacker;
The Kirks Fisgig, Wildfire, or so,
The States new Cacafuego,
And so resolve to let him go.
Now that I have ranged thus far
With General Particular,
Pardon me cause'ts a foolish Trick,
As well as Roman Catholic;
I Will leave them quiet, and be gone,
Resolving to assault poor Don.
The first that treads this Burlesque Stage,
Is the State-Mimick of our Age,
A pretty Pigmy, lank with care,
Like Jugler looks in Bartle-Fair,
Or the Chitty-fac'd poor thing appears,
When Horsed like Creature before Bears;
He winks to understand the Sense
Of what is given in Evidence,
With ominously Neck awry,
Would you know? faith I know not why.
On whom kind Nature did engrave
The true proverbial mark of Kn --
Who winks with one eye, looks with the other,
'S not to be trusted, though nown Brother.
All Creatures hear with Ears? you lie;
For little Tony hears with his eye;
No Treason's this, nor Blasphemy:
A winking, pinking, dapper Don,
Sire of the Association;
A Brat of the little Lord's cold brains:
Methinks the Abhorrers of such strains
At length should shame this Pygmie-Elf
To an Abhorrence of himself.
The Issue both of's Head and Tail
(If weakness can beget a Male,
Or be so weapon'd with a Tool
To make a Child, I should say Fool)
Compare, and then let me prevale
With you to hear me out my Tale.
The Son's Purse-proud and Fortune-fat,
Now Fortune favors you kno what.
The Sire's a Crafty Chit, a Grave
(In plain unwelted Saxon) Kn --
So that 'twou'd strangely puzzle all
The Rabble Astrological
To Schematize to thee, or me,
The Son's Wit, or Sire's Honesty.
Yet the last some accursed Fate
Does ominously praedestinate,
Or Haggard Witch, some Demon Vile,
Or the Ill Genius of this Isle
Preserves this Bagatel to be
The Tap'd Plague of these Kingdoms three.
Yet he could never have survived
So long, but that he is Cat-liv'd.
His Soul's a Blank (pardon th'Expression)
Apt to receive any Impression
Of Maxims fetched from Rome or Hell,
By Loyola, or Machiavel.
A Charles to day, to morrow Nol;
Nay let them Queen Queen Orange-Mol,
All Is one to him, let the World prate-on,
As long as he can save his Bacon.
By help of Bow-dy'd Conscience dapple,
With all these Humors he can grapple,
Nay with as many more as these;
O thou Brave, Pygmie-Hercules!
The spawn of him of whom 'twas sed
By Witty Peg of France since dead,
More Heretics he did create
In Church, than Florentine in State!
He has run through the Torrid Zone
Of Forty eight, and Forty one.
But here I think I err in time,
Only to gratify my Rhyme.
Hanged, it is but a Poetic Trick,
And often used in Rhetoric,
Which we dare say (tho done perforce)
It Is but the Cart before the Horse,
And so is not a pin the worse.
Has seen a Cobbler Lordifid',
Has long Conversed with Count Pride,
(And as it has bin lately said
By Statesman Sage, who is since dead,
If it seems good to powerful Fate,
A Dray-horse may be a Horse of State;
And some of them, who then did Rule,
Had Reason less than Horse or Mule.)
Nay, he has had the lucky fate
To sit with the Council of State,
And Committee of Safety too,
Which was no easy Task to do;
The Jointed-Baby, Bartle-Bauble
Adored by the Giddy Rabble,
The prime Court-Puppet of the City,
Both wise in their conceit, and witty;
Promoter of each Sect and Schism,
The Directory, Catechism,
Made by Westminster-Sanhedrim,
And (when with Zeal filled to the brim)
Their Orator, or rather Prater,
Oracle, Grand Associater.
The Hector of the Good old Cause,
An Enemy to wholesome Laws;
A Friend (if any) unto those
Who are the Nations Public Foes.
None sitter is to Rule the Roast
Than such a one, who has engrost
All the Intrigues of Politic
In Monarchy and Anarchie.
Where Is sleepy Conscience all the while?
Thou Jack o'both sides in this Isle!
With Conscience great, or Conscience small,
Or Conscience seared, that is worst of all,
Or just like Conscience none at all.
Nay farther, for I needs must tell ye,
He has a Commonwealth in's Belly,
Which by some State-Emetics may
Be violently purged away,
Or otherwise he will lingering lie
Of this State-Tympany, and die.
Unto that end I Will have a bout,
And try to fright away his Gout;
Cowardly Gout! for shame retreat,
Rack not his Petitoes with heat
And Pain; for he God wot's grown cold,
And Nature's crumbling him to Mold
By thee, yet let him die in peace,
Rather than live thus our disease;
No matter which way, so we are rid
Of this Sham-plotting Whirlegig;
This little Lord, but huge grand Whig,
The People's Dagon, Demi-God,
The Rabbles Darling, small Birch-rod
Of Loyalty, a Whisling Blade,
The Page of Honor, Lancepresade
Of Valor, Pickaninny-Peer,
Who minds his Hits, Fight Dog, fight Bear
Patron of all Dissenters, and
The Demogorgon of Whigland;
For which, it is said, he must resign
His better share in Caroline;
Nay he shall be, and't please the Pigs
The Anti-Yorkist of the Whigs,
Or else be Canonized by me
The Whigs little St. Anthony.
This Polish-Kingling since, they say,
Who scarce could creep, is run away,
('It Would vex a Dog to lic and peep,
And see a skewer'd Pudding creep)
To spend to's monumental praise
The ragged remnant of his days,
'Till amongst the Boorish Belgian Rout
His stinking snuff of life goes out;
Where he may be of Devils the worst
In all their Cacarchie accursed,
Provided he proves moderate,
And with his horns push not the State.
I like his choice, it is very well,
He has the shorter cut to Hell;
For it is the lowest Moorish Bog,
That ever was Tenanted by Frog:
Now he and they cannot but agree,
Being Rebels ab origin.
Yet if he c'er return again,
And cross the Pond, which some call Main,
May he and's Myrmidonian Whigs
Be sows't in it, and made food for Grigs;
But he has since cut such a Sham,
That they have made this nocent Lam
A Burgh-Master of Amsterdam.
In Batrachomyomachie,
Whether it be by Land or Sea,
If Frogs and Mice once more fall out,
Then he would be, without all doubt,
Chosen within those Countries Low,
On one side Generalissimo.
Now we have done with little Man
Zachaeus, a right Publican,
Exit; and enter on the Stage
The Mighty Anak of this Age;
Who first appears in fur-fac'd-Gown,
Great Officer of London-Town,
(Or as some please to term it City;
But in good sooth, the more's the Pity)
Of May-pole-Stature, high Renown,
Who is so base and sordid grown,
That some by old Tradition dare,
And others positively swear,
He Would craving Colon satisfy
With a Six-penny-Mutton-pie:
Yet if he was resolved to Feast,
And to Regale that Canine Guest,
The Ordinary Club at height must be
Inflamed with sum of pence thrice three,
(But here is the Devil on it, good Sir,
What will become of the Caterer?
Poor Rogue! he will be harrast with care
For to Adjust this Bill of Fare.)
So that this great Jolt-head of Veal
Will die indebted many a Meal
To his poor Carcas, that will crave
Bread, for the Lord's sake, in the Grave.
It might have proved a Gorgeous Prey
Unto those Animalcula,
Who Banquet in all Tombs on dust,
But in his Monument Fast they must.
The Phrygian Fabler all agree
Taught Birds and Beasts their A B C,
Might teach those Insects for to wish,
(Being deprived of such a Dish)
That Mighty Jove would let him be
The pendent Fruit of Fatal Tree,
Devoured, in answer to their prayer,
By blood-beakt-Canibals of the Air.
He Is fraught with naught but Plot and Sham,
Disgrace, hoth of his Sire and Dam;
The Nation's Shame and the Cities Stain,
Which cannot be rinsed out by the Main;
Scorn of his Sex, Nature's By-Blow,
The Chief of Cuckolds all a row,
Who has the cursed thirst of Gold,
As naturally as he of old;
Nay and withal (for all your Jeers)
His Punishment too, Asses Ears.
Therefore some other thing will be
Invented by the Deity
To make this wretched Miser feel
Nemesis angry Lash of Steel.
The day after Simon and Jude,
(Saint I omit, to please the Rude
Ill-manner'd Whigs, whom Jack does teach
To use the Irreverence of their Breech
(I Will say no more to avoid Commotion)
In The highest Act of their Devotion)
Were he on foot he would appear
The Gawdiest Pageant that is there;
But mounted on his Palfrey Stout,
The only Centaur among the Rout,
And when on Steed once fixed and set,
Looks like Baboon, not Marmoset.
The latter is a thing too small
To represent great Lout withal.
In Ignoramus he is well read,
As some are in old Hollinshed;
And know's how to patch up the Panel,
For which some wish him lap't in Flannel;
Or his Executors pay five pound,
And break his heart, though under ground:
For he that would not Club his shilling
For Corpse alive, will never be willing,
When dead, and laid among the Crowd,
Be charged with such a costly Shroud,
Or give such a Prodigious Sum
For's Voyage to Elysium:
Nay others judge he will not spare
The Ferry-Man of Hell his Fare;
But rather wander all alone
On gloomy banks of Acheron.
He is the City's Demagogue,
Whom some call Fool, but most call Rogue.
Wit he has little; but if any,
It Is only how to turn the penny.
But Rogue enuf; a Sneaking Fop,
A sordid Miser, mere Milk-sop.
He Is very Caballistical
In Tavern-Clubs, Harangues them all,
(For English-Prate, if you will afford
Such a good, modish Gallic Word)
With whites of Eyes, expanded Hands,
And Speech Larded with If's, Buts, Ands,
With gross Rebellion, horrid Treason,
During all that Nocturnal Season,
'Bove Statute-Madness, gross Nonsense,
And such a Stock of Impudence,
That without rudeness of a Ly,
Some of the Gang cry Pish, nay Fie!
This done, all is done, and too much too,
Yet not then without much ado.
But when Bow's Curfew rings thrice three,
That does refresh their memory;
It Is late, and some Tory may say,
They turn the Night into the Day.
Then they arise with wearied Crupper,
And some of them reel home to Supper;
But this same Chairman scorns to be
Guilty of such Extravagancie.
Then he begins like Acres-wise
To drop, as every one his size,
So break up the Evening-Exercise.
And then they all shake-hands, and part
With every one an aching heart,
Saying, If Popish Heir appear,
We all of us shall be, I fear,
Involved in blood up to each ear.
Give me leave now tell y'a story
Of a Mischievous Waggish Tory
Who one night ('it was not very late)
Palabrous was, that is full of prate,
And did Inveigh egregiously
Against this same Alderman-Would-be.
Now all the while that he did Chatter
About this great and weighty Matter,
It chanced in Kitchin-corner stood
His Man, like Image made of wood,
Who gaped and sucked in the discourse,
Took it for better or for worse,
As Men do Wives. Torie, they say,
His worth most truly did display,
His Virtues, Parts, the great and less,
As also his Closefistedness.
His Man in the fire-nook, who heard all,
With Patience very great, not small,
Told's Master more, no doubt, than all.
(For stories Snow-ball-like do gain
By being rolled from brain to brain.)
At which enraged, he soon did leap
From Newgate-street unto West-cheap,
Where Tom and Dick, and Jack and Hal
Keep their Rebellious Cabal.
I wonder thou can live among
A Wicked Crew, a Whiggish Throng,
Thus uninfected (Faith and Troth)
Being near the Castled Behemoth,
That Catabaptist Whig, that can
Outly, outcheat each Mortal Man,
And that same quondam Gate-hous'd Fop,
That over the way keeps a large Shop,
Who is no Christian, nor yet Jew;
And that some will aver is true;
As well as Promise and Py-Crust,
When made, that broken be they must.
But to be faithful in my work,
By's Head you will guess him to be Turk.
What makes thee prove a Tory still?
Faith! it is thine obstinate nown self-will.
But to the Man, read him who list,
A Trojan false as ever pist;
A Man, if he deserves that name,
So Profligate and void of Shame,
That he will pretend to any thing,
But Fear God, and Honor the King.
As he grows old he will grow Bolder,
'Till's Head by the Pole's higher than Shoulder.
That Elevation of the Pole
May much advantage his own Soul,
And prove more grateful to the State,
Than that of old, or this of late,
If Souls access to Heaven have
More from the Gallows than the Grave.
He Is Skilled in Mischief like Romes Pope,
Or Priests with a Canonic Cope.
He Is one of those that would, in sum,
Extirpate Kings as did old Rome;
And for a poor thing too, they say,
A Supposed Chaste LVCRETIA,
Then set up a Democracie
(The Darling of the Mobile)
To Rule, and without more ado
The Tyrants play, and Devils too.
Next Father Gray-Beard he appears
With inch of hair and Swaggering ears,
But Peruqu't now shrowds like Man Sage
The Baldness of his Lust and Age.
Tom Popular, let me thee advise
To hearken to the Orphans Cries;
'Cause Charles does his, Tom Fool, must you
Shut up the City-Chequer too?
Your Nest now sure well-feather'd is
By serving our Metropolis;
Therefore the Babes will cry Pray Pay,
For it is now past Twelvemonth-day.
In City Maiden-Fields called More
Lives one has bin a Bawd and Whore,
(And yet's no Tenant of the Grave)
As long as he bin R -- and K --
A Haunter to Creswellian Stews,
A shame to Christians, Turks, and Jews,
Where he with Lustful appetite
Revel'd, till past the Noon of Night,
That Brisk Aurora 'gan to peep
On slothful Mortals fast asleep,
(Except Gold-finder, or Black-sweep,
Burse-Sentinel with Bandeleer,
And Lanthorn'd, Rusty-Halberdeer.)
Casting her eyes about her, she
Espied, and as soon blushed to see
This Superannuated Satyr,
White, hairless-pated Erra-Pater,
Locked in the Embraces of her Arms,
Who had a Mine of Graceful Charms;
The Fulsom'st sight that ever was seen,
To see old Sixty grope Sixteen.
City-Priapus, Campaigne-Bull,
Prostitute to each Hackney-Trull,
Have thou the Impudence to think,
Rank He-Goat, Carrion that does stink
Above ground, that you are fit to be
The Guardian of Virginity?
Methinks the colder Snow of Age
Should cool at least thy Cod-piece Rage,
If not quite quench thy Amorous Fire,
Weak in the Act, strong in desire.
Had he but Youth, and strength of Chine,
He might contend with Messaline,
Who, when o'er-rid by twice twelve, cried
I Am tired, but yet not satisfied:
Nay some do groundedly Post-sage,
That had he lived within that Age,
When there was one, and one alone,
Called Petticoated-Papess-Joan,
He soon to Rome had made his flight
(Without what the Adage says is light)
To try her Antichristian Charms.
Old Soldiers love to be in Arms.
And pray, why may not London-Knight,
To sat Inord'nate Appetite,
Venture as far for German Punk
With credit, as a German Monk,
Whose Virtue and Prolific Skill,
If but as brisk as Lust and Will,
He may depend of the Priests Success,
And re-impregnate Holiness?
Who doubts it? but by the Haly-Rood,
'Twou'd prove a Monstrous, Spurious Brood;
A Holy, Anglo-German-Brat,
Dutch Sooterkin, and English Rat,
Which must, in spite of the Casuist,
Be named the Calvino-Papist.
Well, Hugonot! thou sneering Fool!
They Have now a Porphr'y Cucking-stool;
That, till the very Day of Doom,
Shall no Tiresias be in Rome
For to defile that Holy Chair
With any false Priests, or foul Player.
Rome! the grand Mart of Pious Frauds,
The Emporium of Pimps, Whores and Bauds
Nest of a cursed Gaming Crew:
Then Rome take P -- or P -- take you,
For he is or yours, or some Fiend's due.
Others there are that dare assure,
That when he is in the Grave secure
(Being such a Prodigy of Lust)
He Will Fumble with the Worms in dust,
And get (O pretty sight to see!)
A numerous, crawling Progeny.
There Is one thing more against him in charge,
Wherein I will be brief, not large,
Or rather an Advice, that he
Would learn to practice Loyalty.
Know the vast distance, Sawcebox, come,
'Twixt Royal James and Rascal Tom;
What, make no difference, wretched wight!
'Twixt a Great Prince and a Poor Knight?
A common City-Servant known;
Who ever found him a Faithful one?
Unleader'd now thou may be made,
Or turn an Aged Lancepresade.
Die, Die for shame, thou'st lived too long,
Turbulent Commoner of the Throng,
That we may all with good Presage
From that time date our Merry-age.
Thus you see Exit Dwarfish Don,
The May-pole-Miser too is gone;
And eke also amongst the Herd
Our most Salacious Dad-Gray-Beard;
Of all Sedition, Villainy,
And Mischief, the Triumviri.
To make this Trine a perfect Square,
Which Learned call Quadrangular,
Hearken with reverence and Fear,
Divinity brings up the Rear:
Come Black-Coat-Bumpkin, Grave Fopdoodle,
Shake ears affixt to empty Noddle.
Of a Bad Father the Worst Son,
The Proteus of Religion:
Spawn of an Anabaptist Dipper,
Of the Kirk's Catch an Vnder-skipper,
Once a Lay-Saint-Audomarist,
A Papist and a Calvanist;
Now this, then that, indeed what not?
Even any thing but good, God wot.
As stories tell, (and it is no Flam)
Of The Famous man of Roterdam;
The Papists all so dubious were
Of his Religion, that i'th'aer
They hanged his Corpse 'twixt Heaven and Hell,
Knowing not which t'allot him well;
Much more ought this Lay-Priest to be
Served so for his Inconstancy,
Till the last Trump (a dubious Case)
Summons him to his proper place;
There to receive his deserved doom,
For kindness done to Us and Rome.
This Reverend Doctor of the Manca,
Prudent as Quixot's Sancha Pancha,
Did gravely foot it round the Town,
In Doctors Scarf, and Doctors Gown,
With Janissaries two at heel,
Tied to Morglay's of Bilbo-steel;
Therefore you cannot but him grant,
To be of the Church-Militant;
Now walks en Cuerpo, Honest Tite,
Scorning to leave the Spaniard quite,
'Cause he being every where denied,
Was by the Don Doctorified;
A Renegado (we'll go on)
Who wants but Circumcision,
Asperse good store, and Pezants true,
To make him either Turk or Jew
This Learned Sage Philosopher,
Needs not read Alec. Rosse over.
For this Religious, Goblin Elf
Has a Pansebeia in himself.
He is Religions Tennis-ball,
Bandied and tossed about by all,
From England unto France and Spain,
And thence to England back again,
A Dulman, a mere Clerk obese,
A walking Quagmire of Grease,
So Bladder'd by the Can and Pot,
That he, like the Heraclot,
Values no more the pricks of pins,
Then Boys at Football kicks on shins:
And for these Reasons they do say,
He Is made Archbishop of Bum-bay,
'Cause his Posteriours large and great,
Will very well fulfill that Seat.
So that promoted to this place,
He that had none is called his Grace.
Though there were other Reasons store,
Two, three or four, or less, or more,
As follows such as these are,
(And they indeed are very rare)
As wise as he that rode in quest
Of's Mother Tongue, a pretty Jest,
Or the four-footed Creature dull,
Trotting nine miles to suck a Bull.
In Travel he has all outdone,
Has Lacquay'd the unwearied Sun
All Europe over, like a Divoto,
True by the Figure pars pro toto,
Active as Guts and Garbage can
Be in so great, though little Man.
He has a Voice as loud and yerne,
As any Swallow on a Berne,
With which he in a squeaking tone
Sawsily prates to every one;
Thinking, Proud Fop! he has no betters,
Because he is a Man of Letters.
He was so once; I must confess,
When that it was his happiness
To be Rome's Post-boy, and made choice
Of to be Mercury from Artois.
If this does make him Learned, so
He is, but nothing else I know.
He cannot say his Currat Lex,
Nor, though he ought, O Vivat Rex.
He frequently breaks Priscian's head,
Inhumanely, though long since dead.
In Holy Writ some Texts him gall,
Particularly Swear not at all;
Besides, another seems but strange
Unto him, Be not given to Change;
By which it plainly may be said,
In The Sacred Pages he is Ill-read:
Nay both these sentences would he
Expunge, had he the liberty,
Were it not for that dreadful Curse
(Than which there cannot be a worse)
Mentioned, which I suppose he knows,
Of that Book, in the very close.
More of his Virtues I could tell,
For which the Doctor knows full well,
He Is cursed by Candle, Book, and Bell,
And damned by the Pope of Rome to Hell.
Yet now that I have done with all,
Particularly the Murnival,
I must in the Tories Vindication,
Whisper a word in the ear of the Nation;
And that is truly only this,
(Dissenters, take it not amiss)
When Tories swear, indeed they swear,
But only it is because they fear,
And know, and hear most certainly,
Whigs Cheat and Lie most damnably;
Making Religion Noise and Buz,
Enuf to vex a Man of Vz.
But to excuse them from that Crime,
(If an Excuse may be in Rhyme)
I will assure you there may be
Found amongst you as great Rogues as we,
For Whoring, Swearing, Drinking too;
For Lying we have naught to do,
Nor Shamming, it is your constant Trade,
And will be till the Earth be made
A general fire, and it is true,
As I said Hypocrite take thy due,
And that I certainly thee tell,
Thy portion's th'hottest place in Hell.
Thus Whig Damns Whig, and yet they all
Are Innocent, both great and small,
But I must tell you that is a Lie,
( Whig, I Am ashamed of you) and why.
For though through ignorance of late,
It has been Tom's unlucky Fate
To be abused, I Will undeceive
The Vulgar (if they will believe)
'Twas whipping Zac -- not whipping Tom,
That first discovered Maidens Bumb,
And flogg'd it; though he, Pious Soul,
Designed the opposite Port-hole
To enter, but he first would see
How fair Posteriours might be,
And then he rationally guest,
The thing before was like the rest;
A pretty way in truth to try,
Whether a Maid with man would ly;
Next the Clare-Market Priest comes in,
Who never counted it a Sin
To lie with Woman, Wife, Maid, Whore,
And has (they say) bored many a score;
But that the worst was when he tried
To bless before he occupied;
Who caught the Maid in private room,
With Benediction of the Womb,
Where he upon the very place,
Like Wanton Priest' gat Babe of Grace,
But 'twas not ill to ly with her,
Because a true Jack Presbyter.
Now give me leave for to desine,
The Son of the Handkercherd Divine;
Who swills until the Noon of Night,
And gorges still his Appetite
With Viands and Liquors; but yet then
For to avoid the sight of Men,
Sleeps where his Drunkenness he got,
Like, Holy Presbyterian Sot;
And then at last away he goes
Upon his Feet, (I think with Toes,)
But first it is possibly he may
For's Lodging in the morning pray,
And that is all; welcome, well gone,
Of Holy Father Gracious Son.
I care not for the Bullian Jigs,
That in Moorefields are danced by Whigs;
Of the same Coat, but will conclude,
With one Layman of the Multitude.
A Reverend, Grave Pythagoras,
But in good sooth a very Ass;
That is endowed with as much sense,
And Learning, (for all his presence)
As amongst Schoolboys is one and twenty,
That can repeat As in praesenti.
Yes he has been a Statist too,
Yes certainly with much ado;
A Man of great Integrity,
That will not pay, nor tell you why,
Though a just Debt, only I will not,
Is this your Honesty, pox on it.
One that shall sip from place to place,
Until his Worship does disgrace
His Worship and his Manhood too,
And yet shall rail at me, or you,
Though I have known him, that I Will say,
Take drunken Journeys thrice a day,
And going home at night it is verum,
Has Scarified his Index rerum.
But in a Tory it is a Crime
Unpard'nable, a Fault sublime;
Yet in a Whig it is but small,
A Failing, may be none at all.
Great Monarch! hear now the sad plaint
Of your poor people, sick and faint
For Parliament and Privilege,
Which naught can cure, but Ketch and Sledge;
Grant their Request if you think fitting,
Or send them home to mind their knitting.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Norris, In the Year 1683.
A Satyr against the Association, and the Guildhall Riot, 4o.

The Noble Stranger, a Novel, 8o.

A Tract against the Absolute Decree of Reprobation, in Lat. 8o.

An Idea of Happiness, in a Letter to a Friend.


