A FOREST OF VARIETIES.

First Part.

Non Aliena meo pressi pede. London Printed by Richard Cotes, 1645.

MY Friend; for so you are, or at least I intend you; be favorable to these
my innocent Lines which mean nothing but your good: they meet with an
unfriendly time, and though my self have kept them these late years of our
troubles, like a candle under a bushel, without so much as casting my own eye
upon them; I fear you will admit others, perhaps, neither friends to you nor
me; which if against my will you do, I have yet taught them to say something
for themselves, and here and there they will return a tooth; they were
designed, as they tell you, to a domestique confinement, impatient of public
view, and still of Shop mart and residence; whosoever censures, shall not be
entitled to it as at public Stage Plays, for his money, whereupon I hope he
will be the more modest and indulgent: But now meeting with this plundering
age, if they venture not to undergo the Press, they are obnoxious to a sudden
destruction; nor are their Master and themselves so free from the connaturall
Epidemicall disease of vanity, as easily to consent the annihilation of so many
hours productions, especially seeing diverse of the graver sort of Spirits
have long since advised the publication even of their most light and airy
parts: nor do I remember that ever I knew a Parent of a deformed Child less
careful of its preservation then of the most beautiful: St. Paul made
himself every thing to every body to win some; the very praeludes and antipast
of these may happily lead to good and wholesome nourishment, such is my wish.

Since the birth of these pieces, the world I suppose has never experienced so
great a liberty and prostitution of the Press, to me, there never was less of
writing, I have labored with strong griefs and cares, and yet they found at
last a tongue; the direful extremities and convulsions which my unhappy
Country, and my self in it have suffered these last years make good with me
the saying of Ingentes curae stupent: Partiality found much, ingenuity little
freedom: the first surprise was such as carried me to an affectation of
dissolution rather then to endure the spectatorship of the growing miseries and
approaching tragedies; nay, spectatorship was not allowed, Embarque you must,
and in a manner embarked already was I by my natural condition; total
retirednes had been my former course and resolution, now forced from it, what
had I to do, but according to my acquired habit of mind, s^^ere my course as I
conceived my relations in fairest duty, affection, honesty and reason to
require, this, casting off my self, and all private interest and consideration
I did: the learned sophistical spirits of another not of so fair a mind cast
out such mists from the Or mud their own breeding.
Morasses, wherein they had formerly engaged us, as troubled both mine, and the
general digestion of otherwise no weakly disposed constitutions; this lay long
heavy upon me, til at length that good God who has ever miraculously assisted
me in my greatest distresses dispersed my clouds, commanded and necessitated me
to perish rather in doing my duty to himself, my King, and Country, then so
poorly as I had abandoned my self in contracting and yielding to a growing and
inevitable infirmity and ruin: His inspiration I obeyed, and he has so
blessed me, that in despite of unexpressible disorders of body and mind, as I
have conquered all fears and apprehension of whatever consequences; so do I
in my station and daily duty surmount my not only late but ancient infirmity; I
wrap my self in my honest resolves, steering for the best, untroubledly
prepared for the worst. But I am fallen amongst the Noli me tangere's. And now
again for a spirt to my Book: Poor Book of a most unhappy Author, what fate,
what genius can thou expect to make thee happier then thy Master? Yet thus
far I will encourage thee, that from the fairest, from the best constituted, he
has generally reaped favorable opinion; for others, respect them as little as
he, seek thy happiness within thy self, and not abroad, they will have their
sayings, but thy good constitution will bear thee out against malignant
blasts, wander the least thou can, keep close to thy friends, and tell them
that the many abruptions and et caeteraes of thy most serious, sad, and devout
pieces of Prose were occasioned by diverse expungings of matter intended only
for a Son, or a descendant.

We are now in an extraordinary early, fair promising, and comfortable spring,
and by Gods grace upon a treaty for Peace: May the King be happy in good
Counsel, and believing well of such as seek nothing more then his, and his
peoples happiness, This is our Crisis of emerging, or utter ruin: Pais gaste
vault mieux que pais perdu. Benedicat Deus.

Febr. the 10th. 1644.
A Forest of VARIETIES: Concerning petty Poetry, made more general in address
then at first.
Preludium to the first Verses.
Madam,
IN ancient offerings to Deity, Turtles, Incense, and Flowers have been
acceptable for the zeal of obedience, though of little worth, or advantage;
let my respect to your command make the more excusable the worthless following
lines, which otherwise in my knowledge of the sleightnesse of their stuff and
making should never have presumed to undergo the weight of your censure: True
Turtles you shall find them, full of simple love, and unfurnisht of all
Serpentine climbing art of subtilty and knowledge: Incense and Smoke, they are
but of the gentlest nature, not far fetched Aromatiques, troublesome and
intoxicating to the brain, but mild as flowers unmedicinall for morality, mere
Poseys or Nosegays, gay to the first sense; which if happily you prove them,
favor them so far as to give them their pass without further examination, I
promise not my self that they shall please, for they please not my self;
(especially in a serious humor) I know them full of faults, but think them
not worth the mending. And if to be an Author of such toys be a fault, it is
surely doubled to make them too great a business. Idleness was their mother,
which though I pleased my self to avoid by their destroying her in their
birth, yet to good judgments they may well be as ill pleasing, as ill
natured: If time were misspent in them, yet there was not much cast away; for
the idle hours of three months brought them forth, except some few, the
children of little more then my childhood. As they are far from deserving
good opinion, so am I far from the humor of some so well conceited of such
their works (like Peacocks proud of their feathers) that they are never at an
end of their labor, but still with child to utter them: my travel ended with
their first birth, and so I hope or with the readers may at the first reading;
for if they be not plain and easy, it is against my will, which as it wants
strength to imitate, so cannot approve the ridling humor lately affected by
many, who think nothing good that is easy, nor any thing becoming passion
that is not expressed with an hyperbole above reason. These tormentors of their
own and their Readers brains I leave to be admired in their high obscure
flight, (while my self will be happy, if I can procure but a familiar delight
to a superficial reading) they affect to show more wit then love, and in truth
so much, that whilst they commend beyond reason, they show that either they
want reason to commend, or their subject to be commended; like ill ranging
Spaniells they spring figures, and ravished with their extravagant fancies,
pursue them in long excursions, neglecting their true game and pretended
affection: Be the matter, or the discoursers capacity never so poor and
mean, I ever affect a man that makes right conclusions. And for my self, I
would rather be thought to want invention and knowledge, then judgment and
good consequence in what I utter. The Poetry of these times abounds in wit,
high conceit, figure, and proportions; thin, light, and empty in matter and
substance; like fine colored ayery bubbles or Quelque-choses, much o^^entation
and little food; conceits, similes, and allegories are good, so the matter be
carried along in them, and not interrupted by them. Venus is here drawn by her
Doves, not Serpents; and as I profess my self to want art in all things, so
in matters or love I think it may be best spared, as being an affection
merely natural, and where Art is seldom comely, but authorized with a native
disposition; besides, Verses of love are commonly made for women, whose
chiefest beauty consists in being unsophisticated by Art, and are the more
pleasing in conversation by possessing a free purity of unadulterated wit. And
as we often see that those women that have bestowed on themselves the most Art
and costly dressing, nay many times that have the best proportion, are not yet
the most winning: So in Verses there is to be expressed a natural spirit and
moving air (or accent) more alluring and charming the affection, then others
of a far more rich, fair and curious composition. The world in all things is
full of Critiques, that are sharp sighted to reprehend, and will approve
nothing but according to their own rule; (many times out of square) But for my
part I hold the same opinion of Verses as of Airs in Music, or Houses, that
let them be delightful and pleasant to the first appearance with convenience
to the design, and for the fantasticated rules of Art, Architecture, and
proportion, let them observe them that list: and commonly who most affects
them, most fails in the general delightfulness and use. Poetry is in truth a
kind of Music, the fable of Orpheus expressed as much; Music has its
Anthems, Pavens, Fantesies, Galliards, Courantoes, Airs, Sarabands, Toys,
Cromatiques, etc. And Verses have their Hymmes, Tragedies, Satyrs, Heroiques,
Sonets, Odes, Songs, Epigrams, Distiques, and Strong lines, which are their
Cromatiques, and of themselves may be excellent in their Art; but long dwelt
upon grow harsh and distastefull. The commandments and preceptives are none of
the poetical parts of Scripture. Though I am no part of a Scholar, yet thus
much by casual opening of books I know, that Horace in matter of love hates
difficulty: and though I believe it an imitation of his abrupt and harsh vein
in his more serious pieces, that upon the worthiness of his name and matter,
has debaucht many from the formerly used, more open, familiar and pleasing
manner of versifying; yet I find that even himself (howsoever either
naturally or affectedly rugged, except his Lyrick vein) when he utters his
judgment, or prescribes to others concerning measured compositions, no man is
more frequent in recommendation of a round, current, clear and graceful
delivery: but what his moral, solid and satyrick matter dispenst with, is in
slighter stuff intolerable: there shall you find the rough hands, but not the
voice and substance; let them rather imitate his best, then his worst. It
cannot be good in limited lines, which are a purposed pause to the voice, to
carry with a counter-time the period of the sense to the body of the next line,
much less to dismember an innocent word, that every child according to nature,
and use, in spelling would put together; and words have a natural air,
accent, and quantity, whence to strain them is to rack both them and the
reader: Who will set himself to dance, or his horse to manage, let him seek
to observe good time, air, and fashion: no man is fit for all things; whose
Genius was borne for prose, let him write prose, rather then affecting Verse to
make such unnatural stuff, as shall be good neither. I pity both in my self
and others to see the best of our matter in one place so extremely pressed, that
it is a labor to discover it, and yet in another part of the same piece slight
and superfluous stuff dilated at large. A Poet should raise light from smoke,
not blow that which is light with him to carry but smoke to another. King James.
I am of his Majesty's mind, that the best eloquence is to make our selves
clearly understood, and that to him who has leisure, there need no
abbreviations: I had rather pay for a little more paper then to be put to the
cost of my brain. Sir Philip Sidney.
The admirable inventions and matter of your unimitable Uncles extant works
flourish in applause of all, by a happy and familiar display of their beauties
to the meanest, including withal such generositie of truly and profoundly
extracted conceit to the most inward life of whatsoever he expresses, that
the strongest and clearest seeing judgments may rest satisfied, yea
transported in contemplation of the most lively and pleasing touches that a
soul can apprehend, or a pen distill. Yet somewhat more to authorize my self,
Lipsius upon perspicuity holds it the greatest misery in writing, not only not
to be understood, but to be understood with difficulty: and the sharp-witted
Hunc vol^ qui fiat non sine pane s^tur.
Martial in contempt of the more formal and severe censurers and Writers,
professes that he would have his verses need neither an Apollo, nor
Grammarian; and howsoever some may deny him to be exact, himself in his
entertainments affects rather to please his Guests then Cooks. Verses of love
should be verses of pleasure, and to please in love, the smoother faced the
better.

I may be crabbed and rugged, but will never affect to be so, especially in
verses, whose true nature and use is to work a kind of a Charm upon the mind,
even with slightness of matter, by the well wrought and exquisite harmony of
their Cadence, and sound: There being to be transfused into verse sometimes
such a natural spirit of magnanimity, sometimes such a soft, wanton, and
melting air of passion, that the one shall never fail to affect a generous
and heroic mind, nor the other to work a kind of tender and relenting
disposition in a sensible and well-natur'd constitution; neither of which shall
easily be seen effected from a harsh and rude (though never so witty) an
expression: for as in persons, so in Verses; some, let them mean never so
lovingly, shall yet by their natural verjuyce be ever out of the way of
Bacchus and Venus. But in point of obscurity, in some sort to excuse my self
with others, I fear we all often unwillingly incur the error of it by
thinking our meaning as open to others, as to our selves, when indeed the
Characters of our expression are fully supplied by our own understanding to
our selves, whilst to others they are lamely contracted and imperfect. Thus
much I have been bold to write, not only to excuse a poor Mother wit, but
somewhat to give a pass upon their strange and uneasy habit, who I doubt not
but they will have many a gird at my easy and natural nakedness; I mean
those lofty dim shooting Archers, whom I wish to remember, that he who
shootes highest, shootes not ever nearest the mark; and he that may walk in
the light, is to be suspected for choosing the dark. Now (Madam) I grant that
all I can write (especially what these lines contain) is but vanity and a most
idle vanity; yet thus far I will excuse both the writing and the reading,
that all the world is little better: we often condemn vain pleasures, and
remember not that the most things the best of us most seriously do, have
indeed no other end. For God being served and nature sustained, what fruit
proceeds from our authority, learning, wealth, policy, and earnest intent to
profit, but to satisfy our impulsive affections, which either propound to
themselves a felicity whereof they fail in the possession, or seek to divert
by such employments the dullness and otherwise obtruding miseries of their
condition? which if you please to consider, you will the more excuse many
pursuers of lawful and natural delights, and value those pleasures at the
better rate which are most perdurable and communicable. May the following
wanton (but as modest Babes as their Mother Venus could produce) though they
cannot profit, yet afford some delight light to that your Worthy well furnished
mind, to which I wish all happiness that ever Noble nature possessed, or can
possess. I must yet be so much longer, as to crave pardon for my unintended
and I fear unpleasant length, it is the vice of writing to be endless; thus
has my enmity to obscurity brought forth tediousness, yet not so much, but
that all this may be sooner read, then some one passage of our Night pieces
understood: they had need afford profitable stuff, who utter it at so hard a
rate. I wish your Ladyships authority would so abate the price that our poorer
abilities might hold trade without straining. And seeing I am upon the Theme
of verses, whither I mean not shortly to return, I humbly crave your favor
after my fashion, disorderly to say thus much more, that howsoever some of the
stricter sort approve only of verses so close, useful, and substantially
woven, that there must be neither list, looseness, nor the least superfluity
of words: for my part, I am not of that strict order, nor ever yet saw it
observed in any Author. Nature has mingled stalks with flowers, and Husks
with Corn, and has raised ornament from our excrementiciall hairs: conceits
and matter over-crusht, afford commonly as little grace as pleasure; and to
write all in abbreviations, would take indeed les^e room, but much more time
and trouble. A Geneva print weakens the sight, nor is it good to hold your bow
ever bent, or your horse straight rained. Sometimes amongst pithy and tough
lines I think it not amiss to interpose one of an easy ^traine, like resting
places in lofty stairs, to ease the Reader. Some fluency of weak water helps
the better in nourishment to convey what is more solid. Lamp-oile yields no
good savor nor in sallet nor verse. Difficilia quae pulchra, is to be
understood of the attaining, and not the exercising of faculties. You know how
it is said of Poems, that they should be such, ut sibi quivis speret, idem
sudet frustraque laboret ausus ide^. Strong lines may be drawn on with
Cartropes, but the fairest have generally an easy birth. It is rare for
anything to be well and hardly performed. The French expression, A Deliure,
implies as well perfectness, as facility and dexterity. There may be employed
such an extraordinary (yet gentle) finenesse of conceit, and Conclusions so
designed, wrought, limned and colored, touches so bold, covert allegories and
subtilties so neat, Epithets so material, Metaphors and ambiguities so doubly
fine, as shall be more masterlike then more sententious, sublime, abstruse,
and strong appearing lines. Worth of matter and conception supposed, nothing
more commends a piece then terms well chosen, proper, lively, and significant,
with a free coming on, and as free a close and conclusion. Also a fair,
clear and even thorough carriage with well wrought joints and connexions gives
credit to the workman. I love as much a great deal of force and depth couched
in one word, as I hate little in many. We ordinarily write and speak the same
things and notions, and to the same purpose, but infinitely differ in the
delivery and expression; some proceed in a stuttering confused obliquity,
groping as in a mist or darkness; some go more directly and exhibit their
Idea's and conceptions with so clear and distinct a light, illustrations,
instances, demonstrations, enforcements, and arguments so pertinent,
perspicuous and concluding, that the understanding and assent are captivate
beyond evasion or subterfuge. Sophistry and figures may appear fine and witty,
but prevail little upon the best judgments: Reason must convince the
intellectual soul. May I write clearly and strongly, rather then finely and
artificially; hence is the difference of elocution, hence of persuasion, the
one is light and aerie, the other weighty and solid; most lovely and commanding
is the beauty of a fair ingenuous and rich soul fairly mounted, and armed
upon well shaped and unanimously received virtue, goodness and reason. Verses
are then good, when turned to prose they hold a fair and current sense, and
when translated into another language, there is such mastery found in their
conception by the advantage of what is genuine unto them, that there will be
either more words or less conceit and matter. The privilege they have over
common phrase, consists in the warranted becoming ornament of a lofty well
ordered spirit, and wantonness, such as shall make toys pass for Jewels, and
give to what of it self is precious, an acquisite luster of workmanship beyond
what prose can bear, and that in little room; Their voice is more constrained,
and consequently more shrill and piercing. Nor is it in writing the least
perfection (howsoever it has found little observation) so to order and
contract our expressions, that one well adopted word may run into, and govern
many of diverse and strong sense) for nothing gives more pleasure and
satisfaction to a diligent inquisitive and judicious Reader, then much matter
and conceit compendiously digested with sufficiency of perspicuity. To
conclude, lines of a far fetched and labored fancy with allusions and
curiosity, and in similes of little more fruit or consequence, then to ravish
the Reader into the writers fine Chamaeleon colors, and feed him with air, I
approve not so much, as height and force of spirit sententiously and weightily
exhibited; wit needs not rack it self where matter flows; embroderies become
not a rich stuff; and art is best expressed where it least appears.

A strong wing is to be preferred before a painted, and good ^ense and matter
elegantly delivered before extravagancy of fancy and conceit; such unnatural
impertinency serves rather to shadow then illustrate, to overwhelme then set
forth the subject: as well apposite as accurate writing is the Authorsglory.

Postscript upon occasion of the then young Princes pretended desire to have
sight of the following Poems.
ANd here under pardon to conclude with this further defense of Love the
subject of this little work, but taking it more large and high I find love to
be the most worthy object of the best and most generous dispositions, and none
but malign natures that address not their thoughts toward it: for what good
and worthy mind has its being, that is not bent as upon its felicity either to
the love of women the most natural, of men the most noble, or above all of God
the most happy and rewardfull? Whither else tend all our studies of comeliness,
of glory, and noble actions of charity and good deeds? Wherein can man so well
resemble his great Creator as by worth and goodness to win love? what more
noble end can any man have to study virtue and perfection, then thereby to win
affection and praise, the reward and food of virtue, and tribute of God? Nay,
love the essence of God, the good spirit and wings of the soul, the Mother,
Child, and final cause of Beauty, the begetter and maintainer of the world,
the life of life: by love the Sun shines, and the earth brings forth, by love
is society and commerce maintained, by love the soul dwells with the body, and
God with the soul; by love nature ever works for our preservation, when the
body and almost the soul are laid in sleep. Admirable love! without thee life
is hateful, man but a wolf to man, the world a second Chaos; For thy sake
alone, who affectest not a decaying Mansion, I apprehend loss by growing old,
yet thus again am I comforted by thy most divine power, that thou never
abandonest the dwelling of goodness, and art successively fruitful over all
the good works of nature to the worlds period: so that to the virtuous, where
the love of women fails, the love of men begins, and where that by the
withering imperfections of age grows cold, (as the air to a setting Sun)
there, for our supreme and infinite comfort, begin to shine most clearly the
beams of that divinest love, (which before were too much intercepted by the
sensualities and passions of our younger years) to make us therein eternally
happy by that operation of love, and contemplation of beauty, which at the last
must be our souls immortal food and joy.

Advertisement upon the first Verses.
I am not ignorant that who keeps the common road, falls not into the
encumbrances incurred by them who search or by or nearer ways: Writing is a
by-path of life, I am yet engaged to it, but hope shortly to get out, and by
the way I give you this Antidote and Rapsody of praecaution and true
information concerning the following pieces. The reason why I retain and
expose them with others, is not so much that I esteem them worthy of view or
life, as that they were many years since Copyed and spread abroad beyond my
knowledge then, and are now beyond my power to recall: they are more Chafe
then Corn, fitter to be ventilated, blown away, and play in the air, then
vented in any Market and commerce of wit and censure: they are incorrect, if
not incorrigible; yet I consent to leave them, and many other my pieces, such
as they are, to represent unto me the difference 'twixt then and now. To
attempt to perfect them were to dispersonate their youth and hasty nature, and
fall into the much frequented stage [Error] of putting stronger lines, and more
conceited and elaborate elegancy into weak mouths and strong passions; then
well comporteth with them; let their youth and genuine conception plead their
pardon. You shall mistake them if you often conceive them not rather the
offspring of fancy then passion. But take them at the worst, they have
something of reason and serious in them: and the errors of love are not so
foul, as the love of error; nor is it impertinent to persuade love in them
who have constrained it in you; and love may be such, as to become no less
justifiable then natural. Love is in truth of diverse kinds, ever an Ebullition
of the liver: sometimes it is made and forced upon us, sometimes we weave and
fool our selves into it, sometimes it proceeds from gratitude and good nature
of gratification. It is generally the child of weakness, as well as of
idleness: witness my self in my childish youth and Melancholy humor. A
vigorous gayety of the heart and mind taken up and busy in other affections
and entertainments hardly admits it. It is a sad confinement, a disease like
women's longing, where the violent appetite of one object, no better then the
rest, gives relish to that alone, whilst a right and undistasted apprehension
of every thing in the true kind is the much better and sounder constitution:
and as in longing after such or such a morsel, the consideration is carried by
the fancy and taste, which have no rule but themselves: or as at Table, the
hearty approbation of some one dish is a provocation to others appetites: so in
love. And as most Dogs will often strive to get away another bone, though
otherwise little desired, or when a morsel is offered to be snatched from
them, grow greedy of that which before they neglected; so in affections; I
leave the application. Sometimes as love has been termed a warfare, so is
brave Conquest made ambition; too many make it their felicity, and effeminately
bend all their affections toward it; Sometimes it is taken up for a fashion,
and to be in fashion is in idle times of no small importance to idle and
gallant persons: Sometimes like Coqualuchios and Epidemicall diseases, it may
much proceed from the disposition of the Air; as in other kind we may observe
of quarrels that they seldom go alone; Our poor volatile ayery affections
are strongly wrought upon as well from outward as inward incentives, winds, and
Aspects.

The first access of love is not ever by the eyes, it has often a strong
foundation and preocupation begotten at the ear; when a noble heart takes
impression of a well lodged reputation, eminent in fame, virtue, generality of
love and applause attending it, there is it already half as much subdued as it
is ambitious to possess and subdue: to complete, I acknowledge the approbation
of the eye for a requisite concomitant. To draw and quicken, sometimes the
saying of the shadow is usefully true, it flies what follows, and pursues what
seems to retire and fly.

Whether love be most natural between differing or suitable complections may
as well be a question, as the old rule of friendship to consist amongst
equals has been lately controlled. But as friendships are conceived most
firm in such relation and tie, as there may be a dependency wrought either by
a reciprocation of mutual benefits and advantages, or where at least the good
and fortune of the one relies and fastens it self upon the other: So if the
fantastical existence of love receive not a fixation from some more solid root
and consideration, such as grows either from a rational and deliberate
election, or from such like sympatheticall proportion of mind, virtue and
affections; it will be easily subject to scatter and blow away in the
lightness of the soil that produced it. It is a fantastique and hardly to be
concluded on by reason; but we generally see it is specificall, as between
vipers and other creatures in their kind. And certainly there is a self-love
reigning in us, which will not well permit a quick viperine highgusted spirit
to fancy one of a dull and flegmatique temper. Who ever loved, that loved not
at first sight, is as false as fine; circumstance and opportunities more often
beget it: and love, to show its extravagant power, ordinarily graffs it self
upon the stock of an unfavourable, prejudicial and crabbed opinion. As there
is great difference betwixt What will you give, and What will you take: so is
there in seeking and making love, or being found and made to it. Wise men are
said to make more opportunities then they find, but in love it holds the other
way. True love is as passive as active, and it is the height of its true art,
to moderate it self, as to love and be wise. How blind and unreasonable
soever it is supposed (as I have otherwhere said) a fair, kind and suitable
object has much to allege why it ought to be loved, and it is a peculiar
prerogative of faith to transcend our reason; you see I affect to write rather
obscurely then full and largely (what you stick upon to conceive, may stick the
better with you.) I have often pitied to see not only the most beautiful of
creatures, but the fairest and kindest natures most subject to the excess, and
vicious fruit of their love and kindness; there is belonging to them a kind
of goodness, being as well affected in a gratification of others, as the
natural pleasure respecting only themselves. It is as happy that divine and
humane Laws have circumscribed us herein, as it is miserable to see how nature
by a gallantry of custom has shaken off her fairer, richer girdles and
bracelets so far as to become relapsed into her naked native current common
with other creatures, almost drowned in her own whirlpoole; and neglecting all
other lessons of virtue, honor and Religion; men may ordinarily learn from
women a strength beyond their ordinary in maintaining themselves above the
vanity and levitie of resenting impression from admiring and affecting eyes;
you may attribute it to their honor lying at stake one way, as ours another:
but well considered, men as well in honor as fortune prove the greater losers
by such intanglings; perfection of one may be imperfection in another. But
here let the most unlovely natures and contemners of love find this Take this
other Paradox, that the faire^t are often the chastest: for loving beauty in
the abstract, how ever they may please their nature and humor in giving way to
a parc^^l entertainm^nt of many affections, yet r^st they often satisfied in a
pendulous suspensive power and glory, by an equilibrious distraction, which
others missing more abandon themselves to the concrete.
Paradox, that there is none of them all so clay or kay cold, but despit^ of
their rigid perverse discourse and disposition (I except impotent, maleficiat,
aged, and sickly frigidity) if they meet with a right, a kind, and courting
subject, and be plied with warm clothes, it shall put them into such a heat
as birds feel in the Spring, or Dear in the Autumn; yet this I grant, that
very many not incapable of love wander all their lives without meeting a true
steel to their flint, or a fatal constellation of the heavenly and earthly
stars to their inflammation. You know the proverb of marriage and hanging, and
old sayings are somewhat authentic; Fate may be easilier slighted then
avoided. Gamesters may think to counter-shuffle Fortune out of her course, when
the poor fools become in truth her Instruments to shuffle themselves into her
noose. Reason and discourse were not given to us (I confess) in vain, and
they are to be employed according to good discretion, yet such as will leave
nothing to fortune are not ever the most successful: As men in ships conceit
the earth to move when it is themselves, so we may wittily think we lead
and fetter fortune, which in spite of our wisdom will prove our guide and
steerer. There are to us in our courses (as to Pilots at Sea) certain
insensible currents that force us out of our propounded way and scope.

Si fortuna volet, fies de Rhetore Consul,
Si volet haec eadem, fies de Consule Rhetor.
The universal agent is the great and prime wheel, by whose motion all
thoughts, actions, and events are commanded. It is he who turns ( Ille ego
qui quondam) from Mantua to Troy or Rome, and so it graciously pleased him to
convert my Muse by a better to a better nature. St. Paul made us witnesses of
his, and I am contented by an equal Communication of both kinds to make you
witnesses of my better conversion. That Eternal and Melior natura I implore to
instruct me to distinguish betwixt him and man, true or false, Piety and
Charity, to preside me in all my courses, and lead me in his trust to him,
in whom alone is all true f^licitie. Amen, Amen.

1638. Many of these Verses I own not, for I
In them was scarce my own; Nor am I he
Who made them: but since from such vanity
May grow such change, read through, and change with me.


AVRORA.
AWake my silent long reserved Muse:
Th'allarme of love tumultuous in my heart
Summons out all my souls best strength, and art;
And does my weaker faculties confuse.
What serve you now you precept Sentinells,
You Rampars framed of reason and discourse
Against all passions power and intercourse?
One puts you now to flight, who all compells
To yield unto her all-subduing might.
It Is she may truly say, I come, I see,
And captivate the proudest hearts to me.
Her power commands me love, admire and write
Her glory, and my love, above compare:
Wherein great Queen of love accept good will:
For it exceeds the power of earthly quill
Either to express, they so transcendent are.
On then my pen my burd'ned soul to ease,
She absent, thou alone my mind must please.
Not for their worth, but for thy worthiness
Accept of these presumptuous ruder lines,
Where through my weakness thy bright beauty shines,
And Sun-like does in spite of mists express
Its own true glory: Wisely happy he,
Who in this glass of water viewes this Sun
Excelling object, which to look upon
Our humane Organs too unable be.
What though the Sisters nine my Muse disclaim,
As an untutored Novice new start up,
That never tasted the Castalian cup?
Let others invocate their idle name,
Whilst I by thy divine power set on fire
Thy worth on higher Trophies elevate
Then e're the greatest Poet Laureate
Could her renown that did his Muse inspire.
Assist great goddess then my passions story,
Thy beauties record, thine shall be the glory.
To make an Inventory of thy parts
By fair resemblance of their form and hew
To Ivory, Coral, Crystal, heavenly blew
Hills, Pillars, Bows, Valleys, and piercing darts,
Were to detract from that perfection
Of teeth, of lips, of eyes, of azure veins,
Breast, neck, brows, looks, and those delicious plains,
Which thou hold'st in most fair connection,
Excelling all resemblance, all compare;
And were indeed by cunning to aspire
To color forth the burning heat of fire,
Or glorious light, and dazzling beams which are
In Phoebus face, and fiery Chariot dwelling.
Thou like the joys of the Elysian place,
(Which who strives to describe shall but debase)
Art only known, by others all excelling.
Let then all Pens, and Species confess
Their weakness thy perfections to express.
Since Cupid to Loves Seas my Bark has pressed,
My fate once led me by the Cape of Hope;
But since alas! my agitated Boat
Has past Despaires sad gulf, and its arrest,
I Anchor cast dysaster to prevent,
But Anchor hopeless did, and helpless prove;
That marble white and red it could not move
Whereon I ventured it, but home was sent.
Like as do those, whom fearful shipwreck threats,
Labor for life some harbor good to win,
Yet crossed by wind, and tide, cannot put in:
So up and down my tossed Bottom beats,
Expecting better fortune, and some grace
That welcom'st haven that I may recover,
Which under that Cape once more I discover,
Center of happiness, most wished place:
But cruel night, why do thou me such wrong,
With thy black cloak to bar me of that fight,
My only mark, my souls supreme delight,
Supplanting my enflamed hope so long,
That for a fortnight thou do that remove,
(Fortnight, which will as long to me appear
As if each night contained a tedious year)
The only object of my joy and love?
For joy without her presence have I none,
Nor can I love but only her alone.
If Art by wishing could obtained be,
I would I had the power of Circe's skill,
Not like to her by poys'ning means to kill;
But by some secret Philters mystery
Loves mutual flames to her I would impart,
Whose piercing eyes have set my breast on fire,
Whilst she I fear remains without desire,
Impenetrable to loves powerful Dart.
Be not unjust, great-little God of love,
Turn not a Tyrant in thy latter reign,
Make us not think that thou did love ordain
Our torture, but felicity to prove:
Justices balance ever even stands:
Shoot equal then her heart as well as mine,
That we may both adore thy power divine
With equal, happy love, faith, joy, and bands.
So shall I ever celebrate thy fame,
But else have cause to curse thy power, and name.
I wonder much that all this Parliament
Your Sex against you a bill has never framed,
Wherein (me thinks) you justly might be blamed
That contrary to common Laws intent,
And common good by your means dearth is bred
With scarcity, which men incenseth so
That some contentlesse, some to fury go;
And all because you hold monopoled,
And have engrossed into your sole possession
The mass, and stock, and beauty of our age:
A grievance just, except you can assuage
Their cause of plaint by satisfying impression;
Whereat me thinks I see you forth produce
Your self for Patent, beautifully framed
By God and Natures perfect working hand,
Whose power to question were profane abuse;
And thus your right authorized, they confuted
Subscribe your Patent n'ere to be disputed.
Come on you searching quintessence of wit,
Limbeck no more your all-exhausted brain
To find that delectable place again,
Where all things did in first perfection meet;
Contemplate here this little piece of mould,
And you will soon acknowledge it at least
A perfect model happily congest
Of all delights, which that place did enfold!
Perpetual Summer fair does here reside,
Harmonious concord is in all things found,
Flowers, fruits, perfumes, delights do here abound;
Nor grows there here or nettle, thorn, or weed;
Here all in native true perfection grows,
Nor shall the Gardener need to toil, but take:
Who would not then all earth besides forsake
Here to inhabit, where all solace flows?
Most happy garden, earths true Paradise;
But happier gardener, whom my soul envies.
Be not unwilling my request to grant,
That I your shadow, and resemblance have;
The reason why this favor I do crave
Is not for that your pourtraiture I want:
For were my breast transparent like mine eye,
You there your self enthronized should see
Sole Empress of my heart, my thoughts, and me,
Consecrate trophies of your victory.
This your Idea feasteth me within,
Whilst my poor eyes, who first did entertain
You for their welcom'st guest, do now complain
They st^rved are, distasted of each thing,
Except your self alone: deny not then
A charity so superficial,
Which when times ruins you can not recall,
Shall yet your glory show, and shown to men
(Who nothing will believe but what they view)
Shall force them wonder, and accuse their fate
That made them lose by sending them too late
The happy servitude of seeing you,
And make them honor verse, and pencills skill,
Which only can preserve what time would kill.
Since that my vows, my fortune, and my love,
My course, and resolution did engage
To undertake a sacred Pilgrimage
To that Saints shrine, which sole my soul does move,
So hapless, and malignant is my chance,
That guide and Pilot other have I none,
Then only that blind cruel Boy alone,
Who suffers me nor rest, nor yet advance;
Thus leads the blind the blind, whilst both astray
Wander amongst thorny thicks, looking each hour
When fierce untamed passions should devour
Like savage beasts my poor soul for their prey.
Oh pity now (my fairest Saint and Star)
The restless wildred state, wherein I stand,
And, since I seek but you, lend your fair hand
To guide my course; such moral lessons are,
That none deny to kindle others light,
Nor to direct the wandering Pilgrim right.
That light to light, way to the stray we give,
The reason easy is, it nothing costs,
Nor breeds our diminution, or loss:
And truth to say (fair Sun) I only live
By that pure light and heat drawn from your eyes,
Whose sparks have so my subject heart inflamed
With heavenly fire so wonderfully framed,
That it to quench in you it only lies.
You, like Achilles spear, which sole imparted
Help to the hurt it made, can sole apply
A sovereign balm, such as no gold can buy,
To ease those hearts that for your love have smarted;
Grant then my lives fair Sun, Apollo-like
Whose light's our light, our life, direction, cure,
These virtues Phoebus yields, thy essence pure,
That I may offer at the shrine I seek
The pleasing sacrifice, and fruits of love,
Which tasted may your equal pleasure prove.
You Elegy wayling writers elegant,
Whose sad despised Muse of little sings
But rigor, scorn, and her tyrannick stings,
Who all composed of Ice, and Adamant,
As Nero joy'd those tragic flames to see
Which Romes proud flames had reason just to rue,
So triumphs and insulteth over you
The cruel Mistress of your misery;
I wonder at your brains productions,
Which 'stead of comforting benign aspect,
Are fed with nipping blasts, frosts, and neglect
From those Parelii proud in your destructions:
I like the flame-fed Salamanders kind,
And as the tender Sommer-lab'ring Be,
Except a warmthfull Zephyr breath on me
Am stupifi'd with cold, fruitless in mind.
Love, child of heat and hope, does barren perish,
Except (fair Sun) his tender plant you cherish.
Queen of Beauty most divine,
From whose sacred charming shrine
Humane power cannot part
Without sacrifice of heart:
Thetis Nymphs had little grace,
Whilst your beauty was in place,
And their influence was cold,
As sent from a watery mould:
Shall I happy call that night,
When to gain a pleasing sight,
Precious liberty I lost,
And am now on loves Sea tossed
By a tempest of desire
Mixed full of heavenly fire,
Raised by that enchanting face
Of her Sex the only grace?
Yes most happy I it call,
Though it do my freedom thrall,
Freedom none may near compare
With that happy state, where are
Those in your fair service placed,
And that please to make them graced.
Happy martyr of constraint
Whose pain is for such a Saint,
And who has for object given
The sweet hope of such a heaven!
Fair, a stranger term me not,
That your Sanctity would blot,
Saint did never yet object
Former knowledges defect
Against those whose zealous vows
True devotion avowes.
If my merit yet be small
To procure your love withal,
Time alone to you must prove
How well I will deserve your love.
Grace in Saints ought to abound,
Grace never grows on merits ground,
Be then gracious, as I true,
Constant, and faithful unto you:
And my fortunes, that have crowned
Me happy on that Relics ground,
Shall be all ascribed to serve
You, that all respect deserve.
To win her from resolving upon a Cloistered life, in whom love is conceived
to be yet predominant.
PRetty wanton Beauties treasure,
Made for sweet delight and pleasure,
Precious Jewel of thy kind,
Whose equal it is as hard to find,
As the matchless Phoenix mate:
What though nature did create
You Phoenix-like to be admired,
And your essence so inspired,
That your beauteous winning parts
Should sole triumph over hearts;
Yet in this you far over go
Such solitary state of woe,
That she exempt from like and love
Those delights does never prove
That have made the Gods so often
Quit their heavenly azure Loft,
The sweet food of love to taste,
More delicious then repast
Of Ambrosia, or the wine
Appropriate to the Divine.
Nature you so happy frames
That the sweetest game of games
You (to whom all cards are free
To choose till you pleased be)
May command in such perfection
That the Ambrosian refection
Tastlesse, and insipid were,
Balanced in that compare.
Oh! but how I do envy
Except I knew it should be I
That happy he whom you will daigne
Such Soule-filling joys to gain!
Let not now a fond Discourse
Contrary to Natures course
Make you abstain from those delights,
Whereto she kindly you invites:
She each thing instructs you know
What is its friend, and what is its foe;
Her you boldly may believe,
She did never none deceive.
Be not swayed by wit of Schools,
Precepts were made to govern fools,
And to subject those to aw,
That want selfe-strength of reasons law;
Reason and Nature are all one,
Reason moves from her alone.
But why do we thus dispute?
With a kiss I you confute.
Send those to Cells, upon whose thought
The world and Love have never wrought:
Birds that long have lived free,
Caught and Cag'd but pine and die.
I marvel not, Earths fairest ornament,
Abstract of beauty, Natures only pride,
That your delight is only to abide
In Londons sweet commerce, sole Element
Where the refined Spirits of our I Will
Ingenious discourse communicate,
And hourly fresh delights participate,
Dull tedious time with pleasure to beguile.
We all best love our like, London in much
Does you resemble: London is the best,
The fairest, richest Town of all the rest,
In all this Continent there is none such.
London our treasure, Instruments of war,
Majestic residence, and Gems contains:
London far more then all the other gains:
London the firmament, where every Star
Of magnitude, of power and virtue moves:
London the School, and forum of all Arts:
London the Empory that all imparts,
That use requires, or our affection loves:
London the envy of all other Towns,
As chief in beauty, so supreme in power,
Our Kingdoms brightest object, fairest flower;
Enchanting Siren, that me happy crowns
In honoring of my Nativity.
I to your better judgments now refer
Those nonesuch excellencies to confer
With hers, that forces my Captivity.
But fair, beware you be not like in this,
Though in your prison many a soul remains
(As London holds infinite in chains)
You be no Tyrant cruel, merciless,
Insulting over, and in galling those,
Who or for suite, for life, or for affection
Served by your habeo cor, above protection,
Unto your mercy do themselves expose.
In this Metropolis I must compare
Thee to the fairest flowers, whence Bees may pluck
Their honey, and yet Spiders poison suck;
You (fair) the Be, and not the Spider are,
You, like Earths Jewels, or the Heavens lights,
Were made in glorious places to appear;
Nor ought that beauteous garment out to wear
Amongst the rustic herd, and rude delights:
You, like to Cynthia, the heavens Queen,
Were made to govern, be admired, and seen.
WHen in your lap that cream you set,
Which you invited me to eat,
Sugar it needed none,
Your sweete^t touch alone
Made it a matchless pleasant meat.
The milk that did from these breasts move
That nursed up the God of Love,
No, not the Manna dew,
Nor j^yce that ever grew,
In taste did so delightful prove.
Neither Nectar, nor Nepenthe
Can in like degree content me:
Fond Esau, had thou sold
For this (though not for gold)
Thy birthright, we had never shent thee.
Not Flora's lap most fairly dressed,
Nor the sweet milk of Fortunes breast
So graceful pleasing are,
As it, and you both were,
More sweet then ever tongue expressed.
But now if this such sweetness drew
Only by being placed in you;
Sweet then above all wonder
Is that your sweetness under,
Most happy he that proves it true.
Fair, spotless Scarf, once by my Goddess borne,
When from her arm I you presumed to take,
And with your knot mine own arm did adorn;
'Twas then, I did my self your Prisoner make,
And Captive still do in your bands remain,
To be by her my Saint, or saved, or slain.
It Is true I erred, and fondly you restored,
By arguments most happ'ly false abused;
For still the more that I her love implored,
Her strangeness made it self still more accused;
And when acquaintance, which should freeness add,
Made her appear more strange, my soul was mad.
I then considered (though she let you go)
That she my keeping you had near consented,
And judged it sacrilege to take you so
From her a Goddess thereat discontented,
Hoping my inward peace to re-obtain
By rendering back my Heav'n-stoln fire again.
But let us now fair love ex^ostulate,
Whence that your unkind, killing strangeness grew:
Was it because by chance I near you sat
In that licentious place of public view:
Fair, do not wrong so much your self and me
To think my Company an injury.
Your virtue from suspicion does you free,
And many's persons make their acts suspected
Whilst they, that in opinion guiltless be,
May do much more, fearelesse to be detected:
Nor jealousy, nor malice fear you then;
Women were made to company with men.
Put on the resolutions of your sex,
That all backbiting spightfull blasts contemn,
And like worlds venom, naught at all respects
Calumnious tongues, that good and all condemn:
For well they know, if fair they be esteemed,
'Twas never yet seen but faulty some them deemed.
To them for free enjoying of their loves
The golden age is now returned again,
And who in true confession had those Doves
Which do in Court, in Town, or fields remain,
Shall find few Turtles vowed to one alone,
But matelesse in loves sweetest pleasures none.
The world is now out of minority,
And all inclined to doctrine of freewill,
My self alone to superiority,
And to your powerful law am vowed still;
Nor wish I to be free from that command,
Wherein my sole felicity does stand.
Only extend to me a kind Aspect,
And free access to gaze upon those eyes,
Which Planet-like my faculties direct,
Whose influence my firm obedience ties:
So shall I happy live, and you may prove
Contented in the office of my love.
PRetty precious Curle of hair,
Late fairly dangling by that ear,
Which Jewel yet did never wear
To your worth or beauty near;
Captivated now you are
To him whose heart you did ensnare,
Pledges unequal in compare.
She has my heart, I but her hair:
Yet would the hardy youth of Greece
Have given his hard-won golden fleece
With joy and triumph of the prize
To clip but such another piece.
How often has the wanton wind
To gentlest blasts himself confined,
Whilst playing with you too unkind
You shook him off and still untwin'd,
And coyly turned another way,
Disdaining his unlicenc'd play*
The God of love disposed to stray
Often wrapped in you hides him all day,
Where when his mother him espies
The little wanton nimbly hies
From thence to cheeks, from cheeks to eyes,
And often there so long he lies,
That many a guiltless hapless wight,
That on her eyes chance cast their sight,
Are sudden struck, and lose their light,
Punished by his discovered might:
Thus up and down the darling skips,
And after still the Cyprian trips,
And chaseth him from eyes to lips,
Where Pitho her rich adorned Court keeps;
The next retrait that Cupid winnes
It 'twixt her snowy mountain twins,
Where when the goddess him imprims,
He straight descends and happ'ly inns
Within the vale of true delight,
Whence to her Curles he aimed a flight,
But being overweake in plight
His mother caught him, and all night
They both resolved there to rest,
Where such divine contents them blessed,
That when they solemnize a feast,
All their delights are there addressed:
Yet Venus oftener it would use,
But fears her son would her refuse,
And for his Patron goddess choose
Her mistrisse of my Curle and muse.
FOr wondrous rare I late heard told,
Two Suns at once I might behold,
That equal glorious, equal clear
In one Meridian did appear:
Which when together I did view,
I wondered what illusion drew
So many judgments so awry.
But as it fares with an eye,
Whose accidental weakened sight
The masters judgment does invite
A single object to mistake,
And double seeming does it make:
So do these Aiglets false abused,
And in their seeing power confused,
Reflections into bodies frame,
And thus they raise injurious fame
Against that beauty, which divine
All others does as much outshine,
As Phoebe does a Star surpass;
As burnisht gold unpured brass;
As fairest gardens fallow plains;
Or Diamond coursest glass distaines.
Inferior beauties of our skies
Shun her fair Sphere, if you be wise,
So may you shine, and wonder move,
Win much affection, and love
From those, who to Starre-light confined
Never came where the true glory shined:
But if with them you come in sight
Where she extends her dazeling light,
Like Stars obscured by Phoebus rays
Your selves remain, but light decays;
And all your lovers at a gaze,
(Like silly birds struck with a maze
To see a great bright shining light
Surprise them in their dead of night)
Will all about her fly and hover,
Themselves unable to recover
From that attractive forcing charm,
Alluring them to pleasing harm:
Some guilty by their own desire
Shall hapless perish in her fire;
Others her nets shall captive take,
And them perpetual prisoners make;
Some sad despair shall strike to ground,
Nor shall there any one be found
Of will or power her to leave,
Till death his power and will bereave.
Live ever my victorious Sun,
And may thou those thy triumphs run,
Whilst skies the Globe of earth shall cover,
Or in the world remain a Lover;
Sole rule the Sphere of love, and me
Poor Orb, that moves alone by thee,
Whose thoughts do nothing else aspire,
But thee to please, thee to admire.
FAirest hair that ever grew,
Far beyond my worth or due,
Yet for zeal and love I dare
With the truest heart compare
That our mistress powerful eyes
Ever made Idolatrize:
You are that precious silken grass,
Whence my souls food and comfort pass;
And you such jewel are to me,
As none can give the like but she
Who gave you me: O do not scorn
To be by me your captive borne;
Prisoners their Fetters wear, and I
My soul in your enlacing tie.
You think you lose rich beam divine
Too much by change of being mine,
But what you lose by your depart,
You gain by thaldome of my heart:
Prove kindly true to me, and know,
She, who did you on me bestow,
May find greater, fairer many;
But more constant, true not any.
Song.
NOw tell me Artist, can she love,
Or loving can she constant prove?
Constant she is, and love she can,
But hard it is to find the man.
What one to please her must he be?
Worthy, and perfect such as she.
Then must I of her love despair;
For she so perfect is, and fair,
As the best worthiness in me
Cannot come near in least degree:
Shall I then strive to quench my fire?
No; rather love, and still admire.
For she love's proper subject is,
Who loves not her does love amiss,
I Will love her then, and by her love
So perfect I will hope to prove,
That she may love what she has taught,
And once be caught by what she caught.
Song.
IF you will love, know such to be
The Laws of Cupids Monarchy,
That to refuse
Is to abuse
Loves government, and I declare
That such loves Rebels, not his subjects are.
To love is not to be your own,
Love studies to please them alone
Whom it affects
Without respects
Of ought besides, and love confined
Is but by usurpation love defined.
If you did love as well as I,
You nothing could or would deny,
But would conceive
That you receive
What you bestow, if this were true
Your heart to live in me and mine in you.
IF my divining soul, and all the Art
Loves School has yielded me, foretell me true,
I may possess a parcel of your heart,
And as I love be loved again by you.
If fondly I presume, and overween,
And all my arguments fallacious prove,
Pardon the error that so often is seen
Of a self flattery in desire, and love.
But if my wit my true Informer be,
And yours with Sophistry does not abuse,
You may be loved and honored so by me,
As truest and most zealous lovers use.
If now you show disdain, my hopes are drowned;
If smile, with highest fortunes they are crowned.
To her who shut him in her Closet to break his hearing of her singing in her
upper Chamber, with her Teacher, made upon the instant to persuade her to be
more free.
YOu like heavens influence, beauty, constancy,
And order, would be like in this,
To hide like themly our heavenly harmony,
Whilst all besides imparted is;
Yet Heavens themselves deny not that to those
Whom in their high Sphere they enclose.
Be then like heavens in all, I ask no more;
They are no niggards of their store.
Upon a Brayd of hair.
Fair thou art, nor can be other
That proceed'st from such a Mother,
Soft and gentle, youthful, white,
Suting her skin, and the eyes delight
Such woare Venus, and such hair
Wear all that buy to make them fair:
Silk and silver wrought togeth^r
Showed so fair nor richly never,
Loves leading laisse I hope thou art,
And with thee bring'st to me her heart,
Which to own imparts more pleasure,
Then honor, beauty, knowledge, treasure,
Or all possessions, which to gain
Caesar had left Rome, Philip Spain,
Alexander had forsaken
To master earth, and undertaken
To conquer her whose love alone,
Had filled his vast ambition.
Triumph my soul in this thy prize,
Bas^ thee in her lovely eyes,
And in her joy more height of bliss
Then ever fancy knew to wish.
Let spite and envy swell and burst,
And jealous frenzy do its worst,
Whilst we by loves pure fire refined
Their wits outshine, their malice blind,
And most securely live above
All reach of passion, but our love.
I cannot say I in your service starve,
Since you affo^d me hope to feed upon,
But if you long confine my food thereon,
My poor life cannot long it self preserve;
A meat it is so languishing and dry,
That hourly I diminish, pine, and faint,
Unwilling to importune with complaint,
But that hope bids me rather beg, then die:
Fair flattering hope, but often deceiving guest,
Unhappy happy Anchor of our soul,
Which with distractions do our peace control,
Where evils known our minds would less molest
Pity fair Mistress, crown my hopes at last,
Let me not still roll fruits passions stone,
And make hel-tortured Tantalus his moan,
Who hopes and sees fair fruit, but must not taste.
Best wits indeed at first their favors spare,
But or discard or never long niggards are*
If my Coelestia be content to love,
Fair. love me then to my complete content
Soon will the summer of our years be spent
When life shall but a grief and penance prove.
Since you the seeds of love in me have sown,
Which now are ripened by your fair aspect;
Oh do not now your harvest due neglect,
But please your taste in gathering your own:
Let me not Torch-like set on fire by you
Consume my being in my selfe-fed flame,
Whilst you (too cruel) make my death a game,
And triumph in my dying fondly true
Love virtue like in action does appear,
Where words the cheapest Agents of our ends
Often counterfeit, yet pass for perfect friends,
And proof-lesse none or little credit bear.
That I may think you are not one of those,
Who for self glory are content to feign
A gloss of kindness, and to entertain
Admirers of their worth in verse and prose,
Give me an actual argument that firm
May you to me, my love to you confirm.
Forbear my headstrong Heliotropian thoughts,
Forbear your ever gazing on that Sun.
Such sense-confounding object learn to shun
As you with naught but sighs and passions fraughts.
And you my greedy never satiate eyes,
Who more you view the more you still desire,
Your over daring fixed looks retire,
For sight subsisteth by varieties.
Abstain my feet, your hasty steps withhold
From her, to whom all lovers flock amain,
But none are seen back to return again:
Better is freedom poor then bands of gold.
But Traitors all, I fondly you reprove;
Too late your alien'd service I recall,
Thoughts, eyes, and feet, tongue, hands and heart, and all
Are sole resigned to her command and love:
And so enforced to love we all conjoine
Suitors for grace to her the most divine.
IT was that gracio^s season of the year
When Husbandmen their welcome harvest inn,
When fairest fruits are in perfection seen,
And Courtiers thorough woods chase flying Dear,
When every swain requital due receives
For all the care and pains he had sustained,
When I alone unfortunate remained,
Whose care and pains no recompense perceives,
That I imbarqued in the Courtly crew
Seemed all intent on naught but forest sport,
When often, alas, my heart was far from Court,
Conversing most, my fairest love, with you:
Me thought the hunted Dear the Dogs did chase
Resembled me whom my own thoughts pursue,
And if a wounded Stagge I chanced to view,
My pierced restless heart pitied his case:
Sometimes I checked my thoughts as at a bay,
Which broke by your fair conquering aspect
They freshly follow, careless to be checked,
Permitting my repose nor night nor day:
Sometimes I fly to solitaty shade,
Hoping to escape amongst thick of lettered leaves,
Sometimes in company which grief deceives
I thrust my self, but still my thoughts invade;
Thus toild by day, when night sweet time of rest
(Cordial restorative of all that lives)
Truce to our toil, and fainting sorrow gives,
I tapiss in my bed, all care possessed,
Where restless still exiled from ease I toss
By those my selfe-bred, swift-foote hounds pursued,
Whose long enjoyed chase has so indu'd
Them with advantage, that no hope of loss
Nor hope of life remains, except your grace
Relieve, fair Huntresse, my afflicted case.
INdustrious virtue (Mistress of the wise)
Fair child of nature, and of precept born,
Finding her self misprised and forlorn,
Since she and beauty have been enemies,
Whose quarrel and divorce at first did grow
For that her counsel Beauty naught respected,
And idly nothing but her self affected;
Virtue now pitying eithers overthrow;
The more esteem with all, and grace to gain
A league of late with Beauty has compact,
And made it as a part of her contract
Both in one mutual mansion to remain,
And none so worthy, none so fair approving,
They both united in Coelestia dwell:
No wonder then that she does all excel
Love by their virtue, or their beauty moving:
Virtue as her attendants brings along
Modesty, wisdom, courtesy, and truth;
Beauty brings smoothness, white and red, and youth
Grace, plumpnesse, stature, feature, and that tongue
Which (like all her perfections void of Art)
Charms, and subdues even the austerest heart.
SInce I the fortress of my heart resigned
That Conqu'resse fair unable to withstand,
Who here on earth loves forces does command,
Cupid has often solicited my mind
Her glory and his power divine to write:
Wherein I humbly did his pardon ask,
Alleging for excuse it was a task
Too great and high for my unlearned might,
That I (a stranger to those lofty strains
And smoothly wrought ingenious conceits
Which Poesy sententiously treats)
Should more imbase then honor with my pains,
Whereat my self he willed me animate,
And bade me boldly undertake his will,
For he with moving Rhetoric and skill
My hearts invention would illuminate,
And told me I should need no other book
Then those fair Hieroglyphick Characters,
Which she of worthiness and glory bears
To all eyes visible that on her look:
Wherewith embold'ned, lowly thus I write
What Cupid and her eyes to me indite.
INjurious Time, father of ugly vice,
Merciless enemy against beauty sworn,
Why made thou not Coelestia to be born
When beauties prize was put to compromise?
Had she but then in competition been,
Jove's golden apple of contention,
Which caused the Goddesses dissension,
Had nevr glorified the froth-born Queen.
For she (poor Dame!) had nothing to procure
Their amorous Judge his favor to incline
To judge to her that glorious prize divine,
But beauties bare and casual fading lure:
Which, with those gifts the other couple vaunted,
Hearts Idol, joyful wealth, by Juno proffered,
And graceful wisdom by Minerva offered,
Coelestia all united could have granted:
She like Pandora does all grace possess,
Wherewith the Gods humanity do bless.
My fortune was the other day
My Mistress to surprise
Sleeping alone:
The fairest one
That ever closed eyes,
Or ever Morpheus seized for prey.
Each part so pleasing fair remained
You easily might discover,
Their beauty scorned
To be adorned
By borrowing of another,
Nor wanted what her eyes contained.
Such sleeping conquering grace to see
Will certain credit win,
That fire of love
Does only move
From sightlesse power divine
Of Cupid and her Deity.
It by this slumbring beauty seemed
Sleep was with her agreed,
So much to grace
Her sleeping face
That she should all exceed,
Who fairest waking were esteemed.
She seemed like an Evening clear
When absent is the Sun;
Though not so gay,
More sweet then day,
Whose scorching heat men shun.
When the eye of heaven does appear.
There might I gaze and view at leisure
Each parts peculiar grace,
Brow white and even
As snow smooth driven,
The heaven of her face,
Fair cover of the under treasure.
Her cheeks were fresh as blushing morn;
Nor tincture fetched from Spain,
Nor ever art
Could like impart
True unite Roses stain
By those our fatal Houses born.
Her silken breasts I next espy
Fair wrought with heavenly blew,
Time truly keeping
Amidst her sleeping,
Blessed who may rest on you,
Where Venus and the Graces lie.
Thus whilst in ravishment I stand
Tempted by her fair lips
To steal a kiss
Worlds second bliss,
In watchful Argus skips
My pleasures progress to withstand.
Well Argus, well, though then you crossed
Those my delightful hopes,
I nothing doubt
To fit you out
True tuned Mercurian notes;
Pleasures deferred, yet are not lost.
So happy is the power of Love,
That wit could never prevent,
Nor care dissolve
What two resolve
With musical consent,
Affections mutual joys to prove.
Fond husbands cease your selves to vex,
True Cornut's only he
Whose fear adornes
His brow with horns,
And thinks himself to be,
Giving due right by wrong suspects.
Jealousy often makes unjust,
Deceit is taught by fear,
Who horns does watch
Horns may he catch,
And fair ones may he wear;
Resolved to wed, resolve to trust.
MY cruel friend, too inconsiderate of my state,
Why did you not conceal my too injurious fate;
To tell me my Coelestia loves, and loves not me?
Unfortunate subsisting eyes that day to see!
Why am I not like Ni^be to stone convert
Since love and she prove so unjust to my desert?
Tell me (my dearest friend) what reason, what respect,
What beauteous parts in him, in me what lame defect,
Makes her (that frame of virtue) so ungrateful prove,
So ill discerning zeal, so to misplace her love?
If to be full of fear, of passion, of desire,
My blood now over-runne with cold, now all on fire;
If to possess a passion-sp^aking heavy eye
Which if unfixt on her, dejected still does lie;
If stead o^ periods with sighs to interlace
All my discourse, answers impertinently place;
If to have a heart overwhelmed with thoughts ready to break,
And yet a ^ongue benumbed that would and cannot speak;
If these affects I only in her presence find,
And stupid else with her alone am rapt in mind;
If in her absence 'stead of pastime, mirth, and joy,
I nothing can possess but thoughts, care, and annoy,
A restless pensive heart 'twixt hope and fear distraught,
Which full with passions, sighs, and troubled anguish fraught,
What late it best approved, for tastlesse now rejects,
Nor any company but only hers affects;
If sadly shadowed brow, and eyes, arms intertwin'd
A spirit to retire and solitude confined,
That never rest enjoyes, nor joy, but in her sight,
Banished from all but this heart-easing pen-delight;
If whilst heavens torch his light does unto us extend,
My thoughts to her alone, and to her glory bend,
And when the night invades, that gives all creatures rest,
I restless sole remain my thoughts on her addressed;
If my enamored breast solicit still my tongue
To sound forth chosen stanza's passionately sung,
And some smooth-sliding well-tuned eare-inchanting verse,
That may my love, her prizelesse worth, and name rehearse;
If this (alas! my friend) her love cannot deserve,
Unfortunate I live, unfortunate I serve!
No, no you may forbear an answer to return
Why I for her, yet she does for another burn.
I know you will reply, the God of love is blind,
His arrows poisoned, such as do corrupt the mind
With headstrong passion and with reasonlesse desire,
Which set our weak subdued distempered minds on fire:
Reason is put to flight, and appetite bears sway,
Which blindly leads, and blindly forces us obey,
And that he much mistakes who from a woman's mind
Or reason does expect, or just effects to find,
Since passions, indigest conceit, mere chance and will
Their resolutions and their actions govern still.
But soft my gall-distilling pen, your grief contain,
Which howsoever just, yet blaphemy refrain:
Admit her heart of fleshly temper framed as mine,
Be pierced and captivate by Cupids power divine,
Alas! she rather should be pitied then accused,
Since what from force proceeds may justly be excused:
And if indeed, my fair Coelestia, it be true,
That your heart for another burns as mine for you,
If you desire to be so happy in your love
That his affections unto you may mutual prove,
If you expect your sighs, which numberless abound
Shall e^re receive reward or e're with joy be crowned;
Oh! let your your kindness then extended unto me
Make you deserve your happy hopes effects to see;
And (fair) beware, lest if you show unkind disdain,
Loves justice justly yield you Talions law again:
And if it be true that grief delights in company,
Then will you love my presence and my sympathy:
Together we will sit, and comfort one another,
(For grief is most extreme when we our passions smother)
Where breathing out at large our due complaints of love,
We Will both our hearts discharge, and pity learn to move;
And this lame happiness of love shall please my mind
That though you cannot love, you are not yet unkind,
^^t pardon me, dear friend, it is not report alone
Can prooflesse my aspiring fixed hope dis-throne,
But steadfast still in zeal and confidence I dwell,
As faithful I love her, she may love me as well.
IN fruitless expectation to remain,
To be in bed and yet debarred of rest,
To serve where you no favor can obtain,
Is (says the Italian) to be most distressed:
And these unfortunate effects I prove
(My fair Coelestia) in my fervent love.
It Is you detain my long expected bliss,
It Is you that make me restless pass the night,
It Is you I faithful serve, yet you it is,
Merciless you withold my chief delight;
And know (fair creature) he that faithful serves,
A costlesse favor ever well deserves.
Think that you have a friend that does possess
A curious garden plentifully fraught
With all the pleasures nature can express,
And all delights that ever cunning wrought,
And all these beauties singularly graced
By a fair fountain in the Center placed.
He lets you in, with welcome entertain,
And grants that many ways your self you please,
Yet midst this ravishment you do complain
Of thirst extreme, which seeking to appease
At that fair fountain, which you chance t'espie,
Your unkind friend his water does deny,
And most uncharitable does permit
That part of it should idly slide away,
And part corrupt by over-keeping it,
Rather then yield a drop your thirst to stay,
Which nothing else can quench, and's only bred
By those dry sweets, wherewith he had you fed.
Would you now take this party for your friend?
O, no; I know you rather would conceive
That all his kindnesses did only tend
With quenchlesse thirst your pleasures to bereave,
And justly might you wish you never had known
Those joys, whereby your joy is overthrown.
That cruel friend (fair love) are you to me,
And your perfections that fair garden are,
VVhither a welcome guest I seem to be;
My senses ravished all with pleasures rare
Of beauty, enterchange of words and kisses,
Which yet all breed but thirst and further wishes.
And those as cheapely you may satisfy,
As you a water drop may easily give:
Why (cruel fair) is it then that you deny
That kindness, without which I cannot live?
Deal plainly, may not this the true cause be,
You love my verses better far then me;
And apprehend that if I once obtain
The full of my ambitions high desire,
My love will Moone-like enter on the wain,
And having won the day straight sound retire?
O do not so abuse your self and me,
My love like Phoebus never change shall see.
My love like Phoebus never change shall see,
In constant course and heat ever the same,
And like the Northern Pole shall fixed be,
More firm then can be moved by heavens frame;
Constant to you till death I will remain,
For never shall I see so fair again.
No (fair Coelestia) love is Venus son,
Fear not the mother for the child's destroying,
Nor is that saying unto you unknown,
That th'essence true of love is in enjoying:
He plays the best who holds what he wins,
The wiser sort still at their end begins.
If you approve my muses lofty flight,
And to be fed with change of praises still,
You must not often delude her, and invite
Her to an empty lure, that yields no fill:
A Hawke that loftily has flowne and hard,
Well merits the best food and best reward.
Those exhalations that the heavens feed
Did they not down again distill their rain,
Celestial bodies soon should want, and need
Those vapors which the earth sends up again,
And Jove himself should lose his sacrifice
But that he mortals feeds and gratifies.
No fire can long subsist by smoke alone,
Flame's by an oily solid substance fed:
Who diverse times a field has tilled and sown
Yet finds no profit by his labor bred,
His folly well deserves to reap but wind,
Having often proved it barren and unkind.
Who shoots his arrows up and nothing hits,
Fools bolts they prove, which their own heads do break;
One may be ventured, but he wants his wits
That all his Quiver spends one shaft to seek:
Though virtue ought not foul repulse receive,
Yet wisdom wills us fruitless labors leave.
Full ill he sings, whose song cannot obtain
A draught of drink impatient thirst to swage;
Though silly Bird, I warble many a strain
To please your ears, imprisoned in your cage:
Birds long unfed their singing soon neglect,
No Alms, no thankful language must expect.
As happy in love are they that give as take,
Fair, pity me and make me happy then,
Since you your self shall equal happy make,
Women receive far more delight then men;
And if you find that I unfaithful prove,
Let me be made a reprobate of Love.
And if you like these offsprings of my brain
Whereto your self the Heroine mother are,
Suffer them not to die with drought, but daign
To water them from that your fountain fair,
Which true Parnassus spring does Poets breed,
And tasted makes their Muse her self exceed.
It Is true that my affections lately bent,
And shaped their course that Mid-land straight to win,
Where Love has placed his uttermost extent,
His else insatiate conquest to confine:
And as in nature it is proper known,
That fire should mount until it has attained
His proper place, the concave of the Moon;
So love until it has that center gained,
(Whether by natures stimulating force
It is solicited her work to do)
Restless remains, still laboring in its course
Till it may rest, where it aspired unto:
It Is likewise true, my love has mist its end
And yet I cannot think my labor lost,
Though the main fail, the By has been my friend
So far as with content may quit my cost.
Like to the Alchymist whose golden aim
Shoots chiefly at the Philosophic stone,
Whereof though he fall short, yet does he gain
Many a precious found extraction,
Many a quintessence, and Limbeckt oil
To others and himself of use and pleasure,
Nor thinks it an ill guerdon of his toil
T'impart unto the world such hidden treasure;
So I in these conceits elaborate,
The wanton babes sprung from an amorous brain,
My passions fire and heat evaporate,
And mine own ease with others pleasure gain;
And if I please the kind lascivious ear
With these light airs, for pleasure only tuned,
I seek no more, nor care how the austere
Censure these idle hours in rhyme consumed:
They as superfluous banquet stuff are meant,
Made but to please the outward sense and taste,
Which though they yield no solid nourishment,
They are not yet a profitlesse repast.
And if the strictest Stoic on Earths face
Waste not some hours, as idly spent as these,
Whereof remains no account or trace,
(So necessary pleasures are, and ease
Without the which our souls themselves oppress)
Then let me be condemned, but if you find
Your selves in pleasure, wasting time no less,
Nor show remains thereof more then of wind,
Judge then my time at least as happ'ly spent
As theirs that hunting love, who little care
So they enjoy good pastime, chase, and sent,
To make the silly purchase of a Hare.
I Helen sought where Lucrece I did find,
At least a Lucrece she appears to me,
But were I Paris she perchance as kind
Would prove as Helen, Trojan youth, to thee;
Oh no, I do recant, and firmly credit
She is as spotless chaste as perfect fair,
And thus will flatter hers and mine own merit,
If she were other, I should not despair:
And here my Love shall change its former hew,
And yet Chamaeleon-like remain the same,
As she is chaste, my love as chaste and true,
And to like virtuous die it self shall frame,
Living still hers, though only fed with air:
And as her beauty won my heart before,
Finding her now as virtuous as then fair,
Her inward graces make me love her more;
Nor was my breast possessed with such wild fire
That naught but Venus milk could quench my flame,
Hope's the sole nutriment of my desire,
Where that once fails, my flames alone grow tame;
Nor am I of so strong a faith in love
To think where free occasion has not wanted,
And free acquaintance has given means to move,
What three months have denied will e're be granted,
Who seeks a woman to his will to move,
Yet gains no ground in furthering his desire,
Not to advance is to go back in love,
Let him good Soldier like his Siege retire.
But fair Coelestia, since I have concluded
Your virtue like your beauty most divine,
Oh let no sequel prove me now deluded,
Such subtilty would double that your crime:
Or be indeed what you appear to be,
Or may you still at least seem so to me.
A FANCY.
MY hearts fair Conqu'resse, author of my grief,
Deny me not to plead for my relief;
If you too cruel will no help impart,
Yet lend my plaints your ear to ease my heart;
Offenders capital that plead for grace
Are heard, though not relieved in their case;
It Is you the winner are, cause of my pain,
Sick men and losers are allowed to plain:
You that have made me love, can make me live,
And none but you can my disease relieve;
Should I not then my cure from you demand,
I accessory to my death should stand:
Accuse not him who for dear life does move,
But blame your self who so inforceth love;
You that have made my heart in love abound,
Ought not to be offended with loves sound.
He that is almost dead for want of meat,
You must not blame him if he ask to eat:
Nor ought you such an echo to condemn
As love received from you resounds again;
Nor blame that instrument whose sound is such
As your fair hand is pleased to give the touch.
And if your heart to flint-like be composed
That to no pity it can be disposed;
If It be decreed by my malignant fate,
That here on earth that cursed infernal state
Must be inflicted on me for my pain,
That I must love and not be loved again,
Yet be not angry, Fair; or if you will chide,
Chide Cupid that my subject tongue does guide,
It Is that blind little winged childish God
That does so often times deserve the rod,
For his mis-matching our affections fire
With an unsuited different desire.
But to obey your will (which unto me
A venerable law shall ever be)
I Will rather all on fire within consume,
Then once to ask a water drop presume,
And rather over-swoln with love will break,
Then once to dare of love to you to speak.
Thus will I inward bleed, until I find,
Or death, or you my Love to me more kind.
Made in imitation of a Sonnet in Ronsard.
THough he that loves with unrequited love,
And finds his heat engender no reflection,
Nor that his plaints can her compassion move,
That is the object of his true affection,
May uncondemn'd resume his love again,
And to a more kind subject it apply
Himself exempting from unpityed pain:
Nor does he wrong whom no desert does tie,
Nor does he faith or constance violate,
For virtue and folly incompatible be,
And constant Lovers uncompassionate
Are foolish guilty of their misery;
Nor breaks that Prince his faith who league has sworn
Of amity with some great Potentate,
Who will not after the like oath return
Of love and faithful aid unto his State:
For perfect love in sympathy consists,
And single Love is but a fatuous fire;
Yet little merits he, who not persists,
No victory is gotten by retire.
I Will love her still, though she unjust do prove;
And happier contentment will I find
In loving her with unrequited love,
Then to love one less fair, though far more kind.
Is It possible you can deny
With such unyeilding sleighting heart
So small a suite, so earnestly
Pursued by my so true desert,
That not the cheapest toy you wear
As ribban, pin, or thread of fringe
I may with your kind favor bear?
Love feeds even on the sleightest things.
Unhappily my heart is placed
Since for my heart I cannot gain
To be in this slight measure graced
That I importune to obtain;
You fear be like that I will make it
An earnest of what I desire;
No, I Will but as a Relic take it
Of you the Saint that I admire:
And though my true loves due relief
I hopeless am e're to attain,
Such proof will comfort yet my grief
In that I reap not your disdain.
Welcome at last yet pretty thread,
Never yet since Love his reign begun
Was such small thing more merited,
More prized, or more hardly won.
DO not reject those titles of your due
Which natures art has styled in your face,
The name of Fair only belongs to you,
None else that title justly can embrace,
You Beauties heir, her coat sole spotless wear,
Where others all some marks abatement bear.
It Is not their cheeks touched with Vermillion red,
S^ain'd with the tincture of enchanting skill,
Nor yet the curled devises of their head,
Their breasts displayed, their looks framed to their will,
Their quick turned eye, nor all their proud attire
Can make me their perfections to admire.
All this is done without Natures consent,
Thy beauty needs no arts enticing aid,
Thine nature gave, theirs art has only lent,
Thine shall endure when theirs are quite decayed:
Thy beauty others does as much excel,
As heaven base earth, or earth accursed hell.
Others are fair, if not compared to thee,
Compared to them thy beauty does exceed:
So lesser Stars give light and shine we see,
Till glorious Phoebus lifts up his head,
And then as things ashamed of their might
They hide themselves and with themselves their light
Since Natures skill has given you your right,
Do not kind nature and your self such wrong,
You are as fair as any earthly wight,
You wrong your self if you correct my tongue;
Though you deny her, and your self your due,
Yet duty bids me Fair entitle you.
When God gave man the high Lieutenancy
Of all commanding that on earth should be,
He yet foresaw no true felicity
Could grow to man without society:
Wherefore he made of a refined mould
Woman to all his works as crown of gold:
The richest presents are the last bestowed,
And arts perfections in the last works showed:
Her solely he intended man's companion
Most pleasing object of his conversation,
Whereby who woman's company condemn,
Highly Gods sacred will and Law contemn;
And few or none neglect their company
But such as want worth or ability.
The worthiest men that most prize reputation
Would rather lose men's then their estimation,
Which made th'al-knowing Solomon compare
Their love to things most precious and most rare.
It Is not the vulgar breath as has been said,
But women's good opinion that never strayed;
They wits and virtues whetstones are, that give
The edge and appetite, that makes us strive
Each other to excel in show and deed,
To gain the love of them that most exceed
In feminine prehemenence, whose love
All noble courages of men does move.
Honor from men but fruitless pleasure brings,
But women's love gives happiness of Kings,
And only follows those that do possess
The beauties art and nature do express;
Other delights that hang but on conceit
Are sauce, and margent, this the Text, and meat:
Our several senses find their several pleasure,
But woman is to every sense a treasure.
To see, to hear, to touch, and if not taste
Tisby a sweeter pleasure far surpast.
For taste in deed, and every other sweet
That we enjoy by natures benefit,
Only conduce unto the work of love,
Wherein alone we serviceable prove
To God, and nature, who each work beside
Of our fantastic pleasure do deride;
And they that give all pleasure to the mind,
Are naturelesse, distasted, and unkind:
Nature to me has been so much a friend,
I Will ever honor her and serve her end.
But you will object that women's company
Ought serve alone for man's necessity,
And that their idle conversation
Is useless, but for procreation,
As servile, ignorant, nor ought of worth
Is by their trivial fellowship brought forth.
But women's worth writers enough affirm,
Which so well proved I need not now confirm:
As for the fault of ignorance you find,
It Is but your education keeps them blind;
Yet midst that blindness of such art they show,
As cunning'st wits of men do overgoe;
And if their disobedience you mislike
Beasts by our fall gained freedom, they the like
Perchance expect, and as the Privernate
Answered the question of the Roman State,
That rebels did such punishment deserve,
As they that judge themselves too good to serve:
Which made the generous Roman set them free
Communicating Roman liberty,
Knowing that nature n'ere that State would bear
Which is commixt with servitude and fear:
So had I power to alter marriage law,
Both should be free, and both exempt from aw,
And then this verse you happy true should find,
No comfort's lik^ to women that are kind.
But you my doting ravished souls delight,
Soul of your Sex, subject of what I write,
Whose company affords a second joy
To that which heavenly souls in Gods enjoy,
And whose privation breeds another hell
To those that e're did in your presence dwell,
Where only to have power to come and see
Is happiness above capacity;
Whose presence charms our cares like heavenly wine,
Infusing height of joy and heat divine,
To whom all other beauties, that give light,
Are cold and dead as Glow-wormes in the night,
You a quick sparkling-bright-enflaming fire
That kindles all comes near, makes all admire,
As much more lively pleasing in compare
As gliding streams then standing waters are:
Sole Planet of our Sphere, raising our blood
As mightily as Cynthia the Ocean blood.
I need not name you, you are like the Sun
Known by the most obscure description,
Oh! if you could in course as constant prove,
Too happy should he be that joys your love.
But you like an unguided Phaeton
Take glory only to be gazed upon,
And to inflame this lower world with fire
Of an unbridled and untamed desire,
Whilst your own heart, as hard, and cold as stone,
Is placed above all conflagration,
Reserved I think to be enjoyed by Jove,
Disdaining all inferior earthly love.
For Leda, Europa, Danae, all in one
Come nothing near you, ( Beauties paragon)
You surely are a Goddess, nor can be
Enjoyed but by a perfect deity;
For men may think you love, and find you fair,
But thinking to embrace you find but air:
Nature has been but niggardly to all
That unto you she might be prodigal,
To you true beauties fair original
Whence others have but counterfeit derivall;
Men may over other creatures power pretend,
But full obedience they to you extend,
And glory more your sacred power to obey,
Then over all things else to carry sway.
BUt that, great President of this fair Round,
We may not against thy will expostulate,
Nor dare upon lame humane reasons ground
Oppose what thou have pleased to ordinate,
Our reasons false light else would make us stray,
And with strong arguments our minds induce
Against the marriage sanction to invey,
Whence flows such ruin, trouble, and abuse:
Nor can thy institution be accused,
For that observed what now our torture brings
Had such felicity to us infused,
As equals poorest souls with joy of Kings.
Matches were first made by consent of love,
Which constant minds in purity excelling
Did so perpetuate, that naught could remove
Them from their first affections fixed dwelling:
Now ^ordid avarice, and swelled ambition
Without respect of love make marriage knot,
And are the vicious ends which that condition
With want of harmony and discord blot.
In former ages love did marriage draw,
Where mar^iage band is now loves motive made;
Grossly he erres, who thinks that words or law
Can sympathy of heart and love persuade.
Love rather alien'd is then bred by force,
An essence tender, all divine and free,
Abhorring bands, and compulsory course,
Fainting at thought of forced necessity:
Happy those times, happy that age of gold,
And free community of Plato's state,
When love was unconfined, uncontrolled,
Nor any lived with those their heart did hate;
Then love the Cement of society,
Sweet band of peace, and musical consent,
Failing and turned to contrariety,
Each free from other to first freedom went,
And then the faultlesse, quiet, virtuous wight
Did not the undeserved penance bear
With an unreason'd snarling jealous sprite,
The precious portion of its age t'outweare;
Nor did they in the sweet of home retrait
The matchless cordial of a travailed mind,
Where happy love makes happy our receipt
A purgatory 'stead of comfort find;
Nor did that Phantome honor them restrain,
Or fear desertlesse husbands to offend
Make women their true loves desire refrain,
Not daring lend their own to please a friend;
Nor knew they false-bred squint-eyed bastardy,
Nor yet the horror of a loathed bed,
No the heart-gnawing cares by jealousy
Of loosely kept, and locked up honor bred;
Nor did that poys'ning damned Italian art,
The desperate refuge of the impatient soul,
So often prevail with the malicious heart
That no restraint of virtue can control.
And since that many are of such complections,
That change they must, nor ought can l^ng affect,
What misery it is to such affections
To plague each other with their loves effect?
The Romans, Jews, and many other Nations
Had the advantage to repudiate,
Untied to allege their accusations,
Which would but scandal breed to eithers state;
But since our law such license does not use,
Each take their fortune, and be well content
A common destiny none ought refuse,
Stolen flesh o^t yields sweetest nourishment:
Since faultlesse none, let us bear with one another,
Brag of the better, and the worser smother.
OH do not tax me with a brutish love,
Impute not lust alone to my desire,
No such profane aspersion ought to move
From you the sacred author of my fire;
I seek your love, and if you that deny,
All joys that you and all the world can give
My lovesick soul would little satisfy,
Which no food but your favor can relieve.
It is your better p^rt I would enjoy,
Your fair affections I would call mine own,
It Is but a prostitute and bestiall joy,
Which seeks the gross material use alone;
The Town's not ours the market place unwon,
Nor do I her enjoy whose heart's not mine;
Hearts conquest is the worthy ambition,
Seal of our worth, a ravishment divine,
Invincible to strength of humane hand,
Union divine of mutual burning hearts,
Which both subdued t^iumphing both command,
Sovereign delight that God to man imparts:
Oh let me in this true joy happy be,
Or never may you be enjoyed by me.
MY love to show her cold desire
Has clad her self in freeze attire,
Whilst my loves passion all on fire
Melts with her beams that I admire;
She by this habit proves she needs
No help external from her weeds,
And that she Phoebus glory exceeds
Dimmed by the covering clouds he breeds.
THese things must meet to make my mistress fair,
A graceful countenance of a changing air,
A fair eye that a fairer soul discovers,
Good lips, full breasts, sit play fellows for lovers,
Plumpe wrests, with hands well fashioned, soft, and white,
Fair statur'd body to give full delight;
Yet I confess I often have pleased my mind,
Where what I mention was not all conjoined.
TO be assured men love as they profess
( Lydia) it is a mystery I confess,
And to discern the right from counterfeit
Is a high knowledge Artists hardly get;
For art on false things sets the fairest hew
To make them be preferred before the true,
The art of art consists in hiding art,
Well may you judge parts outward, not the heart,
It is a hidden book, which the most High
Can only read with his all-seeing eye:
It is the private Closet of the mind,
Where what we lay our selves often hardly find,
No^ to be robbed or picked by cunning'st wit,
But where weak spirits have the keeping it:
It is a Sea whose depth was never plumm'd,
Nor e're the creatures and the treasures summed;
It is a sky, where wandering Stars do move,
But the Astrology is hard to prove,
Best knowledge of it is conjecturall,
Nor does it under demonstration fall:
If outward things deceive exposed to show,
Less must we think the inward remote to know.
The best Physician often fails of his skill,
And thinking by his art to cure does kill:
Nor can the cunning'st Lapidarie tell
A true stone from a counterfeit set well:
Nor can the Goldsmith but by highest test
Know an adulterate metal from the best:
A little truth makes falsehood current pass,
As little gold by Alchymy does brass:
Man's grown so basely artificial,
That we have lost our golden natural.
Emulous art has nature overcome,
And inward peace and truth has overthrown;
Proud man that glories most in reasons use
By reason's grown most subject to abuse,
And not content with what God him assigned,
With pleasures false, and false grief plagues his mind,
Whilst seeking the felicity of opinion
Still toils but never finds firm foundation;
For what we build though n'outward force o'rethrowes,
Yet change of passion quickly overblowes.
Thus are we still to seek, whilst other creatures
Enjoy the sweet content of natures treasures,
Nor does the one servile to the other stand,
Whilst he is indeed most slave that does command,
Enough's a feast to them, whilst what we have
Begets in us but appetite to crave.
Nature assigned equality to all,
Nor meant her free gifts under sale should fall,
Nor e're intended we should be so mad,
Having the face of earth so richly clad,
And so sufficiently for man's full use,
That we should labor after things abstruse,
Subterran metalls wrought by fire of hell
Man's happiness and quiet to expel,
Making them Idols, and the needless means
To purchase all which she so costlesse sends;
Whilst beasts enjoy a quiet uncontrolled,
Free from the plagues and mischiefs bred by gold,
Free from war, murder, theft, and penury,
False calumnies, and damned perjury,
Which we old Rebels against natures law
Foolish commit without or wit, or aw,
And fettered live by our own enthralling hands
Most witless servile to fantastic bands,
Fools to the wiser fools, mad in desire,
Preferring ayry smoke before true fire,
Subjects of fool-bred scorn, passion, and envy,
Malice, and boundless curiosity,
Insatiate humor, never content with well,
That vainly still importunes to excel
Reasons and natures bounds, which overpast
No period of contentmentment can be placed;
Faire-promising, little-performing joy,
That in th'obtaining does it self destroy;
Our fleshes torture, cancker of state and mind,
Fancies fair weed, toy-doting childish kind
That feeds, and mads with fair imagined shows
Rewarded to know least where most it knows;
Ape of infinity that proud aspires
Though nature bound to b'endlesse in desires,
Vexed by that woolfe Ambition, pride, and honor
That glittering glass that snares who dotes upon her,
That ignis fatuus, that who e're pursues
Often meets with inconvenience that he rues,
That tickling breath bought at the highest rate,
Guilt pill that costs so many a broken pate,
Monster that preyes upon our blood, and ease,
And makes us toil, whom we contemn to please,
That britly base strung gem most hardly won,
Rich lasting stuff in show, but quickly done,
That pleasant bait that feeds but never fills,
That Siren, that then flatters when it kills,
That curb of pleasure, sweet of our fond pain,
Fair instrument ambitions end to gain.
But Lydia to return again to you,
I grant it is hard to know false love from true,
Your proper art must be your guiding thread
That in loves Lab'rinth you be not misled;
In many things we right conclusion take,
Though we no certainty of proof can make;
I proof-lesse think her painted, others fair,
And find fair weather in a threatening air,
But venture Lydia, she is never much wronged
Who joys the fruit of love, for which she longed.
Well women, we are content for modesty
You shall dissemble, so you will be content,
We shall esteem it as a virtuous lie,
Nor force us to believe more then is meant;
To say you like, and love, yet have no end
Nor any further pleasure do affect,
Then such as friend communicates to friend
In sight, and speech, and outward good respect,
Such may be friendship, but 'twas never love:
Say truly when you do your Lover kiss
Find you no inward kindling sparkles move,
That you enjoy a more contenting bliss*
But may it not I fear be over true
That women have forgot to love indeed,
Nor any such true love is found in you,
As does from undissembling hearts proceed*
And that you may not ignorance pretend
What true love is, I will to you define,
That lovers true may reap their loves true end,
And magnify a power so divine.
LOve's an exhaled Meteor set on fire
By beauties Sun in Region of desire;
A pleasing print nature sets on our heart
Of fairest feature, which to re-impart
Unto the world she agitates our mind,
That thereby we perpetuate our kind:
A longing after inward free commerce
Where spirits seek with spirits to converse,
A mutual bliss, most joyful occupation,
Where two that like would make one corporation:
Love is a liking taken to a piece,
Which to make ours we stick not at the price,
An absent presence, business full of doubt,
A guest let in that keeps all others out,
A peaceful war, a friendly enemy
A free State turned into a Monarchy:
Love is an essence all divine and pure,
A pleasant wound, that only one can cure;
A weeping joy, a hopeful sweet despair,
An April day, Chamaeleon fed with air,
A large imprisonment, a bold faced shame,
A play where holding out makes lose the game,
An importuning fancy entertained,
That mutins reason, if not well restrained:
An Incubus, that sits heavy on the mind,
Or mewing Cat, that hunteth after kind,
A ^igging to discover hidden treasure,
S^^^ union of the minds and bodies pleasure,
The plesant'st game, that ever was invented,
That sweetest sin so hard to be repented,
The happiest gift rich nature does bestow
On them, that do her service undergo;
Worker of wonders, father of all things,
That makes Kings-beggers, and makes Beggars kings,
That makes the Lawyer plead without a fee,
And the Divine commit Idolatry;
That makes the daring Soldier to prefer
A single combat far above the war:
Witness that Dame, who did the Lab'rer win
To quit his club, and settle him to spin:
Love makes the Merchant think his homespun piece
Richer then the stuff of India, France, or Greece;
Love turns the Courtiers reason into rhyme,
And his sleep hours to curious dressing time,
Makes him leave Master, Horse, and Hound, and Hare,
To hunt his Mistress (sure above compare)
And value each kind look, kiss of her hand,
At higher rate then his best field of land:
Love makes the Sloven turn most neat affected,
Yet often the curious careless, and neglected:
Love makes the silent speechless man to speak,
Yet often sets the best Orator to seek;
Converts a Papist to a Protestant,
Whilst he in recompense prays to a Saint;
Makes Atheists to acknowledge Deity,
Yet holiest Writers profane Piety;
Makes honest unto one a common whore,
Yet makes lascivious, who was chaste before,
Transformeth women into manly shape,
Yet makes men become effeminate;
Turns age to youth, that once again they may
In August taste the pleasant fruits of May;
It Is Fancies natural child, never lawful bred
But where by Reason Fancy's seconded;
Fancy but liking, reason love does make,
Reasonlesse love of madness does partake,
But both affections, thus concur in one
Fully to enjoy their object as their own;
Nor is it love, that seeks not to prove
That sweet which nature makes the end of love.
Were It not a silly Be, nay a true Drone,
That having seized a fair flower as her own,
Would simply on exterior pleasure feed,
Nor seek to gain the inward honey sweet?
Such withering flowers are we, and silly they
That gather not their honey whilst they may,
It Is natures work, who the cold barren mould
Makes fruitful by loves fire species to hold,
Her mind and pleasures we ought not contemn,
Fantastic pleasures are not like to them,
One loves this pleasure, the other loves another,
But every Son delights to make a Mother.
Fair give me leave to call you cruel
Since cruel I have proved you,
You kind appeared but to add fuel
To torture him that loved you,
And well you knew your beauty never
Could have bewitched my mind,
Nor had you me entangled ever
Had you not seemed kind:
So to seem kind, so to dissemble
Are but false Siren notes,
And do those traitorous lights resemble,
That Ships entice to rocks:
Cruelty often favor proves,
And favor mischief breeds;
Hard heart which pity nothing moves,
More hard which torture breeds:
Had you at first made firm denial,
Nor seemed to have affected,
I had not lost with tedious trial
The joy that I expected:
Loves Card was wont to tell us this
That we were near our Port;
When women did but hear or kiss,
But now all rules fall short:
Like Helens welcome I Will they are
Refreshing pleasant ground,
Where to put in we ill can spare
But are most hardly found;
Like Proteus daily form they change,
Never the same rema^ning,
To day most kind, to morrow strange,
Now loving, now disdaining:
The witty yet that can contrive
Honor to join with pleasure,
Go thorough where they earnest give,
And keep their credits treasure,
Where silly things that love vain glory,
Little respecting fame,
Make of themselves a blasted story
Whilst others get the gain:
As merciless as is the Ocean
Is wavering woman's mind,
And to give reason of their motion
Is full as hard to find:
Who will their properties discern
Like heavens joys must know them,
What they are never none could learn,
What they are not must show them.
And as in heaven no sin remains,
Nor torment, want nor passion:
So woman's heart no good contains,
No firmness, no compassion.
Nor do I yet hereby condemn
All women, 'twere too much,
But it is too true that most of them
Are over truly such:
I know they will themselves excuse*
And tax corrupting men;
But well they know a chaste refuse
Is seldom moved again:
It Is when we find they entertain,
And lend a gracious ear,
That we pursue, though they complain,
We hope whilst they will hear;
Sometime perchance to try their strength
They Will suffer siege and battery,
And sometimes too, they will yield at length,
Such power have time and flattery:
Who Loves approaches once has past
As little need she care
In loves play to sit out the last
The Act where most hid they are;
But silly men why do we show
The paths of love to those,
That greatest Clerks do overgoe,
And blind as they dispose?
Most expert Soldiers are they all,
With art to fight Loves field,
Nor better knows no General,
When to stand out, or yield:
If they be strong, they open march
And brave the husband foe,
If weak, they night and covert search,
All vantages they know:
Or by the confidence they claim
In their good man's affection;
Or by example still they gain
And color their election:
And think not ever they are silly,
That many entertain,
They are not ever the least wily,
Though often the most vain.
They generally kind appear,
And free^ome use to all;
That those who they indeed hold dear
In less suspect may fall.
As Keepers by familiar use
Of feeding Dear at hand,
The simple herd do often induce
To come unto a stand,
Where freely any one they strike:
So Women freedom use
That unexpected when they like
They their own game may choose:
Such license has not ever been,
And foolish are we men,
Having had power to keep them in,
To let them loose again.
Fair VVomens love I do confess,
Is a supreme delight,
But whatsoever they profess
It Is hard to know them right;
She that pretends to love you best,
Will now as well expect
To see your love in gifts expressed,
As they that least affect:
They by the fruit will judge the tree,
Nor will believe you love,
Except they ample gifts may see,
Your love their worth to prove.
As men their wives love never the less,
Where mony's the match-making:
So women will not have you guess
They love the less for taking.
But love farewell, since I perceive
Such pains and cost you ask,
And are so given to deceive,
I Will seek some other task.
Naught but assured love alone
Can my affection move,
And since assurance there is none
To know when women love,
My fortunes, faith and free estate
Shall never themselves expose
To plead for love, and think we hate
When we are but gulled with shows.
As they often meet with the best fortune
That careless are in play,
So they that least plain and importune,
And most neglect, are they
Who women oftener do subdue,
Then pitiful complainers;
They ever fly from those that sue,
And make the careless gainers.
Poor wailing lovers cease your hope,
That tears, though void of strength,
Will by persistance pierce that rock
Your Mistress heart at length;
Your sighs, tears, vows, and rhyming plaints
With all fond show of duty:
Your making of them Idols, Saints,
Sole Empresses of beauty,
All does but glory work, and pride
In their insulting hearts,
Their own affections women guide,
Not plaints, nor yet deserts.
LEt worthless spirits fear unstedfast love,
Guilty of defects that cannot love deserve,
Such apprehension never me shall move,
My faith and merit shall your love preserve;
But if change-loving your complexion be,
By nature subject to saciety,
My love shall slack as well as yours to me,
Answering natures loved variety:
And though your love most precious to me is,
Yet have I learned to tame affections so
That none more constantly shall joy his bliss,
Nor none lose easier what he must forgo:
'Twere idleness to urge your constancy
For future time above our powers extent,
The wisest knows not what next hour he will be,
Love's nor by force, nor resolution bent:
But to prevent malignity of time,
And permanency to our love to gain,
Give me your heart to keep, as you have mine,
Which no power can remove whilst you retain,
And yours in me such merit shall approve,
We both will fearelesse be of change in love.
You Will say they are toys, the fitter are they then
For such vain bubbles Fantomes as are men,
They profit not, and wisemen you will say
Pleasures foundation on profit lay,
To them that want not (to give nature right)
Profit it self in truth is but delight.
Postscript.
Alas! I cannot love, nor will I wrong
So much your kind heart, or mine own true tongue,
To play the cheater where no need compels
By vowing that I love you, and none else,
It Is for base foolish minds to undergo
To please themselves or others with a show:
Free spirits in reality delight,
Loving to give true nature its true right;
And yet I cannot say, I cannot love,
But she who now can my affection move,
VVon to affect nothing but for perfection,
Must be a perfect object of affection;
She must be unaffected fair even at first sight
T'arrest beholders eyes with sweet delight,
Yet such again, where looking you may find
A silent check to a presumptuous mind;
She must be such as can give due respect
To every man without a rude neglect,
Yet not of such a light and easy strain,
That her own due respect she not retain;
She must possess a wanton modesty,
Free affability with Majesty,
Wit without pride, a freedom well confined,
Discreet discourse, but most a worthy mind,
Whereby her actions she must ever frame,
To paint her beau^y with a beauteous name;
For noblest natures, generous and free,
Will never build upon a blasted tree:
She must to this such air of face possess,
As gives a life to what her words express,
Now calm and careless, then with spirit bent,
In silent Rhetoric speaking her intent;
She must be neither fulsome, sweet nor sow'r,
Of ordered, yet of free behavior,
Accomplished with all most courtly parts,
Yet not transported with her own deserts,
Using them only for her own defense,
Not greedy to bring them in evidence:
Such a fair Orange tree my love must be
Composed of such a contrariety,
So she in private be as Venus free,
Minerva let her be in company,
Desired of all, possessed by me alone,
Guiding her love with such discretion
As gives access to no suspicion,
Nor just grounds of dislike in going on.
A course uneven tyres a love discreet;
It Is perfect love, when love and reason meet;
Love checked by reason doubtful is, and lame:
Find me a Love so fair, so free from blame,
She shall command my liberty, and me
To love and serve her as her votarie:
And mean while to prevent saciety,
I Will live in joviall free variety:
Love's but impression of Saturnian blood,
Whereby we overvalue things though good.
Nec lusisse pudet, sed non incidere ludum.
My farewell to Catlidge. By M. G.
SOurce of my sorrows, whose unequal frame
Presents the course and fortune of my life:
Here thine exalted height deserves the name
Of uniform and stately fair: No strife
Of disagreeing parts; yet the other side
With low and crooked lines abates thy pride.
Thy noble prospect, and that large Empire,
By which thou seek'st to please and bribe mine eyes,
Can never deceive my grief: Nor make retire
Those streams which from thee sprang: Whose force denies
To be exhaust or stopped; through troubled tears
All thy delight dull, dark, confused appears.
Me thinks I see the Gulf, the Rock, the Grave,
Where beauty, strength and life, and all that is sweet,
At once their ruin, wrack, and burial have,
Which all in one divine soul here did meet:
Thou fatal seat of that intestine war,
Which all that is good and lovely quite did mar.
Thus to my grief and passion thou do seem,
Though crowned with health and pleasure; tho the place
Where peace and plenty both strive to redeem
With kind and noble usage that disgrace,
Deaths cruel hand has lately cast on thee,
And to relieve the pressure lies on me.
^ut calmer reason does thee represent
In truer species to me; this does plead
Thy innocence; this sees thy fair ascent,
And Noble rise which heavenward does lead,
Chose by that matchless soul, which might her bring
To the Throne and presence of her God and King.
Farewell and flourish then thou happy place,
Ennobled with the last and sweetest breath
Of earths and heavens ornament, whose race
Here gat the end and crown of life by death.
Long may thou stand and safely keep all those
Her virtues heirs, whom thy fair walls enclose.
Condolement upon occasion of the preceding Verses received from another Author.
MY other self in my affections and sufferings, with whom more then all the
world I delight to converse present and absent, such satisfaction in the way of
knowledge, conference, ingenuity, and Religious virtue I no where else expect;
common conversations, especially such as these times produce, are to me as full
of Soloecisme as the time it self, they invite me not abroad; they have no
influence upon me, either to quicken, extract, or fructify. Some are knowing,
but not trusty; others simply, but inconversably good: there is scarce any
thing left perfect, complete, or in any tolerable order now she is gone whom
we lament. Pardon my present manner of writing: for as it is to you, so is it
only for you: and my great confidence in you makes me as incurious, as free
and open. Though I am at this time unfit to write, though my son lies under
the disease and danger which has bred our passion: Though I am none of the
best conceited of writing, for the little good effect I find from it (we live
by chance more then by the book, and the best praises are every day poetically
applied to vulgar merit and the writers glory) though I have resolved to leave
it more then needs must; yet to supply what I was yesterday saying to you in
acknowledgement of the happiness I found in you in the midst of my loss and
grief, such as I reckon another Phoenix unto me, for we will in the flames
and spices of our Recordations still raise her up, and keep her alive to our
souls eyes, such as whilst we live I beg leave of you to love, seek to
enjoy, and make my self yours with a consecration of me and mine unto you.
Excuse me if I am or have been defective in entertaining you according to
your worth, and that I am of no more worth to be entertained into such place
in your affections as I affect: And let my valuation and affection to her that
has left us, and whom you best (if not alone) know how to value, intercede and
make supply with you in my behalf. But whither go I? I seem to put on an
affectednesse and complementalnesse far beyond what I intended: for my
meaning (next the giving you some account and thanks for the verses you put
into my hand at my parting) is, only in a tumultuary precipitate fashion to
let you see how my imagination was apt to work, and what (with infinite more)
I could have laid hold on, if I had not deserted both the formal following of
my fancy and writing. Time is a dryer up of Radical and other moisture, and I
reckoned my self as unapt to weep as a statue. Nature has provided tears
and showers for a mitigation and dissolution to heat and violence of passion
and storms, and as violence is incapable of duration, and reason and judgment
with time recollect themselves, tears thinking they have played their part give
way to full and clear discourse, and cease in the stronger spirits. Yet such
power and so moving were your lines upon me; that entertaining my self the
most part of the way upon them, not only every reading but several clauses
raised several storms and showers on my heart and cheeks. So see we marble
statues weep either in present sympathy with the weather, or in future presage.
And I pray God the future sufferance of that family (whereof by interest of
blood I have the honor to make a part) exceed not the present sense in this
inestimable loss. I was by the way like an April day, according as the
Sunshine and clouds of your spirit disposed me. Sometimes I suffered in an
apprehension, that according to your title of a farewell to the place, you
might be become like others disaffected, and abhorring all relations and
circumstances to your grief, and so to my self: but therein again you happily
and favorably cleared me. Sometimes I became transported in your lively
representations of her worth, and transcendent happiness of excellency both
in this and the better world: But presently as much dejected and overwhelmed in
your patheticall expressions and sense of her loss. But in conclusion I found
you like your self, as full of obligation as payment, to me as infinitely
beyond my merit, as in your own conceit short toward her, in what you owe,
and her virtue may challenge. My fancy wrought upon returning a farewell to
Lees: I had cause and matter more then enough, as the breeder and true cause of
that which has been most unhappily translated to this unhappy place: but
considerations as due restrain me. As I said, I resolve to deny my fancies
their full birth or Trym; I can no sooner entertain half a thought of writing
upon her for a subject, but I become oppressed with a crowd of matter,
conceptions, and material Ingeniosities, that offer their service, and press
upon me so importunate, that if I presently give them not a birth they
threaten they will neither ever be found of me again, nor that I shall ever
find so good: I seem careless as never despairing of my fancy where she is
the subject; Nay such is the plenty and treasure of her materials as scorn
the help of fancy, and require no more but a reasonable Recorder and Register.
What an unmatchable fortune has Lees been blessed with in two wives! the one the
first to the father, the other to the son: The one like a Romulu^, the other
like a Num^ to Rome; What a foundation of estate, virtue, and beauty brought
the one? What an Economy besides portion, Alliance, virtue, beauty, and
Religion, the other? Candish was her name, but most Candid her soul and
condition. The enfolded Serpent is her Crest, most proper to her excellent
discretion and judgment, which was as natural, as her Dove-like innocence
acquisite unto her. Whatsoever in her condition was to be wished other, was
fatally accidental. Her perfections were all her own, nor was there any
perfection wanting in her, if not of not being her own enough. It is too
unhappy, and frequent an incident to goodness to be too indulgent to others,
and not to give themselves their due. Time had not hardened her to endure a
hardness of time and fortune; if there can be an excess in goodness and
charity it was in her, natural, moral, and divine virtues contended in her
for precedencie. But as well her death as life witnest her charity in its true
prerogative to outgoe them all. She was matched to a field of crosses, she
converted them all to a blessing upon her soul, and would have done upon the
family, had not unlucky disease and death prevented; She was an Echo of her
mothers name and virtues, and that as full as numerous. I may crave pardon of
her soul, and you for writing thus rashly and hastily upon so precious, so
dainty, and sacred a subject; my study must be to stop and contain my self,
as others use to work and labor their brain and fancy for invention. She
neither was nor is as other women, death that was ever ghastly and hideous to me
in others is to behold in her a piece of sweetness and excellence: Her memory
and whatsoever represents it (except her sad misfortune and Catastrophe) is all
perfume, all rapture unto me; Were I not strongly instructed in Religion, I
could not forbear a continued veneration, and address unto her as the Saint
of my soul. Great griefs indeed are not allowed a tongue, nor can they at
first find one, nor ever a due adaequate and full one: But it were a kind of
Sacrilege to rob the world in the due testimony of so divine a worthiness,
and our sorrows tribute at least in some proportion. This is the miserable
constitution of mortality, who will be indolent must be stupid and without
affections; if we will love much (virtue or whatsoever) we must be contented to
subject our serles to overflowing sorrow, it never had a fairer, truer or
juster occasion. But I will abruptly break off at this time that sense and
prosecution, which shall otherwise neither fade nor expire in me. And to
conclude with you to whom I began; The first passage of your Verses, though I
answer it not in kind, where you mention the crookedness and unproportionable
lowness of one part of my house, that where that noblest of souls left this
unsuitable and unworthy world, I mean in monument and memory of her to raise,
and grace the lower side thereof to such a decoration, as (though nothing can
become the occasion) shall not be unworthy of the neighboring Piles; And that
(for all your farewell) I hope you will often become an eyewitness unto. The
lines I gave you yesterday, you find by their disguise, were intended as a
concealment, and so to be kept (and therefore covered) Let this letter also
remain with you as under seal of

Your most sincerely affectioned friend and servant.
This morning of Septem. 14. 1638.
I Have formerly wondered at Montagne (whom you lately instanced unto me) that
in his Essays he often takes a title and writes little upon it: I find it
now in my self, I propose to my self one thing, and other occurring matter
and fancy possess and carry me away, my writings become Oleos, which, if like
others you affect variety, I hope you will the rather pardon: Even now the
entrance to my letter has been as well diversion as matter unto me; It is
received that we should write as we would speak, my speech to you would be
without formalitie, why should I debate with my self how to entitle you at the
beginning of my letter? to superiors and personages of great respect and
little familiarity I grant it decent and necessary, to others there is a kind
of odnesse in it, which shows not well, you were never the less welcome unto
me as were my other friends in your company at our meals, though I saluted
you not with my cup; It is to many especially inferiors more trouble and
interruption then gratification, there is means sufficient otherwise to
express our good affections, and I see not but why as well our kissing salutes
as that might be antiquated and left: kissing is a kind and degree of
copulation, which should be and is so observed by the greatest and wisest
nations more elective and private. A Lady of wit and quality whom you well
knew, would never put her self to the chance of a Valentine, saying, that she
would never couple her self, but by choice. The custom and charge of
Valentines is not ill left, with many other such costly and idle customs,
which by a tacit general consent we lay down as obsolete, only with God we
grow more ceremonious, except in the Lords Prayer, where I know not why we are
growing to leave out the doxology, though St. Matthew the leading Evangelist
has it at large, and so have we been brought up to it: What may the people
conceive of our former style in Prayers and Religion, if they shall be
occasioned to think they have not till now enjoyed so much as the right use of
our Pater noster? We are also in our Creed grown more familiar with Pontius
Pilate, he must now be Ponce, and why not as well Julius Caesar July?
Quantulacunque estis, vos ego magna voco. As I said to some, none of the most
obscure of our Ecclesiastiques, who blamed the Puritans for troubling the
people with abstruse points and novelties, that there was order enough to be
taken with them, so that themselves upon whom we have no coertion would let us
be quiet, and that my self who had been long learning the hard lesson of
Religion and conscience would be loath to be set to seek in my older days.
So can I not but still continue it my prayer, as it is said to have been once
used at Paul's Cross, that it will please God to make our temporaltie more
spiritual, and spiritualty less temporal. God is a Spirit, and decency of
worship is all that is required in Christianity. Abundance of ceremonies were
a load to the Jews, and the exercise of Religion more by the outward senses
then the inward, is too much the way of Rome and a visible object of adoration.
The time was when my charity led me, to wish Churchmen might agree amongst
themselves, and shine to us in their good Ill living Preachers like evil
Cowes, kick down the milk they give.
example, which would (sans Ceremony) best supply all wants that they find in
our devotion. But now they put me to pray and think it no small happiness
that my self may be quiet in the ways of God; There is a disturbance in all
changes though to the better, and often might better be forborne. You see how
prone I am to fall upon the Church, we cannot travel but a Church will come
in our way; are you not afraid it will prove to me as is written of Christ,
that he is such a stone, that who falls upon him shall be broken, and whom he
falls upon, it will grind him to powder? I have, you know, of late been at
some cost with Churches within and without, I had ill fortune betwixt St. Paul
and St. Gregory, I am yet as conformable as any, how long I shall continue so
upon further alterations I know not, I love not to be put to my bearing, I
hope I shall not; The abundance of my heart will say something, and I have
often fallen upon some touches of this discourse in the confused pieces which
you obliged me to take into your view and consideration. If Churchmen will do
things scandalous and unwelcome to us, they must expect to hear something
unwelcome to themselves; I profess to honor nothing more then a good, and
abhor nothing more then a bad Christian amongst them. I have met with some
friends who have pressed me to the press; over-flattering me that it were pity
my conceptions should extinguish in a private Copy or two, and that I may
otherwise be wronged either alive or dead by some false publication: I cannot
become persuaded therein, I suspect fame and abhor vulgar censure, I am
conscious of my precipitation and Crudities, and will not give the silly and
malicious world a privilege to arraigne me; Besides, our Clergy preside and
overruled Printing, and will disallow all that conduces not to their own
advantage; Be my intentions never so good, the Arc must Yet diverse passages of
the New Testament give such high privileges to the child of faith as come
little short of the Priesthood, whether for illumination or powers.
not be touched with profane hands, they will be p^rty and judge, Unicuique
in sua Art, Religion and all that belongs to it is a Noli me tangere to the
laity, more then to obey: The Tables of policy and government are bound up
against such straggling writers as I; let truth be what it will, I shall be
contemned and condemned. They are our Pastors, we the Pecus, yet is our
conscience too much accompanied with science to go as every Clarke will drive.
They have the keys of the Church, they will in some sense be alone
privatively and exclusively, the Church, Saint Paul gives the title of Church
to a particular family, Saint Peter also, etc.
though it was not so in Noah's Arc, where the eight persons cumulatively made
it; they will now be Church and Chancell, whatsoever our Savior said of
Sabbath, we must rather be instituted for them, then they for us; yet in the
time of the Patriarchs we read of no such Hierarchy: all we can say or write
is Apocryphal, their sayings are only Canonical; Let my zeal and charity
be what it will it is blind, it is indiscreet farther then conformable to them,
and their charity begins at home, they cannot, they must not err or be in
the wrong: Yet if you will rightly consider, they shall find that naturally
the more they assume, the more we shall examine and yield the less unto them.
I wish them all their due, and more then a competencie, but I find nothing
more frequent in the old and new Testament then invectives against their
preachings more for themselves and their own bellies then God and his truth. I
make too bold with them, I must either not come in print or pass their sponge,
their Castrations, expungings and expurgatories. If I print not, I shall be
robbed; Plagiaries will make me after a while come too late to call my own, my
own, ye^ will I as willingly consent to my robbing, as guelding; Transcribings
are most troublesome and injurious, but I will be content with a few witnesses
like your self to do me right upon occasion, and keep me alive in your memory
and affection. To you I submit my self, I give your pen as great power over me,
as to my own. I have been told since you left me, that you found the
concluding verse of my Lady Riches Epitaph (which like this letter was of a
most sudden composition) somewhat flatter then the rest, my self judged no
less, it first concluded thus, Had Death had eyes he had not been so Cruel.

But I thought it too light and licenciously Poetical for such a subject; I
love not excessive Hyberboles, much less over bold and profane expressions. I
deceive my self if I give not a temperament therein beyond the ordinary; though
neatness, form, beauty and fancy work as sensibly upon me, as upon others; yet
have I never willingly complied farther with them, then as I find them to
comport with convenience and other good respects. I affect to write more reason
then conceit. I hope shortly to enjoy you farther, and refresh my self in your
company this winter at London, endeavoring to avoid the sadness of this
place, and the approaching season. What with the sight of my Sons extremity,
lying as I thought (and little less it was then) struggling with death; and
what with the immediate preceding heavy loss of that incomparable Lady in the
same my unhappy house, I am confident that since I was a child, so many tears
have not been drawn from me. I want comfort and diversion; but I almost
despair to find them. I have long since lost the best and dearest of my
conversations, my fate has been such, that I have seldom failed to find
distaste and discomfort from whatsoever I have most pretiously affected: such
conversation as can give me contentment, is so rare, and out of my way to
enjoy, that I can little flatter my self therein. You were a witness at your
last being with me of a most extravagant and undue distaste cast upon me; God
in all my course has blessed me with a great portion of charity to pass over
offenses, to construe and hope the best; my discretion may be something
questioned in my patience, but I chose the better and more Christian part. If I
once become lost, I am hardly recovered; who well considers humane frailty,
will the better bear it: we are little better then half witted; it is good
to be circumspect, but we are not thorough sighted. I would the very texts of
Scripture and Aphorisms of State were not too frequently taken by halfs, my
writings are but parings and scrapings, (I mean in respect of matter, for I
neither skim nor copy others) I dive not to the bottom of my self. I had need
gather something, as I do, whilst I write and scatter, for I lose much of my
own fancy by the way. I take not time to consider and digest, I hope you will
as hastily read me. Time and the pillow are excellent Counselors. Sudden
resolutions are subject to imperfection and repentance. Serious, deep and
iterated ruminations are troublesome chiefly to impatient spirits, and the
lighter sort are incompetent and incapable to undergo them; even the most
intent and solid minds shall be often occasioned to say, Had I thought or
known. Men addicted either to delights or much employment, have neither
leisure nor patience to give weighty and implicate deliberations their full and
due examinations: how often have I tossed a consideration, as I thought, on every
side, and in all its aspects, and yet found new and important discovery upon
return! Though the Spaniard be often a loser in not taking the advantage of
present opportunities, yet his constancy and patience in timing, maturing, and
pursuing his deliberations and designs makes much for them and their ends;
their several bodies of Counsels, for several Kingdoms and affairs, are of
great effect: Our late practiced peculiarity of delegations and Committees,
with a choice respect to the wits, capacities and experience of selected
persons and junto's, are greatly to be approved. Trades and professions must of
necessity be more exact in such Countries, where as we find it written they are
lineally continued. If the Art of Physic were distributed, as to Oculists one
part, so other parts and diseases had several professors, particularly to
attend them, their Anatomy and cure, though it savor of the Emperick, it might
be much more happy unto us. But what make I then so busy out of my Province? a
Justice of Peace, as some will think, is the utmost of my calling: Yes, a
Gentleman is a little of every thing, and peaceablenesse in Gods service
concerns every man; Mountains are as well surveyed and judged from below, as
valleys from above, and an impartial by-stander may often see more then the
Gamesters. It is more then time that I untie your attention from my importunity
and trash: it is to me less trouble to write as it were without thinking, then
to think without writing; possibly an active life like yours would prove more
easy and healthful to me, then either of both; but I must take my self as I
am, and as we see little Birds in their Cages, and Apes and other Creatures
force an exercise in their restraint, so, Si fortuna negat facit indignatio. I
have both envied and emulated a Cat or Dog, in the tranquillity of their
spirit: it shall still be my aim, and I hope to become no more troublesome to
you, my self, or any other in this way of writing: But I must stay my time in
all things. Far better then my self, have professed themselves subject to do
the evil which they would not, and not the good they affected. As I am
informed, you have wished I would bestow some further labor in polishing and
better digesting what I have written; but by that time you shall have read me
thorough, I hope you will be otherwise satisfied: and I have, as you may find,
bestowed too much wit in excusing the natural deformity of my writings, now to
consent to lose, and cast it away. Though I know my Children as black as the
Crow, yet they are mine, and I must like them never the worse for resembling
me; they were not made for the market, and they are too frequent in devout
conclusions for the vulgar. I presume better of you, and will conclude with you
like the Letters of former and better times: Committing you to the protection
of that Omnipotent God, whom I never cease to implore; and who has from time
to time, and even to this present miraculously supported me by his grace and
favor, to him be all glory, to you all happiness from

Your most unfeigned, though most unfortunate affectionate Brother.
This morning of the 22 of September, 1638.
STill to omit formality and compellations unnecessary and superfluous, Since
my last of the 22. it has been intimated unto me, that you are not so well
satisfied as I would, in that I vary from my first taken measure and order of
verse in some of my no long pieces. I doubt not but it will be disapproved by
some of the most strict and formal Critics; yet take I the boldness to like
my self never the worse; it is for Novices to write by line and rule, words and
lines are but the bark and clothing of our minds: so decency be observed, my
years and disposition have long dispensed with exactness of following the
fashion, challenging some grateful privilege therein. Our modern fantasies in
music, and your Court masking tunes have taken up a change of air and spirit,
and are the better accepted: you condemn not, nor prove not offended with a
beauty for want of precise symmetry, affected forms of speech and complement
are disaffected; and matter regarded; Scribendi recte sapere est and
principium and f^ns; it is neither this, nor that manner, that makes it good in
writing, or other things; good Judgment is the thing, and never fails of
order: it has an influence into all our thoughts, locks, gesture, language
and actions, and without it all will be wild and incomposed. In my late
dysastred entertainment, ostentation, and curiosity were so much avoided, that
I for bad all extraordinary festival Pageants, Aromatiques, and Quelquechoses.
If you are grown to choose a Horse for true strength and usefulness, accept of
me in my mis-shapennesse, my writings respect ease, duty, affection and profit,
not aff^ct^tion, fame, perfection, or delight; I hate fetters and
circumscriptions, more then Religion, government, and reason cast them upon
me; Magnas nugas as magno conatu, is a double fault. I am no ways a
Precisian, yet in the Adiaphora according to the indulgence of our Church, I
can and do dispense, so it be not with contempt. Sometimes change of matter
agrees to it; sometimes, as we have a Christian liberty, I will as well as my
leaders make use of a Poetical license: Where is the law that restrains me?
Why not conclude with a longer proportion of lines, as well as to intermingle
a long and short? I have sometimes pityed a serious and pious Author needlessly
and wantonly fall upon a Quadruplicity of rhyme or affected variety of measure
and number in verses. If there be any harmony in rhymes, it is satisfied in
two, and not without danger of fulsomnesse, as well as certainty of trouble in
exceeding. I have often wished our Poetry like the Latin and Greek might be
e^ercised without such subjection, if not barbarism. There may be a
Rhetorical sweetness in numbers, spirit, and proportion, charming enough
without it. I little respect old rules further then reason. Reason is the rule
of rules, they often a buse us, and domineere in an usurped authority, as if
we were, less men, and had inferior or less faculties of soul, then those
from whom we received them. I could never find the found reason of subjecting
Comicall representations to the Compass of a day: to tell me that otherwise
our conception becomes overstrained, is nothing: I can as easily stretch my
fancy to a year as a day; and to think my self at Rome in an instant from
London, or Paris, as to imagine my self at White Hall, being in Blackfriars.
I unwillingly lose a good story, or any thing that is good upon niceness of
form: Non oportet destru^^e substantiam propter accidens, was a good rule, I
long since learnt of an honest Physician, in case of bestowing more time and
pains in study then stood with health. Fame is the farthest from my thoughts,
and yet you see how famous they prove in their production, Crescunt eundo, like
Elias his cloud they unmeasurably spread. I intended but a word or two, I
wonder I should be so tedious and talkative in Pen and Ink, who am nothing
less in ordinary business and conversation. I hate a long Tale, especially
dramaticall in the way of Dialogue and Scene; yet if you take but a piece of
m^e, at once, I hope you may at least, as well endure the reading, as I the
writing; this and all my longest pieces are of one Boutade performed at a
breath, part of a mornings exercise. My sonnets of devotion, howsoever
versification be of a more elaborate nature, insomuch, that most miserably it
will sometimes fall out (I believe with the best and most fluent) that the
subjection of a rhyme or measure, shall cost more time and toil then writing a
Page in Prose, and in conclusion matter it self must yield, yet were they
generally of a sudden birth, they needed no Midwifery, but what they found
from above. You find also in them an irregularity of here and there a
superumetary couplet at the end, the piece is complete without them; It also
requires your indulgence to matter beyond form. I naturally hate to be clogd,
yet has fortune manacled me from my youth, want of liberty in the free use,
disposing and ordering of my self and mine have infinitely prejudiced my
contentment and fortune; I take the boldness to say it in presumption of such
a moderation to have ever accompanied me, and so much discretion, as it may
be you will bear me witness that had I not been checked in the mastery of
my self and mine I should have done much better in the world. But I grow as
well diffluent as tedious, and therefore with desire of your pardon and
constant profession of most sincere affection toward you I rest

Your most faithful Brother and servant.
September. the 24. 1638.
MY really worthy friend, It is my unhappiness to miss your company at my
return to London, and that which aggravates is the heaviness of your
occasion, wherein I participate in the great loss of your most valuable
brother; such a gravitie, such a soliditie, such virtue and Piety are too much
wanting in men of your and his profession; Pride, covetousness,
licentiousness, ingratitude, hypocrisy, usurp the place of that sweetness,
meekness, hospitality and good affections to God and goodness, which were
wont to be more frequent in your calling as most incident and proper unto it,
and held before in coparcenere betwixt you, he has now resigned to your
Primogeniture. Gods judgments are to be feared when the world is not found
worthy of such Inhabitants: So young, so suddenly dead under the practice of
Physic, ministers fresh occasion to continue my Invectives against that Caball
of collusion, calamitous to mankind and nature. All the good we usually get by
relying on Physic is the neglect of other better means to subsist, and
presumption in evil diet and disorder. I fear I shall hardly see you before I
leave the town, and when I shall see it again I know not, we are not fit for
one another, Mihi jam non Regia Roma, Sed vacuum Tibur placet atque imbelle
Tarentum, The civil pretiosa fames, the malign fires, fitter for a
Chasing-dish then a Chimney, and yet as costly as a Bustum for a great Roman
carcass or Phoenix, the Parrat heartlesse complements, Gossipping discourse,
Petty censures of this man's seat, house, habit, esta^e, and the others last
action, Lawsuite, child, marriage, entertainment, purchase, sale and bargain,
which the walking spirits of Stowes Chronicle* Journalists and Commentators of
the time carry from house to house, were I never so rich I could not now endure
with patience; It is enough, if not too much, to be by vain experience made
to be no Gull of ignorance; The town is for Professors, Tradesmen, Officers,
Courtiers, and such as feed on others tables to live in for pleasure and
profit; Others if they be wise will not make themselves a silly prey to the
proud Shopkeeper, who plays the Spider in the Cobweb, and is now become come
as familiar as he was wont to be humble and crouching. Non tanti emo
poenitere, non tanti esurio, I will not buy ill air, strait lodging, ill
drink, and little good company so dear. I could possibly find as much
pleasure and esteem in the Town as another if my mind were suitable, but Quid
decet ac verum est have long been my affectation; the vanities, idle visits,
Plays and pastimes of young men become me not, other men's tables appear a
kind of intrusion and importunity, nor is a solitary retiredness pleasing
unto me; Serious men are too busy, and I am too serious for the lighter sort.
I will wish plenty and goodness of time, and howsoever it p^ove will help it
by feeding on my own pasture, and rather enrich then impoverish by dearth and
high prices; f^r the more they grow, the more I will spare and contract, nor
will I dwell at the me^cy of exaction; with choice of place. Tenues luxuriantur
opes. I, cole nunc urbes, quicquid non praestat amicus, Cum praestare tibi
possit Avite locus. When the City had most of my affection, I conceived reason
sufficient why a Country Gentleman might, as I often found, grow soon weary,
and distasted; costly and ill lodging and diet, enforced neatness, importunate
visits, perpetual cap, courtesy, and complements, ceremonious acquaintance,
tedious and chargeable business, pastime to seek, his wonted healthful
exercise, Air and command turned to a sedentary and servile observance, and a
sootie Air, such as the thickest rined vegetables rather pine then live in;
this and much more may well occasion him to think himself out of his element,
when he is drawn to town, where he finds honesty and goodness accounted
^implicitie, and that, Rusticitie; where not to wear his Beard, Cap, Clothes,
and make his reverence in the modern Garb condemns him as much as to speak
false Latin in the Universitie, or go naked in the Country; where to become
every man's acquaintance is to be none of his own, civil and charitable to
every stranger, every impudent unchristian Beggar, incivill uncharitable to
himself, his fortune, plenty, health, ease, authority, piety and natural
neighbors; where thoughts and actions are neither consonant to religion or
Philosophy, nor language to the thoughts, innocence and vanity are the prey of
rapine and deceit, the purse falls into a dysentery, good order and conscience
to a luxation, and the outside of the Platter is all the business. When I
formerly lived in Town I was at home in my place of birth and education with
my Land close by, my fortune has now made it other with me, and for my
comfort, (if time which should improve my judgment, abuse me not, as it
commonly does the distastednesse of old men) the condition of the Town is
altered from what I have known it. Prizes continue double upon a sudden, and
that which is most strange; without either scarcity of years, or plenty of
money; penury of wit and good economy with abundance of luxury work the effect.
No ancient brave Roman was ever more free and prodigal of his blood in the
way of honor and his Countries defense, then our English gluttonous Gallant
and Epicure is easily and insensibly parted with his money (another blood to
the wise) for fashion and sensuality. He affects bravery, and yet contemns what
feeds it. He seems indulgent to his Genius and soul, yet thinks it base and
superstitious to befriend them by looking into his reckonings with God and Man.
The conscience of the seller prescribes no limits but what he can get, nor is
the buyer restrained by any rule of discretion or price, broad Tables, large
Diet, many courses and dainties, make slender fortunes, and narrow souls; gay
houses and outsides, ill furnished minds: we are I know not how become
possessed of late with a malus pudor, a slacknesse, a wretchlesnesse and
shamefacednesse to do what we ought for our profit and good, with a confident
glory in our ruin, and what we should avoid; till God, authorized example, and
wholesome sumptuary laws reform us, we shall never mend: Sed quis custodiet
ipsos custodes? vicious custom has prevailed by the discountenance of wisdom
and virtue, falsification and corruption have so invaded us, that we have
forgotten and lost the very Arts and Idea's, as well as the habit of true
working and living: To strength of my mind and authority all is easy, gross
impunity animates and confirms offenders, and the great fear is we shall
never grow wise but with a mischief; for my part, as I am without power, so am
I worn out of fashion and acquaintance, and I find little new worth the
seeking and embracing; friendships are grown rare, dissimulation, cost and
ceremony have extirpated them; Generosity is hardly to be found; All distrust,
cunning, pride, self-conceited, self-affected, and never less wit, judgment,
courage or virtue to boast of: As the World is, I cannot blame such as frequent
the society and conversation of women, they pretend not so much wit and
knowledge, but have commonly more then men, Plus sapiunt, quia quantum opus est
sapiunt; Their study and concernings lying in less room, they more strongly,
certainly, and perfectly attain and comprehend; they exercise not such a
falsehood of Art, trade, and conversation as men, their Discourse is more free,
friendly, and ingenuous, their intelligence none of the worst, for they command
generally our secrets, and what from the pulpit, what from our open hearted
conference communicate without book the quintessence of our thoughts and
studies; they study us as we our books. They are the winning commonwealth
and society of this our world, and like the Jesuits strongly combine and make
it good by wit. They are greater lovers of worth and valor. They are more
innocent and less dangerous to good men. Observe their ways and bargains,
and judge if they be not ordinarily more cautious and frugall then our selves,
they grudge not to take pains and be at some cost with themselves to please
your eye: No Confectio Alkermes is so good against melancholy (so you surfeit
noton their dainties) as the diversion and pretty trivial lighter part of their
entertainment, gratification is the very worst of them; and you shall wrong
your self and them, if you condemn them all for the worst amongst them; What
was ever totally perfect? If some be bad, the best are to be the more
esteemed. There is I confess a difference amongst them, so also of us, therein
is our choice and judgment to be exercised: The company of the best men best
at leisure is to be enjoyed and found amongst them; the very best things are
often subject to abuse, contain and make a Covenant with your eyes, and take
but a preservative of ne quid nimis along with you, and you are safe and happy:
They are generally better affected to the times, and less possessed with base
and prolling designs then we; Their power with us and over us, proves their
wit to be above ours, finer, clearer, stronger: They are not destitute of Art,
but are more friends and instruments of nature, and she theirs. Thus as I use,
have I mingled less with more serious matter; this latter part belongs rather
to others then to you. I presume of your friendship, whom I know indulgent to
ingenuity, an honest free career, and

Your most faithful Friend to serve you.
January the 10. 1638.
Pathetically, if not too Prophetically Inspired, upon the death of the late
Noble and Brave Prince HENRY. An imperfect, but true Inventory and Dissection.
OH, how much happier had my fortune been,
To do thee service with my Sword then Pen!
And to have shed my blood for thee then tears!
(Fair Prince) whose life, our hope; death, bred our fears;
Though thine own virtues have embalmed thy Fame,
As far as planted is the Christian Name,
And are too beauteous well proportioned,
To be by me unskilful crayoned,
Yet duty bids me offer at thy hearse,
The faithful incense of this mournful verse,
Which contrary to common Monuments,
Is not made fair without, for foul contents;
But poor without such riches does possess,
As budding youth did never so fair express;
Nor fear I now suspect of flattery,
For to the living such their praise apply;
Greedy to turn sweet poison to reward,
Care less of duties, and of truths regard.
Thy fresh and well known worth that tax does free,
Which livelyer we shall know by loss of thee:
Irreparable loss, where overthrown,
Lies our Great British worthy Champion,
Strong Bulwark of our Peace, steel point of war,
Loadstone of virtue, glorious Northern Star,
The Muses love, favourer of all good Arts,
Friend to all good designs and worthy parts,
Judicious, just, hardy, and temperate,
Splendide in well ruled managing thy State,
Too curious frame to last, Model compact,
For future times a pattern most exact,
Fair Ship, most fairly fraught for War and Peace,
Untimely sunk, scarce launcht into the seas,
Too glorious rising Sun soon overcast,
That shin'st in Heaven, for here thy beams were placed
On mould too dull, cold, worthless, to beget
An active fruitfulness answering thy heat,
Thy flames of virtue were more pure and high,
Then our weak state could foment with supply;
No virtue did thou want, or vice possess
That could make great thy worth, or glory less
Furnished with all materials fit to raise
A high superlative of Princely praise,
A true Minervian issue sprung from Jove,
Visible virtue forcing us to love:
As true a virtuous Cyrus natural,
As Xenophons feigned artificial,
Fair fire received as from our Persian King,
Dead virtue once again to life to bring:
Heroic offspring of that English blood,
Which anciently has so celebrous stood,
As fair a splendour to thy Fathers stem,
As, or his Scepter, Throne or Diadem.
If Troy lamented Hector, Grecians scourge,
^arre greater grief thy death to us does urge:
Troy missed no Captains, though their Hector dead,
But whom has now our Priam fit to lead
With union and alacrity the Bands,
Of English, Scottish, Welsh, and Irish Lands?
Whose active well born spirits thirsted all
To follow such a hopeful General;
Whose pattern set the coldest minds on fire
With glorious thoughts and generous desire,
Sole able Engine to have repaired the fame
Of the once illustrious withered English name;
Such virtue could not actionlesse remain,
Which made him fly our dullness with disdain:
Wherefore brave Spirits that do inward burn,
Loving true glory, join with me and mourn,
And with your slames make him a funeral fire,
And with him end each thought that did aspire;
Smother in his Ashes what began to flame,
And teach your thoughts to study peaceful fame,
Temper your most untimely ill fallen hear,
Which may your ruin, not your glory get,
Except that idle glory you esteem,
Vying who most effeminate shall seem,
Most proud, affected, and like weeds of worth,
Which our best soyles uncultivate bring forth:
Mourn and lament him Patron of all truth;
Nay, him the soul, and glory of your youth,
Nor never hope an active time to see,
Except enforced to act our misery.
Happy our Fathers warlike spirits; we
Hapless; though fortunate our Sons may be,
To whom this seven year retrograde has brought
A Prince with like fair promised virtues fraught,
To top his story with victorious bays,
As James with sweet of Peace has blessed our days;
Adding as many Crowns as James has done,
To Crown his titles with possession.
Thus glorious Comet with more zeal then art,
In thy fames dirige I bear a part,
Which may it pardon find, though hoarsly sung,
And pass with favor amongst the Elegiack throng,
As writ by him, who having vowed sword-service
Can ill perform a Poets sacrifice.
Upon the death of Anne of Denmark Queen of great Britain, and the blazing
Star appearing near her death, taken for the stellifyed spirit of Prince
Henry dead not long before.
BRave soul! thou have prevailed, God has his own,
And we ill debtors were, nor paid the loan
Of such a Jewel, be thou Henry's Star
Pointing thy mothers way and not our war;
Heaven be appeased, and grant our prayers, and tears
Prevent thy further anger and our fears.
Say that our false hearts to our selves, and thee,
Deriding goodness and true piety,
Led by our vain affections as our God
Not charity, say this deserves thy rod,
Let not the Roman petty Gods surpass
Thy rulers mercies; Marcus Curtius was
To them a sacrifice their wrath to swage;
Our loss has doubled his, then slack thy rage,
And grant again, we feel no further pains,
But bless our days with joy, in what remains.
Epitaph.
HEre lies James his rich gem, the eyes delight,
The graces mansion, our fair days good night,
Glory of the Court, object no sooner seen
But known the graceful presence of a Queen:
Rich Jewels she is said to leave, far more
Rich was she in her precious virtues store,
Heaven grant her royal virtues transportation
Breed not a dearth unto her sex, our nation.
Upon the death of my fair Cousin Drury.
SSay passenger, and for her sake
Who while she lived had power to make
All eyes that on her cast their sight
To fix with wonder and delight,
Daine that these lines one sigh may borrow
Breathed from thy heart with generous sorrow,
To see in this sad Tomb now dwelling
The fairest Drury, late excelling
In virtue, beauty, and all grace
That heaven in earthly mould can place:
And that which may your grief increase
Is that she did a maid decease,
And all that we in her admired
With her is perished and expired.
Matchless she lived, unmatcht she did,
Druries sole heir, and Suffolks pride.
Upon the death of the supereminent Lady Haddington, Delineated to the life.
IMperious soul, proud Quintessence of wit,
Union of natures beauty forcing love,
Fair Haddington farewell, here dead with thee
Lie Loves awe, sweetness, life, and majesty.
Manly ambitious spirits, hope possessed,
By conquest of fierce beauty to be blessed,
Change your desires, for swear ambition,
The glorious subject of your hopes is gone.
Alas! nor verse, nor picture can express,
The least of her heart-winning loveliness:
Happy who knew her, for he knew perfection,
Such as henceforth has freed him from subjection.
Another.
MOunt up to heaven, free soul, with Larke-like joy
Scorning our earthly base condition,
Where no malicious envy can annoy
Thy fair ingenious disposition.
There show thy self in thy pure nakedness,
Where all thoughts in their simple truth appear
To speak thy self with true borne simpleness
Is virtues habit out of fashion here.
To covet, flatter, lie, be politic,
Hunt gain with greedy falsehood and deceit,
To be a devil, so an hypocrite,
Are virtues to gain this worlds good conceit.
Thou were not such, and therefore happy now,
If faith and truth may happiness procure.
Thy life thy truth, death does thy faith avow,
These are the golden wings that mount thee sure
To lasting glory; glory be thy due
For being faithful, noble, fair and true.
An Incentive to our Poets upon the death of the victorious King of Swedeland.
FIe slow Boots brood! what, not a line,
To celebrate a virtue so divine?
See you not Perseus mounted in the sky,
Outdoing all the ancient Chivalry?
Expect you till his Steed dash on your brains,
To make you flow into heroic strains?
Can your Electrian faculty in wit,
Raise nothing but mere trash and strawes to it?
Is brave Gustavus of too solid stuff,
His great exploits, for your slight vein too tusse?
That like poor falsifyers you despair,
To profit from a piece so rich and fair:
Whilst from more trivial subjects you will drive
A trade, shall make your reputation thrive,
By ransacking the mysteries of Art
To set a luster on some low desert.
Rouse up at length your over stupid muse,
Unite all in one quire, and bravely choose
No other rapture whereupon to sing
Then the high Trophies of the Swedish King.
The reason of a Gentlewomans wearing small black patches. Of another Author.
I Know your heart cannot so guilty be
That you should wear those ^pots for vanity,
Or as your beauties Trophies put one on
For every murder which your eyes have done:
No, they are your mourning weeds for hearts forlorn,
Which though you must not love you could not scorn,
To whom since cruel honor does deny
Those joys could only their misery,
Yet you this noble way to grace them found,
When thus your grief their martyrdom has crowned;
Of which take heed you prove not prodigal,
For if to every common funeral
Of your eyes Martyrs such grace be allowed,
Your face will wear no patches, but a clowd.
The incomparable Lady Carlisle.
Occasioned partly by the Verses above, partly by a fair Ladies keeping on her
Mask in the house on a hot day.
I Never till now thought patches ornaments,
Gentile and happy was your Authors muse,
As gently cruel are her fair intents
Who kills and mournes: but why do you refuse
Their names, who so much wit and fairness own?
I met that very day you showed those lines
A beauty such as if it would have shone
Would have out pierced the parching'st Sun that shines*
But chamber maskt she was, close mourner to
The funeral solemnity she wore,
Innocent guilty, sweetly sad, as who
Resolved to intombe her self to kill no more.
It may be also, she did apprehend
Another scorching Summer would undo us,
And so her self o'reclouded to befriend
Mortality; 'twas double favor to us.
But Sun-like beauty, know great mischiefs flow
From great Eclipses, well as blazing Stars,
We die as well, except your self you show
As by your beams, or our intestine wars:
Shine then and triumph still; better some die
Then this Sphere want its second quickening eye.
Epigram.
WE cannot escape by masking of your face,
We find our selves still taken by your grace,
By your I know not what, mere carelessness
Charms more in you then others curious dress;
Each step and motion of your frame or mind
Consists of a composure most refined,
Cheap virtue is confined to face, yours lies
As well in your high spirit, as your eyes.
A Dunghill Cock untried will look as brave,
So will a Curre, a Buzzard, Jade, or knave,
As the most virtuous in their several kind:
Value consists in temper of the mind,
In judgment right, and resolution strong,
Ends brave and good, thinking nor doing wrong,
Consulting truth and goodness more then will,
Knowing, and daring all but base and ill:
Diamonds in show are little more then glass,
Trivial appearances make men to pass,
But thorough trial proves an Ass an Ass:
Difference in women is no less,
Their goodness makes their pretiousnesse.
True Love and Honor.
THough you are graceful, brave, and fair,
Beyond your Sexes rate, though wit
Enoble you as well as blood,
This, nor your fine exalted air,
And prospect knowing all that is fit,
Nor that you are rich, great, but good
Subdues me: these to cement well
Is that wherein you all excel;
And if to these you take in love,
The India's cannot equal prove:
For me, I must not so aspire,
My part is only to admire,
Your virtue, virtue to the world supplies;
The Sun none ought think to monopolize:
Only I Will strive to be as good as you,
And so part of your love will prove my due,
And mine, you being good, and good to me
Must or be yours, or virtuous cease to be.
An Elegy upon the Death of the most fair and virtuous Lady Rich, which most
unhappily happened upon the 24. of August, 1638.
HAd I least hope complaints could reach our loss,
Could I the Stars or Sea sand number,
I would embarque her virtues sea to cross,
And to my griefs height raise your wonder.
Could or the world, or words such truth receive,
As to her story does belong,
Could any but her self, her virtues weave,
Or sorrow find an equal Tongue;
Such Ship, so fraught, such wrack I Would represent,
As would the Sovereign near surpass,
And make you in a Sea of tears lament;
She is not now that Nymph she was.
Within, without, so glorious was her trym,
Such awe of Odinance she carried,
Had she not by dysaster taken been,
Neptune alone she must have married.
But though her virtues circles just content,
And her squares just diagonall,
Numbers can never exactly represent:
Yet by our course Mechanical,
Somewhat we will say in lame and short account,
Our due oblations to discharge,
Which shall alone all other worth surmount;
Faithfully drawn, though not at large.
Free from all pride, though none but she had cause,
Neglecting beauty, huswi^'ry to mind,
Wholly resigned to Gods and marriage Laws,
Judicious far beyond her years and kind.
Outside and vanity, though most in fashion,
Wrought not on her strong framed and solid soul,
She lived by reason, as others by their passion,
And by her goodness did all wrongs control.
Her presence was a chastisement to sin,
Ill time could not corrupt her spotless mind;
Had her pure body of like resistance been
Against the Air and season too unkind,
We her sad loss had not so deadly grieved,
And she to our souls joy might still have lived.
Epitaph.
IN title Rich, in virtue all excelling,
Rare Daughter, Mother, Sister, Friend and Wife,
Piety seldom had so fair a dwelling,
Unparalled as well in death as life:
Here now she lies, glory of woman kind,
Physicians shame, the wonder of her time,
In body fair, but fairer in her mind,
Fitted for heaven, and taken in her prime:
Few rightly knew to value such a Jewel,
Had death had eyes he had not been so cruel.
On the same.
Foul Grief and Death this year have played their parts, Such time as a most
pestilent mortal small Poxseised and carried many of eminent rank and virtue.

And Syrian-like conspire against the best,
Aiming at one stroke to break all our hearts,
Their cruel spite never met with such a feast.
They threw and bore the fairest Phoenix born,
As singular, as unique to her friends,
They never twined so strong a Cord to mourn,
Nor struck so home, at ours and their own ends.
My wound smarts double on the by; what, where
She suff'red, how exceeding all repair;
How heavy to her friends and mine to bear,
This multiplies my grief with much despair.
My treasure, rest, well-being, all my joy,
Except what duty and piety require
Perished in her; fate can no more destroy
Henceforth but love of good, and good desire.
The good is gone, which if I cease to grieve,
Beyond my own death, let me cease to live.
Such life, such death, so constant, Christian brave
Never became the triumph of the Grave.
I err: Triumph was only hers; may I
Contemplate her both whilst I live and die.
Her birthday was her death-day, and her death
The birth to my discomfort, and sad breath.
A Requiem at the Enterment.
WHo e're you are, Patron subordinate,
Unto this house of prayer, and do extend
Your ear and care to what we pray and lend;
May this place stand for ever consecrate:
And may this ground and you propitious be
To this once powerful, now potentiall dust,
Concredited to your fraternall trust,
Till friends, souls, bodies meet eternally.
And thou her tutelary Angel, who
Were happy Guardian to so fair a charge,
O leave not now part of thy care at large,
But tender it as thou were wont to do.
Time common Father, join with Mother Earth,
And though you all confound, and she convert,
Favor this Relic of divine desert
Deposited for a never dying birth.
Saint, Church, Earth, Angel, Time, prove truly kind
As she to you, to this bequest consigned.
Grotesque.
AS often as we speak we are censured, but much more severely in our writings;
against them men take not only a privilege of boldness, but make a kind of
necessity of exercising their wit and judgment, for fear of being concluded
to want understanding if they discover it not in their exceptions; they are the
evidence that wisemen give in against themselves for a common Jury of fools to
pass upon them, it must be an extraordinary Coat of Mayle that has no false
and weak links, searching spirits howeever weak in themselves will find them
out. I have often observed that the weakest Sex and abilities will as soon
discover a flaw and infirmity as the strongest, they bend their wits to find
faults, as do the better sort virtues. Noble and great Creatures seek not
chinks and cranies; a blemish in a garment is easily seen, when the true web
requires a judgment often as fine as it self. I am no Doctor, nor am I paid
for cure of Souls, and I have ever affected privacy and retiredness of my
poor wit so far as to have avoided all public exhibitions more then
necessary duty has imposed upon me, yet that I wrap not my talent wholly in a
Napkin, I am I know not how, fallen upon this sally, rather in truth to
Register my self to my self then to the world; many good wits use to write down
their occurring conceits, which chance uses to present better then any
industry could extract. I have bin a great loser for want of such practice. I
know the better sort, such as I would admit and converse with, want none of my
slight and pedling furniture; yet may I serve to figure and awake unto them
some such of their own stuff as would possibly otherwise never have become
elicit, but have slept in their Magazine and Chaos. My writing is rather to
mend my self then others: the world had long since been much better then it is,
if writing would have effected it; find fault with me who list, they shall
hardly find or more, or grosser then I know by my self. Spectators and
Censurers of lives and action, exercise a Trade as easy as lazy, Scepticisme,
Criticisme, and Satyrism seldom miscarry. It is as familiar to carpe as hard
to write of the times and not to become Satyricall. Errors in pretended
Science, errors in wit, fashions, and manners, are so gross, that they seldom
fail to meet with as just an invective and derision, as refutation. What a
business we have made to our selves by impatience of our natural condition,
by our affectation of that flashy forbidden fruit of knowledge* what a deal of
Art, building, furnishing, dressing, policy and pastime are grown upon it* nay,
what a business are our very pastimes become unto us? how seriously we
cultivate our trifles, our frothy aerie ambitions? nature made the supply of our
mouth (provision) as well pleasure and pastime as necessity unto us; other
creatures find it so, and suffer as little hunger as men. Examine our own
rules and definitions of As right ends and ways, or right reason of doing,
choosing, and refusing, etc.
wisdom, and judge whether they belong not more properly to other Animals then
to our selves. Our forefathers were not unsophisticated; but what a
super-sophistication have we brought upon our selves more then formerly, in
plucking down our old often more convenient houses for the fancy of
newfabricks? then comes the endless variation of proud and costly furniture:
what a coaching, what a tyring of truly tyring Women and Tailors? what a
curiosity of cookery, wines and sawces, which young men were wont as much to
scorn, as now they are curious to judge? Nature is lost in us, our life is
become an affected Pageant of show, and we are nothing less then our selves,
we are drowned in our own Arts and follies. True honor and virtue are not so
much as Themes to discourse of, we care not so much as to seem virtuous,
honesty is a shameful simplicity, and virtue a net to catch Woodcocks; but
mark the end, and you shall seldom see shame fail to overtake folly, pride,
and vice. For my part I abhor baseness and degenerosity so much, tha^
naturally I cannot well endure that an unworthy conceit of me should lodge
safely in any breast; though fashion be become a kind of superstitious
Religion; and Religion taken up but for fashion, and made superstition: God
has cast me in a better mould, and this advantage I find in goodness, that
as vice has two contraries, one of virtue, another of its opposite vice: so
have vicious men as well the malignity of others, as the goodness of the
virtuous against them, where virtue has only vice for enemy: And this benefit
it has, that as in a good constitution of body, it self and exercise will
bear out some mis-dyet and mis-accident; so will a predominancy of virtue and
good reputation maintain its proprietary against much unhappiness and
misfortune; whereas an evil name, you know of old, is half hanged, and serves
for a millstone to sink an otherwise strong swimmer. The strength of a
predominant virtuous ingredience appeared in Manlius against his otherwise
distastefull austerity, as in other Roman Captains against their remissness;
Gonsalvaes reputation not being made of Cobwebbe-Lawne bore him out against
small exceptions. There are infinite degrees of souls; witness Oysters and
Plant-animals, insomuch as it is to be doubted whether there be any such
substance as to be termed inanimate; every one has more or less its
discourse, or at least affectations: But only God is absolutely perfect.
Amongst us, he is best who participates least imperfection, and in whom virtue
carries the greatest sway; such deserve an indulgencie, and shall find it as
well from God as man. I am all infirm and imperfect in mind, body, and
fortune: yet this commodity grows even from such discommodity, that as
valetudinary bodies by a due care and temperance subsist often better, and
outlive more strong and presumptuous Complexions; so does a skanty yet
competent fortune well ordered prove often more happy and less wanting then a
luxuriant plenty. The like may be affirmed of a tenderness of mind; as
Parsimony is a great Revenue, so experience when it can, Inane abscindere
sol'do, makes much of little: High minds, bloods and fortunes hardly moderate
themselves, and are most subject to inconvenience and ruin; such seek to
conquer all but themselves, the want of which conquest exposes them to all
assaults and spoils: It is a task that few undertake, and fewer prevail in,
without it we are unfortified against our selves and others; it is often
attained as well by flying as opposition it is a masterpiece to pass over
another infirmity, as it is to put by the assaults of our own suggesting
fancy and concupisence, which is yet many times so easy that who once has
learnt to repel first importunate motions shall find them so far from that
importance and force which they pretend, that sent away for the present, and
another motion of the mind entertained, they will show themselves such
nullities and become so lost, that if you would you can neither find nor
recall them; This till we can do we shall not be friends to our selves;
Aversion and diversion are necessary in fencing, cure, and life; Who cannot as
well put by as make a thrust has little art; He steeres not well that cannot
well decline and avoid; It must be an exorbitant force to carry all down
before it; Nothing is strong or weak, A Mathematical Radius moving as upon a
Center makes the motion of the Snu (if it move) no more then that of a watch in
24. hours, and what is slow in an Elephant is swift in an ^mme^.
swift or slow, good or bad, but by comparison and respectively to the Species
and greatness of the body and subject; To know our strength, to know our
selves, and God, is a height of knowledge to be labored for; without some
measure of it there can be no happiness, God is the Author, God is the
circumference, God the Center of all existence, to him be all glory. Amen,
Amen. July the 16. 1638.

THree things have presented themselves this morning to my consideration, of
themselves excellent, though in diverse degrees; Religion, Policy, Arts: when
Religion is not exercised in sincerity, policy to public good, quiet and
Justice, and Arts are employed in folly and error, I cannot but deplore our
humane corruption; they should be the perfecters of nature, but distorted and
abused, prove to truth of judgment her mischief, her deformity; They leave
her not to her self, and our super and preter-naturall life ought to be
instituted and advantaged by them; if yet seeing they have undertaken to lead
and help her, they would at least be constantly true to themselves and their
own pretenses, it were well, better possibly were she otherwise if in her own
hands less should she have of trouble and less to answer for: But
perverseness of disposition which is too generally predominant will ever wrest
the best institutions to its own vanity, pleasure, fantasy and commodity,
other is not to be expected, so it has been, so it will be, whilst we live
in this world, the best of us abuse our selves if we find it strange; we
must do herein as by the weather, pray for good and take it as it comes, use
our endeavors, cultivate our selves to the best, and committing all to God, if
we find our selves better affected then the common course, account at his
blessing with a submisse and thankful heart.

June the 10. 1640.
With whom shall I converse? Where is the dwelling of wisdom, or innocent
simplicity of heart? Happy Shepherds, whose conversation is with the heavens
and the most innocent of creatures; Man generally is become a mongrell, neither
good man nor beast: A Christian in name, a Woolfe in nature, an Apostat to God
and nature, and they have no less forsaken him: Justice long since took her
flight to heaven, Peace, wisdom and integrity have followed, their shadows
only remain upon us; Who should maintain Christian Religion, endanger and
destroy it, who should draw a blessing by studying peace, draw a curse of
dissension upon themselves and us. It were brave if men durst profess what
they are, or be what they profess: But from halfe-witted men there is nothing
to be expected but wholly folly and mischief. Storms ought to fall on their
heads that breed them, and so commonly they do; I will shelter my self as
well as I may: naturally I love stirring, but the weather must be fairer;
wrong courses may succeed for a time, but right wisdom and justice will at
length prevail; That shall be my hope, that my Prayer. Sublunary dispositions
are subject to various influence and vicissitude; virtue as well as ignorance
often labors fastidio sui, Religion it self has its Currents, its ebbes and
floods, in entertaining things we are taken with a contemplation of their
perfections, in progress we grow weary, we carp, we cavil. Nature affects
change and liberty, ordinarily to the worse; This the Roman Clergy knows,
this they work upon, our vitiousnesse affects an indulgent hand, that they
present, like greedy Chirurgians they love sores to feed upon their cure,
ignorance and liberty are the way to, and in their Religion, we are too much
disposed except God avert.

Sudden Touches in the nature of Characters, Written about the year, 1625.
A King
TO be perfect must at the least be of the second form of wit, if not able
to advise himself to the best, yet to judge of and choose the best upon debate,
as also to make election of Counselors untainted in their wisdom and
integrity. He must be seasoned with the knowledge of that great God, from
whom himself and all things have their power and being: from thence will flow
an affection ascending to him, and descending upon his people, with a holy
ambition to imitate him as well in his justice and goodness, as power and
greatness. He is a public person intended for common utilitie, and his
affections must all concentrate to the public good. He must esteem his
happiness and safety to depend on the love of his people, and therefore like
a good Shepherd he will chiefly be pleased in procuring their contentment
and welfare. And if (as every Shepherd has his Dog) he will assist himself
with some person of especial confidence, he must be exceeding careful that
such his favorite be not chosen of a condition rather inclining to the
falsehood and voracitie of the Woolfe, then that fidelity and good industry
which were requisite to his and his peoples good. He ought to think it a part
of his duty to seek the understanding of his office from the best writers,
for them he will find the most faithful and least flattering Counselors.
Thence he shall learn that the only security and honor of a government
both for the present and to perpetuity consist in being zealous of Religion
and reputation, in maintaining justice and the Laws of the Country, which are
the sinews of his government, and the evidence of his Regalitie. The zeal and
observation of these cannot fail to produce the love of his Subjects, without
which he would find himself being assaulted like a man without hands, which
move but according to the heart. And howsoever craft, dissimulation, and
flexibilitie of conscience are in the tenet of many men, qualifications
necessary to Empire; yet true wisdom of government will so order it self, as
to be seldom or never beholding unto them: for strength needs no engine, and
a good judgment will so reconcile the wisdom of the Serpent to the innocence
of the Dove, as to force the currents of virtue and state both into one
Channel. His gifts, preferments, and undertakings must be governed more by
discretion then passion, else he shall want, be ill served, and fail without
pity. Reward and punishment are the weapons wherein he must be cunning, for
they are the Instruments of his honor and well being. It has been an ancient
and constant policy to make all benefits to proceed from himself, and matters
of distaste from his Officers, else does he hunt Counter, but so shall all the
thanks be his, and the blame theirs. A good and cheerful countenance to
well deservers and such as observe respect to him, will often spare his purse,
and make him a gainefull return. To take notice of the worth and capacity of
his servants and most eminent Subjects, and to remember them in the
distribution of his bounty and employments, will much conduce to his honor
and good service. To cherish the good, and be constant to his word, is not the
least reputation. As also to enter slowly and with full provision into a war,
and not to come off but with advantage. To give a free ear to discreet persons
about him that love him and his good, and to show an affection to dispense with
his particular for the public, is the way to know all and want nothing. He
ought to be compassionate to the poor, and affect the relieving of his
people, else shall he be so far from goodness as to be void of common
humanity; To be better content in a small revenue with love, then in a great
one with hate and groans, for where the people loves, the King cannot want.
He will by all means avoid to supply a present want, by giving way to a
perpetual mischief, especially if not urged by the freeing himself from some
imminent ruin. He will delight in his people and the expression of their good
affections, and e^teeming the money raised from them, as their blood, make
conscience in the dispending of it. He will consider what is necessary in a
way of constant expense for the good, safety, and honor of a State, and
before all things assign an infallible certainty of allowance thereunto. In
gifts and payments he will prefer the needy and well-deserving, and crying
debts before others, or matter of bounty. In case of defect of ordinary power
for government he will affect to supply it rather by assent of the State then
by acts of Council, for they will never deny what shall tend to good
government, and it will stand more firm, and beget better obedience. To
preserve his just power and Prerogative as well over himself as his Subjects,
and to use motu proprio as well in effect as in word, will maintain his
Majesty in due respect, not suffering it and himself to be m^de covers of
private ends and passions, nor interessing it but upon necessary preservation
of his Soveraigntie according to the constitution of the State where he
governes. He will esteem it as himself ordained for Common good, and think
no small Prerogative to be a King, though governing according to the rules of
those Laws which make and keep him so. To appoint and observe set times as
well for his affairs, as recreation, will keep him from becoming a stranger
to his office and interest, maintain his servants in their care and duties,
his Allies and Subjects in due respect, and will prevent infinite abuses which
might grow upon him, nor will it abridge but rather give a relish to his
pleasures. To conclude, he will think that a choice and great assembly, like
a great stream, can hardly be corrupt, and that their happiness being
involved with their King they are likely to give him as good, honest, safe, and
wise counsel as any three or four heads in his Cabbinet.

Nec minus alienae libertatis, quam sua dignitatis memor.

A good Counselor.
A Good Counselor is one, whom nature, study, and experience, have fitted
with ability duly to deliberate and resolve upon occurrents of the greatest
importance, and needs no oath, for his conscience, wisdom, and sincerity
will teach him secrecy and fidelity. He will study his Masters honor and
benefit, and will be more forward to give advise therein without asking, then
to move for his own advantage. He is a demi-god placed between King and
People, and must steare a course of justice indifferently betwixt both. When
fear, a temporizing humor, or private ends make him swerve from truth, he
betrays his own honor, his conscience, and his Master. He must ever affect
to be a good instrument between the King, his Allies and Subjects, for their
good affections are the Kings honor and safety. He must direct his opinion
by the examination of reason and truth, and neither by his own nor other men's
affections. His Master and the public good must be his object, far beyond
his private, wherewith he must upon occasion so far dispense, that rather
then not to adhere to Justice, truth, and a good conscience, he must not fear
any displeasure or loss of office. The more he has been raised by his
Masters favor and fortune, the more he will cloth himself with courtesy
and modesty; for that honor is only true which is given to a man, not that
which he arrogates to himself. Or if he will exercise a haughtiness of
courage, it shall be only that brave pride of neither doing nor suffering
injury: for the other foolish one of self conceitednesse and disdain is ever
the issue of folly, and parent of reflected contempt and scorn. He will be
apt to do good offices, and affect dispatch, for that will b^ his honor; as
to undertake more then he can perform, and delude those that re^ie upon him,
will prove an abuse upon himself and his own reputation. Nothing shall be
more prevalent with him, then to maintain his Master in the love of his
people: for that King that is beloved at home is feared abroad, possesses a
secure estate, a joyful heart, and quiet sleep with present and immortal
fame: In which happy effects a good Counselor reapes no small applause and
felicity.

A good Parliament Man
MUst esteem himself an Epitome of the three Estates, with a principal
relation of duty to the King, the head; for in respect of Common duty all the
members of a Parliament are Homogeneall. He is a Physician of the State, and so
must endeavor to rectify all distempers and disorders therein. And if like an
evil Physician, his ends be either his own advantage, or that he comply with
the disease or inordinate humor of his Patien^, he betrayeth his Prince and
Country; and is that murderer, thief, or whatsoever of evil which is
reproached to a Mountebanck Impostor. The writs of Summons teach him his
calling; the King, the Church, and the Commonwealth, are his object; his own
interest and allegiance will instruct him to affect to please the King, but his
conscience will lead him to assent only to what is wholesome; his sincere
judgment, and not implicit faith is to be his guide. He leaves all favor, ill
will, and partiality at the entrance, and considers the good of the King
combined with that of his people. He fears nothing so much as to wound his
conscience, or to betray the truth, which above all things he ought to
reverence. Fame is too aerie an object for a solid soul.
Popular and Courtly applause are the least of his aim. He is not so well
pleased with any thing, as to see right ends proposed, and right ways observed
toward them, which so they prevail, he will gladly sit in perpetual silence,
but rather then matters be carried against his conscience, he will discharge it
with whatsoever consequence. His affections are to maintain all things fair
and even in the Church and State as he finds them duly constituted, knowing
that all innovations are dangerous; yet so, as gladly to embrace such
propositions as apparently conduce to a bettering and reformation. And to that
end he will never doubt that things tending to the public good can be
unwelcome to the King and his knowledge, it being a chief use of Parliaments
to foresee, inform, and prevent. He will be no less affected to a due relief
of the Kings, then of the Countries griefs: for a necessitous Prince can
hardly observe the laws of goodness; and a good and loving people will never
endure a good and loving King to be in want, or suffer the least dishonor. He
will study to m^intaine concord, and will not follow a multitude to do evil.
He will observe a becoming attention. He will make the best construction, ever
study moderation, and so, that right and Justice be observed. He will not
fear any dissolution; no not of the world it self.

A good Courtier
Maintains his Masters supremacy in his heart above all earthly affections,
and furnishing himself with parts and discourse most acceptable unto him,
courts him more zealously and diligently then his Mistress, knowing that as well
his fortune as his duty requires it. His tenure is by courtesy, and he deserves
to forf^it his estate for nonperformance. The least incivility in him exceeds
the greatest in another man; for he must reckon his example, next unto the
Kings, of a diffusive nature. His language, clothes and fashion will all be
well ordered; but he will affect to win love, and esteem, rather by his inward
then his outward parts, and will value the good opinion of one well famed, more
then of an hundred others. Goodness will be his chief object, and reputation
but a second. He will express love to those that are virtuous and ingenuous;
for there cannot be a greater or more sudden evidence of virtue and ingenuity
in himself. He will study the favor of the powerful, and be voluntary with
discretion, as good a Counselor to them, as they ought to be unto the King. He
will love his Masters honor, as much as his own profit, and seek it as
industriously. He will not esteem that the Kings service is a dispensation with
him from Gods, but will so court it on earth, that he may hereafter be a
Courtier in heaven. Though complement and neat attire be a badge of his
profession, yet will he avoid excess in either, and his purse and reputation
will thrive never the worse. He will judge nothing to become him so ill as
ignorance, debauch and ill company, and therefore will study to avoid them. He
will bear an open countenance, and a close heart. He will be just of his
word, and slow, but sure in contracting his friendship. Honest dissimulation,
and a dissembling cheerful patience are a kind of virtues necessary to his
fortune and course. It will be a misbecomming discountenance unto him to be
excluded by his defects from the fair performances of his companions, which
often advance them to no small grace and savor in their Masters attendance.
Wherefore if he come not to Court (as he ought) furnished with perfections of
Dancing, Horsemanship, Languages, and the like, he will industriously bestow
his idle and early hours, which will not be wanting unto him therein. Good
parts may assure him of favor, and favor of fortune. To conclude, he, or no
man, is bound to be a complete Gentleman.

A Gentleman
BOth by descent and quality stands ever bound to his good behavior, outwardly
in a fair, civil, courteous, well ordered fashion, and inwardly in Piety,
Charity, Justice, Courage, Truth, Temperance and those other virtues which the
Schools teach; for if outwardly he be incomposed in his carriage and civil
respect, he will appear to men that understand good fashion as full of
solecism, and more absurd then the arrentest Clown before a petty Justice of
peace; and therefore he will make it a business, so much to frequent companies
of the best respect, and to season himself with their fashions, as that
thereby he may avoid in the least sort to become ridiculous, especially prima
facie. As for those inward seasonings which are to this, as the substance to
the color, he will omit no occasion to give proof thereof; as fearing to
belie his Parentage and title, and to prove himself a wolf and vermin in the
eyes of good men, who ought to have doubled his luster by worth and goodness.
He will therefore be a strict examiner of himself, and least indulgent to his
own errors. He will make truth his guide, for lies are but the bolts of
fools that fall on their own heads, and moderation his Governor, for it is
the basis of all virtues. He will avoid occasions of expense and quarrel; but
being engaged to them, he will carry himself nobly, and come off with honor;
for to be cast behind hand in fame or fortune, is much more difficult to
recover then to prevent. His gifts shall be according to reason, not in
excess, yet inclining rather to the most, for else they lose their good
acceptance; but being excessive he loses his thanks, as seeming to give what
he esteems not, and tainteth his judgment in not understanding proportion.
When he falls to game, let him not think it only an idle pastime; for to a
good observer it is one of the most perspicuous discoverers of our inward
disposition and affection. He will mingle pleasure with profit, but will make
recreation his servant, not his master. Honor and virtue shall be his chief
aim, nor will he draw a note upon himself for any thing but tending
thereunto. He will by his courtesy make continual purchase of affection, but
especially in his own house where he can hardly over-act it. Yet toward men
of insolent demand and carriage it were but unmannerly to employ it. Civility
is an important piece of Society, especially amongst the better sort, and like
other qualities, it is to be exercised with great discretion, and good temper.
High and braving spirits unseasoned therewith, would like Cocks and Mastiffes,
impatient of the fierceness of one another eyes, uncollected and unrecalled,
assault each other with blows instead of Salutes. There have been diverse books
written of the institution of a Prince, of a Courtier, of several ridiculous
and tedious kind of complements, which some use as Saddles to all horses,
tyrannous oppressions to solid dispositions, and such as abound therein get
nothing but the purchase of liars, which is not to be credited when they
speak truth; whereas an old fashioned free-hearted word or two to the purpose
are ever more significant and effectual. There has also been some treatises
framed to frame a good Ambassador; but none that I know have descended to the
formal and now moral part of civil and respective demeanor in giving and
returning visits, receptions, and convoyes, giving place at home, and at the
Table, and such like, some retired Ambassador or Secretary might well perform
such a task. He will affect more to hear then to speak, but when he
unfoldeth himself, he will consider what, and to whom, and ever contain
himself within the bounds of his knowledge and truth; otherwise he shall be
a loser by one of his best blessings, his language. He will not show that
brutish sensuality to carry his mind in his belly, nor his soul upon his
back, much less let it transmigrate into a horse or dog. Books and women
he will use with discretion and moderation, left they devour and confound
him, nor shall he make right use of either who bears not himself above
them; All these are to be used for life, and not as if we lived only for
them. He will educate his son to be like himself, and not infuse Grammar
and Philosophy into him in such sort as if nothing else concerned him and his
well-being. And therefore he will bring him up to the true understanding of
honor and true reputation, and make him no stranger to the managing of a house
and fortune which as much imports him; and the strangeness whereof to young
minds wholly engaged to other studies and delights, is one of the greatest
causes of so many ruins to private fortunes. What is most comely and right
shall be his study, and to discern of truth and right requires a fullness as
well of acquisite as natural furniture. Judgment of comeliness comes the
more easily upon common observation. That becomes us best which is most our
own, most proper and proportionable to the circumstances of our fortune and
condition. It is over incident to many to trouble themselves, incur contempt,
and ruin their estates by an erroneous affectation of greater expense,
curiosity, and bravery, then would be expected from them: such breed and feed
the Canker that consumes them. What is observed and approved by the best, most
sober, and judicious, and neither to lead nor contemn to follow the fashion
is the best rule: to be outwardly too different is monstrous, to be affected
and curious, light and ridiculous. But I have past my hour and will not
exceed, nor intend I either to write all or any thing formally or fully in
this Subject; or if I did I know it were but lost labor, for nature and
preoccupate affection so possess us that impressions may be renewed and
confirmed, but hardly first wrought upon the mind by the pen, especially
without out predisposition of natural parts, assiduity of meditation, and
iteration, if not also the addition of frequent and authorized example. In
effect much pen-labour might be spared, at least in matters of morality, for
the best natures and judgments with experience need it not, and the worst are
incorrigible.

OBserve and practice this confused heap,
And you may chance no small advantage reap:
Nothing more fairly then discretion grows,
Yet with not ever clad in beauty goes:
Some say that nature does the mind neglect,
Whilst she the body does too much affect;
It Is best I grant, when both are richly joined;
But if you love your self, love best the mind.
If you this Inventory rude despise,
You may, I doubt, more curious prove then wise.
A Supplement to the Gentleman at such time as he was out of my hands.
He will practice frugalitie not so much out of a base affection to the love
of money, as out of a general election which he has made in all things to
order himself by that which is the best, most comely and reasonable; whereunto
he will subject all his affections, and thereby avoid the ingageing himself
upon a present heat and humor to infinite inconveniences and repentance,
which he might incur (as men daily do) by rejecting a due regard to the
distant future, and the true use of that discourse and reason which God has
given him, where with to govern his actions and resolutions, and which
differenceth him from the beasts of the fields. Nay, it is ordinarily seen,
that even the brute beasts themselves in their courses do less digress from
such reason as concerns them, then many an inordinate and wilful man. His
course and demeanor shall be ever constant, equable, and correspondent to his
fairest ends and pretenses, as flowing from the same fountain, all of a
tenure, all of a piece, avoiding that just reprehension which falls often upon
none of the least eminent, of being one in public, other in private; now brave
and generous, and presently unworthy and sordid; unweaving their own web, and
unadvisedly clothing themselves in such motley as they would otherwise disdain
to put on. He will not be a Libertine in his jests toward men, much less
toward God, and therefore will kill such itch in his tongue as most odious in
Religion and most pernicious to himself and others. All discoveries of an
affected humor detract from him in the censure of the most judicious.
Wherefore he will decline them, especially in his clothing, for it argues too
great levitie to be employed therein, and too poor a diffidence of his proper
worth to seek esteem and valuation from it. I will little esteem the respect
of man or woman who shall respect outward more then inward bravery, or rich
apparel more then a rich mind, though both do well with women, the best of
them are not carried with shows. He will not easily upon argument enter into
passion, which but argues his own doubt and weakness, for a clear
understanding will pity or endeavor to rectify, but not be troubled at
others ignorance; and calmness maintained with a friend is better then to
prevail in the cavills of dispute. He will examine his own sufficiency and
goodness by the best Authors, and the wisest and best men, and approve of
himself only so far as he proves conformable unto them, and finding
himself fit to do service to God, his King or Country, he will put off all
restinesse and floath, and set himself forward to the employment of his best
industry and abilities for the common good, yet ever so that he regard due
opportunity, and modesty, and make use of means just and honorable toward
his advancement and employment: for though audacitie prevail often upon others
weakness, yet it is more secure from disgrace to be overmodest and
considerate, then overbold and presumptuous; nor will preferment unduely
attained be valued and respected by minds truly worthy and noble. There are
amongst us a barbarous kind of gallants who conceive it great bravery to look
big and contemptuously especially upon strangers, toward whom in truth a
formalitie and courtesy of fashion is most requisite; and many women are not
free from tax, who commonly have neither freedom nor civilitie in store but
for their servants, they think to endeare and set themselves off by such
carriage, though often void of other worth; we become accessory to their
rudeness by terming it rather pride then rusticitie, which it truly is: They
are proud to be thought proud, but should be taught better manners by a just
and out doing scorn and censure; we nourish it in them by sinking under it,
and blame what we breed, as we do Children whom we first teach to be
liquorish by giving them what they otherwise had not affected. It is also no
small fault in great ones not to be courteous to their inferiors, or not to
countenance worth in place of their advantage, they expose themselves often
rather to suffer (a presumptuous obtruding) familiarity then fairly to invite
it, whereby they open the door to saucy boldness, and shut it upon the better
and more modest dispositions. Though it be true that there is nothing whereon
worthily to fix our affections in this world, nor valuable to the fleeting and
uncertain life of man, yet he will above all earthly things esteem of true
honor and goodness, as of that which will make him the most respected by the
wisest and best of men, most advantageous to perpetuate unto him a fair and
happy reputation (which the most worthy and magnanimous spirits have ever
labored for) and most acceptable to God who cannot be pleased in anything
incompatible and unlike to himself. If therefore he either value to be well
regarded by virtuous men, to leave a good reputation and name to descend upon
his posterity, to be secure from the ruins, scorns, and punishments that
evil men daily undergo, or to be well accepted with God, whereby to provide
to himself a welbeing as well after as in this present life, let him labor
for the true understanding of virtue, as the only rich habit of a fair soul;
the knowledge whereof cannot fail to render him like unto it self: nor is it
any thing but a wilful and stupid blindness to the discerning thereof that
causes the defect and contempt of it in those many weak and uncultivated
spirits that these and all times produce.

A Favorite.
NAming a Favorite, I intend not a Minion, the creature of Fancy that holds by
the face, suddenly exhaled to such an height as is against nature for an
unprepared brain to contain it self from giddiness, whose proper Sphere is
that of pleasure and not of business, (especially of State) him I leave to his
Prince like his garden to please his eye, and term him a Favorite whose tenure
is in Capite, and whose good fortune has made his worth and abilities known
to his Master, fit to have the secrets of his bosom and his most important
affairs communicated unto him for his Counsel and guidance therein. This is
the man whom neither birth nor industry (wherein he has many equals) has
called to the relish of a Kingly power, yet fortunately finding himself in
that most happy height and condition of means to doe-good, and glad the hearts
of good men, is as well in gratitude to his Master as thankfulness to God
bound to exercise the uttermost of his endeavors by making himself a blessed
instrument of all welfare to the State wherein he is potent, which will ever be
most easy to him who is armed with place and authority; and if he accompany
them with virtue, modesty, and goodness, he shall be an Armor of proof
against such spite and envy as is incident to his greatness from the tongues
of malignant persons. Circumstance of place, favor, and fortune, shall not
transport his constant and well prepared heart, nor will he discover in
himself, any such uncomely vanity and lightness, as to seem to set his mind
upon magnificence of buildings, furniture, apparel, feasts, and titles, but
will rather affect the high glory which grows to good minds out of their
disposition to moderation and solid goodness from the tongue and pens of good
and virtuous men. And howsoever wealth, greatness of title, and the chief
honors of the Kingdom where he moves, are not more due to any then to
himself, yet he will observe such a slow and graduall access unto them, that
his investing himself therewith shall rather appear an unaffected or unlooked
for favor of his Master, or a seisin and livery after a due purchase made by
his virtue and merit, then a sudden, affected, and unproportionable elevation;
which will so be his advantage as it is seen in nature, that high objects,
be they never so lofty, do not yet appear so much to the eye, as such as
are much inferior and of a sudden ascent. He will recommend to the favor of
his Master, and cherish such as are virtuous or excel in any commendable
perfections, and such only himself will be noted to have about him. For we
ordinarily conster great men by such as enjoy their company and good affection,
and according as they shall entertain the good advise, at least the persons of
such near unto them, their ends may be calculated. Evil men and flatterers
like Sirens will press upon them, and it has ever been hard for men in great
place to discover them, nay such will obtrude upon them, as will gladly work
advantage to themselves or their cause through their destruction. No small
caution will be required therein, but he is an able man, and my abilities may
be remembrancers, but not Informers unto him. Wherefore I will leave with this
Character upon him, that he is either the happiest, or most unfortunate man in
the Kingdom: If he order himself well, and put not on pride, presumption,
precipitation, and passion with his greatness, but run a course of
meekness, moderation and goodness, his reputation and memory are like to be
blessed and applauded; but if otherwise he misguide himself, and contemn the
good opinion and affection of the better part of the world, it is to be feared
lest himself in his end prove odious and contemptible, and be condemned as
unworthy of that fair fortune, and favor which have shined upon him.

A Divine.
A Divine is Gods ordinary Ambassador residing with us, not to exercise the
pomp and state of one, nor to represent Gods Majesty and glory, but to use the
order, care, vigilance and diligence of an Ambassador, by being a faithful
Minister in his function and charge. Though he be termed Theologus, he will be
Theophilus, a zealous lover, as well as a verbal Preacher of God; and he may
be defined with a good Orator, Vir bonus dicendi peritus: for if he preach not
first to himself, and that his life be not answerable to his exhortations, his
one day Sermon in a week wanting true life and spirit will not so much animate
his Auditory to holiness, as will his six days example (the Book that the
people better understand) lead them to dissolution and wickedness. God has
required that he be not outwardly, much less inwardly imperfect and deformed,
and it is he who must make virtue visible, and the visibility that will inflame
our affection. Scandal in others is error, in him a monster, no corruption
being so bad as what proceeds from the best. He cannot be fit for the charge of
others Souls who is careless of his own; and who will beget affection in
others, must first put it on himself. We would hiss him from the Stage,
whose action were grossly dissonant from his words and part; nor is he better
then a cheater of God and the World, who accepts of a spiritual living,
without performing the duties of the Spirit. It is questionable whether an
evil Minister be not inferior to the holiness of his Bells, and much more
miserable, for he is like them in calling men to Religious performances, in
sounding to please their ears, and in flattering, and solemnizing the times;
but questioned upon a due account, in this world, or the next, he will find
himself much more unhappy. But a truly Religious professor will abhor the
indecorum of being unsuitable to his Doctrine, fearing lest thereby as much as
in him lies, he render both it and himself so seeming unprofitable, that men
if it were possible would become distasted of his calling, and Religion it
self. He will rather show himself Gods Minister in godliness and humility,
then the Devils Chaplain in his first sin and impiety; and therefore casting
off all pride, vanity, ambition, covetousness, and the corrupt inventions of
men; he will conform himself to the purity and simplicity of the Primitive
Church, and become as awful to wicked men in his presence, as a Magistrate or
Commissioner of God, sent to take vengeance on their obliquities. He will
Preach God in sincere Devotion, and not himself in vain affection, and will
seek the advancement of Religion, more then of his own order and Hierarchy; for
it is the splendour of the good and sincere lives of the Clergy, and not their
pomp and state that must work upon our consciences. He will be an obedient
Child unto his Mother Church, for she cannot think him worthy to live upon and
serve at the Altar, if he shall think unworthily of it to be observed by him.
He will feed his flock more with plain and sound Doctrine, then with abstruse
points of Divinity, and janglings of controversies, or the empty sound of
language and conceits, (which become not the gravity of the Pulpit) and will
value the peace of the Church, before any particular conceited fancy of his own
or others. Subtilties and niceties, he will confine to the Schools and
Assemblies of his own profession: The mysteries of Religion once received,
being rather matter for faith, then to be controverted and disputed, especially
among the vulgar, who in no sort ought to be taught or acquainted to subject
the transcendency of their Religion to the grossness of their reason. He will
not, if he preach before the King, ingratiate himself by an invective incensing
him against his People, much less in a popular Assembly be Satyricall against
Magistrates, but will better discharge his duty by instructing such as are
present in theirs, and forbear his Castigation upon the absent. He will be
cautious of alleging in the Pulpit out of whatsoever Author, their over bold
and profane conceits of Religion, as also of using (especially insisting upon)
the plain and naked expressions which are found in the Scriptures concerning
women: for all that becomes the Bible becomes not the Pulpit, and there is
danger of leaving ill impressions in corrupt minds. He will use his best
judgment in tempering his Sermons to the best profit and health of our souls:
And considering it is natural for the sweetest and pleasantest things to be
the most nourishing, he will discreetly season and order them, as well to the
good relish of attention, as help of memory: and remembering that the yoke of
the Gospel is easy, consisting of comfort and glad tidings, and that a tender
and wounded soul has never leisure to heal with the continual application
of Cauteries and Corrosives; he will fear to bruise the broken reed, and beget
more discomfort and despair then faith and true consolation in the best and
most attentive souls. Briefly it is only such a good man that deserves
preferment, but he will rather go without it, then to buy it corruptly, with
the price of his Soul. We expect no miracles from him, nor can he expect good
life, and godliness from us, except according to his profession, he show us the
way. Religion was planted, and must be maintained by the Teachers holiness and
humility.

Si vis me ^^^re, dolendum est prius ipsi tibi.
They have, I thank them, done much good upon me; I would gladly make some
requital.

A Physician.
A Good Physician, (if any such there be) forbad enough is the best, in respect
of the Arts uncertainty, will more affect the life and health of his Patient,
then his own gain and living, and will not minister Physic to him to do good
to himself. He will be sorry, that by a surprise of his over-deeming election,
he finds himself imbarqued in a profession, where it is hard to thrive and be
honest, in giving Physic only where there is real need, and a good confidence
in himself, that it shall do good to his Patient; for he will have discovered
that his title is but as of a Mountain from not moving, and that nature is the
true Physician placed by God in every man for his preservation, and himself but
a Professor of a most conjecturall Art: so that who commits himself from nature
to him, takes himself from a seeing to a blind guide. Though it be incident to
his College to be over peremptory, as being used to the authority of
prescriptions, and prostrate sick Patients, yet he will avoid it; for a
discreet, plausible, and winning carriage upon the Patients good opinion and
affection is the one half of the Cure. He will not contemn an honest Emperick,
knowing that his own Art grew but from experience often casual, and that Gods
blessings are not restrained to their College and old Books. He will not be
sparing of his interrogatories, nor of his attention to his Patients relation,
who being sick, and paying, ought to be born with and humoured; But an
humorous Physician is a most intolerable disease, for all is but too little to
effect a true information, and to do well, he will often suspect, that the
disease may grow from the mind. In case of which discovery he will no less
industriously endeavor the Cure of the body by it, and his good precepts and
instructions thoroughly urged to that purpose, then by any other means, it
being often the only way of Cure, but nothing more ordinarily neglected by
such as only affect to say something to draw a Fee, but will be sure not to
trouble their own minds to cure their Patients: But from such God deliver me,
who will as little admit them to the trial of my disease and constitution, as
the Law does a Butcher to be a Juror. Purging Medicines shall be his last
refuge, after prescription of convenient exercise, order, and diet, which by
some of the best are affirmed to be sufficient to cure any disease curable.
He will affect cheerfulness of countenance and fashion, for it is a Cordial
to the sick, but he will take heed of an unseasonable merriment, which is often
as absurd as unwelcome to the seriousness of a sick man. A thousand things
have been, and might be said to his instruction, for no art more requires it,
but this in sum shall serve my turn, who mean only to say something of a
good, but not to work a cure upou a bad Physician. I conclude that Physic had
need have a God as well to the practice, as to the invention of it, for errors
are so gross, and ordinary diseases and symptoms so complicate, Indications
so cross, nature and constitutions so diversely affected in Crisis and
evacuation, nor does she ever powerfully show her self, till she be put to it
for life; Purging and blood-letting, prove so ordinarily diverters, impediments
and weakners, in stead of helpers to nature, and seeing by a mistaking we call
those our diseases, which are in truth the working of nature toward our cure,
and the discharge of her self, as in fits of Agues, Collicks, the Stone, and
the like; for my part, I choose rather with David, to put my self into the hands
of God then man, whose endeavors of cure and errors make us ordinarily more
misreable then our disease it self. I end to my good Doctor, with that Counsel
of the Scripture, whereupon it is to be hoped that he will guide his
practice, namely, that he and his Art are to be employed upon necessity,
which I think to be (for the sense is ambiguous) in such Cases where nature and
diet have ever appeared defective to work a Cure, and that his art upon
infallibl^ and clear grounds has ever been found successful.

A Lawyer.
A Good Lawyer is so fallen in love with my Lady Justice, that there is no
greater Antipathy in the world, then betwixt him and injury, nor hates he any
thing more then an undue course of proceeding. He will make his Science
compatible with conscience, and so run her course, that at the length he may
be thought a fit Judge to preside her high Court of Chancery. He will have a
greater feeling of the cause and interest of his Client then of his Fee, and
entertaining the defense of it for just, will affect more the gaining of it to
him, then to himself reputation. His carriage shall not be only perfunctory,
neither in the taking notice, nor in the pleading of the Cause, but he will
both search and plead it home without tenderness either of his pains, or of
the Judge his displeasure. He will not so much frame his practice to corru t
custom as to honesty, nor bear his eyes on the papers of his present Client,
and his mind on the Fee that presses at his Closet door. He will esteem his
taking no better then theft, without the industry of deserving, and of himself
worse then of a these if his Client relying upon him he appear not in his
defense, yet go away with his money. Wherefore he will entertain no other
causes then he can honestly go through, nor take Fees without a resolution to
discharge his duty for them. Though the Law be an imperious Lady and
unsociable, yet he will endeavor to accompany her with the study of other
literature, whereby to breed her better respect and his own prevalence: and
indeed the study being somewhat dry and dull requires other learning, wherewith
to lard and grace it. He will rather fast from Employment then become patron
of an unjust cause, especially without having first delivered to his Client his
opinion of the nature thereof, and the probability of the success. He will
not make a jest of his profession (as some of them do) affirming their
practice a pretty trick to get money, a contention of wits and purses, a
politic pastime to entertain busy brains, an a duel where the greatest
strokes are given underhand; but will so defend right and Justice, as he
would wish to be defended by them in his best titles and innocence.

A Soldier.
TO be a good Soldier and Commander he must know well how to obey: and
command himself. He must temper his judgment with courage, and valor with
discretion, he will not be greedy of other employment then such whose issue is
likely to breed his honor: and though he owe obedience to his King or
superior, yet if any such execution shall be imposed upon him as appears not
feazable unto him, he will first discharge his duty in discovering the
improbability, but being pressed by their authority will undergo the charge
with all alacrity and forwardness. He is constituted a Corrector of vice and
disorder in others, and therefore must in no sort admit them in himself,
especially that of drinking which is too ordinarily incident to his profession;
for if it were possible, he should be more then a man, but that makes him
less, and it is to be admired how such as profess and are generally in love
with honor and reputation so far as they will venture their lives upon small
puntilio's to the maintayning thereof can consent to overwhelme themselves with
such a vice as draws an undervaluing contempt and scorn upon them, even from
the meanest sort of people. Though it be most unfit for a good Commander to
be prodigal of his own life or his Soldiers upon an undue hazard, yet their
condition being such as to have sold themselves to mortal adventure, he will
be ambitious of nothing more then to meet with a fair occasion of dying in
the bed of honor; and who fears death will never be fitting for that
profession, and therefore will maintain himself prepared for it. He must in
the exercise of his calling be an enemy to sloth and idleness, and keep them
from creeping upon him as he would do his blade from rust. A continual
vigilance must be the Sentinel of safety to himself and the Troops under
him: his taking notice of well deservers, his good example, and fair promises
will animate his Soldiers, and he will ever prove himself just of his word,
both to them and the enemy: for if he often deceive and forfeit the trust and
confidence that ought to be reposed therein, he must impute others diffidence
to his own fault, and will find it a perpetual prejudice unto him. He will
make it a principal care to well discipline his men before he bring them into
service; for that makes the difference between a rabble of Clownes and
Soldiers, and what can be expected from such as are strangers to good order,
and the use of their Arms? He will assist himself with good Commanders and
officers, for what is it else if their men be Bisonians then for the blind to
lead the blind? It concerns him to know all things necessary to his
expedition, and to make sure that they be fully supplied; for as the greatest
honor in good success, so the greatest blame on the contrary will fall upon
him that commands in chief. As want of courage will be one of the greatest
imputations unto him, so a sordid avarice and parsimony would be none of the
least; for there is nothing more unanswerable to a public exercise of an
Honorable profession, nor nothing more deprives a Commander of that affection
and esteem which are most conducible unto him in all his actions and exploits.
But the war is an Art by it self, Commands in war are of several natures,
occasions infinitely vary, and they require a well experienced pen; wherefore,
though I have said something to answer a request, yet I forbear to proceed
further, for I know it misbecomes me: and in truth were my abilities the
greatest that ever any man possessed, yet I find the world so full of writing,
and so little effect from it, every man flattering himself upon his own
brain, and partially carried away with the undivertible torrent of nature,
which suffers nothing to appear good unto him but what is suitable to it self,
that they must either be more in love then I am with the exhibiting the
unsatisfactory fruit of their conceits, and better natured in bestowing much
labor to little purpose, or else they will (as my self intend) find out a
more healthful pastime for idle hours.

An hours Meditation upon goodness and improbitie.
GOOD God! what, and where is the good use of Religion* just men have the
Character of thee and thy goodness, ingenerate in their hearts, whose virtue
alone produces reverence toward thee, and charity to their neighbor, the
Sum of Religion: but they are few, the wicked abound and prevail, such as make
a Stalking horse of thy word, and a scorn of such as make virtue and piety
their direction. Good men are a prey unto them, and they sacrifice to their
own nets, falsehood is their level, private advantage their mark, and like
the Fowler they applaud themselves in their deceitfulness. They prosper in
their evil and crooked Arts whilst uprightness is an unthrift. How little wit
there goes to the ways and language of infidelity? and how little commodity
to the exercise of truth? Shall I therefore abandon the good lessons of my
soul and habit of virtue? smother that fire of grace and charity which has
enlightened and warmed my spirit? Shall I in a base applause of the prosperity
of such perverse spirits, like unto them sell my self to work iniquity, and
esteem the practice of Religion a Melancholy superstition, Hell but a
scarecrow, and virtue a politic fancy? No, I humbly thank God I consist of a
metal and stamp more refined and divine. The double-hearted man cannot more
delight in his craft and cunning gain, then I joy in my simplicity and truth;
nor can he more deride my integrity, then I scorn and detest his false
turpitude and impiety. Let him esteem of wit and discourse as an engine
bestowed upon him to advantage himself as well over the more innocent sort of
men, as over other creatures; concentrate his goodness within himself; become
his own idol, a voluptuous and barbarous beast of rapine and prey; emancipate
himself from all Laws, civil, moral, and divine; shake off the bridles of
fame and Religion, or elude them by Hypocrisy; whilst I acknowledge my great
Creator the author of all benefits and goodness (as I do the devil of all
falsehood and uncharitableness) whilst I rest inflamed with the heavenly love
of that blessed fountain of joy and beneficence, and for his sake love the
affections of charity and goodness, and extend their value where I find them,
as I prove them more or less extensive and communicable in their Subject and
activitie. Let the ignoble minded man conclude knavery for wisdom, sordid
gain a discreet policy, and if he will, let him account cowardice a wariness
for self-preservation, and valor a foolish prodigality of life: I am no such
wittall. I have been trained to take my measure a nobler way, Rectum judex sui
and obliqui, So recti^ude of affections.
and will censure as vilely of him, as his baseness demerits howsoever
disguised. I will possess my soul as the soul of a man educated and
instituted to conscience, honor, civilitie and fair society; and rather
choose to perish a noble honest way, then to advance my self by unworthiness
and fraud, becoming vile and abominable to such as are truly generous and
religious. I will reverence God and righteous men, be true and zealous in
seeking the honor and peace of my King and Country, be ashamed of nothing
honest, nor pleased in any thing dishonest, be more indulgent to the errors of
a good, then seeming virtues of a malign nature, nor will affect longer to
breath, then I shall endeavor to deserve the good opinion of such as are most
justly worthy and communicatively good.

Iustitiae cultor, rigidi servator honesti,
In commune bonus.
What pity it is that it may be said of many as it was of Naaman the Syrian,
they are great, they are honorable, they are mighty and such like, but they
are Lepers in a spiritual sense? which is the worst, for Naaman was cured by
washing, so will not, nor desire not they, no more then Moors or Leopards.

SOme scorn to be termed honest, but let me
Be honest deemed as I would honest be:
For such to be, and firmly to remain,
Require no little strength of heart and brain.
Of Death.
TO fill up this empty vacant space it is high time that I conclude my
Characters with a word of the Philosophers common Theme, I mean our general
long Vacation, Death, the concluder and destroyer of all worldly Characters,
and filler up of all eternity, the period of consistence. To speak much of it
as others have done were to say much of nothing, and to aggravate that by
discourse which but by apprehension is indolent: beasts feel it not, Boys
make it no business, resolute and stupid men regard it not, and to a good
Christian it is rather an object of hope then fear: only such as abhor to
be alone and in the dark, and the overbusy Philosopher confound themselves in
conceiving and digesting it. Things necessary and irremediable are rather to
be borne then expostulated, swallowed then chawed; necessity is the Unum
magnum, and faith the Unum necessarium in passing it over: Whilst we live it
has no being in us, when we die it is in an instant, and no sooner come then
we are gone: Nothing seems more against nature, nor is any thing more
natural; but as I said I will not enter into the common paraphrase of that
nothing, or if any thing, rather a return to, then a forsaking our home: Nor
will I Pathetically end with the exaltation and flattery of that great
universal Imaginary Monarch; let wit and Philosophy flesh him, cloth and
paint him as they can, his Sceleton Posture and dart will still appear
terrible to weak Spirits; To me, by the grace of God and my Savior, he
shall be an indifferent guest, he shall not find me unprovided, the
continual feast of a good conscience shall not, I hope, be wanting unto me;
it shall in despite of his all devouring be my viaticum, and go along with
me. Amen.

June the 6. 1640.
An Essay concerning Music.
LEt him that tafts not Music beware of the Tarantula's sting, which is cured
by an affectation of some Geniall point therein. And surely he is so far
from a perfect quintessentiall constitution of the mind, that I doubt whether
in such minds some undigested lump of the Chaos be not yet predominant. It is
to me an Argument of a soul well in tune, to be understandingly affected
therewith, nor is any one affectation more likely to be accompanied with a
detestation of such vices as discord with the Law of nature and received
virtue. For a disposition once habituated in a delight of harmonious
proportion, must consequently distaste such uncomely dissonance. If earth afford
any resemblance of the incomparable joys of heaven, it is not improbable to be
in music. For I cannot name an earthly delight, where the mind is so disjoined
from gross and terrene objects, nor so sublimed (as it were) to an upward
center, which surely is God, the Center of the heavens and heavenly-spirits. No
small testimony thereof is exhibited in divine service, where Music has been
ever thought fit to elate and prepare the mind to celestial contemplations.
But whatsoever it is to divinity it has ever been a child of the most civil
nations and times, and they that like it not, are in that point Brothers to the
Savages. It has been blamed to effeminate and over-soften men's minds, which
whence it is gathered, my self could never conceive, except in that
substraction which it makes from inhumane, barbarous, and uncivil
inclinations. For it certainly heates, clears, sharpneth and erecteth the
spirits, making them dance in the veins, with such disposition of activitie,
as when the Music cease the heat thereof yet remains, not much unlike that
of wine, in a Dutchman, which Alarums him to be doing and fight, though he
know not with what. Allow it to heat, and you can hardly make it seem to
quench courage, whereunto heat is even the form. Alexander might be a
proof, or the several sorts of Music, whereof some definitively exempt it
from that Tax. But Musicians are known generally fantastical and light. This
indeed is a fault, but in the Musicians, not in the science, which doubtless
is often lodged in most judicious and grave spirits: Of David you will not deny
it. Nor is it verily more to be accused, then the best wine, for infatuating
weak brains. Divine Inspirations have been generally seen accompanied with
a transportation of the weaker spirit that received them. They who least love
it must at least allow it to be a pleasing dream, and an innocent pastime,
wherein if the body and spirits receive no nourishment, they may be yet after
other defatigations be delightfully entertained without wast or expense, in
freshness and alacrity, for the embracing employment in either. It is
commonly as of women, the worst are to be had for money, and often the
pleasure scarce worth the tuning. The haters of it think it but a noise, who
are the more brutish, being incapable of beauty, whereto the intellectual
with the isntrumental part is requisite. The Scripture has assigned a great
property and delight hereof to the time of banqueting, for it is indeed a kind
of banquet, and like wine, a moderation whereof pleases, recreates, and is
allowed to the most austere; but long set at, and made too frequent, destroys
both the receivers relish and good esteem. Nor are all banquets (no more then
Music) ordained for merry humors, some being used even at Funerals.

Air.
So full of Courtly reverence,
So full of formal fair respect,
Carries a pretty double sense,
Little more pleasing then neglect
It is not friendly, it is not free,
It bolds a distance half unkind:
Such distance between you and me
May suite with yours, not with my mind.
Oblige me in a more obliging way,
Or know, such over-acting spoils the play.
Song.
I Thought it much to be so fine,
So curious fitted every way,
Little suspecting the design
Of competition for the day:
Most amiable fair contest,
Song of three parts it should have been,
When you resolved of the best,
Spared your reserve and kept it in;
It was a confident deny
To huswife your perfections so,
As not to win by ^vervy
When all seemed on your side to go;
Yet not so clear but each made good
A fair retrait of Forces brought,
Though they had something hovering stood
By yours in danger to be caught:
Each had her willing captive, I
Unto your triumph whole resigned
Will to no other Law comply
But what shall flow from your fair mind;
No flattering beauty has the power
To alience me a day or hour.
AMbitious Love, farewell,
You are too troublesome a guest,
T'affect what does excel
And to be ever at a feast
Is not the cheapest freest diet,
Less in joy and less in quiet.
I Will take such as I find,
So it be good and handsome dressed;
Pretty looking, freely kind,
To a good appetite is best.
If your usage does not please you,
Change is near you, change will ease you.
Seek not the highest place,
The lowest commonly is more free,
Less subject to disgrace,
Others eyes or your jealousy:
Bold freedom will improve your taste
Where awe embitters a repast.
A doting fancy is a foolish guest,
The freest welcome makes the sweetest feast.
It is not natures way,
She made love no such busy thing,
She meant it a short play,
A Commonweal without a King,
Her love on every hedge does grow,
Her fruits are best in taste and show;
Her sweets extend unto the meanest clown,
Often most fair, though in a russet gown.
Aut virtus uomen inane est, Aut decus and pretium recte petit experiens vir.
Does virtue then depend on time and Per varios casus artem experientia fecit.
chance? it seems it does, but God is the author of time and experience,
chance is not chance to him, goodness grows not but where he plants and
waters it: Precious experience, how much I have wanted thee? how dearly art
thou bought? how slow thou growest? with thee we have enough to do to find
and keep our way, but without thee we are giddy, we are blind, we walk,
we stumble, we fall as in the dark, thou art called the mother of fools;
they should have said of wisdom, for we are silly fools without thee,
thence is said that every one is either a fool or Physician: without thee we
are strangers to the world, we are strangers to our selves; the best
husbandman understands not to manage his ground, nor we our selves but from
thee. Thou under God art the giver and preserver of health and riches, rules of
health and thrift are little acknowledged but upon infirmity and sufferance;
Nature makes us passionate, but thou compassionate. A man that knows the
bearing of his beast will not overload him; had I enjoyed thee I had enjoyed my
self, I had made thee and nature my Physicians; they pretend to be her props
and helpers, but they rather confound and ruin her; they are her Apes, her
Zanyes, deformed and mischievous; inexperience, impatience, laziness, opinion,
and custom maintain their credit, and make us their Patients; the Spanish
proverb is a good one, that God cures the disease and the Physician takes the
money. If men will use them, let it be yet as it was that no man should draw
water at the common well till he had made thorough trial at home; the Art is
uncertain, but their ordinary ignorance and carelessness makes it worse; if
they did not love our money better then our health, they would not neglect
their ancient breakfast. By exercise and agitation to stir up natural heat
to work digestion and expulsion is Physic far beyond them. As Archimedes
said, that if he had other ground to place an Instrument he could remove the
earth: so could I as well and safely work upon the parts within the Ribs as
below, I would not doubt to do wonders in cure, and without it there may be so
much wrought as shall hardly fail to maintain a body right built, in
cleerenesse, breath, strength, and health, and so to cure, where other drugs
weaken and shorten youth and life. The very thought and consideration what
Physic and Phyfitians to use, is alone a disease, a nocentibus and juvantibus:
observation of what helps and hurts, with the ordinary benefit and
communication of others expeperience upon free cost, is Physic often more then
enough: for as truth is said to be often lost by much altercation, so health
by being too superstitiously sollicitous. A medicinal life is a miserable
life, I desire as much not to live as to live by Physic, and when nature is so
weak that it cannot bear or work out a little disorder, let her take her
course, it is at the worst but giving over a game that must be lost, and going
to bed a little before the hour. There may be means to temper the blood
without drawing it, and many make fasting their cure against repletion:
diseases of Inanition are more difficult, yet they may have and find their
restoratives without a Doctor. As exercise is the best Physician, so is rest
the best restorer; my complexion is active, and I have suffered much in want of
suitable employment: waters corrupt, and Iron gathers rust, and the Moth is bred
by want of use and stirring: yet motion without moderation and a proper subject
is often pernicious, as to milstones, which grind out themselves for want of
Grist, and the best metal wears out with much whetting. A discreet ordering
and alternation of motion and rest is a great preservative; Nature has
instructed other creatures in their strength, and the use thereof beyond what
we find for ours, in our Arts and practice. Their undefaced instinct outgoes
our outfacing inventions and conceits; Beasts have much of man in them, and man
too much of (nay often worse then) the Beasts. It has been observed that most
men have in their aspect a resemblance of some Beast or Bird; conformity of
soul depends much upon the conformation of the bodily parts, complexions are
not so various as souls; cruelty and falsehood are invincible in some,
ignorance in others, choler in some, phlegm and melancholy in others: I may be
incorrigibly melancholy, but it is not of the Asinine kind. Strange is the
difference of the temperament of several men's bodies and minds, but more
strange the difference of the same man from himself at one and another time,
now all dull and heavy, then all rapid, active, and aerie; now quick and sharp,
then slow and blunt of understanding; now apprehensive and timorous, then all
daring and fearelesse: I v^^^ly believe there may be or are Spirits and
tempers so fiery and bold as to be incapable of fear, howsoever it may be
conc^ived a passion as necessary as natural to selfe-preservation, the
unconsidering and undaunted fierceness of some creatures witness as much:
Thus for want of other entertainment I am put to ransack nature, Art and my
self, and like D^ogenes busy my self in my particular and with my tub, I
write wildly, I write the wild-goose chase, if you like it not let it alone,
yet do you not contemn the Stars of heaven or plants and face of the earth
for their seeming ^^methodicall confusion. To say something of experience which
has thrust me on this piece; Here you have that at an easy rate, which
grows not on every ground, variety uses to please, let it not displease you,
if it profit not, and the mischief is that I fear it will little profit you
if you much need it if you be not already in some measure proportionable to
what I write, it will but pass by you like clouds, shadows, and dreams, of
little impression and less improvement: What a number of notions there are in
the world of realitie to some, nullities to others? such as Witches,
Apparitions, prodigious advertisements, divine admonitions, instant and sudden
relievings and assistances, etc. Many carry their faith no farther then their
sense and experience Some are so irreligiously preresolved to decline
superstition, that God shall be the last to whom they will attribute any
supereminent production, they will rather stand confounded and lost, then
abandon second causes, or acknowledge any supernatural effect. Yet
extraordinary truths howsoever slighted want not extraordinary testimony, and
God in all times leaves not himself without witness, there would else be, if
manifestation should be equal to every man's sense, no place to exercise
faith, and little extent to knowledge if we were restrained to our particular
experiments, though upon the difference of materials the Print take not in all
alike; we are cast as it were in one mould, what concerns you not to day may
to morrow, whatsoever is written of man, de te narratur fabula, endeavor and
be favorable.

August the 14. 1638.
Unhappiness of Physic.
SInce I writ the preceding piece, it has fallen out to my extreme sorrow and
affliction, that one of the fairest, most noble and virtuous of Ladies, is dead
in my unhappy house under the hands of the Physicians. She was such, that as
it was said of one (none of the best) of our Princes, that if vices had been
lost in the world they might have been recovered and found in him; much more
truly may it be affirmed of her for all such virtues as either ever were or
can be Ornaments and bring a valuation to her Sex. As she neither loved nor
needed flattery, so was her worth so far beyond it, that what had been such
to the best of others, applied to her was but lame abatement and defalcation;
not only they who knew her with any happy interest and relation, but the very
frame of virtue and the world that wants it suffer in her loss; it has been
long sick of a consumption of virtue. She was of so sweet, so winning, so
powerful example, so serene and temperate an Air, that vice and venom were
never so malign, and contagious, as her admirable virtue and goodness would
have proved cordial and restorative to the worlds recovery; But she who was
in a way of being the worlds. Physician, is lost under the hand of Physic; her
memory is not more happy in her deservings, then her loss sad and
indigestible; yet let us, as there is just cause, feel it to the quick, to the
height, there is a kind of sweetness to sorrow to the death, but more in the
memory of her sweetness, let that ever flourish, never die in those that had
the happiness to know her, let us continue our selves a kind of sacrifice unto
her, as well dead as alive; As we water her memory with our tears, let us
keep it alive with our breath, and still serve her in loving and serving
whatsoever and whosoever has relation unto her; her worth and contemplation
are infinite, I should never find a way to leave so full, so pathetique a
subject, but by breaking off to fall upon her Physicians; She is an object so
excelling as confounds and oppresses me, I would you could like me as much
as I love my self better for such confusion, I hope I shall be clearer sighted
upon my doctors, I would for the sakes of the credulous that they could see as
well into diseases and constitutions as I see into them and their common course
and practice; I would there were not as much mischief and murder as vanity
and blindness in their science and profession; the Aruspices were not more
fraught with imposture and delusion: they applaud themselves and may justly
deride us, they must get and live though we lose and die for it, they must be
still the same or nothing; but shall the world and we grow still older, never
wiser? The better sort should be the wisest, shall we still turn our wealth
to our bane in feeding and feeing them to starve, destroy and make us
miserable? shall we never resent what has been long time said, how there is
more danger of the Physician then of the disease? do we not daily see the
poorer people fall sick and recover, whilst the richer make themselves a
sacrifice to the Physicians Art and tyranny?

Heu quam perfa^uae sunt tibi Romatogae?
Need we any other evidence then what they daily give in against themselves, in
their gross detected mistakings, and contradictions the one to the other; Is
any man who has experience of their proceedings ignorant of the almost
infallible fallibilitie of their Art and conjectures? I have found it so
frequent, that excepting some few symptoms of death, which they get by being
about those whom they kill, I might almost (as in Calendar predictions and
Prognostics) take more truly the contrary of whatsoever they affirm. I have
often paid for their counsel and assistance, when my own judgment and
confidence has proved far truer then their threatenings, and my fears, then
their hopes and comforts. They may be ashamed to be so insolent and
peremptory, finding their errors and acknowledging their Art to be so
conjecturall as they do. What is more ordinary then for nature in such a
disease and such a body to affect her discharge downward when their operation
is upward, and so contrary, she to incline to a critical sweat when they in
stead of our disease draw out our best Spirits with our our blood, and so
forth; what a distraction, what an oppression, what a disturbance and disease
does poor nature our sure and seeing Physician suffer from them? False
friends, true enemies they are unto us; It has been no ill Dilemma framed in
natures behalf, that either she is too strong for the disease, or it for her:
in the first she ever prevails, if the Doctor do not hinder; in the last,
have we not howerly experience of the Physician called in time, the Patient
young and strong, the disease common and known, and yet death ensues? where is
the saving, where the benefit, where the advantage that their Art and they
pretend? even in their own purses impassible incompassionate as they are. How
many have they anciently destroyed by cruel denying cool drink in burning
fits, conspiring with the fire and malignitie of the sickness, to possess the
spirits and vital parts which might thereby have been prevented, intercepted,
allayed, and tempered? They pretend to starve the disease when they starve the
Patient; How is it possible for nature to work for her own sustentation
either by medicine or otherwise, when you allow her not the least supply? It
were a miracle for her to subsist, weakened by malady, by blood-letting, by
purges, and by substraction of nourishment, she is wiser then our Art and
discourse, and will refuse meat and drink when she cannot bear them, and
hold in, her treasure of blood many times in spite of the Surgeon, and give
convenient effusion of blood without the Physician. If sometimes she err in
her demands it is by accident, and that less dangerous to satisfy then the
Horseleech Doctor. Experience has taught them against their own method, that
to give way to the violent appetite of Patients is ordinarily successful
contrary to rules; nature never requires any thing but is respectively and in
some sort good and fit for her, howsoever otherwise bad, where the Doctor
runs a course simply and absolutely destructive. We are all borne with a
Physician in our belly, Adam had no other, if God had judged them as necessary
helps as a woman, he would also have created one for him. I have otherwhere
with much less cause discoursed of this subject; their Impatient I justly am,
their Patient I will never be, I hold my life by Gods mercy, and desire no
longer to enjoy it then he shall please to give it, and maintain it in me,
without becoming their Tenant. They who will give themselves up to their
conceited usurped authority, Stultos jubeo esse libenter, let them live as
miserably, according to the saying, as medicinally. It has been observed of
some Countries that sickness and complaint in that kind were never frequent
amongst them till the profession of Physic brought it: we are gulled with
their golden promises of health, as Alchymists abuse many with the hopes of the
Philosophers stone, whereby like Aesops Dog they lose the substance for the
shadow, true gold for false hope, and health and life by revolting from nature
and relying upon false imposterous pretenses. Tuta frequensque via est sub
amici fallere nomen;
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet:
is too true between nature and the Doctor; he kills cum privilegio. Yet some
there are whose Art has not extinguished in them Religion and humanity, who
will dissuade the selfe-abusing complainer from the custom of Physic, as
conscionable concerning their unhappy profession, nor will they without
extraordinary caution give the least disturbance or abatement to nature, but
will move with care and fear as in the dark; others there are of an inferior
sort to the former, none of the worst, who if they meet a Patient whom common
course has brought to have recourse in consultation unto them, yet scrupulous
and declaring a disaffection to their nauseous drugs, filthy and cruel
violation, and tortures to nature, they will as ingenuously comply as prefer
the forbearance of their Arts employment, confessing with Bellarmine a
Tutissimum differing from their ordinary ways: and even the most feculent and
virulent amongst them, pressed by a knowing and experienced opposer, will
sufficiently acknowledge the danger and uncertaintie of their Art, not to be
maintained but upon postulata and an implicit faith in their Rabbis;
whereupon, as also in humoring their Patient, and preventing his recourse to
their enemy Emperick, they think to stand excused in all events, conceiving
him to be brought to a fair end who dies according to their sentence and
method. Press and observe them nearly, and you shall not fail of matter
enough from them to aliene as well your affections as good opinion of their
science: I too lately had occasion to hear one of them discoursing of giving
his Patient a sweat, disallow of forced and unnatural sweats as ineffectuall,
from which assertion may we not naturally and strongly deduce a general
consequence as well against their unnatural and forced proceedings?

My self long since following the fashion and common rode did to my small
relief and comfort, and no little exhaustion to my purse and body enthrall my
self unto them, who Viper-like where once they fasten their heads are not
easily shaken off, custom their fellow Tyrant engages us unto them.

Nec missura cutem nisi plena cruoris Hirudo.
But the little help and great hurt I found from them, their as gross as
peremptory mistakings, their as false as dire Prognostiques, and nothing more
new from them then from my disease, besides what I met by puddering in their
writings, how the Melancholy cure commonly begins where the Physician is
forsaken and makes an end, made me withdraw my self from relying on them and
their Art, since which time by Gods grace and other familiar means I find my
self renewed in vigor and health of body and mind. Oppressed, debilitated,
exanimated, fettered, caged, and enlazied nature, where they have left her any
relics of her self, proud of her liberty, free from oppression mounts and
plays upon her own wings, disdaining their poor and imped feathers. To
conclude with them who will never conclude with us till they have brought us to
our final conclusion. Tinkers they are that make more holes then they mend;
and wonder not that they do not ever affect nor speed our cure, for as common
Chirurgians profess our pain to be their best friend, the like do they find
in your complaint and disease, they protract, and draw your body that they may
draine your purse, they confine you from company, air, common exercise, and
diet, which would all prove your better Physic; they forbid you all that
pleases, and feed you with distaste, Take heed of fruits, for many times if you
eat the other bunch of Grapes or couple of Peaches it would prove your better
purge; they work by natures expulsion of their poisons, who would better have
wrought for her self, had you used the patience of putting her to her strength
upon a fuller charge in the malignitie and excess of your peccant humors. Like
the Ivy to the wall, or play to a consumed Gameste^, they miserably uphold
what they had undermined: like the Imprese of enjewelling the Diamant, they at
the best consume whilst they fashion you, nor are you so sure of any thing as
to come weaker out of their hands. They seduce and control nature, they
silence and insult over all assistants who are not allowed to kill; and be
their advise, Cordialls, Receipts, never so safe, never so good, they must be
scornefully and insolently rejected and become tolerating miserable spectators
of the tragedy, torture, execution, and death of their dearest friends. They
are often as busy and cruel over their poor Patient as Hawks upon their
prey, or Ravens over a carcass, and as little troubled (nay possibly as proud)
as hunters over a great Quarry. If they like not this, let the Galenists read
Paracelsus, and the generality of them Cornelius Agrippa, and they will think
themselves favorably dealt with. Only thus much to you my honored Lady Sav.
who were a suffering witness of that matchless Ladies loss; It is singular
and irreparable to her Noble nearest friends, and your self who knew and
enjoyed the sweetness of her conversation and virtue can find it no less. You
make often use of Physic, my prayer is that you may seldom or never need it;
I confess you are thus happy therein that God has blessed you to rely upon one
of the best and safest in that profession; He was the last that I used, and
would I have recourse to them he should be one of the first; It is their
common practice, and neither their persons nor Art that I abhor: I thought
not amiss to communicate to your view my conceptions herein; If I have used
more passion then reason, or any evil and unproper Ingredient, your better
judgment can as well correct as use. I humbly take my leave, but will never
leave to grieve, and rest

Your Laps. most faithfully humble servant.
Sept. the 10. 1638.
EXONERATIONS.

Second Part.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1645.

EXONERATIONS OR An Inquisition taken upon my particular, and humane Frailty,
Blindness, Presumption, Unquietness, and Vanity.
THUS much for precaution: if you desire to loyter by looking into my
unpleasant story and late expense of time, cloth your mind in its Holyday and
Church apparel, expect not an oftentation of wit and Language, but rather a
perplexed narrative, a solemn, sad and serious exercise of Devotion, such
indeed as becomes the next holy week, penitential and mourning. Otherwise I
advise you to forbear, for you will find all too unpleasant and unsuitable to
your disposition: Nothing is here pretended but private discharge and
satisfaction. All hasty, dysastrous, cloudy, tumultuous, incorrect, incomposed,
precipitate, over-subject to repetitions, for want of looking back and
re-examination in the Course. Especially I persuade the passing over many of
the first following pieces as too much concerning my particular, after which
the streams begin to run more deer and free.

March the 15. 1637.
HEre see securely what a troubled soul
May suffer in a lasting storm, here see
Thoughts stagg'ring reel (whilst the poor bark does roll)
Cling to the Mast, Pray, Labor Or from.
to the Lee,
Throw out their lading, wrestle with the waves
Sink down their sails, now lifted up on high,
Now almost swallowed in the Abyss of graves;
Now a clear heaven, and straight a dismal sky:
Here learn how fairest days may overcast,
Confounding all your quiet with a blast:
What masters me to day, may you to morrow,
But for our comfort, God can master sorrow.
HEre see, how in a sanguine complexion, when Gods grace begins powerfully to
shine and work, as in the month of March, and turning of the year, storms upon
storms: and Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus,
Till -- Deus hane litem (and melior natura) diremit.


MY perverse fortune from my youth, with my melancholy disease, (fruitful in
nothing but thoughts, and those not ever the most necessary or natural:) have
often occasioned me with reflection upon my self, to write something, not so
much to apologize (for alas, it is vain where there might have bin prevention)
as to give some ease to my self, and extenuation in what I may misappeare to
the world; but I have often bin diverted from such discourse, by the overgrown
wilderness, which long time and confusion have brought upon me. Yet thus much
let me say for my self, (and wonder at my self in that I may truly say so,)
that neither carelesnes, prodigality, nor an humor disposed to riot or luxury,
have bred my harm. Nay, (if there be any truth in me) nothing has more
procured it, then a misguided sobriety of diet, with such an inordinate care
for the ordering of my fortune in my beginnings, finding my self pent and
engaged to wife and children, as (whatsoever may be conceived I dare affirm)
no man of riper years and judgment, but might have fallen into, and will,
whenever it shall please God to entangle him in diverse and strong
encumbrances, inward and outward, which in the circumstances of my condition so
malignly concurred, that being something by nature, and more by accident,
mis-diet, over apprehension and studiousnesse, disposed to a strong melancholy,
it was impossible to extricate my self, without such an aggravation as rendered
it incurable, and me most miserable, in the Shipwreck of all joy and
contentment. Wherein finding my self thus plunged, one while my refuge was to
the helpless Physician, and another at last to strong diversions; such as I
chose to entertain my mind to build in dividing my London house where (in all
events) there would be least loss, and then lived many years in the lesser
part.
building, Court, company, travail, and the like, which all proved but such
miserable helpers as melancholy men use to find, full of expense, which till
then, (about my age of 25. from 18. when I was married) I had avoided.
Building, (as troublesome both to my fancy and purse) I soon left, and the
loss of the brave Prince Henry, on whom I had laid my grounds, with much
sickness soon after casting me down, and increasing my disease, I became
unable to make use either of my natural parts, or time and expense bestowed in
Court: thoughts beget melancholy, and that, As, Matter me genu^^, eadem ^nox
gignitur ex me.
thoughts, alternatively. It is questionable whether I did more hurt my self
with my thoughts, (which many years together long since, brought me often, even
to an utter exhaustion) or whether with Gods assistance, in a strong
constitution of body and mind, (for had not God furnished me with as strong
and present supply of extrications as intrications, I must often have perished)
I more extraordinarily relieved and supported my self to subsist against the
impetuous I mean not a curiosity of ostentation or daintiness, for such never
possessed me: but only of sedulous consideration and rectitude.
curiosity of my disease and nature; but my unhappiness has also bin such, as
in critical times of my life, to have met with such unluckie crosses and
connexions of fate, to put me out of my course, that the consideration thereof
would make any man (not otherwise superstitious) take knowledge of an
overruling hand therein; whereunto (I humbly thank God) I so submit my self, as
that for my spiritual good, I acknowledge there ought to have gone no less,
to work a total conversion in me, so hard is sanctification to be wrought even
in men of religious inclinations. For my posterity, I must crave their pardon:
hoping they will with me submit to the Almighty hand, which can at its good
pleasure as well raise as ruin. Worldly confidence illudes, nor can any thing
confirm prosperity in this and the better world, but a firm faith, and resolved
obedience to God and his Son, in whom alone is salvation. That, that alone can
reconcile and calm the contrarieties of our complections in the distractions
of pleasure, profit, conscience, honor, decency, authority over others, or a
self-injoying: making true Religion the only star of our course, whilst
others for want of it, sometimes wildly flote, and sometimes sink in the
confusion of their passions. Good intentions without firm resolutions are
insufficient. No man has meant more thriftily then my self; but alas! in
what a mist of contrary indications and contingencies do we live? when I
concluded against hous-keeping, I have bin indulgently overruled by others to
the contrary. And this I have found a great error in my nature, to have bin
more apt to gratify others then my self, and to believe them often more wise
and trusty, To judge others by our selves may be a rule of charity, but not of
wisdom.
then there was due cause; a miserable condition of the better natures:
Engagement to wife, and servants made over-necessary take away the liberty of
our resolutions; to intend thrift is commonly enough to enrich, but woeful
experience teaches me that diseases and crosses such may come, as shall turn
the strongest out of his way. No man more abhorred debt, felling, and felling,
then my self: yet few have more incurred them. No man almost has allowed
himself less cost or sensuality then I: yet the diversions my disease has
urged me unto, have set another face upon me, toward such as were not
acquainted with my inside and native affections. Few have more affected the
service of King, Country, and Friends: not have by accident bin more
unserviceable. I ever extremely fancyed my chief feat; yet fear of cost in
fitting the house, and height of charge in living there by occasion of such an
eminent fear, with other accidental considerations, kept me thence, till such
time as my fortune was most unfit for that, and it for me: and yet against much
reason and interest of my own, I was drawn with relation to my predecessors and
posterity to settle my self there, with so much cost and In truth, half-hood of
materials and workmen, their mistakings, and loytering, make building much more
vexatious then formerly.
trouble, as (but by the grace of God) it is a wonder how in such indisposition
and lowness, I have undergone. This the good God can do, and howsoever it
shall please him to dispose of me, (whose preserving hand I confess I have
wonderfully found) may it please him to make my life and death to his glory, it
is all my ambition, Many unluckie circumstances, like that of a free mind
entered into Court with a pent fortune, I omit, partly in respect of others,
and partly as fit to be confined to my self, who have suffered their
perplexities and contrarieties. Gods grace is all in all, for the best of us is
subject to be carried away, both against what we know, and what we would. Such
a blindness steals us from our selves.

This Discourse which I have these many years at times bin inclined unto, and
have forborne, in respect of the little credit or use which it might bear, and
the confused nature of it, ill befitting my health and condition, wrapping my
self in an honest conscience to my self, and having long since put off the
world and worldly censure: yet have I at last thus tumultuarily adventured upon
it; having not cost me much above two hours in one afternoon: wherein though I
cannot vindicate my self (for alas! who can against errors so seeming easy to
have bin avoided?) yet I can be content that such of mine as love me and truth,
should find me here such as I have bin, and not such as I may be traduced.

June the first, 1637.
I Must not forget to thank God that my fortune is not utterly ruined,
considering how all helps and hopes have failed me, in my cure and otherwise,
how costly diversions have bin unto me, whereby to support my self, and how
unfit I have bin in the mean time to look to my estate: Debauch and gluttony
have spoiled many a body and fortune; scrupulous abstinence and care mine.

Though I acknowledge my fortune and estate left me was such, as by this time I
could in likelihood have so improved, as that my quality should not require a
better, yet this give me leave to make appear, that being engaged to marriage
before eighteen years of age, I had my quality left unto me with an estate of
revenew not above six hundred pounds per Annum de claro, little improvement to
be made of a long time, by reason of long leases and Joyntures: Parkes and
Houses I had to betray me, and I was left so barely as my Predecessor dying at
Michaelmas, I had nothing to sustain me till the next rent days.

This would trouble a tender spirit to know which way to turn, especially with
other cross circumstances in fortune.

I must insert one vow made by me which cost me a great part of my estate,
having against my intentions entangled my conscience thereby, upon an unhappy
accident of the greater house at turned into my hands, at such time when I was
thoroughly resolved for thrift in a most private course, a quite other way.

Though I have made alienations for great sums, yet know, that many thousands
I laid out in building at London, and buying in Lease, and the wood, which did
but return to me in the sale, and many thousands of the sale remained beyond
the debts, where with my son has been enabled to make some purchases, and by
Gods grace will make more reparation with the moneys remaining. I thank God,
with all my necessities, I have left my Son both his freedom of choice, and
Wives portion. Whosoever shall take notice of great possessions passed through,
and away from our Family, let them know, that the most of them were but in
Transitu, by the way of Mart, never intended to be kept; I must be content to
appear the only unthrift, howsoever my unthriftinesse had not its root from my
self, but rather from fatal mis-accident, and Predecessors undue consideration.

The good God be pleased to bless my Son, and make him as happy, as I have
been unhappy. For my whole life (since I have been a man) has been but a
conflict with the worst of diseases, and a wearisom seeking for contentment,
plunged in an inextricable gulf of all misery; another man possibly would not
have come off so well in fortune, body, or mind.

Good God, how vain and miserable a thing is man without thy good Spirit to
direct him? by nature corrupt, by Art Sophisticate and confounded: how lost in
the ignorance, and inexperience of youth? how short of the tranquillity of
other creatures? how often ruined by accident, by mistaken courses; I, by that
which men call good nature? yet happy (in worldly account) are they whose
natures lead them, not only to affect thrift, (which many by reason of other,
not bad affections, imperfectly do) but to make it their pleasure, their
felicity, which humor thoroughly possessing them, pleases, profits, and
advances them in fortune and reputation: whilst others bred to more ingenuous
and fair appearing ways and studies unthriftily miscarry. How ill, and
unadvisedly do Parents provide for their young Heirs, giving them Tutors for
Learning, and Arts, neglecting their instruction in true Virtue, and use of the
world and their fortunes? How lamentable it is to see many (who if left to
themselves would do well enough in the world) over-swaied by others, and so
turned out of their way, as that they cannot recover themselves. But alas! why
suppose I it would go well with us, if left to our selves? who know nothing
more assuredly then this, that all humane wit and resolution are vain, without
the powerful Grace of God to assist us. That I implore, that alone is my
comfort and support, that sweetens all the bitterness of fortune unto me, and
but for that I would a thousand times as resolutely and constantly have left
this life, as others fondly and dotingly embrace it; Christian Religion had
need be maintained in our hearts by a strong hand from above, seeing it
abridgeth us not only of our general liberty of this worlds delights, but even
of the freedom of leaving the world, when it affords no delight unto us.

June the seventh, 1637.
MAny things concurred to make me melancholy, as a Complexion Sanguine,
inclined to delight and pleasure. Yet withal a natural scrupulosity of
election, sensible of fair reputation and thrift, affected with knowledge, and
at length a conscientious tenderness of Faith and Religion, working me the
greatest happiness, but not without great perplexity. I was young entered at
Court, and by accident quickly dis-heartned for that course. The use of my
fortune in the Country was by want of means to keep a comely house, and other
many cross respects, not free unto me; and though afterward I was drawn to
housekeeping against my will and Discourse, yet both in my estate and disease
(by the care and retiredness incident thereunto, especially in a short
fortune) it proved most pernicious unto me. My disease likewise was much, if
not originally occasioned in my body by an over-using of new Treakle against a
danger of the Plague, which I fell into by Mr. Sanders his death thereof near
to me in his travel with me, at his return from London, the first of King
James. As also by an overspare and evil diet, who for long together fed on
little meat of good nourishment but only fat, dredgings, Skins, and such
like, and in truth, scarce ever man of my strong constitution and health gave
less way to himself in pleasing his appetite. This, and much more wrought an
alteration upon my mind, and made me seek a supply of former pleasures, by
entertaining my self with studies, and my importunate thoughts, which (by my
ignorance how the mind might over-presse and wrong the body) I made most
mischievous unto me. These oppressions cast me upon costly diversions, and with
disease and expense of spirits brought me so low, as I could never recover. So
that all the effects of melancholy, as weakness of memory, countenance, and
faculties, with oppression of mind, which long and miserably afflicted me,
proceeded from nothing more then the waste of my spirits, loss of blood, and
over-thinking, with extraordinary obstructions of all my inward parts. I
contesse I have been a most intemperate man, but it has been only in the
excess of my thoughts, else I think no man can charge me that any vain
inordinate humor has transported me. And so my mind (as I have often been
charged) and that dangerous Master, fancy, and a natural doubtfulnesse
(especially upon hard and questionable terms) have afflicted me. Thus may
contraries breed the same effects, ruin as well from undue care as
carelessness. I could (in probability) have preserved my self from much harm
of any other disorder.

June the seventh, 1637.
OH God, how great and just are thy judgments, how wonderful thy mercies, how
extraordinarily can thou humble us by the one, and relieve us by spiritual
graces in the other? how great a work it is, and how many degrees are required
to effect a firm conversion upon us? I most humbly thank thee for the gracious
effects I have found thereby; such, as had thou not sent me temporal
afflictions, I must have been eternally miserable. Let no man rely upon his own
strength, resolutions, and precautions; for when God has a work in hand, and
leaves us to our selves, we shall find our selves so dementated, as that we
shall be able to make no use thereof to our good. We shall find our selves
so imprisoned, so waylaid, against what we would or should do for our help,
that it will become impossible for us to make use of our selves and ordinary
means, etc.

It proves (as I apprehended) that once entered in, I should hardly find the
way out of this deep, thorny thicket. My health and life have been lately so
desperate, as it is little adventure to undergo any thing; and indeed my
nature has been too prone to put many things to the hazard. The rule of quod
dubitas ne feceris, had been much better observed; but alas! what rules can be
strong enough, not to be overborn by our blinded precipitate passions and fate,
etc.

I neither must, nor will specify the numerous particularities of my
misfortunes. Only thus much I will say, that from my coming from under the
rod to this present, I have successively met, first with dangerous diseases in
the University, then with engagements and accidents of consequence to my whole
fortune and course: then with such a melancholy as dashed all my spirits and
countenance, otherwise strong and bold: then with extremity of diverse
sicknesses, which more dejected me: then with a ruinous vow: then with loss of
children, and other heavy disgraces, the effect of my disease: then with
desperate effects of mistaken powder Which overkept in a small Dose and having
lost its due operation, lay in my body till the next spring and with a burning
and corrosion then for three months spa^e deprived me almost wholly of sleep
which to an inveterate melancholy, was no little sufferance.
and course of Physic: and after all this and much more, etc. Though generally
I so despaired of life, as not to dare to venture any thing upon it, to buy
some place to support me in my fortune and against my disease by diversion, yet
I once attempted that course, and was most strangely and causlessely put by.
Sometimes I have resolved for a course in the Wars (as against the Turk) and
then came Peace and Truce. In truth, employment (in likelihood) would have
prevented the weight of my disease.

Many things which appeared in me affected courses of pleasure and vanity,
were in truth laid hold on by me for diversions and supports of my oppressed
spirits, against the violence of my disease.

June the ninth, 1637.
WHen I think what my fortune has been, and how long and continual the
afflictions which I have endured, as well in mind and body, as in my estate, I
make question whether many years (if not ages) do not pass in the whole
world, without paralleling my sufferings. None but an extreme melancholy man
can conceive them, which yet have been aggravated in me by a contrary and most
sensible complexion; no body, but of an extraordinary strong constitution,
could have undergone them. How often have I thought my self at my end? How
often wished it? and yet has it pleased God miraculously to preserve me. Oh
that it might please him thereby to work his glory and service! Otherwise how
long have I been, and now am, from desiring it? I confess my self infinitely
faulty, both toward God, Man, and my self, but withal strangely unhappy in
the occasional circumstances and concurrencies of my mischiefs; I have
evidently discerned an extraordinary and high hand therein, and I most humbly
thank God, who has by degrees brought me home unto him. I have long subsisted
only under the shelter of his wings, and desire nothing but his favor to my
end. Nothing else has supported me, nor could, nor can; my mind and fancy
were naturally active, and for want of outward employment besitting them and
me, turned and wrought upon my spirits. If I had, notwithstanding all
objections, settled at at the first, I had found that center and quiet, the
want whereof infinitely hurt me by giving way to my fancy to be overmuch
working upon it, before I put such course in execution. I at last gave way to
prevent the like inconvenience of trouble of mind and cost, which might befall
my Son in a just affection of settling there. I confess that in projecting what
concerns us, it is not unnecessary to be possessed of a summary disposition
therein, but to descend to an exact punctuality of perticulars (in a
precautious speculation) before time and opportunity of acting and execution,
is commonly as vain as troublesome. Fancy may please and infatuate it self
therein, but the present view and circumstance of things to be presently acted,
is that which gives the final order and determination, with a contradicting
and retracting nullity, to our prepensed conceits and resolutions.

June 11. 1637.
SApiens dominabitur Astris, is a pretty saying, but if not applied and
restrained to godly and divine wisdom, as far from truth, as the Stars are
short of God. It is extraordinary, that in all my course of a long life, I
should ever meet with hindrances and crosses, even when I have most strived to
avoid them, and never with any thing of help and ease; yet this for my comfort,
and to exempt me from envying others, if I would but in an ordinary measure
have digressed from my austerer ways, to my Son and me, there might have
been a larger proportion of honor, authority, and fortune. God knows what is
best for us, and I affect nothing, but according to the fairest means, and his
good pleasure. That noble friend of mine, who upon consideration of the
natural strength of my body and mind, wondering at my infirmity and disabling
in my fortune, in conclusion imputed it to my having been put out of my way,
upon what ground, I know not, but I am sure he was not mistaken. For first, my
early marriage in a short fortune abated the edge and alacrity of my spirits;
next the course and conversation of the Court by accident made unfit and
unfavourable to me, having entered upon it, was no small dejection; my self
also by the examination and test of discourse, contradicting They who wrestle
not against their appetites, nor are over solicitous of avoiding all
inconveniences, are they who often succeed best, and sailing in the common
channel, enjoy the commodities, and delights of this world. Many inconveniences
are easier born then avoided, easier admitted to be subsequently rectified,
then industriously and curiously ^^chewed*
and restraining my natural and youthful inclinations (which other young men
use with a full sail to give way to and uncontrolledly please themselves)
amated and contristated my mind. But above all the good Spirit of God, (whose
ways and religion are opposite to flesh and blood and consequently to me and
mine in nature) brought such a conflict upon me as proves at first to corrupt
nature ever harsh and perplexed, with many reluctations, winnings and losings
of ground, but by degrees and successions of grace, sweetly recompenseth all
our conflicts, all our sufferings.

Good God, how sweet and admirable are thy mercies, which never fail to
relieve and deliver them who persevere to call and rely upon thee! Oh the
tumultuous condition of a melancholy tainted mind! Oh the Herculean labor to
oppose and repress it! How thoughts impetuously like Hydra's heads grow upon
us as fast as we allay and cut them off? Iun^ should have set Hercules to that
task, to have plagued him more then all his Monsters, all his labors. It was
truly said of it, that it is Hospitium calamitatis, and quamcunque rem malam
quares, illic invenies. It insinuates it self at first as a flattering friend,
but in the treacherous sweetness of it we drown and lose our selves like
unluckie flies, etc.

Proh Jupiter, quantum mortalia pectora caecae noctis habent! how many ways
there are for us to lose our selves in this worlds Labyrinth? and how many
miscarry before they understand where they are, why they came, and what they
have to do* some lose themselves in their pleasures, others in their troubles,
some find unfortunate and so dain, some a lingering ruin, some are born to
^^^re, some to stormy days, some to journey with the wind^ in their backs,
some in their faces. If fate be but a dream, the world has been much
deceived, the constancy of it in some men's fortunes speaks it more, to the
Christian all is the providence of God: And there is no true plaster for the
cure of a broken heart, a broken fortune, but the contemplation and application
of his goodness and mercies by a lively Faith, that must be his gift, and will
dispell all clouds, storms, and discomforts. It little imports what weather we
find in a short journey, so we attain at our journeys end, a place of
perdurable joy and comfort.

How full of darkness is the mind of man? how little do we understand? and
how little are we able to make use (without Gods grace) of what we know? how
often and violently are we transported as it were against our wills, against
our knowledge? how obvious and near unto us are things ordinarily most useful
and affected, which yet we are most blind to discern at our need? such is our
frailty, such our blindness; so that neither ears, eyes, knowledge, will, or
understanding, are farther availeable, then it shall please God to bless them:
He alone it is, that gives the will and the deed, and without him the will is
uneffectuall. He has small experience of the world, or has little observed
himself, who has not this experience. It has pleased God to have blessed me
with some understanding, some industry, and some holy affections toward him.
All have failed me, and in all I have been failing to my self, yet through
many falls and frailties, I am confident at last, by his great mercy to have
attained such Grace, as will abide with me to my eternal comfort. God grant
me to my end, the antidote of Faith, and confidence of his mercies in Christ,
etc.

August 8. 1637.
IT is good to refer our selves to God, who best knows what is good for us.
In the discourse of death, I fell in my first manhood to affect that As did the
first Caesa^.
kind which was least long and languishing, (supposing ever a constant
preparation) but it has pleased God contrariwise, that I have spent a great
part of my time, facing and struggling with seeming imminent death, so far
have I been from enjoying the pleasures and contentments that this world
affords to others. I humbly thank God, who has given me patience, and
without his grace and respect to him, my resolution could never have undergone
it. Melancholy, the taint and canker of our minds, bodies, and fortunes, how
many ways, and easily art thou contracted? how almost impossible to be cured?
how inevitably incident to many; yea, the strongest minds, especially when
many perplexities, and cross accidents do at once assault them?

For my part, besides my mischievous disease bred in my body, which naturally
working upon the mind, made all more sour and difficult. I met with cross
ambiguities, and judications in almost all that concerned me, or that I
affected: I confess (that which now more tormenteth me) a resolution and
course might have been taken to have prevented (in reason) the unhappiness
which I have found and bred, but alas, I was nipt in my bud, destitute of
experience and good advise, met with times opposite, and such a disposition of
my own, as could neither abandon it self to pleasure, nor rigid enough to In
truth my estate was so scantie that my endeavou^^ could intertain no further
aim then to be able to subsist.
profit, though ever so sensible therein, as never to allow my self a ruinous
delight. My expenses had never the ground of pleasing my self; though our
artificial humane condition be full of ambiguity, and some minds more then
others, of various complexion. Yet had I mist my disease, I might (with Gods
grace) as well as another, have extricated my self; a soul hard to please, and
a pregnant fancy, are of the most troublesome guests a man can lodge. I have at
length learnt so to disaffect this world and worldly pleasure, that by Gods
grace, I am only pleased in him. It was a hard conquest, etc.

August 8. 1637.
MAn, certainly in his naturals, as more abounding in fancy, is more variable
then other creatures, yet more Sophisticated, by Religion or artificial reason
taken to heart, check out Ple^r phoria, in natural pleasures.
Art, and policy, by Religion crossing his nature, cast into further
ambiguities and perplexities, difficulties, and disproportions in his condition
and fortune, with respect to his quality and engagements, aggravate and
intricate him often more, but when a rooted Melancholy once seizes him (as by
many accidents as well as naturally it often does) then to dis-intangle from
the cross considerations incident to a perverse fortune, will trouble a strong
mind. Nay, so hard is it to reconcile the inconveniences, to find and take
the best in the courses of the world, that the stronger and larger the mind is
which is to choose, the harder it finds it to please it self, and the more it
plungeth it self to incombrance and disease.

How easy are conveniences to be found? how hard it is to find them? how
easy it seems to please our selves? how hard to please God and our selves? how
often have I opposed my fancy and affection by a way of abstinence and
frugality, which yet has proved most improsperous unto me? how often have I by
Gods grace preferred him before all worldly delights, and yet wanted the grace
of constancy? What shall I say? if ever man played a long heavy unhappy part
upon the stage of this world, it is my self, etc.

August 21. 1637.
NO care is more natural or necessary, then for Parents to enter their young
ones into a proportionable fortune, and fair course, to be able to live in the
world; the direction of a Father to his Child therein is of main importance. I
was left young and greatly wanted it, had I been left single, young as I was, I
was resolved never to have married, but so as to have set my self at ease for
housekeeping, and other charges which attend it, according to my quality.

My mind was not so loose, but that I could have contained my self in expense,
for till I was lost in my disease, I gave many years proof thereof. That
error has been verifyed upon me, which is said of fools, that they ever begin
to live.

Time and necessity, the great rectifiers of our courses, have made me see my
faults, and accommodate that which I thought impossible.

August 22. 1637.
MIserable condition of my fortune and the melancholy humor: how one while for
an evasion, it diverts it self by a working imagination, how there may be a
bettering? other-while it aggravates it self upon consideration how incurred
misfortune might have been avoided? both fruitless and perplexing.

September 26. 1637.
THere is little commiseration due to such as entering upon a fair and full
accommodation of house and fortune, wastfully consume and abuse it: With me it
was far otherwise, yet young as I was, had I been left with money in my
hands, or had raised moneys to my self by what I had, I was not so loose
fingred, as not to have kept or employed it to my advantage. I am confident
that many an Heir ruineth his fortune; who, did he enter upon Moneys, as well
as Lands, would thrive and do well.

To a nature not foolishly dissolute and prodigal, money sets rather an edge
of increase then dissipation: Ignoti nulla cupido. It was a rational way to
reclaim that prodigal which is recorded, by showing him those massy heaps
that were to go to discharge his wastefull debts; the eye makes the most
effectual impression. I have known a Prince, who was insensible of giving
great sums by word, yet was tenacious of what once came into his hands: as
the hand naturally, so money politically, is the instrument of instruments;
without it, like Ships without water, the wisest and most active can make
little use of themselves. Gods blessing I ever imply, for without that the
builder buildes, and watchman watches but in vain.

How unhappy is the condition of an unquiet mind? and how hard it is for a
spirit sharp sighted, and sensible to inconveniences and advantages, to
maintain a tranquillity amidst the unsound and humorous incidents of this life?
so little is the reality, and so various the apparitions of humane contentment.
Fortune is to some a mother, to others a stepdame, some she humors, some she
crosses from their infancy; and whatsoever is said of every man's forgeing his
own fortune, he knows little who finds not greater abilities miscarry, when
inferior succeed. We made not our selves, nor the times, and other
circumstances we live in, whose correspondencies (shall in despite of us)
import us; Good Mariners are often sunk at Sea, when ill ones arrive at good
Harbor: for me, I acknowledge in my self (through my whole course) many
errors, yet have I found such an unhappy constellation of fatality overruled
me, that what course soever I had taken, I can hardly persuade my self, I could
have had any better issue: moderation, sobriety, care, Religion it self,
(preservatives to others) have been to my fortune, body, and mind, flayles and
rocks, yet all conducible and necessary to a better life, etc. I thank God for
all, and desire no more but his Grace, in granting me either patience, or a
fair deliverance from this worlds miseries and corruption; I have long hated
and despised the world, and all the frail vanities that others dote upon; I
find every day more and more the nullities, the wickedness of its pleasures,
etc.

September 27. 1637.
HAd I my full strength, and clearenesse of spirits, had I much more knowledge,
and would and could conveniently bestow much more time in working, these
over-flowings of my heart and brain, yet such is the obscure confusion of this
sophisticated world and my natural curiosity (by melancholy, much more hard to
please) that I should never satisfy my self, in writing what belongs to this
or any other Subject: I would willingly by these evaporations impart, with ease
to my self, some impressions to my friends, how there has gone as much fate as
fault to effect my misery, and to occasion them to resent and compassionate the
wretchedness of humane condition, by representing my self none of the
worst-endowed with parts of body, mind, and estate, thriftily and temperately
affected, become nevertheless most tediously miserable in them all; such has
been Gods will, and such in despite of nature and reason shall be his
condition, whom accident and circumstance conspire to afflict. A Doctor of
Physic told me long since, that I had too much mind for my body, but never
advised me the moderation of the one, and natural improvement of the other. I
thank God, toward him who is the chief good, it is the better for me, and
good for me that I have been troubled; I confess I had naturally a strong,
active, and sensible mind, yet not such, but if I had escaped accidental
melancholy, I might well have tempered it, but when that seizes upon us,
things otherwise easily to be passed over, become full of scruple and
perplexity. My The smallest seeming inconsiderable causes are often induction^
to the gr^^^st concl^^on of this world.
over using of Treakle, hot and dry, in my youth, first bred the alteration in
my body and mind. I knew not what I ayled, nor whence it proceeded, but
enforcedly yielded to melancholy effects, such as retiredness, over-reading,
and over-thinking, little as then conceiving how the body should become
oppressed by so abstracted a thing as the mind.

My first studies in the way of morality and Scepticisme, took off my edge from
worldly delights. Gods good Spirit afterward was a check to me against them,
by whose mercy I was never free from perplexity till of late, I will by his
grace fix my self upon him, and leave off to ruminate upon, much more to
enumerate my infinite past misgovernments and misfortunes. God be praised, my
Sons beginnings are as well, if not better, then ever yet were any of our
Family.

Cross tides, they say, make the Irish Seas so troublesome and dangerous;
there is a proportion of bearing beyond which we sink. I was in my prime youth
encountered with many unfavourable dysasters, etc.

The great change of the Court, and long greatness of them whom accident, etc.
My Great evils are truly observed to take advantange by seconding one the
other.
absence in travail hindering my falling in with those times, my retiredness
by that course and over-exact study of language, which certainly is proper only
to children, to whom it comes insensibly, and is most troublesome to curious
spirits, these and much more conspired against me.

I would when my fortune was whole, have matched my Son then very young, and
have assured my Lands upon him for a reasonable portion; it could not be. My
Predecessor after a long and desperate sickness lived just enough to marry me,
and many stranger things then these have befaln me in the Article of a
Catastrophe to my fortune.

November 2. 1637.
TO say something still of diverse ambiguities and perplexities incident to my
condition and fortune, which besides the accidental melancholy bred in my
body, could hardly sail to work an alteration, and disease, upon a mind
curious of avoiding inconveniences and choosing the best, my nature was bent
to ordinary pleasures, yet morally withdrawn to an observation of decency,
virtue, moderation, and improvement of knowledge, with an acquisite affectation
of Philosophical, Moral, Civil, and Christian perfection, wherein as well
for vogue, fashion, and reputation, as truth, I could not willingly consent to
come short of the best. When I grew toward manhood, being of myself disposed
to forbear marriage, until I should be thirty years old, and then not to
marry without great choice, in fitting my self, and obtaining a fullness of
fortune, to set my self at ease in my quality and that estate, ^etc.

I saw the inconvenience, but Wife, Children, and my disease, made me unfit for
another man's house; and though I wished, yet I could not resolve a change,
which to me, who could never easily admit a resolution with inconveniences
attending it, was ever abhorrent, my natural curiosity (whose mind was never
quiet till all circumstances and conveniences were run over and over, and
accommodated by me) made all things, (especially in a seat of my own) most
troublesome.

To the melancholy tainted spirit nothing is more unfit then idleness, nothing
more troublesome then its curious discoursing upon resolutions, nothing more
unfit then confinement to one place, yet nothing more hard, then to resolve and
digest change and alteration.

Once married, I was set to seek how to live, where to live; my birth and
breeding was in the City, my affection and chief seat in Cambridgeshire, but
many strong considerations diverting me from it. The Court where I was young
entered, followed, might have kept me from that depth of melancholy; whereunto
travail, study, and retiredness in care and fancy of what belonged to a house
drowned me; but that also by accident was unfit for me, yet at length for a
strong diversion, and under so brave a patronage as that of Prince Henry, I
readventured upon it, but his immature death, and much sickness of my own,
following upon it, with other disproportions finally aliened me from that
course.

Thus and much more has my life been a conflict with disease and fortune, I
have formerly touched many more particulars, yet not all, nor the worst. It is
one of the greatest in satisfactions of writing to an ingenuous spirit, in most
important matters to have least freedom, there are many Noli me tangere's. The
contrast of Gods grace and Religion against the impetuosity of natural
affections, has been many years my greatest combat, I have fought resolutely,
but received many foiles, yet by the infinite goodness of my Savior, I have
received such most unexpected succor, that to my unvaluable comfort I triumph,
etc. I have dedicated my self (next to God) wholly to my Son, and have many
years endeavored his good beyond my own. I have now made my self his Pensioner,
and I wish no worldly happiness more then his prosperity: thus with a running
pen I ease my mind, which though with no serious exactness, yet with little
prejudice to my health, for otherwise the strength of my disease would not
suffer me to bear the strength and curiosity of my own discourse.

He who is subject to melancholy, let him shun as a Rock at Sea, over-studying,
or tyring of his thoughts, and when he finds conclusions come not off clearly,
and that a restinesse of discourse grows upon him, let him give over for the
present (not admitting the least tumultuation) till such a good and fit time
after, as he may return new and fresh to work: by this means shall he avoid
much hurt of his spirits, and attain better to his ends.

In reading also, little and little at once shall dispatch more, and that
without inconvenience of health, then much together to the oppression of the
soul; Ne quid nimis, in all things is an excellent instruction: How many a man
has tired his horse by riding a little too fast, who might otherwise have come
well to his journies end? The like is seen in expense, a very little
contracting would often have given ease and thrist, where a very small
overspending has bred continual want and ruin.

By my miserable experience, I could give many rules upon this worlds course
and melancholy. Moderation is good, but Gods grace is above all, and without it
nothing can prosper.

How lustily does the root feed a tree, whose branches are few and small in
respect?

To the all-seeing God be glory, for with us (but through him) dwells nothing,
but darkness, error, frailty, and ignorance.

November 4. 1637.
MY gracious God, the support and guide of us and all our actions, since thou
have vouch safed to grant me a firm and happy faith in Christ, and love of
thee, with a contempt of all earthly and carnal joys; confirm unto me, I most
humbly beseech thee, thy heavenly graces, and the comfort of thy good Spirit,
for I abhor my self whenever that joy fails me, or any worldly affections
assault me: none more then I, knows their vanity, their unsoundnesse, their
emptiness of all true and perfect satisfaction, such as left me ever to seek,
ever unquiet, till such time as I wholly resigned my self unto thee. The world
is a wilderness of ravenous beasts, there is no path, no safety, no
contentment or protection, but through thy favor: Sweet Lord, impart it unto
me, and I shall find that quiet and joy of heart which I have ever wanted.
Help me, for I shall hate my self, if through the infirmity of my flesh and
blood, I reap not more joy and complacence in my surrender to thee, and in thy
grace, then ever I did or could find in the most full and flattering
pleasures, which this instable world affords. I have often found thy most
merciful and miraculous relief and support, beyond expectation, beyond
natural conceit.

Let thy mercy and grace continue with me to my end, and at thy good pleasure
set a period to that life, which I only hold in expectation of a happy
discharge and dissolution by thee, Amen, Amen.

November 5. 1637.
A Physician once told me upon repair to him for my disease, that I was to
resort to God, call upon him for his grace, and guide my self by him, or to
like effect: I thought it then strange and improper in his profession, but I
have found it spoken like my good Angel, for there is no such anchor, nor such
receipt to a troubled, to an agitated soul. The melancholy humor once
predominant, in despite of judgment and resolution, will obtrude importunate
thoughts and fancies, take occasion from almost every object, to make a
troublesome and discoursing impression, make things otherwise of easy
resolution anxious, and vexing, representing difficulties as fast as designs;
whereunto free spirits are not in the least sort obnoxious, they are in a
clear light and alacrity, delighted in themselves, entertained and diverted
with ordinary conversation, business, and pastime, whilst the other droope,
and howsoever often naturally quick, would play upon the wing, the melancholy
clog checks and pulls them to the ground. God alone is the Hercules, that can
purge that Augean stable, the Aesculapius who can give relief, ordinary
Physic is but a palliation, nay often an aggravation of the disease. The
powder called Kellowayes powder, with Gods blessing is to be prized, for it
goes to the root, it works at length, and so as the patient may sleep, play,
go on in an ordinary diet and course, a common and long course, which urges
keeping in, weakens, and makes tender, is mischievous, and incompatible: if
such powder breed inconvenience, Epsam The use of Tunbridge and Epsam waters,
for health and cure, I first made known to London, and the Kings people; the
Spaw is a chargeable and inconvenient journey to sick bodies, besides the money
it (...) out of the Kingdom, and inconvenience to Religion.
waters, though but a draught in a day at morning, wonderfully allay and
rectify, as also the use of new and good Sider; these with Gods grace,
constant exercise, and a moderation of the mind are incomparable. Probatum.

God has given me so strong a body and mind to bear the injuries I have
received from my self, accident, and course of Physic, that I admire. May it
please him to make my life and death to his glory.

November 6. 1637.
GOod God, of thy great goodness continue thy mercy upon me, and as I have
hitherto proved the truth of all worldly things to be nothing but vanity and
vexation of spirit, so be thou to me joy and comfort. It is true that my
nature, education, course of life, and disease require society and diversion,
the consideration of my past and present fortune is full of sadness, but thou
can raise light out of darkness, and joy from sorrow, thy good spirit is the
spirit of comfort, and without thee there is truly none, thou have blessed me
so far, as to have allayed, satisfied, and expelled all my worldly fancies. I
have fitted my house and fortune to my Son, in as much as I affected and was
capable: bless it unto him, and by thy grace exempt him from these
unquietnesses which I have found; there is no perfect, no solid happiness in
this world; teach him to bear such inconveniences as may be better born then
sought (with an unquiet unsetling) to be avoided; it has bin to me a great
disease to over-humour my self therein, there will in all conditions be
something amiss, a mind curious and impatient is a great mischief.

Thus appears that which has been observed, that men seldom or never betake
themselves to good and right courses till such time as a pressing necessity (I
might rather say God) compels and enforces them. Necessity (I have ever
said) is the sure reformer, then and not till then, and, often after smart, we
contract our selves, and contain and refrain our extravagancies, presumption,
dissolution, and luxuriant fancies.

November 6. 1637.
A Searching spirit fallen amongst the crudities and cavills of this worlds
Sophistry and imperfections, is a great oppressor; it were well if contentions
lay only, as some affirm, in the brink, and not in the depth of Sciences,
search shows it far otherwise. It is a happy spirit that can pass lightly
over the things of this world, and even in matters and mysteries of Faith
Curiosity is neither safe, nor allowable. I am something of the nature of those
dogs, which coming into a strange place, rest not till they have ferited
every corner.

It is likewise a natural importunity with me, in any thing that concerns me
in mind, body, or fortune, not to take full rest, till such time as to my
capacity, I have run over all that seems to belong to such resolution,
willingly I sit not down short of other men, (I mean in honesty, decency and
knowledge) much less short of my self. Ingenuous minds affect to give a due
and just accommodation to all things and persons, and to themselves no more,
which is hard to do in this various fantastical world.
Yet if we seriously and curiously mind these earthly things, they are full of
scruple and vexation, if we slight them, a deliberating nature wants much of
satisfaction and contentment, and does as it were, brutifie (and sin against)
it self, yet so shall it as well Minus dolere, as gaudere.

It is that which I have long since found and affirmed, that if we set our
hearts on these worldly matters, they prove foolishness and perturbation, if
we be cold and dull in them, all things are alike, but it is the misery of a
hot complexion, that it requires entertainment, hot, full, and stirring, etc.

Where grace once infuseth it self, all earthly troubles are evacuated, that
alone is friends, pleasure, and advantage enough, it is all-sufficient, all
consolation: perfect then, good God, the inestimable gift of Faith, which thou
have given me, it is truly thy gift, flesh and blood cannot afford, nor relish
it, thy ways to it are wonderful, often sharp, but most sweet in the
conclusion; I kiss thy rod, I rejoice in my afflictions, and feel that I had
perished, if I had not perished.

Thou who have rebuked the winds, and they have obeyed thee, rectify my
spirit, and calm all suggestions, all storms within me. Then may melancholy be
infectious, but not mortal: then shall I live and die to thee and thy glory,
which is all my ambition, all my prayer.

November 7. 1637.
I Have not found any thing more strange, nor been more abused in any thing,
then that constitution of soul which is frequent, and more or less incident
to us all, so mixed, so Heterogene, so pregnant, and right of understanding in
some things, and so dull and wrong in others (such commonly are they which most
disturb the world, as dissonant from weakness as true strength of judgment,
exhibiting according to the saying such productions as a fool could not, and
perfection would not) so appearing docile and capable of reason and
improvement, and yet in effect so insensate, incorrigible, and unalterable, as
it is hard to conceive how such incongruities and inconsequences should consist
in the same subject, or in truth how they can quadrate with a soul rational
and instructible, but there is assigned to us all a natural stature in all
things, which no Art, food, or industry can enable us to exceed.

The ordering of my fortune and course, where to dwell, what to sell, or keep,
what to disparke, what and how to build at or to forbear, which to a near
consideration made no little anxiety, whether to keep house or not, finding my
wife and self unfit for it, and yet as unfit to sojourn, what Physician to use,
and course to take to recover health; whether I should adventure to buy
employment, which seemed necessary to my active spirits, though my life in my
conceit was desperate; whether to adventure upon a strong diversion by a course
in Court, and how far to comply with the times, which little complied with my
discourse; whether to keep or break a rash vow of importance, that cost me
dear.

This and much more might well oppress a melancholy mind; my diversions
appeared as fruits of a vain and prodigal disposition, but alas they were
nothing less: I hoped still to have recovered my self, and then I could have
thriven well enough, I was not unknown, nor wanted an easy way to preferment,
but it pleased God by weakening me, by confounding me, to bring me to him,
blessed be his name. I reckon it a supreme happiness, etc.

November 8. 1637.
TRuth, exactness, and perfection, are Oar of a rich Mine; but lie so deep,
that they often hardly recompense the labor of their extraction: my end is not
so much to vindicate, as to give some true knowledge of my self, and shake off
the burden of my mind to my pen and paper; it is unfit for me, and I for it,
and yet I cannot avoid it: and this is one of the unreconcileable properties of
my condition, I write not to please, I write not for oftentation, and if I did,
Praetulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri,
Quam sapere and ringi.


It is too true that the fine curious affected shoe often wrings the foot,
High seats So of minds.
are brave and Aerie, but low ones quiet. Romae Tibur amo ventosus, Tibure
Romam, was a production of a fine, but windy melancholy spirit. Would I be an
idolater, I would sacrifice to quiet and dullness. I will affect wit and
curiosity in nothing, but to repent my sins and please my God. Gracious God
it is thy infinite power and spirit, that works in all things vegetable, and
sensible creatures, in, and at their first production, without any discourse of
theirs, teaching them their nourishment, their sustentation: thou art
omni-present, omniscient omnipotent, assist me good God, in my discourse, in my
resolution of dedicating my self wholly unto thee, etc.

November 9. 1637.
Go now presumptuous and overweening man, boast in thy prerogative of reason
and nature, confound thy self in thy own ways and inventions; nature may lead
thee to pleasure, and profit, and so commonly it does the most base and vulgar
spirits, but it must be an extraordinary supernatural spirit, that can make
thee thrive to this and a better world.

This the natural man discerns not, and the fool cannot understand, but
this the School of experience, as well as of Faith, teaches us.

Thou, Oh God, art the God of nature, but the ways of nature, and Religion are
so diverse, that it is a kind of irreligion to seek or measure thee in natures
course, the course of thy Spirit and judgment run another way, they, thy
decrees, thy graces, are all supernatural and wonderful, to thee be ascribed
all wisdom, justice, power, and Majesty.

And here my most gracious God, I humbly thank thee for thy merciful and
wonderful support through my whole course, to my body, to my mind, to my
fortune; for it equals any thing that I can call strange, that I have subsisted
through all my storms and sufferings, without having incurred utter scorn and
ruin: shipwreck is not ill escaped with loss, and a good haven at last is not
a little joy, though thy storms have all past over me: and seeing I have used
this term of the Psalms, I cannot let pass how most apposit and accommodate,
I have found many of them to my condition, as the 88. and diverse others, in my
friends being removed far from me, and sundry other passages. Lord I humbly
thank thee, that thou have so made my face ashamed, as that I have got and
found thee, and found that of thy very mercy and faithfulness I have been
troubled; I can now call thee the God of my Salvation, my countenance, and
confidence, for I have found the beams of thy mercy, so to comfort me in
darkness and misery, as that I doubt not to apply to my self, as well the
Psalms of consolation, as I have done those of complaint and distress.

I can now look upon all this worlds glories, pleasures, and vanities, with
contempt and pity: continue thy mercies, and I have heaven upon earth, thou art
perfection of Philosophy, thou art the true Summum bonum, in thee is all
fullness, all joy.

Humane discourse and resolution can do much, but first motions and surprises
upon the mind, disturb nature, concoction, and the spirits, even in mere
nullities of conceit, in despite of a firm faith and reason, it is from God
alone to prevent them, to allay them.

Tentations are often above the power of flesh and blood to resist: the
melancholy humor is most violent in hot and active spirits and constitutions.
There it estuates, there it ferments and boyles, how it suggests, confounds,
resolves, and then again forgets the circumstances of a former resolution, and
by forgetfulness, or a new predominancy of humor, relapses to a fresh
rumination, and confusion upon the same subject. Melancholy at the first is a
querulous humor, but in extremity it wraps it self in silence, and exceeds
expression, it dwells in inward conflicts, hopes by Gods grace the best,
prepares for the worst.

November 9. 1637.
HOw gracious and good (O God) art thou, that wilt be found in trouble, and
become the relief of that calamitous Soul, which had neglected thee in the
times of seeming prosperity! Thy wonders appear in the deep, and out of the
deep thou art called upon; the deep of distress, the deep of Melancholy
discover the wonders of thy Judgments, of thy power and mercy, even as the
Stars and glory of the heavens is discerned out of a deep well, not otherwise
appearing.

Lord, with what a fullness do I labor to express thy glory and my comfort!
even in that, temper me, or I shall be confounded. Ipsa faelicitas se nisi
temperat premit. Vouchsafe to demonstrate in me by my life and actions, what
my pen cannot express.

What was said of Fortune is true of God, Occaecat hominum animos cum vim suam
ingruentem refringi non vult. According to Gods determinate counsel, we
discern, or are blind, we judge, resolve and execute aright, or lose and
confound our selves in error and folly. Thy decrees, O Lord, are irresistible.

November 11. 1637.
HAd I been left a freedom in my self, or been constant to my own Discourse and
inclination in the ordering of my ways, it might have been wordly fortune
enough unto me, but I found my self pent, fettered, and intricated in all my
course, many changes, inconveniences and incongruities brought upon me, little
fair way to a fair mind, betrayed to worse, though older counsel then my own,
which in some things to my prejudice, I followed, though not in all.

Aestuat, and rerum disconvenit ordine toto,

Is truly mine; happy for this world are they, who fall upon an equability of
mind and fortune, fitted and suitable to the times, and their condition: now to
me, Ut placeas, debes immemor esse tui, is not sufficient, I have contracted
infirmity, decay, and age: knowledge, resolution, Rules are so variable in
their application, that without strength of experience and discretion to
overruled them, they as much mislead as direct: they serve to good notions and
discourse but little to practice: I mean not such as are Mechanical.
precepts, Philosophy, all earthly advantages without God, are of little
effect, and as little comfort, they all stand aloose, like false friends at a
time of need, when the surprises, and precipitations of nature and fortune
carry us away in despite of them, in despite of our selves.

Thou my God, can reconcile all strifes and discordances, and wilt at last
(though not till the last) refine us from all our dross, all our corruptions,
wholly perfect, wholly sanctify, wholly fit us for the serene peace and joy of
thy Kingdom, etc.

November 13. 1637.
MAny have been the evil consequences of my disease, yet such qua cadere
possunt in virum probum, if not fortem, and such as (God be thanked) have not
made me in worldly ways, do things false, fordid, base, or dishonorable, by
his grace as rigid and insuperable to the world, as humble and submisse to him,
contrite and broken to him, in moral virtue inflexible and entire.

Sir Edward Coke was wont to say, that let his Son order matters as he would,
he should never take more pleasure in spending, then he had done in getting:
and I may say, that never man suffered more in getting, then I have done in my
consumption. Gods will must have effect, Caesar alone in sobriety was the
overthrow of his mother Commonwealth. I was ever far from being Epicure, or
Riotous; God at his good pleasure can permit some men to prosper by their
prodigality and Luxury, whilst others ruin themselves with their thrifty
intentions.

A constant course is the way of thrift, as not to be diverted by ambition, nor
over-studying for the improvement of the mind, Alias res agendo, with a
neglect of domestique fortune, in an oeconomicall way, but without Gods good
influence, even that often does and shall miscarry. I and many others by an
over-affecting of melioration, have spoiled all, like him that darkened his
rooms by much inscribing [ Fiat Lux] in his windows.

These papers I know may appear imperfect, I would the best of us in
Christianity were not such: It was a right observation, that it is hard to be
thoroughly good or bad; we are constituted of contrary Elements in our bodies,
in our minds. It were happy if Religion it self were maintained in its purity,
it runs through the conduits of humane discourse, and it is to be feared, that
it often carries with it too much tincture of humane conceit, and policy, yea
often to our own abuse and mischief. Marriage is a holy thing.

I wish Gods institution were rightly understood, and observed therein, in the
undertaking, in the pressing, in. the course, in the dissolution: certainly
there can be nothing more unchristian, then for man and woman to come
together, and live together, as ordinarily they do; and possibly a great part
of the world might at this day have been Christian, more then is, if man had
not cast more constraint and restraint upon it then God.

I am persuaded, no Treatise could prove more Christian and useful, then if
some able man would exhort people in general, not to ru^h into marriage so
rashly and corruptly, Parents to leave their Children full freedom with their
consent in so important a case, and Princes to take into further consideration
that Norman Gottish Law, which occasions precipitate, unsuitable, and immature
Marriages, and proves the ruin of infinite good Families.

The Romish Priesthood saw something, when it exempted it self; I hate a false,
politic, and hypocritical Christian, better be without all knowledge, then
due observance in Religion. Ignorance is a better plea with God, then halting.

As I have formerly said upon perusing of these my writings, I find many
confused repetitions, which could not otherwise happen, considering how
cursorily they passed my pen, without examination, without deliberation,
without method, they are raptures, they are ruptures of a loaded spirit, I have
affected thereby to disburthen my self, but my perturbations and notions lie so
deep, and pestered, that I have still rested unsatisfied in giving them their
full and due light and birth. I do like the dog at the River of Nile, a lap
and away for fear of the Crocodile.

The Melancholy humor is indeed like the Nile, the original hardly known, the
overflowing breeds infinite venomous strange creatures, and monsters, yet by
Gods grace a A predominancy of any of the four humors is pernicions, and so of
Melancholy in excess. Ambition is condemned of many who would be glad to
resemble it in its concomitancies of vertues^ that and Melancholy with their
right correctives (...) prove as happy as witty. They are often misshapen and
bad in the root, but fair and good in the fruit; like Wardens, choaky and
harsh in their cruditie, but of generous and excellent j^yce and relish,
seasoned and concocted with the soft and gentle (...) of Gods good grace and
spirit.
happy fertility may be raised from it: Melancholy, and retiredness, one of
its children, work us either too much good or evil, it affects exactness, and
sits not down in a mean; Gods saving grace ordinarily draws good out of evil,
and where it works leaves not, till it habituates us in as much perfection as
humane frailty can bear. Religion and piety are of those meats, that are
better wholly refrained, then to eat but a little; but the Melancholy humor,
as it is the sauce of the body to stir an appetite, so moderately used, it is
like a sauce or salt to season all things, but in abundance it is both most
unpleasant and hurtful.

Few men have more tempered, and resisted the importunities and strong
impressions which it breeds, then my self, which though I have not performed
without much frailty, yet but by Gods most gracious assistance, I could never
have done so well.

The Melancholy soul dwells in so tainted a cask upon such a dunghill, the body
is full of such mud and dregs, that it must not be overmuch stirred, and
pressed upon by any course, or discourse; for like the sea, it works and swells a
long time after.

November 28. 1637.
THis artificial world, or rather second Chaos of man's making, has been to
me, and is to many, an instrument whose Music is not worth the tuning, nor the
tuning worth the strings that are stretched and broken about it. Many a good
man makes here such a voyage, as many have done in the discovery of the
Northwest passage. Much industry and patience, wrestling with mountains of
seas, ice, and rigor of weather, and in the end glad to recover their Country,
with their victuals spent, and their Vessel weather-beaten, having found
little but the vanity of their voyage, and that what they sought, is not at
all, or hardly to be found.

Here the ingenuous and ingenious nature finds it self intricated, here it
toils and spends it self, and by that time it has made discovery of this
worlds vanities, and in any good sort surmounted them, by that time it
understands what nature Politic engagements, humane inventions, and
unnatural sophistications raise such a mist and confusion, especially upon the
most ingenuous well affected spirits, that the best of our short day is past,
by that time we can clear and free our selves.
and what grace will bear and comport with, it becomes so infeebled in health
and fortune, that there remains nothing but to wish a happy return to our
heavenly Country: And as those Northern climates are found only inhabited by
wild, crafty, and ravenous beasts, so is the world incompatible to an honest
sincere Religious disposition, heaven is the proper sphere of goodness and
perfect sanctification.

I am contented not to destroy these papers, because they carry in them many
great graces and good motions of Gods Spirit upon me, and will or may, like so
many pictures, hereafter serve to show and witness me, as well to my self, as
to others, what then I was, even through their crude, unpremeditate, unreviewed
confusion, which with the employment of some more accurate labor and
diligence, I confess I might correct, but having satisfied my self in their
private production, I am contented to let them pass lame and disordered as
they are: some also may make happy use of my unhappy observations and errors.

December 7. 1637.
AS he that travelleth toward a mountainous Country, climing one hill
discovers still more and farther, both in prospect, and to be ascended, or like
Sisyphus his stone, still begetting new labor; so is there no end of writing.
Infinite have been the writings, and might be, upon the melancholy Subject, and
innumerable have been my sufferings, and conflicts in it, more then are fit to
be revolved, or related, wherefore I must desist; no humor is more eagerly set
upon entertainment, diversions, and delight, none more necessarily require and
urges it, but thus incident is it unto it, to trouble and infest it self in
its entertainments, hardly moderated, hardly contained, and satisfied; they had
need to be such, as are of a nature to entertain the mind without over-busying
the fancy, idleness is pernicious, and business cumbersome. Gods good
assistance and spirit must be the best and only support and guide.

How subtle and witty in far fetched and strained apprehensions and
impressions, is the melancholy tainted spirit to its own hurt and disturbance?
without Gods help, and a firm faith and resolution to oppose it, it were
incapable to maintain it self.

There were no end in setting down incidences and conceits, as they obtrude
themselves. It is best in this case to be abrupt, crushing of this root affords
inexhaustible juice, but of importune, malign and venomous effect; Man's spirit
is infinite, and so our discourses.

November 29. 1637.
ANd now most gracious God, I render unto thy divine Majesty most humble thanks
for thy wonderful preservation to this day, for as I have discerned thy
extraordinary, supereminent hand in humbling me, I have no less participated
of thy mercies in my relief, even then when I have been brought so low, that
both in body and mind I have conceived my self incapable of all humane help,
or evasion; this has often transported me to an ecstasy, and admiration of thy
infinite goodness. It has taught me to be other, then such as resent not thy
ways and judgments, how thou art all in all the Author of all, but especially
good motion; many who feel not the motion of their heart in ordinary, do yet
in an extraordinary trouble and distemper of the spirits, take notice how then
it beats within them, and how by the motion of it they move, and are glad to
comfort and strengthen it; so fares it with men neglecting the motions of thy
Spirit within them, by which in their best prosperities they ought to move, in
tribulation they resent it, they are glad to comfort it, and seek their supreme
comfort from it. Thy providence is the current, in which we all insensibly
move, all our sails and oars cannot carry us out of it, he is an ignorant
Navigator who knows not this.

Thou, Oh God, art the Star, the Loadstone, the Neptune of our voyage in this
world, be thou my current, my guide, and to thee be all my Sacrifice.
Flexanimity is thine alone, and but for the favor of thy good spirit, I had
been shipwrackt upon a thousand Rocks. I have been put to encounter cross
winds, and waves, the Leviathan of diseases, and that like a Vessel without
Mast, Sails, Oars, or Stern, or at least tottered and disabled in all my
natural furniture, my spirits wasted, my blood consumed, etc. Yet through all
these defects, all these storms, thou have appeared my mighty deliverer,
redeemed me from the swallow of infinite threatening gulfes, etc.

The Plant may attribute growth to its own virtue, but what were it without the
Sun? or what motion has the heart of man but by Gods grace? etc.

December 2. 1637.
THe Melancholy humor is of the nature of what is written of the Hectique
Fever, in the beginning hardly discerned, and easy of cure, but in process
of time too manifestly discovering it self, and hard to be remedied: From the
upper regions of the Air, proceed the inundations and corruptions of the
lowest: It fares so in the body of man; the Head, Heart, and Stomach (I might
say principally the Mind) breed the crudities, impurities, and obstructions of
Liver, Spleen, Miseraiques, and the lower belly, which by their evil noxious
vapors and effects, revenge themselves upon their superiors, offending and
infesting them with great trouble and mischief, insomuch as some have made a
superstition in the bowelling of dead bodies for a perpetual purity.

I have had experience of the truth of such discourse, and have by Gods grace,
and great agitation of my inward parts, wonderfully preserved my self; it may
be all in vain, but whilst we live we are to do the uttermost and best we
can for our selves.

OH the lamenesse, oh the misery of mankind! having attained some principles
and elements, we presently presume we know all things; then we doubt, then we
question, and in conclusion our humane knowledge proves ignorance and cavil:
To know God is the only true knowledge, all else is vanity and confusion.

Good God, teach me to subsist as well in thee as by thee, and I am happy, do
thou support me, and it is alacrity sufficient; moderate my working spirit in
my petty employments, and I will esteem it no small matter to spend my time
well in Piety, Charity, and some worldly trifles; I never affected any thing
more, then to do good, and be useful in good ways, but to be employed
without power and freedom, or in matters unsuitable and unpleasing to my
affections and discourse, I have ever preferred a private quiet, and exemption,
affecting rather to exercise a power of composing homebred inconveniences
within my self, then to undergo their imposition from others, I could as well
as another, have been a busy man, etc.

1637.
HAppy are they who according to this world desire little, or moderate their
desires, even in the way of perfection, knowledge, and happiness it self: for
our portion here is ignorance, imperfection, and loss of happiness by
over-seeking it; in the true knowledge of God, and his favor, consists the
only true tranquillity and felicity, and nothing but the perfect joys of
Heaven can satisfy the perfection and Summum bonum affecting soul.

When we have said and done what we can, we are in such a mist and confusion
of things, so short sighted through our false Perspective, that there is much
chance in discerning the truth and right way, even of things within our reach
and capacity, in despite of all our search and circumspection, God is all in
all without him, seeing we shall not see, and understanding we shall not
understand, who referres to nature and our natural universality of faculties,
and not to his extraordinary influence, is blind to his grace and operation.
By him we live, move, and have our being, and no thing or faculty works, but
through his grace and providence.

Fantasy in us is like the sail of a Ship, without it we want much of
ornament and motion, with a predominancy of it, we are in danger of
over-setting; without it many things otherwise delightful, are dull and
insipid, and if it be over pregnant, it ordinarily ruins and befooles us. It is
our Souls Perspective, multiplying objects at one end, and lessening them at
the other; it is a better servant then Master. Happy they whose Steer and
Balast can rule and command it. It is a Horse that must be born with a hard
hand, if it get head, it transports us to much inconvenience, and hardly
contains it self within any limits of judgment and reason. All things take
their tincture from it; It is to be less then man, to want it, and more to
bridle and overruled it; God alone can temper and moderate our inordinate
fancies In our naturals they had bin easily contained, and within a small
compass, when nothing but faith can now circumscribe and quiet them.
and affections, he alone is commensurable to our vast desires.

Moderation has ever been a hard virtue, the most conscientious spirits have
ever been subject to superstition and Idolatry, strength of fantasy is apt to
multiply it self beyond measure, irreligious hearts cut the Gordian knot which
they cannot unty: to distinguish betwixt God and man, must be from God and not
from man; Man may endeavor and concur, but God alone can clear and confirm.
My good God, I will (with thy good grace) let my heart loose to no other
object, then thy self, and what is pleasing unto thee, so shall I have fullness
of joy, nor shall I regret or envy the most splendid employments, or
fantastical delights, where with this world Syren-like enchants the minds of
such as dote upon it; smile thou upon me, and let the world frown or scorn, the
worlds kisses are poison, the embraces confusion, they carry their sting with
them, but thy favor is present and eternal felicity.

If the very enjoying of our fancies, and feeding them, be a kind of surfeit
and oppression, what is it to fail, be crossed and miscarry in them? Little
sail and little fancy make the best and safest voyage.

To conclude these shreds and ejaculations, which may weary, but never satisfy
either my self or any other: (for there is evermore and better to be said) our
artificial, infirm, and perplexed condition, is to a curious strong mind, a
natural and strong distraction, a large and various prospect works upon, and
divides the fancy, and with a divulsion breeds a kind of convulsion in the
spirits, and a solution of that sweet continuity and harmony which God has
ordained natural unto us. Original and actual sin inhabiting in us, deserve
that and much other punishment. If God of his great grace and indulgence give
us not a clew of his thread to guide us, we are confounded and lost in this
worlds Labyrinth, he is ours and the worlds prop, and if it had not pleased him
wonderfully to assist and support me with extraordinary strength of resolution,
and his good Spirit, I had a thousand times perished in my errors, and
confusion. Wild affections, which lead grave reason by the nose, had undone
me; a vertiginous spirit, and my own weight and strength had oppressed me: and
well might I miscarry, seeing the strongest spirits are in the multiformity of
their discourse most obnoxious to find reason to fortify themselves in the
grossest obliquities, to us in propriety is all sensuality, vanity, foolish
presumption, Sophistication, and corruption of truth, with innumerable
exorbitancies and follies.

But to God, only good, only wise, just, merciful, and omnipotent, be
ascribed all honor, and glory for evermore, Amen, Amen.

Good God, I am the work of thy hands, and now happily of thy good Spirit, let
thy mercy work with me, and upon me to the end and Eternity.

Tot contra unum caput conspirantibus, quis potuissetresistere, nisi Dei optimi
maximi speciali gratia aspirante?

There had need in truth be an extraordinary supply and support of reason and
grace, against the strange and strong fond impressions of the Melancholy humor.

November 25. 1637.
IT is said, that if a horse could be equally placed to provender on each side
of him, he would sooner starve, then resolve.

I was ambiguously constituted, balanced in disposition, betwixt contemplation
and action, thrift and comeliness, pleasures of the body, and mind; vice, and
virtue; Country, Town, and Court; private, or public course of life; and no
wonder, if Dubia torquent, the world is a Riddle, an entangled skaine,
vexatious to extricate; to intend our minds and affections much upon it, is as
well misery as vanity, it pays us with a Cloud in stead of Juno; torment, in
stead of contentment; we often lose substances for shadows, and felicity by
over-searching it. There is a proportion of wit, most conducible to this worlds
resolutions and happiness, if we exceed or come short of that element, either
the height and finenesse of the Air agrees not with our Lungs and
subsistence, or we are dampt and suffocated in an over earthly and flegmatique
dullness. As in squared paving stone, such only endure the earth and open
weather as are neither over-hard nor soft: so is it in the temper of men's
spirits, for the undergoing of this worlds incidents. Happy such as most
slightingly pass through it; yea God himself requires, that we esteem it as
but a passage to Eternity; a point, a nothing in respect.

He only can fill and satisfy the curious soul, I cannot be sorry that the
pleasures of this life concern me, neither in use, nor affection, when I
consider their sting, their molestations, and emptiness, compared with the
sweet comforts of Gods favor, and the blessedness of everlasting life.

There like the upper Region, dwells all peace, purity, and glory.

Here all corruption, Meteors of imperfect mixtion, storms, and calamities.

There is our true Country and Region, where, when God shall have refined us,
we shall live, and shine more glorious then the Stars.

I Have promiscuously specifyed the causes and originalls of my Melancholy
disease, I was deeply engaged in it, before I suspected it, and had given so
much way to it to take root in me, as made the Cure most difficult. It is a
Goliath, but we must not (like David) fight against it with our own Arms.

The grace of God is All-sufficient, but humane strength most incompetent; once
discovered, I manfully resisted it, else I had never near so long subsisted; I
used diversion, which is the humane, first, second, and best remedy. I opposed
Labor and Constantia, ferendo and feriendo. Like a Parthian I fled, and
fought, but prayer has been my most effectual remedy: It is a Devil that is
not otherwise cast out; Physic is a feeble exorcisme: but when by hearty
Prayer I humbled my self to God, and implored his aid, I ever rose from the
ground like an other Antaeus, with renewed and revived spirits. God make me
thankful, for his mercy has surpassed the transcendency of my follies. Happy
the wounds that meet with that good Samaritane. Happy the disease that brings
us to the cure of such a Physician.

I Have read how Plutarch complains of man's infirmity, who can in nothing
keep or measure, or constancy. In truth affections in our minds, resemble
overmuch the motions of the wind in the Air: They rise and take their course,
sometimes in moderation, sometimes in storm, they discontinue, they change,
they whirle, and all so strangely and irregular, as we neither can well
conceive, or control; we neither know whence they proceed, nor where they
will end; the objects of our pleasure and discourse possess us with a
drunkenesse, with a giddiness, the strongest and hottest minds are most
intent, most Mercuriall, most unsettled and Volatile. Thence has grown an
observation of the frequent changes and troubles in the Florentine, more then
the Venetian State. Now what means have we to fix this Mercury? the natural
temper is hard to alter, the inconstant body acts too much upon the Soul.

Thou, O God, can only effect so great and supernatural a work; faith alone
and a Christian hope, can become the anchor of our souls, to maintain them
firm and secure, against our own and the worlds winds, waves and rocks.

No other then thy divine Armor can resist, no other then thy divine water can
quench the fiery darts, which Satan and the world throw against us, and our
selves shoot to fall on our own heads: thou who made us, can only mend us,
thou art the sole Physician of the soul; our knowledge is imperfect in the
flowings of our blood, our elementary humors, and the anatomy of the body,
much more in the motions of the mind.

Thou, Oh God, who made it, and inspiredst it, understandest it better then
our selves, it is of thy privative jurisdiction, and thou alone can steer,
can rectify, and fix it. We mis-know our selves and thee, when we attribute
to our selves a presumptious selfe-ruling power, we have not motion but from
thee, by thee, and through thy daily providence, support, and assistance: it is
so in all creatures; in many of them their motion is without discourse, and
involuntary, but in us thou give the will and the deed.

January 13. 1637.
HOw sacred and serious ought to be, and is our Religion? how in this Galley,
most look one way and row another? how yet some people entertain sins with a
national Denization? some ironically sport and play with them as Natures game,
some make them venial, which in Gods Audit will find another account: To what
cross batteries of Honor, Nature, Laws, Custom, and Religion, is our frailty
exposed? Poor humane soul, curious of rectitude, curious of knowledge, no
wonder that thou suffer such distractions, such convulsions: Example, which
should rectify thee, betrays thee: Thy leaders who should guide thee in a
clear and constant way, wander, and confound thee, and in their partial and
self-interessed subtilties lose themselves and thee. Naturally I affect Truth,
and am impatient of imperfection, especially such as I appear capable to
remedy, and till I seem to discover what may be commodious and rational, I
cannot resolve, but right and truth have so various an aspect, and dwell in
such a cloud and crossenesse of apprehension, that if God of his great grace,
make not himself the guide of the good well-affected Soul, it strayes, it
loses it self, and becomes overwhelmed with this worlds confusion and
obliquity: Thus works my fancy, thus accidentally enfeebled, am I put
(according to my nature) to walk strongly in weakness. Moderation is the
hardest of virtues; my daily prayers to the Almighty shall be, that he will
please to bestow it upon me. I greatly need it against my nature, against my
self. I am at at an evil exigent, employment I want, and am weak to undergo
it, yet idleness and vacuity of thoughts (as unnatural unto me) I cannot
bear; I have done, and will endeavor my uttermost, to compose my self, to
subsist and entertain my self toward God, my Neighbor, and my self, in the
most Religious, discreet, and charitable temper that I can, etc.

December 11. 1637.
IT is hard for a man to dissect and paint out himself, yet have I thus
adventured upon it according to the life and truth, and without flattery. In a
Looking glass, they say, we see our selves by reflection of the beams of our
sight upon our selves: in the mirror of my misfortunes, I have thus reflected
upon my self, but I confess true discerning is toward outward objects, we are
naturally blind to our selves, besides the mists that self-love and interest
raise upon us.

I have touched in one passage, that the Melancholy humor, and Choler adust,
must not be violently stirred, in respect of the rage and distemper it often so
procures in full and soul, especially long unstirred bodies; but I profess my
course has been by all means, inward and outward, to search it to the root. I
went much upon the Rule of Quod movet removet, Medicines in truth work their
effect by encountering and stirring the peccant humor strength of nature
expelling both the Physic and humor in which consideration a right and
stirring exercise is the surest and best digestion and expurgation
And what I heard once from a good Doctor, that obstinate insistings often work
great and strange effect. I have long for born Physic, even when I most needed
it, so still incorrespondent has my condition been unto it self; some reason I
had, that neither I could nor would admit it, but had I not by Gods instruction
and long degrees, brought my self to be able to work upon my self in an
extraordinary way, exercising my self by his support, and supporting my self in
a great strength of body and mind, I could not near have subsisted; I had by
many years and degrees brought my self to it. It is for me alone, and
therefore I cannot prescribe anything therein to others; there is a mean and
discretion, belongs to all things, but certainly Melancholy obstructions are so
tough and lead-like, that they are immovable to ordinary courses and
medicines, and extraordinary must be cautiously and gradually employed,
Inveterate, they consist of a fat, waxen, viscous, impacted, and tartarous
substance, such as Vegetables slip by without penetration, Minerals are more
effectual, in such a difference as betwixt the stroke of a cudgel or sword, a
natural Crisis and evacuation is above all. But we have so clogged and
entangled our selves beyond the quiet of nature and of other creatures, that
art and Physic are thereupon become more necessary.

In truth though the Melancholique patient has a Wolf by the ears of his
disease, trouble in holding and stirring, and unsafe to let go, yet I esteem
it a poor resolution to suffer a rooted mischief (which is presently noxious,
and will more and more grow dangerous) upon fear of adventure, where there is
any the least hope of delivering our selves: in supportable evils, admit and
excite rather to any hazard, then a miserable toleration, a hopeless condition
is most calamitous, a well built body will endure, and work out very much, like
a good Ship against soul weather at Sea; mine, I thank God, is such, that had
not my mind like an evil Steers-man, infinitely (even of late) been injurious
unto it, I had by Gods grace infallibly prevailed, both against my Giant
disease, and infinite intervening unfriendly accidents, but by Gods help, I
daily mend and hope to leap over the wall.

Nil desperandum in Christo, nil a^spice Christo.
L'industrie est de nous, L'he^rex suceez de dieu.
December 11. 1637.
TO give us courage in misfortunes, it was well said of Fortune, that her
course is irregular, and that we ought not to despair of her, for often when
she appears to threaten us with imminent ruin, she is truly in the article
and Catastrophe of our good and advantage.

It is more verifyed in the ways of God, nothing more ordinary with him, then
by humbling us to exalt us, and to strew the path to Heaven with afflictions.
Caesar animated his Pilot by carrying him and his Fortunes; it was a vain
presumption, but he who the Almighty is Pilot to, cannot sink nor miscarry: to
demonstrate his power and awake the faith of his Favorites, he permits (as to
his Disciples) the storms to rise, and waves to threaten destruction, and in
his mighty and supernatural rescues, appear his sweetest comforts, his
greatest glory.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus; as the Divines affirm, that
tentations proceeding from the Devil, may be distinguished by their violent
and sudden surprise.

So may Divine deliverances be infallibly known by the sudden and
extraordinary help that we receive from them, at such time as our condition
appears unto us most irremediable and desperate. I have infinite matter and
thanks to render to my Maker, to my Savior, but in nothing more then that of
his abundant mercy; he has been pleased to lead me through Seas, through
Wildernesses of troubles and error, by a cloud, by fire, by the thunder of his
voice, by infinite wonders for near forty years together, to bring meat last
to his happy Land of promise; that is, to peace, joy, and repose in him, where
alone flows all true happiness and fixed contentment.

There can in truth be no constant courage, without a firm Faith, and assurance
of Gods favor toward us; that alone fortifies us against danger, darkness,
and death.

December 12. 1637.
IT is truly said, that we know so much as we put in practice, nor are the
notions and floting impressions of the brain, without a through tincture of the
heart and soul, any effectual Science, and so it is that virtue is
constituted a habit, and not only a babbling scientificall discourse of the
mind; until I considered this, I often wondered to see the best Clerks often
the worst men, as well as none of wisest: Men read and study commonly rather
for curiosity, to censure, to learn language and the course and manner of the
world, to maintain a side, to gain bread, and knowledge like other men, rather
then truth, virtue, and piety, to gather opinions, and to appear good, rather
then to be: Propounding to our selves wrong objects, no wonder if we miss the
right, which makes so many Scholars, who study to get the best Livings, less
virtuous in their lives then others, who more virtuously and spiritually then
worldly affected, study rather to nourish then cloth, to Dye then paint their
minds. Corrupt nature like a depraved stomach turns and assimilates all
nourishment, it makes an alien of forain instruction, and governs it self by
its own Laws. Nay, ordinarily against our wills and resolutions, nature
relapses, and ravisheth us from our Moralls, from our Metaphysicals, Sensuality
prevails, and we prevaricate with our Consciences: when I approached Gods
Sanctuary, this was yet less strange unto me, there (as Copernicus has placed
the Sun in the Center of this Universe, whose influence and Magnetique virtue
gives life and motion to all material creatures) so is it clear that the
immateriall mind of man has its life and motion only from the good Spirit of
God, and unless by his influence and inspiration he carry our instructions and
informations to the root, except he alter, reform, and season our hearts, like
hasty showers, all passes away, whereas a sound heavenly dew works a better
watering and fruitfulness; want of that Divine irradiation makes us such
Mungrills, such half Christians, as we ordinarily are, acknowledging our Faith
and Savior in our tongues, and denying him in our lives. God of his great
grace grant us his saving Spirit, and we shall as well practice as seem to know
and profess, Amen, Amen.

December 14. 1637.
NO wonder that I search into the abstruse causes and proceedings of my
disease, for I am a wonder to my self, that a Sanguine complexion, with a
natural strength of body and mind, and none of the most impertinent in wit,
and discourse, should fall into so great a confusion and consumption of mind,
body and fortune, without some outward most apparent violence: But (besides
what I have formerly expressed) I consider that steeping my self in my
beginnings, in the study of Mountains Essays, which are full of Scepticisme,
and a kind of Moral mortification, in crying down the delights and
presumptions of this world, proved to a tainted and tender mind, a great
amatement and blunting, with an anxious disposition of doubt, in the ordinary
course and pleasures of this life, that, and much adverse accident, nipt me in
my first Spring; otherwise in all probability I, who in that lowness and
oppression of spirits, which has possessed me, could yet so bear up, as in
some measure to become sought, and respected by the better sort, might have
been somewhat more then I have been in the eminency of this world; but the
great and good God has otherwise ordained, nor am I without hope, that he,
who has to this day so wonderfully supported and converted me, will thereby
work his glory and my good.

It is true that my course has been most improsperous, yet never of a grossly
irrational or unthrifty election.

I have in truth been so far from humouring my self in the impulsions of
Nature, or most delightful objects of my fancy, that I have mainly resisted my
self therein. It has pleased God to make me an instrument of crossing and
punishing my self in whatsoever I most placed my mind. The obstinate
continuance of my disease, and the failings of those whom I have trusted and
relied upon, have abused me: I have lost much pleasure and profit, whereof I
might have been capable; but for my self I regret it not, for alas how vain,
how transitory, how full of vexation are the best of earthly commodities, etc.

Truth has been said to be the object of the understanding, and good of the
will: Totus teres atque rotundus, expresses an honest man, yet a bowl
perfectly round, except upon a ground exactly plain, holds not well its
straight line and way, a strong byas better maintains it self against whampes
and unevenness.

So does a man biased with some sinister affection, often run a more constant
and thriving course, then he who has constituted truth, and true good his
Mistress; but himself being round, and his way uncertain and uneven, he varies
and fluctuates accordingly, as I have often said, Truths to us are such
obscure, high, twinkling Stars, that we hardly fasten upon them; what
pleases us, is only certain unto us; I speak in a natural way, for
supernaturally in Faith alone is all truth, all good, certainty, and pleasure.
Till God gave me that happy gift, I was a bowl without byasse, a ship without
steer, or Star.

I Were more then most miserable, if my resentment, my heart, and affections,
were set upon this world, but I humbly thank God, it is far otherwise with
me, and now as there ever has been a difference made, between such as cast
themselves into open and eminent mischief, and such as fall into unhappy
consequences of evils unforeseen: so hope I to find favor A^ was said, Non
ego pau^ is offender maculis (...) non incuria sudit, aut humana parum cavit
natura, such in great part have befalne me.
and pardon from the better sort, and the worst I respect not: And as that
Prince who plain in personage and habit, was by mistaking set to drudge for his
own entertainment, and being discovered and demanded what he meant? Answered,
that he did penance for his evil-favourednesse: So am I contented to undergo,
and submit my self to the not undeserved penance of my fate, with an
acquiescence of, Fiat voluntas tua; sed liber a nos a malo.

January 2. 1637.
NEmo laeditur nisi a seipso, never proved it self more true then in me, I have
been both agent and author of my misery, and sufferings, I have been both
Criminal and tormenter: God made me strong, I have made my self weak; God
entrusted me with many Talents of advantage above others, I have mis-imployed
and abused them, and my self; from my youth I have suffered his scourges and
terrors, with a troubled soul, yet such is his mercy unto me, that it is good
and happy for me that I have been troubled; As I have turned unto him, he has
been graciously pleased to turn his countenance of favor toward me, healing
my wounds with the soverain balm of his grace, and refreshing my Soul with
his waters of life; humbling me to exalt me, and chastising me in a Fatherly
correction, to prevent my eternal punishment.

How sweet (Oh Lord) are thy mercies, beyond comparison, beyond my expression?
the false and flattering joys of sensuality are mere sowrenesse, bitterness,
and vexation in respect; continue thy grace unto me, perfect thine own work,
and make me an instrument of thy glory, confirm me in the contempt of this
worlds vanities: and as on me, so work upon the world, by thy Almighty Spirit,
thy saving health, that thy will may be done in earth, as in Heaven; nothing
but thy all-powerfull Spirit can effect it, draw us and we shall come, and let
it be through tribulations, sorrows, fire, and whatsoever long or short, a
fair or rugged way, so it lead to thee we shall be happy above measure, Amen,
Amen.

Sweet Savior, let thy precious wounds cure mine,
And save my Soul, which is by purchase thine.
January 15. 1637.
BEauty and the delight of the eye consist in well-ordered luster of Colors,
proportion, and motion: yet forbeares it not to be extraordinarily affected in
the enjoying of such objects, as the appetite and fantasy have prescribed to
themselves for a necessary or voluptuous satisfaction, whereby appears that we
become most ravished and transported by the operation and cooperation of the
mind, whose truest and noblest objects are virtue and goodness. Hence sprung
the conceit, that if virtue were visible, it would beget in us most
transcendent affections, so beautiful, so amiable it would be to a generous
Soul.

God is the Author and Prototype of all beauty and goodness. How infinitely
then beyond comparison sweet, fair, and lovely must he be to such as apprehend
and contemplate his glory, and to whom he imparteth himself and his mercies? As
the sight of the body of the Sun so fills the sense, that for the present it
can admit no other conceit; so does the glorious speculation of Gods essence
and Majesty, annihilate and expel all earthly affections. How vain, how
mostly, poor, and beastiall are vulgar delights, in respect of that tincture,
that rapture, and eternity of bliss, which flow from his Divine grace and
knowledge? how is it possible, after such influence, to relish the drossie
pleasures of the world, for the most part common with beasts, fleeting,
molesting, lame? Miserable is the heart which he does not season, disconsolate
the comforts which proceed not from his Grace: who without that could live
contented; could be content to be one of Circe's beasts, and live and die in a
drunken fit? I most humbly thank thee (my gracious God and Savior) that thou
have vouchsafed to open my eyes to thy glory, and the worlds vanity; till then
I never found solid or permanent comfort. I have, like others, been apt to
conceive, that this worlds delights were our proper portion of thy assignment,
but thy great Grace has enlightened me, and with a strong hand taught me to
choose the better part. I have since thy illumination affected above all things,
to set forth thy Grace, Mercy, and Glory, but pardon me (Oh Lord) they surpass
my poor abilities. I am an earthen vessel, weak, and crased, as unable as
unworthy to be a fit instrument, to sound forth thy praise, I was ambitious to
have wrought thy Divine love upon others, that they with me might constitute
thee the sole scope and Lord of their Counsels, their projects, their actions,
but a fuller and richer Magazin then mine, and a stronger health are required.
Pardon (Oh Lord) that I withdraw my self, conscious of my weakness and
inabilities, but what my pen cannot attain, my tongue and actions shall (by
thy Grace) endeavor to supply.

January 14. 1637.
CHarity implies the love of God and man, without it, whatsoever we pretend, we
are Infidels, objects of hatred, to our Maker, to our inferiors; what
condition can be more contemptible? No delight is comparable to that, which
reflects upon a good mind from its own goodness extended upon others,
especially when our Consciences bear us witness, that we do it out of a true
love and obedience to our most merciful and Omnipotent God. To pretend Faith,
and be without Charity, is to mock God, and our selves; better were it for us
to be like beasts, without all knowledge of God, then to play the Hypocrites,
and draw a thousand woes upon our selves. Above all thy gifts, Oh Lord, thy
gift of a lively and true Faith is precious and sweet unto me, to be conscious
of that, is to be happy; Conscience without it is a sting, a torment unto us,
and such shall they find it, who in the lustiness of their fleshly pleasures
and discourse, most smother and affect to extinguish it; it has a root in them
from their youth, which may lie long hidden, but will, despite of their
nipping and obstinate courage, find a season to send forth thorny branches and
bitter fruits. May I (Oh God) no longer live, then I shall endeavor to please
thee, more then my self, and others who bear thy Image as much, confining our
indulgencies to our selves, we are worse then beasts, extending them to others,
we resemble thee, whom we are commanded to imitate, nor are we otherwise fit
for a sociable life in this, much less for the society of Saints and Angels in
thy eternal world. Make other virtues as easy unto me as that of Charity, and
I am happy.

January 20. 1637.
For my Son.
Toward a departure, or a long journey, men use to settle an order, to declare
their will, and express their affection: I have resolved (if it please God to
enable me in performance) as necessary to my self, and fit for you, to absent
my self some little time from home, that having entered you into an
oeconomicall way, recollecting your self, you may in my little Fortune (which
I have wholly committed unto your disposing) have a full and free faculty of
managing and ordering all according to your good pleasure and discretion: You
know what is said in your Theater d' Agriculture, that Eslever trop de Palais
and nourrir trop de valetz, is a way to ruin. As for the first, concerning
building, I hope so to have furnished you, and provided such accommodation, as
it shall not need to trouble either your mind, or purse. For the second, it is
the mischief of the English manner of living, (especially in the Country) to
labor and be charged with multitude of servants: great fortunes may bear
profusion, but in yours, you had need (as much as may be) study a restraint: A
small estate and few servants, well ordered, often make a Master live most
happily and handsomely. I never was so careless or prodigal, as to propound
to my self a course of expense above my means, but my mishap has been, that
such on whom I have relied, have never contained within the limits prescribed,
which has bred my consumption. For though the malignity of my disease has
thrust me beyond my inclination, in some extraordinaries: yet against that
alone I could have found remedy without a breach upon the maine of my Fortune,
and such expense I never pursued: Since your self has been a witness and an
Overseer of my ordinary expenses, it has not been without exceeding; God be
thanked, I have born and supplied it, you are not now without experience, you
have not been without advice, God bless them unto you; and for me I have long
since composed my self to undergo as well the censure as the loss: good men's
opinion I will ever value; but same, (as a thing without me) I never much
regarded. Comfort your self with what Horace says of parvoque potentem
Fabritium, and the well-being that goes with them, to whom Dii dederunt parca
quod sat is est manu. I know a Philosophical forced contentment, is no vulgar
felicity, but so it conduce to a been esse, it may suffice. You have a straight
and fair way before you, and God has blessed you a with good and constant
temper and affections, be constant to your self, and you are well.

If any thing prejudice you, it may prove your tender and infirm constitution,
with a mind bent to the more noble speculative and generous thoughts, but you
must something force and stiffen your self, to carry an eye, and take a
pleasure, in super-intending what concerns you: It is possible for a soul not
sick, though otherwise affected, to conquer and acquit it self herein with
ease and cheerfulness, if not delight.

You want no good will, you want no precaution; Now as it is my prayer, so it
is my confidence, that God will not be wanting unto you; Paul you know may
plant, and Apollos water, but it is he alone that must give the increase;
without his good grace, all is but Invita Minerva. As I have been indulgent to
you in your Marriage, so as you know, have I been otherwise so far, as to put
my self out of my own ways to accommodate yours; and as well before as since
your Marriage, to give away the absolute power over my fortunes to fix them
upon you and yours, all which I have done both out of affection to you, and
experience of my own fate to be such as I durst not trust more then needs must.

You have as well my errors as precepts to admonish and instruct you, and I
hope you will make use of the rule of Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum. You see how troublesome I am to my self in any thing I am to undertake,
or that concerns me; I turn it every way I can, I wind my self round about
it, and though I cannot take a resolution, but upon a through search and
disposition*

Yet it is even then not without some distrust and insatisfaction, so infinite
is the fancy, and perfection so transcendent: wherefore it is best for curious
minds to put on a rigid consining of themselves, and obstinately to entertain
no more matter of fancy then needs must; to slight this world as it deserves,
and to fix our souls upon God, is the only sincere satisfaction, an infinite
subject to an unbounded fancy.

I remember what a Lady once said unto me, that in government of household
expense which her husband committed unto her, howsoever she handled the matter,
she ever made sure not to exceed the allowed proportion; indeed there are many
ways incident to this worlds course, and we have a latitude of disposings, and
pleasing our selves; but the unnm magnum, the unum necessarium for this life,
is not to over-spend.

This was in my discourse, this was in my affections, but my want and infirmity
in health, wildered and overthrew me: God be praised, you yet enjoy Mentem
sanam in corpore sano, moderate your self, and hold so, and make no question of
well-being and fortune; maintain your self ready and capable, and Fortune
seldom fails to present her self. God multiply his blessings upon you; and
receive the blessing of your wholly devoted Father, Amen, Amen.

I have set you even, I have set you before hand, contain and run not behind;
never make your self such a stranger to your fortune and course, as to make
anyone servant necessary unto you, you shall in truth become enthralled unto
him, and it is both preposterous and ruinous. Whether you take a Country or
other life, it imports not, so you hold your self within your bounds. Place
forces no man.

They have their several advantages and disadvantages like other things, and
are to be embraced as discretion and affection shall lead. Certainly the
travailing course used of late (especially in the most spiritual and
Academicall minds) breeds a great partiality to the equal conversation of
Towns, but not without danger of being aliened from the knowledge of your own,
and as much abused therein by others, as of abusing your self in being carried
away with the City vanities, and unfruitful idleness. The Country life is
assuredly most natural, pleasant, settled, and profitable to the English breed
and course. Do but you care for your self, as I have cared for you, and all
shall (with Gods blessing) go well with your mind, and well with your
fortune; seek your happiness from Gods grace and bounty, he will not fail to
give it you, make Christ your Rock, and you have a sure foundation.

December 19. 1637.
QUos perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat, was a true saying applied to a false
God, but my God has often deprived me (in some particulars) of the use of my
ordinary reason and discourse, to act things against my knowledge, my ends, my
resolution and my self: he has raised oftentimes strange and independent,
combining constellations against me, I have evidently discovered his footsteps
therein, and he has thereby led me to my salvation; there was no redemption to
mankind, but in Christ, nor can the wounded and troubled soul find any other
sanctuary, he alone is the horn of our salvation, the Cornueopia of a perfect
plenty and felicity unto us in this and the eternal life. I have been Master
of a dog, whom when I have threatened, in stead of flying, he has appeased me
by a submisse fawning upon me.

Thou my God, art in like manner merciful, to such as seek thee and humble
themselves unto thee. Praise to thy blessed name for evermore, Amen, Amen.

January 21. 1637.
OUr Faith is well alluded to a Rock; and our Savior to the Cornerstone of a
building: for without them we are all tottering and infirm, nor does the
sweetness of any earthly pleasure make amends for an unstable wandering mind.

Good God, why did thou not to frailty give
One life to learn, another life to live?
Why, so it is, who here does thee regard,
Eternal life and joys are his reward.
Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,
Eterra alterius magnum spectare laborem.
Unexpressible is that tranquillity, ease, joy, and peace which I find, by
having freed my self from this worlds common interests and encumbrances; my
Soul is like a bird escaped from the Fowlers net; and I am as a free
spectatour beholding the busy burdened Actors of this worlds Tragedies,
Comedies, Farcies, and follies. Good Lord confirm me more and more, and make me
thankful in such my joy.

Once belonging to the Alphabet Sonnet of the Letter E.
BUt we, like false-bred Eagles, fly the sight
Of thy (to humane sense) confounding light:
Bartas and Herbert led, but flew so high,
Our flowery waxen wings dare not come nigh:
OR,
It Is hard to see them; harder to come nigh.
Verses, I confess, though such are best, which most resemble Prose, yet (as I
am now affected, especially in that measure which I had lately chosen) are not
so fitting to my present subject. There are diverse kinds and degrees of Faith,
the generality of such as call and think themselves Christians, go on in a
course childish kind of Faith, which gives little tincture to their
affections, and less to their actions, yet according to their nature, in some
things they make more, in others, less conscience: in a farther proceeding and
consideration of Religion, they lay hold on Christ, and use him as a salve for
their sins, and sinful propensions; but when the good Spirit of God, by means
of affliction, or otherwise, thoroughly awakeneth them, and works upon their
Soul, then, and not till then, are we truly converted: then are our eyes
opened to see and feel the ugliness of sin, with the sweetness of his saving
grace and favor: And thus (Oh Lord) has it pleased thee (in thy infinite
mercy) to work upon me. Now I see, and pity the worlds vanity and corruptions.
Now, as thou have dyed for me, I will rather dye a thousand deaths, then to
grieve thy good Spirit by my least consent to sin.

As thou have done to me, so vouchsafe to extend thy extraordinary hand of
mercy upon others, withold them from sophisticating thy sincere Religion,
with their poor and rotten policies: we may say of it (as some use it) as is
said of Tilt and Tourney, that it is too much for jest, too little for earnest;
it cannot be expected that the people will follow, except their Teachers lead,
and in the sincerity of their lives show the way; their Tithes are substance,
their shows, and ceremonies alone in thy service deserve them not. Magistrates
when they obey thee, may more justly and exactly expect our obedience. A gross
affectation of policy in Religion, ministers too much occasion to weak
Christians to judge and conclude of Religion, rather as a humane Policy, then
Divine Truth.

If any sins were venial, such appear most pardonable as carry with them a
kind of warrant from Nature, and a gratification to others; and thou, O God,
art least indulgent to such as offend of malicious wickedness.

They are like the Planets and Stars, in the Heavens, to guide and comfort us
by their sweet influence; when they prove malign (which the Stars seldom
do) they are our mischiefs and our Plagues: and as the Stars have their
shining and influence more for our, then their own good, so ought they to
exercise their power.

It is a soul, unhappy fancy, that pleases it self in displeasing others.

I Have of late been urged to work, and am at this time working upon a piece of
ground, which has long been designed for Gardening, and so employed, it has
had much cost and industry bestowed upon it, but the nature of the soil
consists of so stiff a Clay, that it has ever rendered an ill account and
return of such feeds and Plants, as have been entrusted unto it, lusty and
fruitful it has showed it self in grass, and rank in weeds: There is an
evil Herb they call Twitch, which has overrun it, of such nature, that
having once possessed a ground, the soil must be wholly altered and overcome,
or no good thing will thrive committed unto it: My Gardener to work a cure,
has not only dug and manured, but has brought a new and better earth upon
it, so that now, with a due industry and watering observed, it can hardly fail
to yield a grateful and faithful fertility: Some soyles are cured by much
breaking, some by fire, some by inundation; frosts, and hard weather, make a
good preparation; All is happy that confers a bettering, and improvement. In
the diseases of our bodies, where an evil habit prevails, and ill humors
abound, some are rectifyed by purgation, some etc. and some by the very
distempers which they breed; A burning Fever remedies a Palsy; and Agues
ordinarily clear the body. We see also, that a disordered, and ill habituated
Commonwealth and State, but upon extreme necessity and violence, seldom grows
to reformation. A vicious and depraved mind corresponds to these premises, as
well in disposition as cure, till extremity, distemper, and affliction work
upon us, till God the good Gardener of our souls cultivate, weed, alter, and
subdue us, we insist in our corrupt naturals, we remain obstinate in our
errors, impatient of good and healthful counsel, perverse in all our
courses; Happy that Soil, Body, State and Soul which find him their
Gardener, Physician, Reformer, and gracious Redeemer. Paradise was our first
plentiful Garden; Health, Original Justice and integrity, our condition; till
he renew, heal, reform, sanctify and reduce us to our principles and
perfection, we are barren to goodness, unsound, corrupted, tainted pieces.
Persist, Oh Lord, in such thy grace, as I have happily found toward me, be it by
breaking, sickness, confusion, or humiliation, so thou make me good, and make
me thine, I shall be faithfully fruitful, Athletically vigorous, prudent,
temperate, just, religiously virtuous, and already in Paradise and in the
Confines of Heaven.

What shall I render unto thee, Oh Lord, for the incomparable influence,
assistance, and sweetness of thy grace and favor toward me? I possess
nothing, but what I have received from thee, nor can I pay thee, but with thine
own; The graces of my body, mind, and fortune, are thy Alms unto me, I will
sacrifice unto thee all my vain and worldly affections; and even that is my
great game, the unspeakable sweetness and comfort of thy favor is an
overflowing and superabounding recompense unto me; that wherein thou have
invested me with the most propriety, is my humble thanksgiving and imperfect
obedience; Nor that can I offer up and tender unto thee without thy gracious
hand raise and assist me: But help me (Oh Lord) and I will never cease to
praise and endeavor to obey thee, Amen, Amen.

I most humbly thank thee (my most gracious God) that my trouble of late has
not been so much in any thing, Some of these pieces were intended but as
Paraphrases to verses, after digested to Alphabeticall Sonnets.
as in a laboring affection to set forth the greatness and sweetness of thy
mercy toward me; Thou have been my sole Physic and Physician, my
preservative, cordial, restorative, and support, even then when in taking
measure of my natural strength, I might have conceived it impossible to
undergo what by thy grace I have performed; thou have many times found and
inspired ways and means beyond me, as well to assist and support me, as thou
have formerly done to humble me. Thou never want means; Melancholy,
confusion of face, defection of the eyes, crosses have been thy instruments to
make me thine: I was a house built for pleasure, but thou have made me a
receptacle of all calamities. I was not that crooked piece of knee timber,
fitted for distress, I was framed for the Pacifique Sea, but thy storms have
all past over me, and yet by thy favor I am a greater wonder to my self in
what I have born, then was that Cock-boat which safely transported from the
Bermudaes, such as committed themselves unto it. Free spirited Horses do often
brook worst the bit and curb, and soonest tire themselves engaged to a Moorish
passage, when a Fen Mare, and an Asinine patience, better complies and
extricates it self: no sweetness is comparable to thy grace, nor strength to
that which thy good Spirit gives. Naturally I am impatient to tread my shoe
awry, I have abounded in errors and exorbitancies, but thy mercy has ever
opened my eyes, and recalled me to disallow them, and at last to detest and
abjure them.

It had been else too hard for flesh and blood, they can never cast out, nor
cast off themselves; as thou have said, A Kingdom divided in it self cannot
subsist: but be thou with us, and nothing can prevail against us; invincible
is that body, that mind and estate, which thou assistest.

Consilia quibus impares sumus, fatis permittamus: understanding fate for God,
is the counsel I take. A Ship that cannot sail, must drive, etc.

My gracious God, accept I most humbly beseech thee, my humble thanksgiving for
thy wonderful preservation and favors toward me, and particularly for blessing
me in Charitable affections toward others, as well as reverence toward thee;
daily I have too much experience of the little good, that the best preaching
works upon depraved minds; grant that I may not offend thee, in hurting my
self by an immoderate and indiscreet affecting of others good; Give me a
cheerfulness without oppression of my spirits in thine, and my ways.

Bless the sincere profession and Professors of thy sacred Word, teach them
that they may truly teach thee, withold them from mingling policy, and
self-interest with thy Religion, withold them from shaking the foundation of
our Faith, and peace of thy Church. It has formerly been too great a tax upon
our Nation, to have been too inconstant and troublesome therein. Maintain the
true Light and pure exercise of thy Gospel amongst us, our iniquities deserve
the punishment, of a most gross relaps to discovered and escaped superstition
and Idolatry, but of thy great mercy give us true wisdom and repentance, and
avert thy Judgments. One pious Churchman is sooner to be believed against
their own affected authority, then twenty for their usurped power and
advantage. Luxations in Religion breed a long subsequent weakness, and the
adversaries of our Religion, as well as Atheists, take too great advantage from
such occasion. Contain us, Oh Lord, from over-prying into, and censuring thy
secret Counsels, Predestination, and Freewill, strike the same stroke upon our
lives. Our comfort must rise from our endeavor, in either opinion; The most
subtle Writers lose and confound themselves on either side, and make too bold
in concluding of thee by our blind fantastique rules of Justice.

Thou dwell in the Clouds, and have cast a mist about thy self, which our
frail fight cannot penetrate: how can man hope to understand thee, whose poor
finite capacity cannot so much as in his imagination conceive either way of
that, which he sees and knows of necessity must be either so or so? As for
instance, we know that this sublime Candens must necessarily either have
bounds, beyond which there is nothing, or else go infinitely on finally
unbounded, and one limit still succeeding another; but I am much deceived, if
the strongest imagination can conceive either way, though one be most
necessary: much less can we comprehend and compass the essence and infinity
of God, obedience and reverence to his revealed will, and not an over-bold and
curious search, belong to his incomprehensible Majesty: But I have ended my
paper, and almost my self, vouchsafe (Oh Lord) to give me modesty, moderation,
Faith, Charity, and Conscience to guide my ways, and guide that guide, that I
may live and dye in thy truth, and to thy glory, Amen, Amen.

January 29. 1637.
THis house and staire resemble me, no line
Runs parallel, nor due proportion held,
No Landing even, by pre-engagement spil'd,
High, low, fair, mean, imperfect, and what is worst,
Anxious to fit succeeding, to the first,
Full of cross reason, 'twas our equal lot,
Casting our birth, th'Ascendent was forgot;
Yet all in this are well and happily cast,
Leading to God, and Heaven at the last.
The Verses above in their relations, are not to be understood, but by him,
which knows and considers the house, staire case, and my fortune and condition.

The staire at last leads to a standing, mounted for prospect, which leads only
to it self and Sky.

My Ash Wednesday Ashes.
No term or Metaphor can carry a more true, full, and lively expression, then
does that of our regeneration, we are in the womb of this world before our
second spiritual birth, such Embryons and imperfect Infants as can scarce
admit to be affirmed of us, that we are endued with life and sense. It is more
potentially then actually that we enjoy them. We acquiesce in a stupid and
corrupt condition, we are fed and pleased in the impure nutriment of earthly
and false delights, we draw our nourishment, by the Navill of our sensuality,
we are wrapped in our uncleanness, and of our selves we neither know nor
affect any other being. But when God of his great grace calls and urges us to
our true and second birth in his Spirit, he changes our affections, cloatheth
us anew, brings us to another light, another Air, another condition. He
works in us a sight and feeling of our former infirmities, and corruption, he
purifies, refines, and fits us for a more excellent life and knowledge: He
displayes unto us his far more excellent beauties and glory, we draw our
nourishment by another root, more celestial, more defecate, we loathe and
scorn our former being, and become ravished in the joy of our change, which is
not without difficulty and cries, happy cries, happy distress, most gainful
change. There we could not have lived ever, nor ever been but blind and
miserable. Our first life is vegetable, sensual, common with beasts, dark,
base, cumbersome, our regeneration is the only true and eternal life of the
Soul. There is no sincere pleasure, content, wisdom, courage, or peace
without it, Christ alone is the Man-midwife to bring us to such happiness.

By thy grace (Oh Lord) am I born, and without it better had I been unborn. I
was wildred in a Wood, entangled in a dim light amongst Briars, Thorns, and
wild beasts; but thou have freed me, and brought me into the fair, open,
delightful fields of thy grace; I was engaged to a Sea of raging waves and
storms, but thou have instructed me to strike my greedy sails, to cast out my
vain lading, and brought me to a most happy Port, in thy most happy Climate. I
was an executor of the worlds trust, but found the estate so entangled, so
subject to debts, that thou have taught me to renounce and free my self: I will
by thy Divine assistance avoid the Wood, and be free from the Briars, the Sea,
and be free from Sea-sicknesse and storms, the worlds common courses and
conversations, and enjoy thee and my self, exempt from troubles, crying debts
and importunate vanities; The world does in Truth (for the most part) but
magnas nugas magno conatu agere, etc.

I have (I thank God) in honest sort paid every man his own, and provided for
my children; It is not every man's case to be so disengaged. I am free (O God)
to live to thee and thee alone. My Country needs me not, nor does it find me
fit for its service, etc. I am (by Gods grace) too rigid, too straight a piece
for such Shiptimber. I grieve to see the world as it is, nor can contribute
ought but prayers to help it; how can it be other then Cachecticall, tainted
with the licencious luxury of strangers, intoxicate wantonness of Favorites,
dissolution of our Seminaries, the Universities and Innes of Court;
Prevarication, and corrupt example of Ecclesiastiques, and sinister affections,
and illusions of Magistrates? as one said, Signa nostra sequentes prodimur, and
nisi Christus se ipsum vindicet, actum est. The Church is compared to the Ark;
and I would it did not in some things too much resemble it. It is full of
various, many unclean beasts, and too floating and unsettled; I would rather
prove it a City built upon the Rock Christ Jesus, firm and unchangeable; he is
the sole and all-sufficient fundamental of our Salvation, and whilst we
confound our selves and seek for other, let us take heed we lose not him, and
betray our selves, not only to infinite uncharitable, indiscreet, fanaticall
opinions and Schisms, but even to Turcisme, and Atheism; our wild unsettled
dissentions expose us too much to both. Lord of thy great mercy teach thy
Church and me, to fix in a firmitude of thy saving Faith and Religion. Banish
undue policy, banish will worship, and teach us to serve and honor thee in
unity and truth of Spirit, instruct and guide me in thy ways, and seeing thou
have made me a sociable creature, and given me a working, active spirit,
address me to the comfort of a suitable conversation, to discourse and walk thy
ways aright. Thou must reveal such unto me; for I find it too hard to find
them. Shall the Roman Religion afford so many, and thy Truth so few who can
persuade themselves to leave the world for thee? If all other Company fail my
desires, be thou my guide, be thou my comfort, and I shall still happily
subsist in thee, and want nothing. The world is a writing so full of fauks,
many corrections cannot mend it: Una litura potest, and that I have chosen.

Thus writing is troublesome, and well, nee possum vivere cumte, nec sine te.
It is endless, nor is it fit for me to write what I would or could. May it
please thee, Oh God, to turn to thy glory and my comfort, these my weak
endeavors, Amen, Amen.

February 7. 1637.
LIke to his joy who meets a sure guide to direct and conduct him in a fair
way, after he has been long wildred and benighted in false, soul, and
intricate wanderings, such, Oh Lord, is my comfort in thy sweet exhibiting thy
self and thy favor unto me, I am now at ease, I see and hate the solecismes of
the times, I am disentangled from a wilderness of the worlds confused ways
and errors, nor could any other guide have freed me; Thy grace has supported
me in my writings, in my health, in my deliverance, beyond expression: Let
vanity and sensuality delight themselves in trewand wantonness and wanderings,
but keep me, Oh Lord, in thy ways and school, and let me rather smart under
the rod of thy Fatherly correction, then become abandoned to an undue and
licentious Liberty. Perfection belongs to the one, perdition to the other.
Accept my most humble thanks for thy infinite favors, and bring me to the
heavenly Jerusalem, Amen.

February 10. 1637.
TO give in some sort, a taste and glimps what kind of Spirit possessed me in
my first youth and melancholy, take these few fragments, which with many other
then I coined (but have now lost and forgot) for inscriptions never employed.

Fond passion is, Opinion but a fool:
God, Nature, Reason, are the Wisemans School.
Delights, good servants, but bad Masters are,
Minds cordial medicines, used without fond passion,
Fitting age, calling, means, degree, and fashion,
Useless, but for our recreation,
Doted on, turn diseases, our souls snare.
You Will say they are toys, the fitter are they then
For such vain bubbles, Fantomes as are men.
They profit naught, and wisemen you will say,
Pleasures foundation on profit lay.
To them that want not, to give Nature right,
Profit it self in truth is but delight.
It is not affectation makes me write,
But honest hearts ever affect the light.
Thus did Melancholy and retiredness work upon me, my Melancholy wrought my
retiredness, and that by removing me from the common delights and course of
young men, my farther Melancholy, removens prohibens, goes for a cause. I
affected the Tree of knowledge, tasted of the unnatural fruit, and lost my
earthly paradise: though labor, toil, and affliction have been my portion in
such loss, yet Christ has proved unto me infinite advantage. He is the
Christians eternal Paradise, in him we find a new Earth, new Heavens, Peace,
and joy incomparably more complete, without him all is vanity and vexation of
spirit; Happy the fall which meets with him to raise us, happy the loss which
finds him to guide us. Since the first fall man discerning his nakedness, of
himself has sought Figge-leaves for cover and advantage, a partial clothing
in humane policies, Arts, and inventions, which all but make us feel the more
the weather, and our wants. Nature is lost in artificial affectations, and our
false-acquired knowledge proves our true and real misery. Thus plunged in vain
deceiving delights and wretched perplexity, no exemption, no redemption
remains but in and through Christ, and the true knowledge of him: By him we
turn our first nakedness and rags into a full and glorious garment, by him
our darkness and confusion becomes a perfect illumination, and in him our vain
pleasures and frail troubles become a solid continual feast of joy, peace,
and contentment. That Sun of Righteousness is the only true Sun, that
lights every man to true happiness: the Sun is the life of flowers, and
many of them open themselves and turn toward it; let us learn from them to
open our hearts, and turn to God. He alone can disperse in us the clouds of
ignorance and light vanities, in him alone is that tranquillity and true joy to
be found, which by our disobedience, and foolish affectation we have lost, all
our other curiosities, all our sensualities do but more wilder us and set us
further to seek. The wiser sort of men in a humane way have sought for
immortality to piece out their frailty, but in Christ alone it is to be found;
and without him, it were better to want it. Poor creatures that we are, poor
happiness that we seek, without him who said, Seek and ye shall find. But do
not such appear to doubt too much of the souls immortality, who will rather
deny it to become infected with original sin, by way of propagation in a
probable analogy to Faith and Gods Justice, then acknowledge a natural way of
one eternal Soul to beget another, eternity being the only gift of God, and
as easily and more reasonably flowing from him the one way then the other? Is
not this, leaving a fair, natural, rational, and religious way, a kind of
teaching to doubt and mis-beliefe? Why stick they at that which is most
reasonable, teaching nevertheless Faith beyond reason; such as deny the earth
to move and turn toward the Sun for its own advantage, upon pretense of Text
of Scripture for the earths stability, which as a thousand others, they might
as well and with far less straining interpret in a way of common Besides
other Texts which make and consist with a different opinion. The ancient Church
error against the Antipodes may also be a cavear*
appearing, if now upon real demonstration and reason the earth be proved to
move, do they not wrong both the Scripture and our Religion? Miserable
lamenesse, miserable blindness, of humane Divinity! Help, Oh God, or we are
confounded, we are lost; true knowledge, thrift or joy, are annexed to no
person, place, or condition; but thy grace and blessing gives them. Assist us
all, assist me therein, and I have found more then ever I lost.

February 10. 1637.
HOwsoever these writings may, in some respect, be as unfit as troublesome in
my condition, yet herein they have proved my great advantage and satisfaction,
that they have taken me off from other importunate discontents and impressions,
and have tied me faster and faster to God, they have turned the sight and sense
of my misery into joy and comfort, upon the discerning and participation of his
mercies unto me: They have entered and entertained me in to sweet a
contemplation of his glory and goodness, as I hope shall never languish and
dye in me, and I have, I thank God, gathered such strength upon them, that I
conceive much better of my self, and the vigor of my Spirit to the discharge
of any ordinary performance. This my good God has done for me, and it is
wonderful even in my own eyes, may it please him to indue me with all humble
thankfulness, Amen, Amen.

February 12. 1637.
MY good Friend, you have obliged me, in the reading and perusing of these my
confused crudities, and you have in your indulgence to them and me, and their
innocent spirit of ingenuity, commended some things in them far beyond their
worth: and wished some more labor of mine to be employed in their more orderly
and perfect digestion, and a farther communication, but I am over-weak and
lazy, and they too incorrigible, they are misshapen lumps of an imperfect
conception, which howsoever it might be fit for me to be delivered of, yet are
they most unfit for other, then a friendly view and judgment; I put them into
your hands, but am far from wishing any your farther patience or labor upon
them; They are such Bears whelps, that if they were capable of any good
shape, yet were it most unfit, that any but their natural Parent should lick
them into it; notwithstanding if out of your good affection to any part of
them, and the propagation of goodness, you conceive a tolerable Mercury may be
framed of them, for the view of a more remote well-affected friend, I submit
them to you. Hew off, and fashion them at your pleasure, if you should prove so
idle, as to make such an undertaking, I fear you will find so shaken a piece
of Timber, as is nothing but chips beforehand. I thank God, I have ever
superlatively loved goodness, and nothing better, then to be an instrument of
doing good: but my fortune and opportunity have not answered my affection: Nor
can I now, either so flatter my self, or the world, to hope the least good
effect from any production of mine; you have often in your course and
profession, given, and daily give better and happyer proof of your self that
way. The stuff Imperfect in the first concoction, not to be perfected in the
second.
which you find in my pieces, is in truth (and so ever I conceived it) most
unfit for the sight of any other, then a cordial and familiar Friend. The
presence of sores, infirmities, and criple diseases, are fitter for an
Hospital, or Almeshouse, then the stage, they excite pleasure in none, and
compassion but in few, and well-disposed persons: I affect privacy, and love
not to expose my self and my errors to censure (guilty of my imperfections)
especially of fools and depraved dispositions. In truth, Melancholy and
human frailty and dysaster, will hardly meet with anyother idoneous and
compassionate Judges, then such as have felt and smarted in their sad unhappy
effects; every piece was intended the last, and they are too wild and
incoherent, to make a Teame: But (as I have formerly said, use your pleasure,
reduce (if you will and can) my Chaos into method, cut off repetitions, there
is matter enough to prune and burn, little for fruit; correct, destroy part, or
all; if you retain anything, the labor will be the less, to let it be merely
mine; And thus I commit my self and it to God, and you, his will, and yours be
wrought on me and mine.

February 12. 1637.
TRue, and exact definitions are acknowledged to be most difficult, and
knowledge of causes to be most abstruse; false divisions and strained
proportions abuse us, faculties and notions stand not so clear and distinct in
their nature, as they are represented unto us, and conceived of; nor can we
temper words to the mixed nature of things, erroneous affected Idea's mislead
and deceive us, the wisest of humane knowing men professed the height of his
knowledge to consist in knowing nothing, and might it not be a great part of
his wisdom to write nothing? In truth not to know God aright, is to know
nothing: and to know him, love him, obey him, and enjoy his grace and favor,
is to know all things, and enjoy that perfect happiness, which the
Philosophers have so industriously sought, but without this illumination could
not possibly attain. The world is Hydropically swollen in the abundance of
books and writings of imperfect digestion, it thirsts more and more after
them, and increases more and more in tumor and crudities; men for the most
part employ their wits and pens in vanities, and for vain ostentation, they
cavil and carp one at another errors, and flatter themselves to know much,
when they are able to affirm, what were the customs, and what the tenets of
such and such Authors, and Nations, howsoever both such and their own
assertions, in several notions and acceptations of things and words, and as
they are diversely affected, do but thicken the mist of our ignorance, and
prove so many ignes fatui, to lead us out of the way.

Nature is lost and drowned in Artifice and mistakings, our ignorance is become
invincible. We build one upon another unsound foundations, and are so dim
(short) sighted and entangled, that nothing but a supernatural light can
clear our Egyptian darkness, and disabuse us. Our presumption would exalt it
self to make us a kind of Gods in knowledge; but ( non si te ruperis, par
eris:) It will not, it cannot be; all we can really attain unto, without Gods
good Spirit to guide us, is to take notice of our lame ignorance and misery
(and that, if we can make good use of it, is some happiness in that it opens
unto us a way to a more full and happy knowledge) we must in despite of our
prying and affectation still be men, and dye like men. Thy goodness, Oh Lord,
thy love, thy glory are the only subject, wherein I would be ambitious to write
and spend my self, but thy glory is too bright for my feeble eyes, I must again
sound my retreat. In thy own holy Scriptures thou have revealed thy self
sufficiently for our knowledge, for our eternal happiness and salvation.
There alone is the habitation of light and truth, and there alone, and in thy
Christ shall I find thee. I will affect no other knowledge, no other writing.
Be propitious unto me.

February 15. 1637.
To my above mentioned Friend. The Conclusion.
YOu have formerly seen, how I engaged my self to Verse, and broke loose from
it; there is indeed a kind of wantonness and constraint incident to it, which
agrees not with my austerity and affected liberty. I am even in prose too much
a Libertine, impatient of method, abandoned to confusion; I have partly, though
imperfectly, made to appear the calamitous progress of my disease, with the
happy and admirable deliverance and issue, to the good of my Soul, and no
incompetency in fortune, wherein I doubt not but I shall move as well joy as
compassion in such as are good and well affected toward me.

I have not been formerly void of good inclinations, (my best was ever an
affection to God, good men, and goodness) but my disposition therein was so
imperfectly sanctified and fortifyed, that it pleased the Divine power to cast
down all my fences, to turn my best wisdom and intentions to solly, and to
expose me to the scorn of such as in my naturalls I might have scorned: such
ordinarily is the world, and the corrupt disposition of man (especially the
worst and most degenerous) that we over-measure our selves by our own foot,
like lewd filthy boys we sport our selves in casting dirt one in another
face; He thinks me foolish, I do as much for him, we gratify ourselves in
taking advantage at others infirmities and misfortunes, we think to inhaunse
our selves thereby; In truth scorn grows commonly from such to whom it most
belongs from others, and they exercise it without self-reflection, charity,
compassion, or discretion.

Care undermined me, improsperous courses blew me up, Physic was my bane, and
diversions my confusion; How miserable, Oh God, is humane frailty? How
wonderful are thy ways? It is said, that if in case of Physic, of these
three, Physician, Patient, and sickness, any two conspire, they prevail. In
me the conspiracy has been in all against me, with Body, Mind, and Fortune,
and yet Gods extraordinary grace and mercy have supported and delivered me.
There is no despair till we become incapable of all manner of cure and
subsisting.

February 26. 1637.
I Have often deceived my self in thinking my self at my end, the like happens
in my writing, and before I shut up these ill-favored, imperfect
representations, though what I have already said, may partly satisfy my
intentions, in expressing that it has been more my disease then my self, which
has been the chief Actor in my misfortunes, yet know that the worst, the
strangest, and most of my story is not brought upon this paper stage; it is too
tedious and unfit for view; not only in the story of particular men, but even
of State-resolutions, and public actions, and especially of natures course
and proceedings, their true and real motives, springs, and ways are in most
important effects, secret, concealed and disguised, ordinarily hidden in their
original, even from our selves that act; we may take copies of others faces,
but not of their hearts with any assurance. It has been an honest advise to
keep a corner of our heart to our selves; and if an honest heart ought not in
point of discretion to expose it self, what truth is to be expected from
hypocrisy and dissimulation? One absurdity admitted, a thousand follow, and to
the foundation of my disease laid in the excess of Treacle, infinite have been
the effects, and my sufferings, which have flowne from that and other
concurring circumstances. I have at the entrance of my alteration, been ready
to sink at the Table, I have many years since travailed and slept with
cordialls at hand to keep me alive; nor left I them, till a hearty friend told
me the heart must comfort the heart, which yet was lame and ineffectuall in my
strongest resolutions, till I had recourse to God the only true spirit of
courage and resolution; to a curious and well-affected mind, and a
weather-beaten Soul, there is no other refuge or harbor of safety,
satisfaction, and tranquillity. There are Climates, where it seldom or never
Raines, others which clouds malusque Jupiter urgent. In one and the same
Country, where the earth and heavens in their constant seasons should be as
constantly disposed, yet does the same time of the year prove sometimes cold
and wet, sometimes hot and dry, the materials and circumstances appearing the
same; this must rise from secret Springs, and combinations above the reach of
our discourse. The same diversity and contrariety of effects befalls men in
their fortunes, howsoever in appearance equally constituted. God is the cause
of causes; He has in all times and Countries provided wonders above the
ordinary course of Nature, to humble and convince our humane presumption. I had
a body and a mind so strongly built, that had not my spiritual and
intellectual parts predominated in me, to withdraw me from a base vulgar
abandoning my self to sensuality, no man in probability could better have
subsisted and maintained himself against ordinary course of dissolution and
debauch. I had a Spirit naturally tempered to contain and contract it self
above all excess, but its own; And even that as well as another, it might have
bridled, had not Melancholy and other adverse conditions surprised and mastered
it, betrayed unto them under color of friendship: The blood is said to be the
bridle of all humors, that I lost, and much of my good spi^its with it in the
conflict, but God has proved a better bridle, a better spirit unto me.
Innocent and groundless blushings proceeding from the tenuity and waste of my
blood and spirits have been none of my least importune and prejudicial
symptoms. Such weakness joined with a strong fancy has made me subject to
blush not only to my self alone, but upon any surprise of mention and conceit;
not only upon any real occasion, but upon what there might be so much as a
possibility of in the apprehension of another. I have taken my self blushing at
the appearing or name of a woman, who had she been Eve and I Adam, the humane
race would have been in great danger of failing, at length custom and
complying with a conceited expectation of others, produced it, etc. God has by
his extraordinary grace upon my humiliation furnished me with as strange means
to subsist, as I at the first found extravagant means to keep low and oppress
my self. In the depth of Melancholy, I have not found so much as a melancholy
dream, my spirits have taken root from above and have grown upon it. Long
since, after a great disease, I had such a tenderness of spirits and humors,
that a thick cloud could not pass over me, but I felt an alteration upon it.
It is strange how a transient thought will work, and give a sudden stroke to a
remote and ill-affected weakened part of the body: the mind works not alone by
the heart and brain, as is vulgarly conceived, but the praecordia, and all
parts more or less contribute, and are affected therein, and God has blessed
me with a mind so strong that it ever discharged it self in its passions and
errors, more in my body then its own sufferings; but they are still Hippocrates
his Twins, and must weep or laugh together. I have now disburthened my self of
all trouble, but this of writing, I am too inexhaustible therein, weary me it
does, satisfy me it cannot, I will change the Scene, and seeing I find my
self so ill a Companion, I will seek better company. I have ever been over-hard
to please in conversation, my present affections and habit make me now more
dainty, what shall I do? I have by Gods great grace recovered in great part,
those Jewels of peace and health which I had long lost. Therefore I will no
longer rake in this puddle, nor abuse his grace in over-bold and indiscreet
presumption; Like the stranger belonging to another Country, I will
transitorily please my self, and converse with the common passions and
Interests of this world, I will spend my time in search of goodness, and will
make much of it where I find it, I will wash my hands in Innocence, my Soul
in my Saviors blood, and wrap my self in my own virtue, and his merits,
relying on his neverfailing mercy. Amen, Amen.

March 1. 1637.
THough friends be absent, conversation lost,
My bating Soul often laboring in it self,
By winds and fortune on the black Sea tossed,
Thou present, Lord, I fear nor wave nor shelf.
Thou Father, Brother art, and Friends to me;
Be the world whose it list, so thou be mine,
They never miscarry, who rely on thee;
Grace storms dispells more strong then they combine.
All thrives, where thou the pruning Gardener art;
To thy Plants, blastings frugall blessings prove;
Though Summer height and flourishing impart,
Winter gives strength and Timber to the Grove.
To thine, all sufferings end in joy and rest,
And th'absence of a wicked world is best.
Forced delights and contentment, are no delight or contentment; dispose, Oh
Lord, my affections and I am happy; until I had digested the tough morsels,
and crudities of this world, I could never have had peace and quiet.

IOckey and his Horse, were by their Master sent
To honor him in hunting, run, and race;
To put in for the Bell, and take content
In honest sort, fitting fair time and place.
In pride of nature, fit for any sport,
Jolly and lusty both, at first they were,
But shortly after both of them fell short,
What by mischance, by ill-advise and care.
Soon he became engaged to a match,
Which cost him dear, both on the By and Main;
He thought himself no easy piece to catch,
But knew not to resist so strong a train.
He now conceits he could not hope to win,
Except his horse were straightly dieted.
Such course he takes, but thrives so ill therein,
His beast grows joylesse, faint, and famished.
He who depended much upon his beast,
Grew much dejected; study, care, and thought,
To set all right, and do all for the best,
Brought him as low, as first his Steed was brought.
After much time, Art, Cost, the Beast became
As vigorous and lusty as before:
Ill now they sorted, the one wild, the other tame,
Zeal to his Master helped to make him poor.
Jockey must ride, the Beast would run away,
He strove and pulled, and used his best of Art,
To check his pride, and force him to obey,
So long till both were sinking out of heart.
The Master now came in, to this disorder,
And finding Jockeyes want of strength and skill,
By his all-taming art, brought all in order,
And fashioned horse and man unto his will.
Thus right, and each to other fitted well,
They are to run, and cannot miss the bell.
You may call this to the world a fit of Melancholy, but my hope and resolution
is by Gods grace, never to be other, then my conclusions make me to appear in
the former pieces: I shall be sorry for your patience, if out of your good will
to me, you have troubled your self in running over any part hereof, but happy,
if I may find you recompensed by being taken, with any one of them; they
disaffect publication and fame, yet believe me, I mean to live by my Book. For
though I avoid exemplification and enrolment, yet I am contented to admit of
some few honest witnesses, whereby the more to oblige my self. I know it is a
wilderness, but even such are artificially and affectedly of use in none of
the meanest Gardens, and good Herbs and Simples are not rejected or contemned
for growing wild. Though the fruit be harsh and grow upon a shrub, you may
find it wholesome, you may find it useful.

HAving by Gods great grace, this present morning, fallen upon a design and
rumination, which I esteem the most perfect and happy of any that ever I
entertained, the notions and affections of the mind being ordinarily fleeting,
the memory infirm, and unfaithful, and resolutions without a constant
firmitude, fruitless, and ineffectuall: I have thought good to Register such
my discourse, whereby the better to fix my self for the future, in what I now
approve and intend.

I have taken notice of many in all Religions possessed with an affectation and
industry of converting others to their own Faith and tenets. Generare sibi
simile, is a natural propension; and assimilation, a common delightful
operation. In-animate species naturally multiply themselves in the Air, and
propagation of impressions effect a pleasing reflection. Many Preach in the
Pulpit, few in their lives, and fewer make it a business particularly to labor
particular Reformations in their common conversation: Christianity is taken up
rather for outward fashion and profession, then for any inward essential form
and habit; if we were really what we pretend to be, we would not rest satisfied
in our perfunctory proceedings. We would actuate and propagate our Faith and
Charity upon others, and improve our felicity in a spiritual way, according to
that rule, which affirms him to be born in vain and unprofitably, per quem non
nascitur alter. We are all ordinarily charitable to such as we see out of the
way by our directions and conductings, we are apt to rectify errors in any
thing rather then piety and Religion. It is a preposterous affection and
modesty, seeing there can be nothing so important both to Gods glory and our
own good, as a due observation of his will and our profession. We love the
children of our beds, and of our brains, and they are often happy unto us: But
certainly it must be an incomparable and superlative contentment, if it has
pleased God to make us the children of his good Spirit, to become happy
instruments of raising up and begetting spiritual Children to him; nothing
conduces more unto it, then that our light so shine before men, that they may
see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Light is most
diffusive, and flame incentive, if we be truly enflamed our selves, we shall
hardly fail (at least we ought not) to communicate and extend it to others,
who often consist of matter well disposed and combustible, but want good
kindled Coals of Devotion and blowing to be applied and work upon them. I have
formerly lived in London with hurt to my self, and no good to others, I fear
not now my own prejudice, and am ambitious of others good, could I meet as well
with opportunity and convenience of living in it with a society and seconding
in my affected course, as there is too much occasion and subject of corrupted
times, and matter to work upon, I should be much the more happy. But howsoever,
I intend the prosecution of what I propound to my self, and that confidently:
we too frequently glory in our shame, and are shame-faced in the exhibition of
a true and glorious piety and devotion. Bless me, Oh God, in this, and all
other thy good motions, perpetuate them unto me, teach me to scorn the
contempt and glory of the world, to prefer and exalt the sincerity of thy
truth and Religion, above all earthly considerations, let me be none of those,
who believe thee no farther then they see thee, and their own imaginations
before thee, confirm and strengthen me in all good endeavors, and accept my
most humble thanksgiving for thy wonderful grace and mercy upon me, and that
for thy dear Son our Saviors sake, to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit be
all glory for ever, Amen, Amen.

March 20, 1637.
THis is the misery of writing, and condition of matter, if we pass things
slightly over, our short touches make little or no impression, and if we
inculcate them with long insistings, and repetition, we prove nauseous and
tedious. I am guilty of both.

My Sun rose fair, but soon was overcast,
Strong, wanton, Joviall, active, free, and bold,
Morally good by nature I was cast,
Saturn, and inexperience all controlled:
God I should say, good only, I remained,
And by his goodness better goodness gained;
The clouds are gone, and I am over-blest,
A Fagots second fire is sometimes best.
Poor busy fools! walk fairly to your Graves,
Live long you cannot, you may dye to morrow;
Short stay a suitable decorum craves,
Temper your seriousness as well as sorrow.
THIRD PART.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1645.

This still let me Preface to the fair Philosophical Inclination.
PArdon the rather my inobservance to Method, for far more sublime and better
Authors have discovered as little order, and as much repetition; witness the
Collections of Marcus Aurelius, St. Augustines Confessions, and some of a
higher Class: If my aim and scope be good, and that I have with any force
and energie pursued it, out of the way of common and vulgar footsteps, accept;
if I have failed, excuse me, spare your labor, read and consider the less,
it is easy to forbear; you may otherwise become as little favorable to your
self and good intentions as unto me: If you catch me not at a word, at an
Epithet, you will often lose me and the best of my sense and matter: Wherefore
weigh, and either proceed or reject: Yet thus much know, that either Religion,
health, right reason, thrist, decency, true honor, moderation and morality are
nothing, or something I conceive I have written not unworthy your attention. If
you affect goodness in your self and others as good men do, you will not
scorn the very Essays and offers at it, in the way of prudentiall rules,
knowledge, and observations, howsoever imperfect: You may find, if I overween
not in the through course of these my preceding, and ensuing Sections, short
assertions, the fruit and quintessence of a long concocted experience, as
easy, useful, and advantageous to you, if you ruminate upon and digest them,
as they have been costly to me to attain, extract, and gather; especially if
you are young, and to seek, for to such is this address.

Crotesque.
MAN is to himself either the best or worst company, in the even ground of
solitariness the bowl works it self to a by as of good or bad resolutions, if
in this bivious world we take the right hand way, it is good for our selves and
others; but as children are apt to be left handed, so we: Nature is a cold
combatant against it self, you bid in vain a stone to mount, or fire to
descend, natural propensions must be supernaturally predominated: It is found
that most Soyles (and I believe it of all) how perverse or barren soever, have
within them at some reasonable distance a marne and manure to correct and
fertilize their mold, but industry and Art must extract and employ it. The
blessing of God must go to the finding and improving of his blessings upon us;
I intend not to discourse of our pronenesse to evil, and the difficulty of
virtue and piety, others have handled it at large, only I will say of my self,
that if I be not of a vicious inclination, it is Gods good grace and character
upon me. I know as well as another the advantages and easy ways of
dishonesty; I could hide my claws like a Cat, till I met with an opportunity
for mischief, I could transform my self into an Angel of light, and play the
Devil in my heart, but my ends, end not in my self. I confess every man loves
to walk on the ground of pleasure and delight, nor ought or can a
self-consideration and interest be excluded, Fancy must and will be humored;
some have imagined pleasure to consist in indolency and putting our selves out
of pain, by the satisfaction of our longings, but some delights are even
naturally and indiscoursively such, by the impression wherewith they surprise
and affect the senses inward and outward, they are indeed intended and exalted,
or remitted and extenuated according to the fancy and other circumstance, that
gives them entertainment: not only delights, but variety is necessary to humane
nature, many are so tempered and elemented, that not only seeming pleasures,
but such as are hot, full and hazardous are required by them, they must have
their load, and be put to their strength, or they find no relish. What is now
to be resolved* we exclusively usurp the reasonable form, if we use it not in
elections and moderation; I consider not my self in my naturals, as a savage,
which I might have been, but as I find my self, a civilized, a moralized
Christian, moderatour to my own disputations and actions. Drunkenness may be
pleasing, but is ugly, and exposes us to inconvenience and scorn: I will
endeavor to avoid that and the like, I will make a Harmony of discord,
reconcile Nature, Art, Religion, my own and others interest: This you will say
is a work, but it lies upon me, I drew it not upon my self, and I must comply
with my condition, I will bridle my appetites, and willingly give way only to
such contentments as are most cheap, clear, safe, and lasting, such as allow
me most mastery over my self, my ambition is to possess all, by desiring
nothing; if I can find contentment at home, I will not seek it abroad; I love
not to part with my freedom and power over my self, to exercise a conceited
power over others, such kind of spirit and power may be sweet, it may be
brave, the other I prefer as more firm, more sound; I can willingly forbear
the giving of ten blows, to avoid the taking of one, which consideration is
said to have established Justice, and by the same I will endeavor my quiet. A
private course is neither void of pleasure or variety; Place forces no man to
expense, but well chosen, gives as well change as cheapenesse of food and
pleasures, the same affections move in little as in greater creatures, and may
be entertained as well in a Country, as Court course of life, they who use to
play small game, can do it as seriously as others the greatest. Business is
many times rather a diversion then exercise of life, let us be never so
impatient, we cannot shake off our natural condition, if we could be
contented to be but our selves and soberly enjoy our selves, we should prove
better and easilier contented then we are. I will first improve my self and my
own to the best, before I make an alienation, I will be weary of my self,
before I pass my self away, I will not willingly subject my reason to my own,
much less to the fancy of others; there is motion enough to be exercised
within our proper locality without those excentriques and trepidations, wherein
many violate their own and natures Laws: it must be an exorbitant fantasy that
cannot entertain it self in its own Apogeums, and Perigeums, contemplation of
Heaven and Earth, and a conformity of action. If ever I affect farther, it must
be by a fair calling, and shall be with an affectation of others good more
then my own, or good, or fancy; I find few such Commissions granted, Cum
libera potestate, as would suit with my affections, we shall find enough to
do to make good our account in a private, much more in a public course;
power and gain, which are strong motives to other men, are too vain and sordid
to become my objects, quiet and good are my ends, as motion and gain theirs, my
disposition was never lazy or timorous; But I cannot deny a kind of restinesse
and Epicurisme in honest, sober self-pleasing and Idolatry; it must come fair
and walk fairly with me that will be mine and hold me. My wit and discourse
are no farther at my command then I approve my object and subject. Though I be
not Mercuriall, I resemble the Planet Mercury in this, that my conversation is
much according to the company. Every man has much of the Ape, much of the
Chameleon, much of the Parasite, too much of the Serpent and envy in him,
opportunity and necessity are strong Agents. I cannot speak half so well French
with an English as with a French man, nor exercise half so much freedom or
ingeniosity with a dull, common, or prevaricating, as a lively, generous, and
sincerely expressing spirit: I well endure not to sow my seed, but on good
ground, and expectation of a good return, nor to converse with such as are so
wedded to their own opinions, and full of themselves that there is no room or
indulgence for any other. I am as tender of giving the least distaste or
offense to another, as to my self; Though I love conformity, yet no more then
needs must to an absurd fashion, and not at all to a vicious temporizing. Here
you may find no small perplexity; Art is long, multiform, infinite, Nature
short-sighted, bounded, we are obnoxious to a world of cross indications and
reluctances; Art, and Inventions owe us a fair amends, for we suffer and are
confounded more then a little by them; were it in my power I would recompense,
restore, help, and piece out Nature by my Writings, but I fear, the best
Authors often more disguise and confound, then better and improve her: She
has, I confess, found some advantage from Invention, as appears in the
extent and multiplication of Perspective Glasses, Catacousticons, digesting our
Language to be conserved by writing, regulate and sublime observation in
Astronomy, and the course of the Heavens, as the Ephemerides, and exact
prediction of Eclipses do witness, but how well she might have subsisted and
walked without a Jacobs staff, and these helps let others discourse, I
acknowledge them much better then the invention of high heels, head dresses,
and training Gowns, etc. But may it not be a shame to Art, that all this while
it has not taught us to fly (and for swimming, we are rather dis-taught by
our Discourse) and that cutting down and destroying great Trees upon otherwise
barren soyles, it is not able to teach them to bring forth Corn and inferior
Plants: Fancy, and the Melancholy humor, are great Inventors, but as the
Melancholique humor breeds an Appetite, so does it ordinarily hinder
digestion; a stomach that surchargeth it self with variety, digesteth ill, and
breeds crudities; It is hard to make a just concoction and distribution of our
unnatural superinductions. The craftier sort of people strip themselves of
such clogs and encumbrances, and insist too often in a corrupt and unreformed
nature. They look upon God (if at all) no farther then they find him in
Nature, and in his Works, they pass over his supernatural revealed Word and
will, as wanting the eye of Faith to discern it, and either question the
recommended interpretation, or wrest it to their own sense and interest, they
admit no Law but their own Nature, and worldly and sensual advantage; No man
can know God and his will, and contemn or slight it; But Religion, like Nature
and the Senses, is indemonstrable, because nothing proportions unto it. Every
man frames God unto himself, such as either his grace or our own
interpretation and sense deliver him unto us. If our Divines were either so
consonant in their interpretations or lives, as were requisite, we should
become better Christians then we are. His will would not be so indifferent to
us, nor would we conceive him so indifferent as many do to our wills and
actions; Excepting Religion all other knowledge is so painful to attain, and
so troubled and muddy when we come to stir the bottom, that the game is
hardly worth the Candle; God of his great mercy enlighten us and mend us. Amen.

August the 2. 1638.
To my best Clergy friend in relation to the best among us.
IT proves according to your conceit for this my farther writing, I affirmed
to you as I then thought that nothing lay upon me requiring farther vent. In
truth for the particular which I now fall upon, it has been long since in my
affections to write something therein, but the tenderness and daintiness of
the matter, and censuring ticklishnesse of the time withheld me; possibly I
have been too pusillanimously injurious to truth and ingenuitie, too much
misdoubting my own strength, and over prejudicate upon superiors in such
restraint. Religion, as it now stands betwixt us and the Papists, is the
subject. There have not been wanting on the one side some who out of a Romish
presumptuous and overflattering disposition, and on the other, some, who out of
a Scottish jealousy and distrust, have over-boldly apprehended (if not
concluded) that both our King and many of our Bishops are against their own
and our good and quiet too much affected that way. I have formerly understood
from you your opinion to the contrary, and that grounded upon sound reason, and
mine has run with yours; None should prove so great losers by such a change
as our King and Archbishop of Canterbury, and they are both of them too wise
and sensible of their own power, freedom and splendour ever to consent to
reenthrall themselves to those great usurpations and abuses which the Monarch
of Rome exercises over such Princes and States as acknowledge him. It is
little that we of inferior calling should suffer under him, in respect of the
continual reluctance wherein they would find themselves plunged. Our King and
State enjoy now that happy freedom which has cost others full dear to have
attained and have failed in their endeavors. Yet a King of France is mighty
even in the Court of Rome, so far as to bandy against the Spanish faction,
which is commonly great enough to be troublesome to the Pope himself. The
power of all other Princes and States are petty Planets in comparison of these,
of so little sway and eminency that their influence and operation is very
little more, then as they side, adhere, and involve themselves to the others
interest. Our King is now one of the most free and eminent of Christendom, nor
can there be the least just fear that his wisdom and spirit upon whatsoever
Antipuritan suggestion can consent to bring over himself an unbridled and
unlimited jurisdiction and controller. The usurped vicegerency of the Pope as
God on earth is too imcompatible with the just temporal power of Kings, to be
willingly admitted. The strained gross and injurious pretenses of the Roman
Church have been too clearly detected, and Christian rights and truths too
strongly vindicated to relapse to former delusions; whatsoever future
remissness and indulgency the Pope may pretend, nunquam ligat sibi manus, there
can be no security against him, and naturally (as well as for their pretended
truth and uniformity) they will ever tend to recover their losses and pristine
authority. Many carry a reverend respect to that Church more out of a
contemplation of what primitively they were and now should be, then what they
long have been, now are, and are likely to continue. Unity in truth and
sincere Religion were indeed above all things to be wished, as nothing is more
to be avoided and abhorred then falsehood, prevarication and imposture.
Whatsoever pretext of policy and devotion there may seem to be in part of
their discipline and Tenants; certainly there is little Christian wisdom and
less devotion, to admit corruption and falsehood upon any policy; Gods truth
stands not in need of our simulation and lies: a discovered Woolfe and
Impostor, let his clothing be what it list, shall never deceive me, and in a
sincere way I can almost as easily consent to be of no formal Religion, as of
a false one. But they will tell some of the wittiest amongst us that there is
no assurance, no alacrity in a Calvinist spirit. Indeed their Clergy is very
kind in charging their own souls to seem to ease ours by an implicit faith
and absolution; If I were to choose a religion for my ease and liberty it
should be theirs, but I know too much of Religion and them to be of that mind,
I cannot but make use of my own eyes in a way that so much imports me, nor
can I yield to resign them God requires the reading of the Scriptures, for
they t^stifie of him, and by the same reason ill Clergy men forbid them.
at their request. Now as it is my prayer, so will I endeavor to retain a
confidence against such apprehension, and will persevere with you as well to
judge as hope the best. This discourse though I am more unfit for it then it
for me, I have adventured upon in full discharge of my heart and soul, nor
will I forget to put you clergy men into my prayers; for next to Christ and the
King, from your sincerity of doctrine, spirit and life, must flow our peace,
happiness and salvation. If you preach Christ more then your selves and teach
inward more then outward holiness, we shall learn from you to become more
truly Christian then hypocritically pharisaicall, you may otherwise confound
and ruin your selves and us, from which mischief and misery may it please our
merciful God and Savior to deliver us. Amen, Amen

September. 5. 1638.
Habitual virtue insuperable.
THere is an admirable communication and intelligence as well as league and
Colligence between the body and soul. They Act the one upon the other, they
suffer the one from the other, sometimes the one, sometimes the other leads the
dance; If the mind be sad, the body is heavy, if rejoiced, active; and so
contrariwise the sickness of the body dejects the mind, and health gives it
alacrity. The Economy of the bodies concoction and faculties is disturbed and
hindered by the trouble of the mind. So is the working of Physic. Only the
virtuous temper of the soul maintains it self incorruptible and firm, in
despite of all bodily infirmity and distemper. A mind habituated to valor and
virtue will never degenerate to cowardice and baseness from its ingenit and
natural Character. The body may incline, it cannot compel: it offers to lead,
it forces not to follow; in our dreams a wellconfirmed mind maintains it
self against vicious transportations; Yet may the state and temper of the body
be much conjectured from our roving and raving fantasies in our sleep or
sickness. Rheum, Choler, and Melancholy may be concluded from waterish,
fiery, or dismal representations, or the intention and abatement of a
paroxysme and disease from the suitable pleasing or unpleasing impressions and
objects whereby they will find means to impart themselves unto us. (I speak
upon experience) in the malignitie of a fit or humor, we are full of
perturbation, difficulty, and unluckinesse, in the decrease all goes fair and
prosperous. More wonderful are the influences and impulsions of God upon the
soul, such as are rather to be felt then related, they are unexpressible and
indemonstrable. The leadings, the withholdings, the comforts, the relievings,
the deliverances, how sweet? how incomparable? Our spirits are nothing but as
inspired from him. He is the incomprehensible Spirit of spirits and the world,
the giver and ruler of our thoughts. True joy has no other Spring or Center.
He is the uniter, consolidator and commune viuculum of soul and body, the
heavens and the earth, the elements and universe. No creature is more indebted
to his favor then my self. I shall be happy if he please to continue me
thankful, and exempt from abusing it. Which that I may not do in further
prosecuting this insatiable humor of writing, I resolve by his good grace and
assistance to make this my piece of farewell. I know how short I come in
matter, how short of what my self could write, I will not too much presume of
his mercy and my own strength and ordinary preservatives. Subjects of writings
are as various and endless as obscure. If you will read the Schoolmen, or
more full and Divine writings of our present Bishop of Salisbury upon original
and actual justice, it will abate our presumption, and discover so the vast
perplexed intricacy and nature of things and questions unto us, as will beget a
modesty and restraint as well to our contentious discourse as scribbling. God
has put me as well into a way of health for my body as my soul, if I wrong
not the one by the other. He has cleared my mists and confusion by the
Sunshine of his grace. God make me constant to my self and him. Amen, Amen.

Postcript.
To make me also the rather consent to withdraw my self, I find that already
in my wild diversity, I have fallen upon so many notions, that for the most
part, that I now take up is apt to enterfere with what I have formerly touched,
and the very avoiding would become near as troublesome as the delivering of my
self.

September. the 28. 1638. If to be temperate and good it is hard,
Will easy is, and seldom fails reward.
But who nor is, nor goes about to be,
Shame may he reap, his vices proper Fee.


Sweetness of Goodness.
Were the world as fit to hear as I durst be free to communicate my most
secret thoughts, I could and possibly would use another manner of opennesse
then I do; I often appear profuse in respect of others, when I am reserved in
respect of my self; I am full of vanity and error, yet such as a good man
and Christian may, and for the most part must undergo, though not approve;
Absolution must proceed from God, and he alone is idoneous for an entire and
unreserved confession: I have abounded in an exorbitant fancy, passion, and
infirmity. Some men account tenderness of conscience, a silly weakness of
mind, I make it my glory as they their shame. It was impossible for me to come
off from so long a wrestle with God, and not to bear his marks: I am none of
the miraculous three Children to come out of the Furnace and not have my body
and garments savor of the fire. Such a conquest and obduration had been my
souls loss, and would manifest it self in such a profligate wickedness as I
hope shall never be mine; If I be not totally reformed and refined, yet as
far as the condition of a frail passenger admits, I will as well endeavor as
hope to give proof of a bettering in my affections. He is an evil Scholar
to God and the world, who learns not to improve his talent, they both expect
from us according to what we pretend and have, not according to what we make
no show of nor possess: he carries a great load who has charged himself
with a great expectation, whether in virtue, curiosity, expense, or
oftentation of knowledge; a little wit, money, or goodness, with humility,
sobriety, and well managing will go far, and often find better ease,
plenty and acceptance, then a greater abounding. I would be sorry not to have
improved my experience to such a Regulation of expense and affections as to be
able and as well pleased in shortning the one, as stretching out the other
beyond a Novice or common course. Time is an excellent Shoolemaster of Lezany,
and ought to be of piety, good improvement in any kind is one of the sweetest
pleasures to a good mind, and it is one of the most happy conditions and
nearest to God, to actuate a power of beneficence. The greatest felicity of
Princes, is their power to do good; there is nothing more easy with Gods
blessing then for a King and people to flourish in honor and welfare; the more
miserable is the consideration that such power should so often miscarry by
falling into either unskilful or ill affected hands; Immense and infinite are
the good effects of a power judiciously and constantly well employed; If the
fortune of private men in a constant way of thrift and course succeeds as we
often see, what will good order and industry produce in a State and Kingdom?
If we were as intent to provide remedies for public as private defaults and
inconveniences, Plenty, Justice, Honor, safety, strength, and the contentment
of good men would flourish in the world more then they do it shall recompense
all improsperitie in my self if I may see prosperity in the service of God,
my King, and Country; As he is good, may his Counsel be such and we are happy.
Age is a disease and breeds a morositie, years and experience of good and bad,
right and wrong, have made me nice and hard to please, whether in diet,
conversation, or good order, we have much ado to become pleased in our
selves, as much in others. It is a discourse that has been taken up against
marriage, I have felt and could say much therein, but it is a jarring string;
the best of us are clogs and remora's to our selves, much more to others; we
cannot the best of us be so good as we would and should, I will yet wish well
to others and be as good as I can. Curantem quicquid dignum sapiente bonoque
est, is that I affect to find in my self and others. Morality leads us to
fair grounds, Christianity to the best and soundest; It were well if we
could be constant to either without being at every turn of fear, hope, fancy,
and our own false appearing and flattering advantage, shaken in our
resolutions, and abandoning God, Religion and goodness. But alas, we call
upon many men to be good, and to be wise, who have it not in their power; they
want a conformation and temper of parts, they have Laesaprincipia, vitiosa
praecordia; It is proper to God alone to be exempt from error and frailty.
Many men err by inconsideration and want of Judgment, many by following their
inclination and judgment, in nature right, but wanting experience or
supernatural illumination and grace; the first are wholly in the dark, the
second want the true light, the first want judgment as well to Many of us must
seele our errors before we see them, not ever then; we will blame fortune or
somewhat else rather than our selves.
correct and recollect as at first to discern and design, the second want not
discourse and understanding, but first suffer it to be overcast by their
carelessness, sensuality and affections; the first suffer in their frame, the
second in disease, and distemper: no wonder if the first be incorrigible, they
are blind and have it not in them, the other have, but sometimes cannot go
about to find it, and sometimes will not use it. Though to me error has ever
been essential, yet at the worst have I never been so dissolute as to enthrall
my self to the tyranny of any delight, vicious, or other, I have in truth been
such a Sceptique as not to have been sure in so much as what was my pleasure, I
have brought it to the rest of reason, and judged common delights too base and
bestiall for a cultivated soul. But why was not I more scepticall against
course of reason, then pleasure, which seems to admit of least doubt and
dispute? reason is indeed too multiforme, fancy, interest, preoccupation,
misunderstanding sway it too much, yet not so far, but this conclusion may be
raised. Experimental and natural consequences must be acknowledged, and they
who order their courses and actions with least prejudice to themselves in
either present or future respect may be termed the wisest. But to
distinguish, to restrain according to truth and realitie, Hic labor hoc opus.
God and nature must and will be our leaders; God originally, Nature
instrumentally; fantasy and discourse are pieces of Nature, and well
instructed, well habituated may overruled her. Perfection of soul consists in
found understanding and affections, in conceiving and affecting our selves and
other things in due measure and as we ought; Regulation and moderation are the
great business, right understanding begets them, and power in them our
practice, God, Justice, Honor rooted in and seasoning our souls will have an
influence into, and steer our course and actions; Beauty is not fair, nor
received pleasures sweet, but as they insinuate themselves and comply with our
predisposed Fancy, which gives them their relish and tincture. Great and
eminent beauties and Physicians are idly supercilious toward such as regard
them not; their operation exists much in our conceit; they are much beholding
to Princes and others who subject themselves to their power of life, death, and
torture over them, our weakness is their strength and credit. But here by
Gods grace I leave this fruitless Labyrinth of writing, humbly begging his
helping hand which only can assist and di^rect me, and has never failed to
support me. Amen, Amen.

November. the 10. 1638.
THough I miss of your company in the vast cloud and press of this Town, yet
I cannot forget you, nay such is the difference that I find betwixt yours and
common conversations, that I want you the more by enjoying of them, and like a
true piece of goodness discern you the more by wanting you: Gratitude must
never grow old, and some bruises and hurts are of a nature to renew and refresh
their sense, by inward or outward accident, even till our deaths; that quality
has, since I saw and writ unto you, produced these little resentments which
now I send you. It is a year of mourning, and mine is long since double-dyed,
death and sickness are grown a common conversation, and have alone of late
been mine, excepting the diversion which I have received by a continual load
of most importunate and vexatious trouble; my is also dangerously relapsed into
the disease of the time, carelessness, presumption, impatience, and a
treacherous indulgence to his own humors (our common reigning maladies) have
been the cause: We are of late so out of our wits that our very mother wit of
keeping our selves warm fails both in our mothers and us: By natural heat
we live, want of clothes, want of cherishing it makes us all suffer: Though
you know my mind concerning Physicians, yet such is their Ius acquisitum that
my son is under their jurisdiction, God send it to his good, cold taken upon
Physic has cast him down. I have been present at their Anatomicall discourse
of his distemper, danger and cure, excellent terms to amuse and amase the
credulous ignorant, enough to work a cure by the enchantment and charm of
their words and language. Yet I cannot but compare it to a Rope-dancer whom I
have seen do his tricks, and show his Art in a Sack, if his footing were
right, good, if other, hazard for a neck or limb: But here if their learned
blindness mistake, the poor paying Patient must suffer. It is just that they
who cannot govern themselves should be ruled by others often worse. These and
more evils must we suffer, as it is in the 14. Chap. of the book of Wisdom,
Verse the 22. from the wars of theirs and our ignorance. A word or two less
would have ended with the bottom of the page, but howsoever I end well if you
continue and accept me.

Your faithful Friend and Servant.
November 12. 1638.
The Shepherd, Sheep, and Wolf.
MY true fair-minded Friend; I believe you now in labor to Preach and mend the
vicious world, I also wish, but little hope to do it by writing; you sow, and
I write in the Sand, we both dwell at the sign of the Labor in vain, the
More will not change his hew, nor the Leopards their spots, they cannot, nay
they would not, you shall not persuade them they are blemishes no more then the
Lady her affected patches on her face, they are in fashion and appear fair in
their own eyes, as every man's way and pleasure to himself: we may lament one
another endeavors, others will deride us, or possibly, some will be so good as
say, Well said, well writ, and as they use their feasts, eat, and forget; the
sober diet breeds the better nourishment, example is the better Teacher, but it
must be numerous to prevail; Virtue is grown but a name, and that neither
well understood nor agreed on; Some honest men there are, Rari nantes in
gurgite vasto, they may make much of themselves, and wrap themselves in their
own virtue, a habit God knows out of fashion, they are fitter for Cloisters
then the worlds traffic, and like square playing Gamesters shall be sure to
be made a prey and sit down by the loss; their strong constitution may resist
the corruption of the times, they shall not alter them, their innocence shall
have as little power (howsoever commended) as fresh waters upon the Seas
saltness, the worlds antiperistasis may better them, not they the world. But
how comes it that so few are honest? is it that perfection must be as rare and
hard in Nature as in Art? is it that our artificial confused meat and drink
infect our bodies, and they our souls? is it the perniciousnesse of example in
great and powerful persons, who sway the times and seldom originally attain
to riches, honors, and greatness by just and honest ways? Or is it that as
some species of creatures are of a perverse and evil nature, such as live by
rapine and destruction; such as Apes, Wolves, etc. so man is naturally of a
mischievous kind? if so, them may a good natured man be esteemed a Monster, and
rather an error then perfection of Nature: Is it these, or is it not rather the
corruption of our minds and affections by having changed and perverted Nature
from her first purity, into Artificial fancy and affectation of enthralling
others and enriching our selves? So that as women are in respect of their
attire, often the least part of themselves, the like may be said of man in the
disguise of the mind: So it is, and such punishment is deserved in our
desertion and rebellion against God and Nature. We are one another scourges,
we are scourges to our selves. If you and I and others are rather Sheep then
Wolves, let us thank God whose grace it is; let us cloathe our selves in our
own wool, short Pasture will content us for food, little drink more then the
dew of Heaven; Thither let us tend toward him whose mark we bear, the great
Shepherd of our Souls: Let Wolves be wolves, whilst he is our Shepherd, and
his good Angels our guard, we are safe and happy now and forever; let the
wolves of this world, the Loup-garrons, the mankind wolves devour what they
can, they shall devour but what they can, most commonly one another: There are
so few of us, they would else want meat, though their rage be great, their time
is short, our comforts are sweeter, more permanent: as much as they contemn us,
they are content to make use of our clothing; they reckon us foolish Martyrs,
of a foolish Philosophy, and we them beasts of a foul deformity. They are
ugly to God, ugly to goodness, often ugly to one another, and ugly to
themselves, especially when affliction, sickness, and infirmity lets loose
that Band-dog, Conscience, upon them, which they had formerly in their
prosperity tied up and kept in darkness and sleep; hating and hated,
flattering themselves with strong delusions, to one another torture for the
present, and eternal torment hereafter I leave them, committing you and all
good men, the Sheep of God, to his inviolable, infallible protection. Amen,
Amen.

November 14. 1638.
NO wonder if a perverse nature use perverse and crooked ways, a Serpent
cannot go right, craft is the evil man's instrument to evil ends, as cunning
is sometimes necessary to good men for good purposes; evil men are in the
dark, they are blind to true virtue and charity, their works are works of
darkness, and their ways accordingly: it is the glory of discreet power, in
goodness to walk fairly, and choose the open safe and fair way, where others
how ever powerful, needlessly encumber and bemire themselves in briars and
bogges. As I have often said, it is a sweet thing to see knaves miscarry, and
play the fools, as commonly they do: they, like the Woodcock, think
themselves more concealed then they are, as much unduly overweening themselves,
as undervaluing others. I never knew a fool without some kind of craft, nor a
wise man affect it.

MY second Father, Brother, and spirit of comfort, thus yet I am so happy as to
converse with you in absence; it is a piece of my misfortune to be at so great
a distance from you in the same Town; my late, long, and hasty walk unto you,
endangered a distemper and sickness upon me, but as burning with burning, so
evil of exercise with exercise is cured. Natural contemperament, and heat,
strength, goodness and sweetness of nature and supernatural grace, excited
and maintained, I find the best companions and Physicians of body and soul;
you are witness how necessary they have been of late unto me in the sorrows
and troubles I have undergone. I thank you for your visit and spiritual
comfort you imparted to my relapsed Son, he still needs it, he has not
wanted natural heat and courage; temper, moderation, and a well concocted
discourse, as well as a through digestion to some peccant humors of his body, I
fear he does: Time, and conflict with evils have not confirmed and wrought
upon him, exchange of liberty, health, and pleasures, for disease, restraint,
and pain, with an apprehensive contemplation of imminent death this mortal
year, work a melancholic dejection upon his mind, and meeting with his
infirmity, appear at this time his greatest danger. A little ease, strength,
and alacrity of spirits, animate his natural presumption to his harm, and a
little cloud overcasting him, as much exanimates. If God had not furnished me
with as strong a resolution to flight, as I have ever been apt to apprehend the
worst events, I had a thousand times miscarryed; there is no slavery like the
fear of death, no bravery like the contempt of the world and fortune; I have
lost possessions, friends, brothers, children, but I have found God and have
not lost my self; I have sowed kindness, and reaped dis-respect, my good
intentions, charity, resolution and the grace of God are my reward and
ever-relieving cordials. I seek not my self abroad, nor judge my self or others
by the success, others weakness and distempers shall not be mine, it shall
rather fortify and recollect me; if my exuberance of natural heat and fancy
breed my inconvenience, I can make an oil of the same Scorpion to help me; not
to have too much, is not to have enough; Aliquid amputandum, is the best
constitution, luxuriance of Nature is the longest laster, at least if violence
accident, and over-bold, indiscreet Whereunto it is too frequently propense.
adventure intercept it not; heat is the vehicul^m of virtue, hot natured
plants have the strongest faculties, and braveliest resist the vigor and
extremity of weather and Winter. Thus I play the Peddler with you, to you I open
my pack of small wares; to the world I durst, but will not, they would but pry
and smile and scorn; not buy to use, to wear and make their own: You find
here a great deal of trash, but no trumpery, many bables and toys, yet some
Gloves to wear, Knives to cut, Linen to adorn, cover, and keep warm,
Looking-glasses to see and order your self; Pedlers are not ever unwelcome,
sometimes they are required, at least let my good will make not unwelcome unto
you this my good morrow. Yet to go a little further, and end where I begun:
There is a happy and just use to be made of natural heat, of our selves, and
of Gods creatures, instituted, as Oil, for cheerfulness of countenance; and
Wine, to rejoice the heart of man; that use to find, that to practice without
declining either to excess, or fantastical superstition and rigidity of
humane Sophistry, prevarication and error, is that we ought to endeavor and
pray for in the discreet exercise of a good conscience, which God grant us,
Amen.

November 17. 1638.
THus you see, Animal vigilans semper laborat, some more remiss, some more
intense, according to the activity of their spirits and occasions, but my
voyage is well past over, and I will not spread my sails to every wind, I
will be a stone to my self, against the wings of my thoughts, sedation shall be
my affectation, I will spare my fuel and rake up my fire, let them make
public bonfires, and ring their Bells to warm and sport the world, who find
matter and joy to publish, mine is inward and shall serve my self till
opportunity concur; accept in good part with your wonted favor, this my
pastime account and register, never intended for a work, or piece of worth.
Farewell.

Souls must have objects; strong, high-relished;
The strongest, filling, fair, and permanent;
Such is Gods love, wherewith not nourished
Earthly and base must be their nutriment.
No other love can defecate a soul,
From wallowing in delights base, empty, foul.
THou Lord, who first did nip me in the bud,
From time to time do humble me,
Lest I should sin by height of blood,
And love the world more then the love of thee.
I gratulate thy favor, confident,
That so thou do my soul preserve,
To be a well-tuned instrument,
To sound thy praise, and thy decrees to serve*
Nor will I envy this man's wantonness,
His honor, or the others wealth:
Esteeming nothing happiness,
But to possess a soul in heavenly health.
All other joys infatuate the mind,
Feeding it with a false content:
Oh let me still thy favor find,
To keep me thine, I grudge no chastisement.
Moderate health and fortune are the best,
A little fire close set unto,
And heat sufficient to digest
Do the same things that more abounding do.
The more we have the more we still presume,
Disordred minds good states abuse,
The highest spirits most consume,
May I have nothing more then grace to use.
Great Farms are seldom duly husbanded,
Rank grounds abound in noisome weeds:
Wolves, Foxes, Goats, in wastes are bred,
He feeds more foes then Friends who many feeds.
THough Friends be absent, conversation lost,
My bating Soul often laboring in it self,
By winds and fortune on the black Sea tossed,
Thou present, Lord, I fear nor wave nor shelf.
Thou Father, Brother art, and Friends to me;
Be the world whose it list, so thou be mine,
They never miscarry who rely on thee;
Grace storms dispels more strong then they combine.
All thrives, where thou the pruning Gardner art;
To thy Plants, blastings frugall blessings prove;
Though Summer height and flourishing impart,
Winter gives strength and Timber to the Grove.
To thine, all sufferings end in joy and rest,
And th'absence of a wicked world is best.
EAse, handsomnesse, nor profit it is to tread
Your shoe awry: like may of vice be said;
It Is ever best to live and walk upright,
Things crooked grown, hardly return to right:
May I enjoy a fair and quiet mind,
Souls work like troubled Seas, long after wind.
GOdly content and quiet of the mind,
Constitute happiness resembling Heaven,
Where souls nor strife, nor thirst of action find,
Reluctance is conquered, all goes even:
Virtue it self untroubled must proceed,
However its Acts miscarry, or succeed.
Devotions.
Et quoniam Deus ora movet,
Sequar ora moventem.
Introduction.
DIvinest Herberts Soul, Upon Mr. Herberts true Hymn. p. 162.
daign that I join
In Hymns accorded to the heart by thine,
Unto our Masters glory, and admit
Me for a Rival in thy height of love:
For though thy lofty flight be far above
My creeping Muse in spirit, verse, and wit;
My love both may, and ought, thy love exceed,
Since greatest pardons, greatest love do breed.
Thus living, sing we, (Swan-like singing dye)
His Panegyric, our own Elegy:
Others, I hope, will come and bear a part,
To hide my want of voice, my want of Art.
Corona.
Alphabeticall, in imitation of the 119 Psalm.
AWay unhallowed spirits, fleshly borne,
Unto the second birth these lines belong,
Your eyes are full of lust, your hearts of scorn,
You cannot taste a supernatur'd song.
When in Gods furnace you shall prove refined,
Divinely transubstantiate from above:
Your Souls contrite, your stony hearts calcined,
And him propound sole object of your love;
Then shall my inspirations find applause,
And penetrate your souls as well as mine:
Then will you find them both your meat and sauce,
And warm your spirits at such beams Divine.
God knows what preparations I have past,
Often broken with this Plough to kill my weeds,
Down melted, in a new mould to be cast,
Macerate, fettered, fitted for new seeds.
When his magnetique virtue draws, you come;
Till then, to what I write, be blind, deaf, dumb.
Blessed Founder of this earthly Hospital,
Sole, daily Benefactor to mankind:
Lord Paramount of Lords, of Kings and all,
Soul of our Souls, controller of the mind,
Transcendent Essence, dazzling more our sight,
Then Sunbeams Owls, harder to comprehend,
Then it is for Ants to judge, and reason right
Of men, and know whereto their counsels tend.
Thou who giv'st Faith, and Grace spiritual,
Hearts happiest Center, food, and notion;
Who truly art what falsely we do call,
Instinct, or Nature, Father of motion;
Inspire my soul, my spirit animate,
Thy working power and glory to express,
That these my lines may partly expiate
My lives and pens past errors, and impresse
Thy stamp divine upon my readers heart
Assisted by thy holy Spirits Art.
Contemn not Lord this humble sacrifice,
This Incense from the censor of my heart;
Heart, which thy quickening Spirit mortifies
To live and die to thee a true convert.
As in my heart, so flow into my style,
Untie, tune, clear my soul, that I may sing
Thy saving grace and prove most happy while
I may one sparkle to thy glory bring.
None but a power Almighty could create,
Yet greater wonder our redemption was,
Nor goes less mercy to regenerate,
That work nor consummate nor Sabbath has.
To live fresh fishes in this briny Sea,
To swim by faith against strong natures stream,
Beyond our reason and our eyes to see,
And make thy soul transporting love our theme;
This Antedates the sweet fruition
Of thy most beatifique vision.
Dispense O Lord that I polluted, lame,
Presume thy power and mercies to display;
Thy Priest should perfect be and free from blame,
But thy projection works on base allay
The greatest graces, thou have summoned all
Thy creatures to thy praise, their rent to pay:
Nor can I choose but answer to thy call,
Accountable for mercies more then they.
But yet (alas!) what fruit can I expect
From these far short of lines Apocryphal,
Since thine own dictates find so small effect,
And Isralites proved hypocritical?
Yes, thou have wonders wrought on me and can
By thy assistance so my labors bless,
Some one at least by me may be advanced
To feel thy Spirits motion, and redress
The course of sin, which flesh cannot withstand,
Without the succor of thy sacred hand.
ERect (O Lord) thy Trophies in my Verse,
Confound with shame the Idolatrizing Muse,
Teach such with me thy praises to rehearse,
It Is better write to save then to seduce.
Teach them thy beauty, riches, thou who art
Riches and beauties donor, clear their eyes
To admire the virtues which thou do impart
To the rich furnished earth and gilded skies.
Thou needst no strained conceits nor figures, such,
As they employ to show wit and give grace,
Thou their Hyperbole's exceed'st so much,
They faint to see invention wants a place.
Oh that my Verse like Aarons rod had power
To overcharme, what those inchanters sing,
And all their strong illusions to devour,
Or like the Brazen Serpent cure their sting:
Then might my Muse triumphant Laurel wear,
Endu'd with grace no thunder blasts to fear.
FAther of beauty, goodness, power and love,
Virtue of virtues, spring of eloquence,
By whom alone we are, we live and move
And exercise a happy confidence.
Whose love to us made thee evacuate
Thy self and glory frailty to put on,
Frailty to hunger, die, degenerate
To man in all but his corruption.
Oh let thy love like love in us procure,
And teach us to deny our selves for thee;
Change, which to thee was loss, will be our cure,
Thy hunger food, thy death our life will be.
Teach us to love and we shall learn to write,
In Characters of love our hearts will flow,
Love chafes benumbed spirits to endite,
And ever carries light 'its flames to show.
Make me, Oh Lord to thee a perfect lover,
And love will both it self and thee discover:
No wonder else if we prove dull to write,
For it is a wonder Lord, to love thee right.
GRieve Oh my heart, grieve that thou can not grieve,
Grieve that thy streams flow counter to thy will,
Grieve that thy frail propensions still survive,
And thy intemperate nature swayes thee still.
Shame oh my soul, oh shame to see thy shame,
Shame that nor faith nor reason can prevail,
Shame that thou know most savage things to came,
And that thy Art upon thy self does fail.
Suffer thou do and justly suffer too,
In self offending, will thou still befoole
Thy self in doing what thou should not do,
And non-proficient prove in thy own school?
Yes Lord, it will be so, except thy grace
Continually prevent, preside, restrain;
In thy least absence nature will take place,
Nor can against it self it self contain.
Children from Nurses are nor safe nor quiet,
Without thee, soul nor body, can keep diet;
Destroy Oh Lord what foments our annoy,
Or wild presumption will our health destroy.
HEaven were thou no reward, Hell but a tale,
Religion but a waking dream begot,
Twixt policy and fancy to prevail
Over frail flesh and hopes and fears besot;
Were conscience but a brat of Arts begetting,
As real in 'its falsehood as in truth,
A homespun stuff as false wrought as self fretting,
A brand imposed upon our tender youth;
Yet has it pleased my Lord to manifest
So palpably his self and love to me;
Were nature richer, sweeter, I Will divest
And strip my self of all for love of thee.
None more then I th'erroneous print can read,
Of melancholy and superstition,
Nor better all their subtle steps untread,
Distinguishing between Text and Tradition:
Believe me, more has gone me to convert,
Then either wit or nature can pervert.
HAbituate maladies are hardly cured,
Relaps proves often mortal, worst in sin,
To me relapsed often and to sin inured,
Strange has thy mercy, Lord, and patience been.
Insolvable I am for such great grace,
Yet I ambitious am to make return,
What most is mine and others most embrace,
In grateful sacrifice to thee I burn.
Obedience, Temperance I here profess,
Worldly delights and wealth I abdicate,
No fettered votary yet never the less
My self to thee I freely consecrate.
Power, honor, riches, pleasures sensual,
The Idols which the world does most adore,
I flight as much, and so I master all,
That others creep to: Nothing I implore
Lord, but thy grace; in that more pleasure rests,
Then all the base delights that flesh suggests.
IMagination, what thou can produce
By thy prolisique pregnant faculty,
Is a discourse as subtle as abstruse,
How thy own species thou do multiply.
In what great distance, secret sympathy,
Through air or spirits thou act'st on things remote,
I cannot say with perspicuitie,
Nor how thy impertitions are begot.
Distempers and conceits do verify,
Strong fancied objects outwardly appear,
Paying in opticall realitie,
The intromissions of the impregnat Air.
Wo^ke then my faith by thy great energy,
Faith upon others warm with charity,
The coldness of the times to fructify,
By its diffusive virtuous quality;
Rise Lord and sympathetically incline
To turn to thee, thy enemies and mine.
KNowledge is sweet and bitter, fair and lame,
A great impotor, body framed of Air,
A chatting, flattering and self-painted Dame,
More in conceit then real beauty fair.
How justly could I raise a mutiny,
Against our self-deceivings, till I find
Our errors are not worth the scrutiny,
Nor truths true subjects of a sensual mind.
God found us in our loss and selfe-bred storms,
And with his light his Port exhibited,
Us to disbryer crowned himself with thorns,
And made us rich in wares prohibited.
Forbear: believe and love is all he craves,
All other knowledge is as false, as vain,
We fool our selves, and make our selves true slaves
To our false dotage, faith alone is gain.
Thy constant love oh Lord is all my aim,
All other affectations I disclaim.
LOrd, I desire my contract to make good,
What e're befalls should I a loser prove,
How e're things pass as they are understood,
We cannot lose, if we can say we love.
Though as we fear, Psalm. 90. v. 11.
so thou should prove offended,
Though vicious longings satisfied would cure,
Though I could seize what fancy e're pretended,
Yet would I stoop to nothing but thy lure.
Charm what thou can false world, deaf is my ear,
Thou Lord alone can fill my greedy heart,
No other object have my hopes or fear,
Nature adieu, for I will live by Art.
Lord make me Master in thy Arts divine,
That this worlds Sophistry I may elude,
Could I as well demonstrate as define
Solve as distinguish, vice should not obtrude
It self for virtue; I would make appear,
The height of pleasure is thy love and fear.
MY self converted (Lord) as thou have willed,
Others I would confirm and draw to thee,
That here more perfect, though not yet fulfilled,
Thy Laws obedience and our joys might be.
My sins and sufferings my compassion breed,
To see souls not malign bewitched by sin,
Let thy wounds Sympathy make their hearts bleed,
Knock hard O Lord, and they will let thee in.
Their souls have cost thee all as dear as mine,
Vouchsafe that they may equal favor find,
Had thou not forced me I had never been thine,
Open their eyes or they must still be blind.
But Lord thy will be done, best time thou know,
Thy justice or thy mercies to impart,
Thou ever in thy favors overflowest,
Thy justice keep for the malicious heart:
Charity binds us to seek others good,
How e're thy will and grace have firmly stood.
NOr Cynthia Stars, nor Roses Violets,
Nightingales Wrens, nor our heart-charming Queen
Can so surpass the vulgar delicates,
That shine and are in trivial beauties seen;
As do thy pleasures, Lord, the worlds delights,
Which seem to feed, but leave us hungry still,
Suggesting false distracted appetites,
Which satisfied with gall and wind do fill.
Poor flattering fading pleasures sweet to none,
But grovelling Palats, Bubles of the mind,
Compared with them you show how short you come
By the discountenanced guilty shame you find.
As is the Galaxia in the skies,
A light from many hidden lights proceeding,
Such constant confluence of joy does rise,
From Gods sweet influence of grace succeeding:
Lord guide me in a refluence to thee,
And worldly affluence my scorn shall be.
OH Lord I know I may be thought to sing
Triumph before full victory obtained,
But since thy pardon has vouchsafed to bring
Me to thy feast of conscience unstained,
I nothing doubt mercy complete to find:
Why then my soul art thou perplexed still?
Stere clear (O Lord) and pacify my mind,
Since thee to celebrate is all my will.
But my extent it does too far exceed,
To tell the wonders thou have wrought for me:
Accept oh Lord endeavor for the deed,
My best expressions must come short of thee.
Then rest my soul, repose in God alone,
He is thy countenance helper, and thy Lord,
His mercy never fails to his own,
Such as believe and trust unto his word.
Yet Lord I care not, so thy favor last,
Though Taper-like I spread my light and wast,
Or though I like the poor flame-courting fly
Seeking thy glory, singe my wings, and die.
Prevailed thou have my God and made me thine,
A stubborn knotty piece thou have me proved,
Seaventy times seven at least thou did refine,
And pardon me by thy example moved
To labor others good, forgive their ill,
With courage and with love invincible,
We perish Lord except thou vanquish still,
And work us to thy will reducible.
Great to thy Rebels (Lord) is thy compassion,
Which does to us part in thy conquest yield,
In thee we triumph over sins and passion,
And chase the strongest lusts out of the field.
Some live in sin, yet find thy grace at last,
To thee repentance never comes too late;
I in thy conflicts all my life have past,
A moment could not well me subjugate.
The hardest conquest is the greatest glory;
It Is not the course but end that crowns the story:
Advance O Lord thy conquest still in me,
That I may find sweet triumph still in thee.
Quarrel no more my ca^ping soul, but yield,
Yield to thy mighty conqueror, and know,
It Is for thy good, nature has lost the field,
And that thy self thou to his grace do owe.
Thou have thy self enrol'd into his pay,
Nature was false and paid thee in base coin,
Oh do not now thy self and him betray,
But fight against his enemies and thine.
Undisciplined, licentious was thy course,
In thy first warfare, natures stinging want,
And empty pay led thee from bad to worse,
Sharking thy pleasure was, thy food was scant.
In shiftings and in change thou did subsist,
Thy purchases dissolved in wast and grief,
Oh joy no more in doing what thou list,
But joy in thy well disciplining Chief:
Happy who are to his command resigned,
All else is as the blind to lead the blind.
REckon we do without our Host, if we
Dispose, Oh Lord, our ways irregulate,
In carnal appetites neglecting thee,
Sole Founder, and upholder of our State.
As little reckon I, as care to live,
Thou have cross-byast me to this worlds pleasure,
Nature has been as frank to me to give,
As unto others, but another measure
Has levelled me, where God makes strong impression,
Like silly impatient birds, we struggle may,
But not evade, the humor of adustion
Possessed, dispenses not to disobey.
Most happy humor, how art thou depraved,
And made the bath of spirits most malign?
Thou art Faiths sealing-wax, and we are saved,
Holding by Faith, and mounting by thy wing.
Take brutish vain delights who will for me,
More solid pleasure Lord, I find in thee.
SWeet, Lord, above compare thy mercies are,
More sweet then pleasure, I thy grace do find;
Quiet and safety harbor in thy care,
Thy love alone cures all disease of mind.
Nor mighty frowns, nor flattering applause,
Nor threats of death, nor worldly misery,
Can least amazement or distemper cause,
To such as make thee their felicity.
That is the only necessary thing,
Which where it dwells, all troubles drives away,
Whilst cares distracting, other souls do wring;
They in thy peaceful Regions soar and play.
Arts Sophistry, which Natures peace has killed,
With intricate intanglings (which to solve,
Reason stands lost, and our best spirits spil'd)
Can never now to happiness resolve,
But Lord in thee, there do I find with gain,
More then I lost, never to be lost again.
It Is probable, that who discovered first,
America's rich Coast, made loss his gain,
Nor ere had found it had he not been lost,
To Enrich himself, and feed ambitious Spain.
Nor had I ever found the promised Land,
Had I not first been wildred, saved, and lost,
Above my reason by Gods mighty hand,
Happily ship-wrack'd on that fragrant Coast:
Coast subject to cross tides, rocks, storms, and shelves,
Its channel narrow, turning off and on,
Where we can never arrive (left to our selves)
But only by that Pilot God and m^n.
Wonder works Faith, Faith wonders: sin is bold,
Yet fearful; rich, yet poor; but Lord, thy grace
Gives full wealth, peace, joy, courage uncontrol'd,
And makes sin bear, what does it self efface.
Strangely, but never was man so hap'ly crossed,
I had been lost (Lord) had I not been lost.
Until, (Oh Lord) I fonud and turned to thee,
How I was still to seek, uuquiet still,
I shifted place, delights and company,
But till my self was changed, retained my ill.
Thy shafts stuck in my sides and hunted me,
It Was not a Court, a Mistress, game or play,
Princes sweet presence, and society,
Could chase disease and clouds of cares away.
I thought the bounty of a bounteous Prince
Would never fail to recompense desert;
But sad experience has taught me since,
Saints must be prayed, and Courting is an Art.
Masters and Mistresses too often are won,
By flattery more then duty, and true love;
To speed with thee requires but well to run,
In thy Court, merit needs no Saint to move:
Thy self our Advocate and merit art,
None happy are, but whom thou do convert.
WRiting of holy love, infused grace,
And births stupendous of conspiring fate,
Which make me a self-wonder and disgrace-
Ses Monument, subsisting to relate
The matchless story of a stormy life,
And weather-beaten Soul, built fair and strong,
For gazers Comets, and to suffer strife;
Such ground-works often to Christian Faith belong.
Gorgons, and Harpies, Porpoises, might here
Challenge appearing, with mysterious spell
Of Chemistry, of Caball and such gear,
More then my story I my Scene might swell.
My Stars in native posture I present,
Affecting truth more then fond skill to show,
Nor fill I with strange shapes my firmament,
But rather wish my Verse may gently flow
In sweet returns of gratitude for grace,
Lord, till I sing thy praises face to face.
X Why the letter thou should be to spell
Christ's Character, except by mystery
Of thy Crosse-figure, well I cannot tell;
But crosses Lord, do best resemble thee:
Thou were a man of sorrows, and who will
Thy soldier be, must thy Crusado take,
And bear thy Cross, fighting thy battles still,
Against the world and nature for thy sake.
It Is a hard task, but such is Virtues food,
Fight, Victory, and Conquest gives a Crown;
Warfare is none of pleasures Carpet brood,
Nor sleeps brave honor on a bed of Down.
They who can raise their thoughts no higher then
Soft sensuality, beasts let them be,
Grazing on short delights, unlike to men,
That either glory do affect or thee.
Thy Stars, Oh Lord, my glory are, base pleasures
I leave to such as dote on this worlds treasures.
YOuth, thou debauched boyler in thy blood,
Thou unconsidering domicile of Lust,
Thou self Idolater, senseless to good,
Ape of the times, proud of thy glass of dust,
Unbridled colt, subject to all impression,
But that of grace, thy state I do lament.
To bring thee on thy knees for sins confession,
Thou who art stranger to the word, repent.
I grant, that if Gods truth such course did urge,
And policy could Homogeneall prove,
With true Religion, thou needst such a purge,
Thy Plethorique Luxuriance to reprove.
Miracles are not ceased, if we can quit
Ourselves for God, such change his work must be;
I have had good affections for a fit,
But to persist, Oh Lord, must come from thee.
I have been young, some good I would have done,
Which now is all to prayer and paper come.
Zeal of thy Faith, my God, has wasted me,
My errors and thy truth have kept me low;
Were thy truths errors, I would err to thee,
Rather then in all earthly pleasures flow.
Thou gave me strength of body and of mind,
But inexperience led me to abuse them;
The last, I over-fed, the other pined.
Lord, what are gifts, except thou teach to use them?
The strongest minds their strengths to ruin turn,
Goodness of Nature often it self o're-throws,
Fevers, to ashes best complexions burn,
Nature is blind, and knows not where it goes.
Lord help and pardon our infirmity,
And let thy Justice upon malice seize.
Malice is surely thy Antipathy.
Be reconciled to them that seek to please.
And rather set a period to my fate,
Then that I ere become thy reprobate.
Corollary.
IN dentures are termed Deeds, I seal and sign
My part, Oh Lord, to thee, poor fruitless part,
The leading deed original is thine,
Deedlesse without thee is my Counterpart.
Thy seal and hand must give validity,
Or all our acts will vain and counter prove:
Thou only can give perpetuity
To our intentions, to our faith and love.
Thou that have hardened me to break, or dye,
Rather then bend to baseness, (in self-love,
And honor, maugre all other love) shall I
Less constant in thy zeal and service prove?
No, thou Omega as well as Alpha art,
And all thy works wilt to perfection bring,
As well as thou have taught my simple heart,
In this my Alphabet, thy Praise to sing:
Hosanna, and Hallelujahs unto thee,
Shall fill my Soul, and my conclusion be.
Madam,
THE Verses which I read to your Ladyship the other day, at your then open
Casement, were occasioned by some disorder of the preceding week, and some
distemper I had at that instant upon me, which made me unfit for such a
placing, and caused a farther cold, which I have since suffered, but by a happy
constitution, and cleernesse of body, maintained by daily exercise, I thank
God, I fear not any violent or long continuance; Nay, I rather reckon it as an
excellent medicinal Physic unto me, cold ferments into a heat, and heat
digests and purifies, storms clear the air, agitation refines and subtilizeth
the water and fire, and stirring advantageth the earth. Evils are said not to
go alone, and distempers purge away more then their causes; But it is good, as
well in state, as soul and bodies, to maintain themselves in such a freedom
from overabounding in evil humors, that misaccidents when they come, and there
can be no security against them, may not endanger the whole frame; Thus much of
cold: but what shall we say in surprises of heat and fire? we have lately seen
many misfortunes thereby, shall we therefore not build, or not make fire to
warm our selves? such resolution were to defraud our selves of the natural
commodities of our reason, and discourse, which teaches us rather to confine
and moderate the use of things, then utterly to decline them. It is the
property of wild beasts to fear and fly from fire, and of men to use it. And
now to revert something to our other nights discourse of Love, (which certainly
has some Divinity in it, or otherwise it could never, as it does become a
fresh and infinite Theme of our best spirits) Love and anger are the fires of
the Soul, if inordinate, as well dangerous, as vicious, shall we therefore
shun them as a Plague, whose best antidote is to fly quickly, far, and return
slowly? is love as incompatible with reason as is pretended? and may not
Religion, though supernatural, admit of a natural and free virtuous affection
betwixt the two Sexes? Religion says, Be angry, but sin not; and is rather a
rule to rectify then extinguish affections, they are the wings of the Soul,
without an object they are nothing, and without the use of them we fall flat to
the ground, like disfeathered birds. The Lady and Nation of Ladies, which your
Ladyship mentioned, are not reasonlesse not to be without a servant,
especially such as are or have been beautiful, for it is a commanding
Character, certainly instituted for a delightful entertainment and
admiration. It is an unnatural stupidity not to be affected therewith, and a
kind of injury to its Author, not to exercise such affection. I ever mean
without abuse; but this concludes for women, not for men, our affections have
more fire in them, matter more combustible, and women are commonly as well in
effect as in title too much our Mistresses; Children and fools are not allowed
to play with fire, it had need be a strong, well-prepared, and well-habituated
Soul that entertaines it; we are no Salamanders, to thrive and be safe in the
flames. What now ought a man that would be wise, to do, affecting to give as
well his nature as Religion their right? Platonique Love is exploded, Love is
corporeal, and enters at the eyes. Lust cannot be excluded for an ingredient,
which yet admitted, it follows not that it must be predominant, as I discoursed
unto you, some other overruling affection may contain and repress it, either
in a Religious, civil, or other self-interessed consideration, nay, even in a
diverse prevailing respect toward the very subject of our love. I can be
affected with the objects of my palate and eye, and yet forbear them, burn with
a surprising desire of mortal revenge, and yet refrain: Fear and awe will
prevail even with dogs and beasts, and why not in Love? but how far this is
to be allowed in discretion, I submit, with a good morrow to your Ladyships
more refined discourse, and judgment. I send you the Verses, humbly kissing
your hands, and end with my Paper.

Your Ladyships, etc.

A promiscuous piece of three hours work in a morning, to clear from further
writing.
Madam,
IF I deceive not my self, there is somewhat of power from above, urging my
address unto you; I have now, by Gods grace, finished that my design of
Verses which I had propounded to my self; they are upon presumption of your
Ladyships favor to goodness, and your humble servant their Author, at your
command: expect not the strong Masterpieces and quintessentiall lines, which
these curious times, and the refined ambitious Spirits of our age produce, in
defiance of Critiques, my births are natural, easy, and hasty, sometimes
four pieces to my breakfast in the beginning of a morning; I am as impatient
as any woman of a long and painful labor; I haste to my journeys end, and can
as little hope or go about to remould any of my first births, as your
Ladyships your children once brought to light. I love not Verses of the ragged
staff, but wish them fluent and gentle, which was wont to be a commendation.
If my walls want strength to support themselves in their natural stuff and
scope, they shall rather miscarry then borrow the supports of inwrought strange
conceits and butteresses of Art: if I would undergo any affectation, it should
be to deliver over ingenious notions, and material, instructive, rational
conceptions, with an ingenuous and genuine elegance, and some depth of
prospective in my terms and expressions, according to the capacity and
perspicacity of my Reader. But I am now too old and serious for Verses, and
have wholly given them over, only these my late pieces I conceived my self to
owe to my Maker, and I am sorry they were not my first fruit, which are more
properly his due; Autumnall fruits are neither the most pleasant, nor
wholesome; I have in great retiredness and confusion employed my time of late,
in the dissection of my self and fortune, our observations in the Anatomy of
the body grow from the opening of others, but of the mind from our selves, as
the Stars of heaven and Globe of earth, they are as yet in great uncertainty
and undiscovered; some rules we have attained, and Eclipses we can foretell,
but for sound and infallible knowledge and judgment, we daily find our selves
as erroneous as our common Almanack-makers, whose prognostiques are as
ridiculous as false. And now finding my self in motion betwixt heaven and
earth, give me leave to impart a contemplation of Characterizing such a
perfection as yours, in relation to them; in Rel. to the La. R.
comeliness and beauty like the Heavens, in motion regulate, in order fair,
powerful in influence. A well ordered mind resembles the clearenesse,
serenity, peaceablenesse and harmony of the upper Spheres, and Crystalline
Heaven; a fair built body, the beautiful variety of the earth, delightful,
fruitful, well dressed, and correspondent to the Heavenly motions, in season,
order, and constancy; yet such little worlds there are, which seem to enjoy in
some exemptions a privilege above the lower heavens, and the earth; for they
are free from storms, scorchings of heat, nippings of frost, inundations and
other disorders; such Comets are sent sometimes to be admired, and to awake the
dying virtue and reputation of your sex. Phidias an excellent statuary, is said
to have composed such a Minerva, and such a figure of himself in the center of
her Target, that the whole work bearing upon it, it could be no less
permanent, then the main piece: I have here presumed to place you as a precious
piece of preservation unto me. The abridgement of my story shall now follow
like a cloudy storm, after a fair Sunshine, that I have been most unhappily
miserable more then the outward face of nature, or fortune discover in me, is
known to all that know me, but true and secret causes are so obscure, that it
has been even to my self a most intricate disquisition to find them. Yet,
besides what may be attributed to the Stars, Fate, Complexion, and an
overruling hand, as in former papers, though disorderly, I have made to
appear. They may be partly reduced to an unseasonable and Marriage,
accidental, inordinate, and indiscreet use of Treacle, long and unfavourable
dysaster, in respect of the Court, where I had my Introduction, a fortune
unproportionable to my quality, spirit, and engaged condition; A mind curious
as well to its own furniture, as election of course, and no course obvious or
fair unto me, especially in the distracting ambiguous considerations of my
seats; (and above all) for without that I could as well as another have passed
over all the rest; a super-induced Melancholy from the abuse of such Treacle,
which wholly altered and disanimated me, urging retiredness, study, thoughts,
care, and a distastednesse upon me. Physic, instead of releeving me, was my
bane, over-drawing of blood, and over-working my active mind, brought and held
me in such a lowness and consumption of spirits (whereunto also an
over-slender diet for fear of fatness, much conduced) that howsoever a free
boldness of spirits and conversation was natural unto me, I have been forced
to live so far under my natural rate and faculties of Soul, that I wanted
spirits to counterlook a Cat, confusion of eyes, memory, and gesture, with
infinite other incident malignant symptoms, were the pernicious effects of my
disorder; my natural strength and violence of spirit, aggravated my disease,
bred my continual mischief, and by the same strength and Gods better grace, I
as indefatigably resisted and subsisted; long and dangerous Feavours took
advantage upon the matter and occasion of my infirmity, other desperate
accidents in fortune I suffered, and much more then all this in the
contrarieties of my contracted condition, and misgoverned errors. It has
pleased God as extraordinarily to support me, as by extraordinary and strange
ways to confound, deject, and bring me toward him. No man ever became extreme
bad in an instant, supernatural goodness is harder to effect. Being now at
length thoroughly conscious of my infirmity and violence in all my affections,
and as thoroughly wrought upon by Gods good Spirit and grace, that which I put
in execution remained only fit and necessary for me, which is as this King of
France has lately in consideration of extraordinary troubles, and in them as
great protections of God toward him and his people, solemnly committed and
devoted himself and his kingdom unto the protection of our blessed Lady,
though somewhat preposterously: so have I wholly resigned and consecrated my
self to God, having withal put off or made indifferent unto me, all common
and worldly affections and ambitions, by means whereof I am now as quiet as I
have formerly been agitated and troubled; abstinence is often less difficult
then moderation, diversion is a powerful means of cure, active affections
must find a subject, and there is none so happy, none so satisfactory as God;
not to be affected with goodness is not to be affected with him, and to
contemn or be insensible of beauty were to slight one of his Master pieces:
such only of my ancient concomitances I cast not off; virtue is ever to be
prised, but most when fairest set. Grace, goodness, and beauty are his
brightest beams, concurring they move to veneration and delight. My thoughts
shall at this time no further follow such an alluring subject, what I would be
and resolve I declare, what I have been I cannot help, possibly I could not,
many solutions are brought against the arguments of Fate, which more confound
themselves then avoid it. Let Fate be as it will, the understanding rises from
the senses, and the will from it, suc^ constituted causes must produce such
effects; right elections must needs be as difficult as happy, (our passions
give tincture to our judgment, as a colored pane of glass to the Suns
beams, or as in the Jaundies we see all yellow) they depend upon accidents,
and upon our complexion, objects vary according as we diversely approach them,
their very being consists often more in fancy and apprehension then truth, they
are involved in darkness and innumerable circumstances, as hard to discern as
accommodate, in such circumstances, they hourly vary, and we as much. It is
hard for two ships in motion to hit the one the other; it is true that some see
clearer, and are more circumspect then others, yet old and long experienced
counselors are often rejected, as the worst resolvers, they apprehend too
much, chance and boldness give often the best success, chance according to us
holds a predominancy, but God is all in all. Happiness and tranquillity have
no other true center or circumference, my Spirits naturally working and
violent, were incapable of rest, had I not found it in his grace and favor to
me, and my total surrender unto him. Faith is the sole Catholicon, and
general Antidote against worldly perturbations. He has wonderfully exempted
me from scorn, from want, and all great infirmity; He has satisfied all my
reasonable affectations even to this of writing, wherein I have so disburdened
my self, that though it be hard to write truly, and not inconveniently, or
any thing to the full satisfaction either of others or my self, yet I have
done enough to resolve to withdraw my self from it, confining my self
hereafter to write nothing but necessary letters, and subscribe my self

Your Ladyships most humble and faithful servant.

Noble Sir,
For Sir John Suckling upon the preface concerning Poetry and the Corona.
YOur late request, which was to me an obliging command, makes me send you that
piece which you honored with your pretended conversion; I never thought it any
thing till now, and now I make it yours that it may receive some further virtue
of operation from you; and seeing I find you a proposition convertible, I
presume to lend you another piece of simple conversion. It consists of a few
begging verses, if you find them blind, impute it to their hasty and zealous
production. They beg a hand from God, a favorable eye from you, from him
fatherly, from you friendly correction, they need it from you, and the less
you need from them, the more your happiness, and their obligation, I submit
them and my self to you as

Your faithful servant.

TO you whose sincere Faith to God and Christian religion, good affection
toward me, and good discretion and judgment in all things are most approved;
to you who have been most present and domestique with me through the late
course of the most and best of my writings, and who above others are acquainted
with the inside of my heart and fortune, I entrust my poor treasure of papers,
what ever in themselves, to me costly, and possibly to an inquisitive reader
of no ungrateful or unprofitable relish: their unaffected nakedness is their
riches, nor was Adam ever poor till he sought for covering; may they meet
with no other eyes then such as yours, and their ingenuitie shall be happy, at
least find pardon: Monkeyes have a kind of prettiness, one man's errors are
another correction and institution, promiscuous fantastical graffings afford
delight, but I must run the common fate, some must like me better, some
worse; If honest men find an honest spirit in me, and prove indulgent to it, I
am satisfied; they are happy fruits of my worldly misfortunes: for my
particular, I would not have wanted my errors, upon our most uncomely parts we
put most comeliness, and there are as well happy errors as unhappy
prosperities: I have lately found in these last ornaments and complements which
I bestow upon my house (wherein I have so contained my self as to have
forborne the satisfaction of my fancy therein since I first knew it) that my
workmens mistakings and abuses have produced a bettering to my design. I have
been strangely favored by the weather, considering the earliness of the
year: unfavourable seeming circumstances where God befriends prove our
advantage, may the journey I am now called to, prove such to our betters and
our selves. If God shall please to bless me in a good return, I hope to fall
handsomely to an honest country course, and play the Paterfamilias better then
others have discharged themselves toward me in my infirmity and trust; I am
naturally over solicitous in what I undertake, impatient and exact; But God and
experience I rely upon for my moderators: we all have our imperfections; God
has wonderfully supported me against my own and others miscarriage, no man
owes more indulgence to frailty then my self, but supine, wilful, fierce and
malepert weakness or abuse deserves it not. The Text that says who is
over-wise or over-just shall be left alone, teaches us a moderation in the
best of our faculties and affections: the square of reason often puts our
reason out of square. School Logic instructed me that man consists of a
reasonable soul, and I believed it so far as to think them senseless Poets
who represented upon the Stage most senseless and ridiculous personal
absurdities, yet such and worse has the world acquainted me with; some
infirmities are to be dispensed, others not, I worst endure my own, the
equal balance and mixture of many dispositions betwixt good and evil, hope
and despair of amendment work a perplexity of resolution to conclude upon
them, how far to go on, or where to leave them; charity teaches to presume
and hope the best, it suffers much, but often too much, if it begin not at
home, wisdom is the rule of rules and God of wisdom; but it has pleased
him to call me to a practical course, and I leave to write; whatsoever my Lord
Bacon St. Albans pronounces, that he who imployes his mind to small things
shall not be fit for great, yet who contemns small, shall hardly or attain
or hope the greatest, Some have made the world it self to consist of Atoms.
I will God willing so intend the greatest as not to neglect the least; To him
let me enjoy your prayers, in him your affection, as you shall mine for you and
all good men. Farewell.

March the 19. 1638.
Charity.
THinking this morning of worldly power and pleasure, and of the pleasure of
power, I took into consideration what proportions were conducible and
necessary to a happy condition, and grew to state every man in a natural and
just dimension of his proper quality. For a man to have a grant of or to
assume power and pleasures beyond his capacity and use, were but supervacuous,
troublesome, and often pernicious; That clothing is best that best fits the
body, warm, comely, and easy, is I confess to be wished, more is but
cumbersome, enough is affirmed as good as a feast, what am I the better if when
a pint is the uttermost my thirst requires, one give me leave to drink a
Tun? If we suffer our selves to be transported by an extravagant fancy, we
shall never be rich; Reason ought to be as well our bounds as our boast;
Limited we must be when we have done what we can, a man is but a man; if
the King would give me vast possessions and power of life and death beyond my
conveniencie, I should value it but an unprofitable load; It is pleasure
sufficient to be out of real pain, power enough to be safe, possession
enough that corresponds our just occasions, what exceeds runs more to others
use then ours, and serves only to plunge us to inconvenience and swell our
accounts. The true advantage of power and Riches is the enabling us in means
of beneficence: To win hearts is indeed a supreme delight to all natures that
participate more of God then his opposite, the devils damnation grew from a
sinister affectation of power to do mischief rather then good, our affections
are devilish when they terminate not in Charity: there pitched my thoughts,
thither confined I my discourse of power, pleasure, possessions, and the
pleasure of power, which casting me upon the 13. Chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, where St. Paul falls into an ecstatiquall exaltation of charity;
I set upon the metrification of the beginning of the Chapter with a little
close of my own which here I subjoyne.

At York intended for the sight of the most sacred. May 7. 1639.
HAd I all tongues of Angels and of men,
And wanted charity, what were I then,
More then the found of Cymbals, or of brass?
Had I all perfect knowledge, and could pass
For a great Prophet, were my faith so great,
That I could make huge mountains change their seat;
Gave I my goods to Alms, body to flame,
Charity wanting, all would prove but lame.
Charity is patient, Charity is meek,
Not envious, proud, perverse, nor does it seek
Its own advantage; No dishonesty,
Despite, or evil thinking comes it nigh;
Loves truth as much as it abhors wrong,
Hopes all, believes the best, and suffers long.
Without it man is but a fiend to man:
With it a God to do all good he can,
Loving and loved, good to himself and others,
Is happiest life, and many errors covers.
At my return from York.
GIve me leave, Oh Lord, that I express my most humble and hearty
thankfulness for thy most gracious favor and preservation toward me, in the
diverse accidents, encumbrances and hazards of my late journey, and course of
life: thy indulgencies and accommodations have as much exceeded my hope,
contrivings, and present condition as my demerit. Unspeakable are thy mercies
to such as confide upon them, let their memory never decay in me, and with my
due acknowledgement, perpetuate thy grace unto me: Honor, thrift and
salvation, attend thy goodness and such as rely upon thee. I have found thy
blessings, as well temporal as spiritual, in the sustentation of me and my
fortunes fairly proportionable to the constant moderation of my mind: I am now
by Gods grace and the Kings, returned to my home, where Church, Chapel, and
my home-stall are like to bound my thoughts and course, the Economy of my
Soul and Family will abundantly employ me: Let the Schools and the world make
oftentation of their Ethics, Politiques, and Theology, whilst I wrap them in
my plain habit, and act them in my Soul and life. If I have ever written any
thing beneficial to others in either moral, wholesome or Religious discourse,
I shall be glad, but my end was my own provision and discharge; I have been so
much versed in the world, and conversations, that I am no longer fond upon
them, I am neither ignorant of their vanity or solidity, it is no unnecessary
School of experience, I have bought it, but am sorry that others with my self
have paid for it; It is of no small use unto to me; God, that, and years, have
taught me so to contract and prune my self of superfluities, that a little root
and sap shall stretch further with me, then more with another, and I hope to
give proof that God has not made me incapable of governing my little hive; my
mind and studies possibly were larger, but this is the most certain, easy,
and pious course; God, and my unsitnesse for the ruggedness of the time, cut
off distractions and make it fair before me; Besides my want of health and
failing in my hopes and endeavors of recovery, and others improvement, and due
discharge, I have formerly suffered by trusting them too much, and my self too
little, I have made trial of all performances but my own, to that I am
necessitated, and that they have cast me upon; if God and my health enable me,
I will so play the super-intendent, as to carry a through tempered eye to all
duties, and expenses, making my way as regularly easy, and my household as
undispensably orderly, as I can: The diversions of Fancy which obtrude their
service to the sweetning of a present perplexed condition, shall no more
predominate me; God who knows better then our selves what is best for us, has
contracted, satisfied, and settled me; I am no more a stranger to the worlds
market and my self, nor to seek as I was, in rules of proportion, commodities,
and stock to drive an honest Trade. Few servants, religiously and orderly
affected and chosen, make much of a little; and be they never so few or hard to
find, others I will not admit nor continue. My Friends shall be so entertained
and welcome, that by their curious and wastefull reception, I make them not in
effect my enemies, and fare the worse a month to feast them for a meal. This
is my intention and resolution: Herein I implore my good God to continue
propitious unto me, and I desire no other worldly felicity: to him the Author
and perfecter of all blessings, be all glory, Amen, Amen.

May 21. 1639.
Mr. Doctor,
I Am your debtor for what I have heard from you, for a most obliging Letter
received from you, and for what I have heard concerning you, many outward
duties you know we owe, but none more then to the household of the faithful, it
is now contracted to a small number, our zeal may be the more though our
exercise the less: My years, fortunes, the times and other circumstances have
confined my course and discourse, to a resolved retiredness, as unnatural to
the respects of my places of birth, education, and conversation, as
solitariness to mankind; no man was ever more affected to an intelligent and
well-spirited society then my self, I have formerly sought it and enjoyed it
with greediness, I have now lost it, and that which to my discomfort comforts
me the more, is, that it is grown scarce to be found; I wish that this
expression proceeded rather from my distaste, then a real diminution of
goodness, generosity and rationality: Our Souls next to God, have no food so
sweet as the fair commerce of reason and knowledge, I am put to drive a trade
of discourse, either without return, which is unpleasant, or with an
impertinent unvaluable return, which more offends me: All this tends to beg
your Company when you can afford it, I have been little given to beg but from
my Maker, yet I never made scruple of it, where I presumed of goodness, and
good will: I know you Charitable, and hope you will not deny me begging from
you so much way and light; my Coach shall be at your Command: Mr. Doctor
Bromrich is now free from his great Office, and taking you for birds of a
Feather, I should be glad to see you fly together: if after your living in
London, and now in Cambridge, you came to live in a Country Parsonage, you
would commiserate me: You shall have good way, good Air, and good fire, water
enough to cleanse, and not to dull or infect; Christmasse is a season of
Charity, which shall make you expected by

Your faithful Friend to serve you.
Catleidge the 6 of December 1639.
A Christians life has been justly resembled to a warfare, mine has been many
ways such, continually encumbered with outward and inbred troubles; occasions
sometimes thrust upon me, sometime raised by my self upon my own grounds of
mind and fortunes, commotions, insurrections for Religion, for Liberty, for
Accommodation: and as Polydor Virgill, upon contemplation of the wonderful
extrications of England from diverse ruinethreatning obsessions, attributes its
subsistence to God alone, calling it Regnum Dei, and supported by his Grace in
despite of all its own misgovernments and prevarications for private advantage
against the public good: So have I to my great shame, found his mighty
deliverances, above my most gross relapses of error, and self-offending. How
long I shall do so I know not, for I am most unworthy thereon: At such time as
I have found my self upon recovery of strength and alacrity, fortune has ever
presented some most unexpected and extraordinary incident to perplex my curious
and working mind. Poor Souls that we are! how weak? how blind? strong and
seeing, only to our own mischief and nakedness; Nature runs away with us in
spite of bit and bridle. I once heard a learned, witty Magistrate (himself
none of the best, if not one of the worst) say, upon the disgrace grown to one
of our greatest, most learned, and witty Judges for corruption, how we might
see by him the power of Natures torrent against all erudition and ability of
writing and discourse. I prove it too true, though (I thank God) not in that
way. I have of late to gratify some (who neerliest concern me) been carried to
reaccommodate my seat with a Park: My resolution for my own particular was,
after having been Master of so good in that kind (that it was impossible for
me to become pleased therein) to forbear as I have done a long time. In this
particular, which has been more then most troublesome unto me, Fortune
according to her custom, has played double with me, offering me on the one
side most casually Grounds in my hands close by my house, well-wooded, and
Park-like, which I confess much surprised my fancy therein: Yet on the other
side, such varieties of persuasion for greater, less, good, bad, dry, or wet
Ground, ways through or not, some neighbors Grounds to be taken in or no, and
whether or no they might be had, difficulty of paling and carriage which I
hate; for though I love not trouble, yet I endu^e my own more willingly then of
my Friends and Neighbors. After these and many other cross points of offers
and retractings of Neighbors, and such like, I have been led by degrees (
aliud agens) besides my meaning, to lay out a small, yet sufficient piece of
Ground for household provision of Venison (a Garden to keep me from beging) so
near, dry, fertile, pleasant in view, convenient, and commodious, that I would
scarsely wish it other; it was, as it were, marked out unto me, and for my
purpose. Yet (blind as I was) diverse and cross considerations, which this
world and I abound in, kept me so long from discerning to lay hold of it, that
I scorn my senses and my self, and almost condemn my self to all, that I have
suffered in my nonsense: The inconvenience of pale is avoided, for I have
enough at hand, I am still Master of my Woods, my Ground found for Winter and
Summer, and the goodness of it makes it much in little, nor would I wish it
greater: great inconveniences attend a great Park, it is a kind of Whore, much
in fancy, and often kept more for others use then our own; it is a wild
Mistress, and courted by a kind of wild people, fiercely riding this way and
that way with great hoopings, and outcryes, upon a very slight errand. Our
forefathers were not yet without reason, who meeting with a world and
wilderness of woods and wastes, assigned an otherwise useless part thereof to
Parkes and Forests: It is not so with us; want of Timber and Woods will tame
our wildenesse, and reduce us to an useful compass. Never was Land bought
dearer then I have paid for my own, (may house and land prove more happy to my
Successors) how many years of my life it has cost me, I know not, nor much
(as the world is) care. This and much more, retiredness, Melancholy, and
Fortune have brought upon me, yet considering how ill a wandering or public
course of life would suite with me I choose rather to suffer and compose as
well as I may all incommodities within my self, then to expose my self to
such as others find, and thrust themselves into abroad, and which would be to
me more intolerable. Quiet is not ill bought at any reasonable rate: Vt habeas
quietum tempus, perde aliquid de tuo jure, is a saying, which if the Spaniard
had practiced even to the quitting of the 17. Provinces, or I in sitting down
by some forbearances, we might possibly have been both more at ease. God has
given him a strong state of dominions, and me of body and mind, to our own as
well trouble as subsistence; He maintains his strength by exercise, and so
have I done by extraordinary motion, agitation and distensions, such as to a
man of an evener mind and fortune then mine are I confidently affirm shall
keep in health, strength, free from great inconvenience of colds, fevers,
fullness, or putrefaction of humors, etc. vigor of spirits, and length of life,
better then Lessius or Cornarus their staticall diet, which is most unnatural,
servile, subject by their own confession to great distemper upon the least
change, or excess, (whereas the other comports with any tolerable diet)
prescribed in reason rather for Monks, Hermites, Votaries and persons of a
sedentary life, then such as are to use the world and labor. Thus much have I
written in this early of the morning as hastily and wildly, and perhaps to as
little purpose as Foresters follow their chase: which to my own better
instruction, and use of my self and mine may it please God to bless. Amen.

December the 7. 1639. Potius inserere virtutem, quam disserere de virtute.



Postscript.
IF I write wildly and erroneously, yet my follies are short and the shortest
are the best; I had rather write without method and abrupt, then as many do in
long intricate and often mistaken distributions and divisions, as tedious and
unprofitable in some one subject, as I am confused and wild in change, and
varying my scenes. Thus Bos lassus fortius sigit pedem, and if my soul cannot
digest and endure its own weight, strength and discernings, it must suffer.
Perplexed condition As in the end of the 7. Chap. o^ Ecclesiastes God made man
right, but he has sought out many inventions.
of our sophisticated and preternaturall life; the ways of nature are obvious,
easy, certain; The Swallow, Crane, etc. know their seasons, and vary not in
their course, or building of their nests, where the most ingenuous and
rightaffecting souls amongst us are ever to seek, and even at the best (which
I call) with the illumination of supernatural grace, vexed with our own
scruples and fancies, and either forced from the world and natures liberty of
delights, or like Lot, to have their righteous souls contristate with a vain,
crooked, perverse and wicked conversation.

IF my pieces appear not all of a piece constant to themselves, but so
diversified that I ordinarily fall into a superfetation, or various births of
male and female at one graviditie; If I superinduce and contract into little
room matters of several and important consideration, such as might otherwise
have been beaten out into particular and large treatises, I hope you will be
indulgent to the sparing of labor as well yours as mine, finding in your power
to extend or remit your own, either by receiving my coin for current, or
bringing it to the balance or test of a farther (yet favorable) examination,
not forgetting that allowance which I have often begged to my acknowledged
infirmity, defects, confusion and precipitation in their conception and
production.

Passus graviora, dabit Deus his quoque finem.

FINIS.
EXTRAVAGANTS.
Dream.
IF you are at leisure, I will tell you my mornings dream, which was, that in
the quality of a Soliciter for Old England, in a cause that concerned him for
limme, life, land, and liberty, which were all drawn to stake, by I know not
what Promooter, I cast my eye on a Friend as I rode into York, with the Chief
Justice of Assize there to be held, and desired him to help me to some good
Counselors to plead for me; he looked about him, and spyed some portlike men,
riding on Scotch pads, but said they were not for me, for they favored of the
others near them were on hard Scotch saddles, but had long since given
desperate the cause of Old England, and were now packing and posting for
New England and the Isle of Providence. Some he saw upon French pads, who came
this Circuit only for Company, to laugh, make good cheer, and advantage of the
times, but not to meddle till the cause became their own. A greater number were
mounted on the French great Saddle, with Pistols at the Bow, but my desires
were peace, and their word was Vive la guerre. Then the Spanish Morocco men
presented themselves to our view hopeless to me, for War was both natural
and profitable unto them. Next I eyed a grave Gown-man, fitting in Croop
behind a side Saddle, I liked him for a good forward man, but my Friend told
me he was a Scotch Bishop, and had too much to do for himself. Not far from
him rode a pretty pert luking man, upon a lean bare horse back, and I was
informed he was a Scotch Recusant, and could not speak good English. Then I
observed a Coach drawn by six Mules, with well-stuffed provender bags at
their noses, a long-Coated Postillion, with Pistols upon the foremost, a
solemn robed personage, in place of Coachman, the first a short whip in his
hand, the second a long one which was somewhat tangled in the carriage, a
company of Gown-men within, concerning whom I enquired, and found the fore-men
were Churchmen Militant and Triumphant, and those in the Coach were
High-Commissioners, and the Kings learned Counsel, who were not used to plead
in common Causes. After them came a company of plain fellows upon Pack-saddles,
who proved to be out of favor for the present; yet followed on in hope of
better Grace. In this distress I fastened on one of my New Englanders, and
prayed him for old Englands sake to stay his journey, and speak for me: he
replied, his tale would not be heard, and that he came this way only for his
safety to defend himself and no body else: Whereat in great despair, I asked
if there were no conceit of a kind of Parliament to be held here. My Friend
told me no, and that another Faux had long since blown up that hope with white
Gunpowder. One while he advised me to sue in Forma Pauperis, and procure my
self Counsel to be assigned, other-while to suffer my self to be nonsuited
for this time, pay charges and expect a better advantage; But at last he
encouraged me, saying, that counsel or not, I needed not to be dismayed, being
my Judge was both good and wise, and too much interested himself in the
consequence of my cause, not to relieve and compassionate me, which gave me
such a joy of heart, that I awaked.

April 1639.
News from York.
THe world is full of expectation what will be the product of this early
Spring; The Sun no sooner cuts the Line, but with him we march in the month of
March toward the Cancred Tropic, our Lady day, and King Charles his
Initiation, inaugurate our expedition; I should have said for us; We travail
toward the little Bear, exalting Charles Wayne ore our heads; great cost,
great scot and lot we pay, which may prove Englands joy or bane. Mars is Lord
of the Horoscope, Saturn may grumble and eat his Children, but Jupiter and his
Lieutenant must rule the Roast: Momus may go whistle, and the World dance,
whilst Mercury pipes, and with his Caduceus charms, extracts, conjures and
transformes the Clouds. There are ill Conjunctions abroad, that threaten little
good, but if Jupiter prove not malevolent, all may go well: Let Venus go
Retrograde, and Diana raise the Clouds, we will not fear but Sol at his
height with a fair Northerly wind may disperse them and bring fair weather.
These late raines promise a good year, and if Booker and his fellows may be
credited, the storm will fall where it was least looked for: if you will be
advised by me, break not your brains with over-calculating, for all this grew
betwixt the pen and the paper. Many spirits are conjured up, and it must be the
work of a good Exorcist to make them keep their circle and settle them again.
York was never fuller of business and idleness; Feavors reign, and ravings
must be admitted; Fancy, Reasons old Ape, will have his vagaries, and since the
invention of Gallileos Glass, men must discover farther into Moons, and
Milstones then they were wont; in the mean time you that want work as I do,
exercise your selves with this my Trol Madam; To tell you the truth, I must be
thinking, though I know not what, and indeed who does? These are times that
would pose Oedipus, or Solomon, and make him fly to his Vanity of vanities and
vexation of Spirit; Vivere and Laetari, would be his Motto, but it is hard to
do at York, where though Victuals are cheap, Ale is dear. The people drawn
together, are too much strangers, to be over-familiar or confident: Never more
company, never more solitariness, men are so hard to find and far to seek,
that Diogenes would be troubled with his Lanthorn at noon day, to find an
honest friends lodging. Here is riddle me riddle me, what is this? A Courtier
and no Courtier, a Soldier and no Soldier, Little War, and less pay to a
great many, who find great fault with the Translation that says, No man
wars at his own charge; Many of the Court, few of the Counsel; Gentlemen
want their Mistresses, Lords their Ladies; some have too much, some too little
to do, some expected to have been Actors or Counselors at least that prove
but lookers on, and hangbies; some find themselves prisoners without conflict
or knowing the crime, and want the old comfort of the War, which was wont to
be quick death, or victory. Many wish Sir Arthur Ingram had been made Purveyor
General for the whole year, but he found it charge enough at York. Every man
roves at an end; but many will miss their marks; where men scarce know their
own ends, it is hard to know others, where intentions are concealed, ways
cannot be concluded, yet from Cards played a good gamester will guess at the
game, and from things appearing, results may be forked out, that either thus or
thus, and so I entertain my self, and so do you; every man has business,
every man his thoughts, such as they are: The blind man may hit the Crow; some
are not wise enough to divine, others are divined wiser then they are: This
would I do, quoth I, a wiser man of another mind, says no; For brevity sake I
omit to tell you my thoughts, I am wise enough yet for that, Sauue qui pent,
Swear what you will, but say nothing: This you may thank me for, when I could
write, but not read, and wanted something else to do.

Your Cousin and servant John Nonsense.
May 1639. Postscript.
When the Children shall be drawn into the desert of Zim, it is much feared
that horse and man will have somewhat to do to keep their iron and flesh on
their backs, that murmuring will prove a great pastime, Quayles and Manna would
prove in great request, and that Moses may have use of his rod.



SEventh Henry Roses, Kingdoms James united,
Eight Henry in Popes defense a book endited,
Which made Romes Bishop style him faiths defender,
The style he held, but made the Pope surrender
His Papal power: King Charles has far outgon him,
And with his sword taken Bishops cause upon him.
They owe him more then well they know to pay him,
If Woolseys Pope lived Gar would be his saying:
Take heed good Bishops what you go about,
Lest Charles hold fast the faith, and turn you out:
Of angry Bees Scotland's a parlous Hive,
Hedges twixt King and people seldom thrive.
Wise Jesuits with the Scots took little pains,
Well knowing thence would rise but little gains.
Pilgrimage.
AS I travailed along in my earthly pilgrimage to the heavenly Jerusalem
accompanied according to my wishes by a good old Minister or Priest of Queen
Elizabeth's time, (I know not now how to term him) there crossed upon us in our
way a supercilious personage with an high cornerd bonnet (his name and nature
did little agree) who questioning our intentions told us we were out of our
way, and that if we would take him for guide and company, he would carry us a
sure smooth and pleasant way to our Journeys end, and if we turned a little
aside now and then it should be at his charges, we should not need to trouble
our thoughts, he would take all the care: He was witty-facetious company, and
when my old companion would have replied, I told him I thought he was but in
jest, and not to be dealt withal in good earnest, for whatsoever he pretended
he had a plot upon us for his own advantage, and wished to take our leaves of
him, for he had a Pistol by his side that he trusted to beyond his wit,
which was great pity; and what ever good companion he seemed, he would make
roastmeat of us if we appeared not in every thing of his mind, and that all
our good and true heart to God ward would not excuse us: whereupon leaving him
and walking on, there crosses upon us on the other hand, as we found him upon
speech, a Banbury man who scorned to desire our company, but taking notice of
our design told us we held too much of the left hand, that his was the only
right course and (whatsoever we thought) not so rough and uneasy as some
esteemed it, with much more; we thanked him and told him his Sabbath day ways
and ours lay not together, and that if he would have been less nice and
censorious over good men (none of his Brotherhood) and more sociably attractive
he might have had more company along with him. Then crosses us again on the
first hand an odd kind of person, I knew not well whence he came, nor whither
he would, his fashion and habit were likewise ambiguous, sometimes formal and
cringing, and sometimes staggering and licentious, he forsooth would have
egged us out of our beaten path into a pretended better discovered by-way of
his finding out, telling us it would prove much for our ease and forwardness:
we were thankful for his good will, but told him we did not love to follow
we knew not whither, and that his course sided something too much with the
high cornered cap whose company we had considerately forsaken. Our next
encounter from the second right hand country was a grave man in the Geneva
print, a little more conformable and less rigid then he of Banbury, he took
notice of our voyage, and much desired our company, intimating unto us that his
way lay close by ours, but was much more plain, certain, and peaceable, as
having more of terra firma then the inconstancy of a floting Island: he said
he had an invariable sure Cart and Compass to direct us, and that he was
sorry to see us English whom he loved, so apt to change that we might be as
well painted with a pair of sheares in our hand for our Religion as our
clothing, that we never knew when we were well, and that it was ever a great
fault with us to be apt to overdoe, that ceremonies and indifferences grew so
formal unto us that it was to be feared Religion it self would become at
last with us, but a ceremonious formalitie. He wooed us heartily and somewhat
to the purpose, telling us he had no ends upon us but our journeys end, that
he would not trouble us with much complement, but much desired our company,
which if we refused, we should be in danger of being entised or forced and
justled out of our way, which was already also grown so little trodden that it
was hard to hold: with our thanks we dismissed him, telling him that having
as sure a Cart and Compass as himself, and as learned and pious directors as
he or any other, we doubted not of our way, which we had hitherto found
right and good, but if we met with force and opposition we would carry such
an eye toward him that being as well in breath (otherwise called spirit) as
the best, we would soon overtake him: his complement was little, ours not
much more, and so with hearty short and comely prayers for our welfare, and
industrious instructions, which none of the other would afford, (except the
second, who was very tedious to us in terror and threats) we parted,
continuing our way with a resolution not to stumble at every straw, nor be
drawn by any zealous example or otherwise to leap over scandalous
Christ-masse blocks.

November. 1644.
STrict Rhymes stand by, and wanton measure,
All here is out of tune,
And my self more then all;
A skipping Satyr calls for room,
Ruff, wild, like him shall be my lines,
Bring the Fools cap again,
And give the world its own:
It never was fitter for the times.
Give me a four Elbowd Coat,
There Is no fool to the old,
That knows the Fire, yet runs into it,
And cries, Lord help, withhold.
Kings by your leave and take good heed,
^est whilst you shadows graspe,
You lose true substance, love and ease,
Showing that you were out of taste.
Statesmen study right and peace,
Be faithful plain and wise,
And do not seek so much to please,
That all may sink whilst you may rise.
Churchmen should mend, not mar the world,
Live as your read in Scriptures then,
We know them now as well as you,
Think not to blind or God or men.
Good and bad Pastors they set out,
Bad vent their own inventions,
Feeding themselves more then their Flock,
Bewate of such intentions.
Judges, occasion not the rout,
By a misguided course,
To think how they may live without
Your Furs and never fare the worse.
Would't not make the devil laugh
To see a masking faith,
Feed him with Corn and God with Chasse,
Whilst juggling zeal the truth betrayeth.
Would you not jeere to see an Ape of clay,
In Gown or Doublet jet it to and fro,
Brisk as a Puppet in a Play?
Who Mushrome like has but a week to grow,
Or see men play like busy buzzing flies,
Venereous, skraping still for Ore,
Upstarts with pride swelled to the skies
Upon their journey to be seen no more,
To see a Doctor play the learned fool,
The ravenous Woolf in justice seat,
The devil preaching in a cool,
Glossing the Text to get what he can get:
An old wife curious in her Curles,
Prattling and painted like a Jay,
Wise Gallants led by giddy Girls,
Triumphing to become a prey:
To see men love to gather hate
Woorying the one the other,
Losing themselves to get a state,
And trample on their brother,
Like Schooleboyes make rods for themselves,
By turns to whip each one his marrow,
Running their mates upon the shelves,
Shortly to prove their proper sorrow.
The wiser sort the arrant'st knaves,
The learned make formal works
Full of false method and mistakes,
Where nor delight nor profit lurkes,
Curious dissections to confound,
Things already known and plain,
Great Treatises on little ground,
Notions from nothings to attain,
Terms which should science easier make
To make it harsh and more obscure,
Like Sprights to fright and make forsake,
Things useful else, who can endure?
Youth to vice and baseness framed,
Impudence for virtue pass
Knowledge by ignorance disdained,
Gay trappings on a pampered Ass:
Temporizing wisdom counted,
Zeal of virtue folly,
Goodness by vice so much surmounted,
Small good can come from being good or holy:
Master Pamphlets sweld with words,
And tumors preternaturall,
Pageant-dishes for Mayors bords,
High cry, but little flesh or wool,
Lofty, brave, corveting speech
Plain dealing to outface,
Prauncing over hedge and ditch,
In stead of keeping even pace:
Truth a stranger is become,
Vicious times no more can bear it,
Flattery and falsehood holds its room,
Writers must suffer or forbear it.
Self conceit, and foolish pride,
Hypocrisy, and juggling shows,
What sober judgment would abide?
But that shame meets them in the close.
Endless 1644.
Epigramme.
Full many a want had Ages heretofore,
Had ours goodness and wit, we want no more.
Glimmerings.
GOd above all, thy Neighbor as thy self,
Lovely Epitome: could speculation see,
And practice thee, John's Commonwealth
Would flourish, and we should most happy be.
REligion, Gods reasonable service is,
Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light:
This wel-agreed, would make the whole world his,
Pastors and people would walk more upright.
ALtar against Altar, Clergy against the Lay,
What may this breed? nay, what good can it breed?
It Is nine to one; yet God can all allay,
And raise sweet fruit, from foul and bitter seed.
Poor creature man, that studies to be poor!
To whom God gave this ready furnished frame,
To use, not pry, rip, live on follies score,
Quit Natures legs, to walk in knowledge lame,
Do emulate, dissect, work what you can,
To Gods works still thou shall be blind, poor man.
Some steps affects, and squarings, thou may find,
To the full Schematisms thou must be blind:
Bacon, how-ever short of a clear light,
Did well to show how far thou art from right.
When women marry to be chaste, not free,
When Clerks turn Priests, for Gods sake, not for gain,
When King, and People love, and well agree,
And all themselves within their Spheres contain,
Then may we hope to see a happy age,
F^aud will abate, and malice will assuage.
ILl-Clergy-men have reason to forbid
Reading the Scriptures, for they them discover
So clear that one would think all were kept hid,
By them as from the Lay, so from each other,
Else would they shame to say and do so ill,
As if Religion they professed to spill.
St. Gregory's Complaint, two hours work.
REady to dye, though well I know not why,
You that go by, hear me lament and cry,
And tell the King, who can do no ill thing,
'Twas no good ring under St. Paul his wing,
Gregory to spill, who has stuck to him still,
And never did ill, (alas) by his good will.
I can prescribe, full many a Christmas tide,
How by his side, his Peterman I ride,
And what disgrace I now bring to this place,
I cannot guess, unless as fallen from grace.
Nor can I see, that a true cause should be,
In my degree, and consecrate Antiquity.
Happy St. Faith, whom no mis-hap betray'th,
My lowly height, casts me, St. Paul's gloss says,
But my great crime, is, Paul I undermine:
Yet that is not mine, St. Faith take that for thine.
I will repair, what ever I impair,
My cost and care, shall make me through fair.
I am no wen, except miscalled by men,
Mole be I then. Moles, faces grace have been.
I am no stain, except you overstrain,
And lay me plain, your good work to distain.
Good works to nurse, made good men open their purse:
St. Gregory's curse, may make Paul's fare the worse.
Make not them glad, who wish St. Gregory sad,
For being the Lad, who first turned Tables had.
The Parish cost, and rich inside they boast,
Would not be lost, since God loves inside most,
Though Paul's full age, nor sister needs, nor page,
It Is no vantage.
To cast old Gregory off in holy rage,
My Verse breaks measure,
Great Neighbor, Lord of Treasure,
Assist my Rhymes, to those that rule the Times,
And help if you can well,
Whilst I toll my own knell,
Yet I will not despair;
Church ruins ill repair.
My Caesar right informed,
My will shall be conformed.
His sentence final be my fate,
To stand, or to lie desolate:
Now do not blame my Verse, but know it
St. Gregory never was a Poet:
Many a one has reese by Rhyme,
O might I so my fall decline.
St. Gregory to St. Paul.
MIghty St. Paul, help Gregory's desire,
And scorn me not, though none of thy great Quire,
Take heed a second time of Heavens fire,
If falling late, thou now my fall conspire.
Without thy Buttresses, thou can not stand,
Accept of me for such; and thy command
Shall rule me still, though small, yet near at hand,
And next to thee the greatest in the Land.
A shrub offends not a lofty tree,
An under Oratory let me be:
Thou partly stand by my Charity:
For that and Gods sake then, Oh pity me.
My Bells and Western Steeple I will lend
To thee, that want them both, I Will be thy Friend,
And stop their mouths, who ill Invectives send
Against thy state and ways, and so I end,
Sick, but not dead, and dying, but not sick.
About 1635.
I Have gotten a little leave of absence from the Parliament, to lay hold of
your promise for the favor of a visit, and I hope notwithstanding all fears
the carriage of affairs will be such as to give no sudden occasion of my
recall: Gods grace and his Majesty's wisdom, goodness, and constancy, must be
the Authors of our happiness, our distractions and distempers are otherwise
such in the State Ecclesiastic, Civil, and Military, our spirits in all parts
so peremptorily and uncharitably divided, men so superabounding in their own
sense, and so little indulgent, and communicable to others, and parties daily
growing to a stiffer opposition, that without such a prop I should utterly
despair of any good or quiet: If some men chance to find a strength rising
against them, they may partly blame themselves in their reservednesse, a Cause
may be starved at Law for want of fees, and so may power by being over-sparing
in a winning familiarity, it is harsh to a noble Nature to think it self
slighted, a good Judgment may manage it self in an open freedom, without
profusion or betraying the bottom, and there is the greater need to use it
where there is little else to pay.

It is true that the King may seem to have made himself a great loser, by
giving ground so much from the way of his former course, but it must first be
cleared, that it was the right way of his advantage, and well examined, others,
more their own Friends then his, may prove the greater losers, and his parting
may be like Abraham's in the conclusion, rather with the Ram then the Child:
The undoubted Laws of England are no such churles, and niggards to their
Prince, as not to leave him a Royal power, and splendid state: but there must
be at this time more then leaving, after so much alienation, exhaustion, and
contraction of debts, there must be a plentiful supply and support, this
indeed after all our other payments, will be a work, but so it must, nor do I
doubt but suddenly it will be vigorously undertaken, if new jealousies
interpose not themselves. His Majesty's condition requires it, his goodness
deserves it, and his faithful Subjects affection, duty, and reputation can do
no less. It is true, that we have already had a long time, and paid dearly
for it; possibly there might have been a better husbanding, but a good end will
make all good, and for the best. As I said before, that Grace of God, and
wisdom of his Majesty, which have hitherto assisted us, are my hope and
confidence, the Genius of the Kingdom does as yet extraordinarily need them:
The consideration of Divine Service, Episcopacy, and Recusants, in the scandal
that these late times have drawn upon them (or they upon the times) is yet to
be regulated, and the conceived offense and danger, springing from them, to be
prevented; this you will say is a business, and the greater by the greatness
of the parties severally affected in them: For the Common Prayer Book, you know
how the Scots esteem it, multitudes of our own growing in all parts no less
incurably impatient of it; Bishops are in the same predicament, but so much
worse, by how much a dead Letter has neither so much imputed to it for our
past troubles, nor apprehended from it for a future propension to Popery. But
it may be said, Punish then the men without rejecting that calling which
certainly is more ancient then the Papacy; and that surely might serve, if
there were not such a connaturality in the reasons for the one and the other,
that admitting the one, the other will ever be in danger to follow, as has
been seen: The Common Prayer Book has also unquestionably much good in it, but
the scandal considered, whether another form of another tenure and
extraction, more of a piece, and conform to the other Reformed Churches, be not
more fit and necessary to our quiet, I refer to better judgments. Gods
Service and Worship is the substantial and Moral part. Episcopacy, and this
or that Form, but the Ceremonial, and I would be sorry to see cutting of
throats for Discipline and Ceremony: Charity ought to yield far in things
indifferent: But must all the yielding be on the Governors part? God forbid,
that we should yield to every fanatical opinion, and to fall into a way of
Enthusiasts, without any set Form of Directory or Liturgy. Freedom of zeal,
and inspiration may be reserved to the Sermon, or an after Prayer, without
engagement through the whole time of convention, to go along and say Amen, upon
surprise. The other great bodies of Reformed Churches, are in great part
prescript and regulate; and as the ancient Druides who ruled the Religion of
France and Britain, were said to hold their chief seat in the Isle of
Anglesey, so may his Majesty, I persuade my self without going farther then the
Dominions of his Crown of England, take from his Islands of Gernsey and Iersey,
in this rare necessary some such model (at least with little alteration) as
may fit his greater Island, and immaterially differ from our Brother Churches.
But howsoever, it is necessary to come to a resolution, and settlednesse,
whereby to prevent the numerous spreading of obstinate Sects, which are said to
grow too much upon us, amongst which multiplicity it is somewhat strange unto
me, not to hear of any Lutherans, considering our late Queen Anne was
according to her Country, conceived that ways affected. Now for our Recusants
they have Petitions in Parliament to move a relaxation of the Laws, and a
Commiseration in their behalf. And truly for the better and devoutest sort
(such as turn not their Religion into wantonness and malice) I am moved to
pity them, but as they affect to move us to pity them, I wish they would no
less reflect upon us, and consider the troubles and unsufferable condition
that their leaders have affected, and will ever affect to draw upon us, and
what a difference there would be in what we should suffer from them in respect
of that being and conversation which they have enjoyed amongst us, to the
proceedings of their Inquisition against us, I refer you: Charity begins at
home, and let them in the first place pity their abused selves, let them crave
the pity of their Pope and Priests, who for their own unjustifiable ends are
guilty of all their sufferings. I spare them who spare no man, and whose
policy, incompatible with all Monarchy and Government but their own, enforces
the industry of others, in the preservation of their true faith to God, and
their own safety: Thus after my manner, I run and write, with a light hand, I
touch, but not to the quick; You who carry a Key of my thoughts can further
open me, and will, I hope, as you use, be indulgent unto me: London, and the
Parliament afford much company, but to me little conversation; I am now in an
opener Air, and with you I lie more open. The truth is, Carriages have been so
Cabalisticall of all sides, so unpleasant, and inconvenient to participate or
comply with, that being embarked to a concurrency of results, I found enough
to do to look to my self, as little desirous to counsel, as affected, or
thought fit to be called unto it: No man ever acted less, or suffered more,
then by my infirmity I have done this Parliament; My good God has still
wonderfully supported me, and it may be all to the best. Much good may others
find, and we in them by their advancement. My ends are only to keep my self
an honest man, with an untainted Conscience and Reputation, nor am I, as I
hope, unhappy therein, at least from the best. A fair and quiet retrait from
the world, and worldly cares, has long been, as you know, and still is, all my
ambition, it is easier to wish then to find; my appetite to the world was
never much, (howsoever I have appeared) if ever it had been any thing, it is
now past; My conversation is more in the other world then this; and that the
rather, seeing (if my distaste misleads me not) the generality of men's spirits
is not possessed with that sweetness, Courtesy, Familiarity, Indulgencie, and
love to goodness as was wont to be. But here my paper forces me to an end,
and to profess my self, as you shall ever find me,

1640. Your sincerely affectionate Friend and Servant. Du. North sen.

A sudden, free and opportune discourse to the present 28. of March, 1641.
OUr weather is said to have been much more gentle then in the more Southerly
neighboring parts, the entrance of the Spring proves fair and more seasonable
then of late years, our storms and distempers possess our spiritual and
politic part; This Parliament is our Crisis and time of Physic, which if
unlucky our State is desperate, and health in truth is never to be despaired
till the body cannot bear the remedy: acute and pressing diseases hardly admit
of long and preparative courses, and often as little of violence: the fair and
just temper of our Spirits has cast us upon more regular, though longer ways
of reformation and punishment then the practice of former more tumultuous
times, but in the mean time our Physic and Physicians prove so costly as
offends, whilst it mends: such may be the Peccant humors, as the body may be
sooner overthrown then they extirpate; to put off the present paroxysmes,
induce a good diet, and abate predominant malignitie, may possibly suffice to
overcome danger, and exempt the body from being obnoxious to every residing
venom. Our disease has consisted in the troubles of our Church and liberties;
for Church matters, as we have gone slowly on, so still they stick in our own
distractions. God be praised, our differences are rather about discipline then
doctrine, and certainly so far as the Scripture prescribes a competent general
rule therein, it must and ought to prevail, where it leaves a latitude, we
may respect our selves and the times, not without charity to others scruples,
and as far as may be an affectation of conformity and harmony with other
reformed Churches; if our Bishops would have held the same course, it might
have been better for them and us: we shall hardly attain quiet without hearing
all parties amongst our selves, nor are there wanting diverse learned Ministers
of other Nations resident with us: Judgment of private discretion holds a
necessary sway in particular men's election to what Church they will incline,
nor do I see why a considerable number may not be admitted to the same
liberty. I mean the body and head of a Kingdom howsoever Layick: The Clergy
having ever overmuch assumed to be judge and party in their own concernings
has ever bred a great disturbance in the world. We are now by Gods grace and
the Kings in a happy way; Peace and truth are likely to kiss, may justice and
mercy as well: we are upon an indissoluble conjunction of King and people,
Scotland and England, reconcilement in Religion, and a marriage with the young
Prince of Orange, and his Majesty's eldest daughter. And now as it has pleased
the Almighty miraculously to effect, that Scotland and England severally
within themselves have passed hitherto thorough their late great troubles, as
also their forces raised one against the other with an in consider able
bloodshed, how happy I say would it be if any expedient and security could be
found to save time, cost, and blood, with a celebration of all these happy
consummations in some other accommodation, such as a submission to Fine,
Banishment, exclusion from all public businesses and advises, to the
satisfaction of justice upon transcendent misdemeanors, and this to be the
better assured by manucaption of friends, or otherwise? Pity it were that this
expected Jubilee should not pass, if reasonably, without stain of blood: and
surely His Majesty is too good and wise ever to readmit (though it were left
free unto him) Ministers so hateful, prejudged and unhappy, as they who now
are questioned have been unto him; But this is rather my wish then conclusion
and hope. I have in my hasty unaffected manner disburdened my self, I have I
thank God no affection or passion, but what is requisite to a good Christian,
Subject, and Patriot, so in despite of all prejudicacy and sinister
misconstruction I will ever be found, and so I submit to better judgments.

March 1641.
HAving, as my preface lately mentioned, adventured in a private way upon the
Press, and that now near an end with me, how censorious and tender soever
the times are, I cannot be so stupid as totally to forbear a resentment of
our unparalled calamities: Our sacred Anchor is come home, our ultimate
hopeful pacifique Treaty is dissolved, ecstasie and despair succeed; Eyes
turn to fountains, there is no Balm in Gilead: Tantum Religio potuit suadere
malorum: No, no, it is not Religion, it is nothing of sincere Piety; It is in
the root, the artifice, the ambition, the malice of prevaricating Jesuits and
Priests: Poor silly infatuated Laity, they had a mission as of Sheep among
Wolves, but they invert it upon you; They drive you to their shambles, nay they
prevail with you to slaughter one another, (Gladiators of their Theater) to
furnish and celebrate their feasts, their festivalls: And you unhappy (often
the best meaning, though over-facile) Princes of the Earth, how grossly are
you frequently intoxicated by them to your own, to your neighbors, to your
peoples funestious destruction? they carry you irrecoverably by blinding
degrees and trains to the precipice of their concealed, disguised, pernicious
machinations; They work upon the weakness and corruption of your Favorites
and Counselors, who Satanically tranfigure themselves into Angels of light to
abuse your over credulous goodness. Many times a superinduced, preternaturall,
adventitious malice invadeth an otherwise well chosen Counselor, finding his
conceited merits mis-received, mis-interpreted by the vulgar; All to your
ruin, to your subversion: you mainely suffer and are the losers, where they,
if they fail and miscarry in their maine proposed ends, attain no
unacceptable satisfaction in revenge, in blood, in desolation.

For our Redeemers sake redeem your selves and us: your private and the
public good and quiet can hardly be over-bought; our very being, not only
our wel-being is now almost thorough all Christendom in question; some
proprietary goods are well thrown over board to save a fair well-peopled Ship
from perishing; time may supply them.

Avoid extremities as a Rock, Gravissimi sunt morsus irritae necessitatis: Take
heed of permitting dangerous humors to settle overlong; take heed of raising
the Billows and the Feavour too high; if water be not now rather then oil
applied, inevitable ruin alone must extinguish our devouring flames:
Professions and pretenses have been hitherto on all sides not unfaire, O that
they may be so contained! And now you also on each side, our soul and State
Physicians, look upon God, his truth, and public peace more then your
passions, self interest and policy, stre^ch not your strings too high: trust
God with the blessing his own Truth and Oracles, fear not the consequence of
a truly orthodox assertion: may truth and peace be ever as well your object
as pretense; fair, uniforme, harmonious, reformed discipline, order and
government your prudentiall and Christian aim: maintain our foundations as
entire and unshaken as an orderly, candid, well intended edifice will admit,
else may you pervert and destroy what you are bound to assert and maintain.
Nor will I pretermit you Stars of the greater and lesser magnitude in the
Oxford Firmament, whose ennobled blood, birth and station constitute you
Patrons and supporters of your Countries preservation and welfare, whose
predecessors and progenitors are glorious in the Registers of time as happy
advancers and dilaters of the English possessions, name, and honor: Suffer not
now our Annals to disgrace your name and memory as the impulsive active Engines
to our Kings and Countries lugubrious irreparable loss; commiserate the sighs
and groans of our gasping exspiring defaced Nation; Search home into the
disguised ca^ses and Authors of yours and our miseries; undeceive, disabuse
your selves, dispell the mists of your distempered bewildred spirits, and lend
at last a hand to save and rescue, to stanch and cure our letiferous wounds;
Let no Roman recorded eternized examples devoted as a willing ambitious
sacifice for their Countries deliverance and redemption diffame you in what you
owe, and to procure can hardly over-doe or suffer. Infinite matter you may
discover would here offer and suggest it self, the times require, but will not
well comport with ingenuitie: much for caution, much for cure might be
exhibited; I have met with conjunctures to have been often versed and engaged
in deliberations, obnoxious and captious, nor have proved my self destitute of
some ability to tread by a line and cut by a thread; I am at this instant not
unfurnisht of a plentiful Magazin of specious flattering materials for the
present occasion; somewhat I had conceived not impertinent to have farther
alleged for my self: I silence and pass by all, confining my self to what
impremeditately falls and flows upon my paper: my wonted diffusive confusion
would fit these troubled distracted times, but I will contain: if my lines
have a propitious Genius, (though unhappily I have as much despaired as
affected to be able to serve my generation) either alive or dead, I may
possibly with my little erudition prove an illiterate Author of some small
fruit and edification, at least to the seeking, fair, industrious mind; such
is my prayer, such my desire. How near my end of writing, of ability to
comply with public duty, and my lives period concur, I know not: The
disorder of the times consumes our fortunes and spirits, consternates, devasts
and plunders our souls and consciences. I have a long time conceived ordinary
taken Oaths (especially when multiforme) of great and evil consequence, and
little effect, (Oaths of course, as I was wont to say, are coursly observed)
they pass at length insensibly, they cauterize the vulgar, they often ensnare
when considered, like over-iterated frequent Physic, they lose their
operation; as well the tender conscientious as the libertine impatient, finding
themselves pent and constrained, to disentangle they counterworke and perforate
them, like Sampson they break their uneasy bands, and by a depraved
consecution carelessely slight them, letting out their souls to a subsequent
dissolution and corruption: War and custom turn blood and cruelty to
nature, necessity of imposing, and rigorous coertion render us
incompassionate: Yet however he may appear, the honest good Surgeon being
by the inconsiderate ignorant unjustly censured of cruelty and
hard-heartednesse by his incisions and other necessary operations of art, will
to the better judgments stand justified, as having acted only toward cure,
preservation, health and recovery: May it please God to overrule and rectify
our hearts, blessing us in maintaining our Fundamentals of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, and me in supporting my self by fair and necessary subterfuges and
diversions: I am no Cabalist, one of the open, none of the closer Counsels; I
am neither wise nor good enough, yet as the Scripture mentions of the over-wise
and over-just, am left alone to my solitary unjunctoed self; my fate, not my
affections or laziness may be the cause: I confess some unsutablenesse may
be in me by my default and curiosity, making me in business more
troublesome, and less ductile and tractable then ordinary; my mind is also too
sof^ and smooth for the questionablenesse, anxietie, obliquities, hardness and
roughness of the present; I am naturally active, yet dainty and scrupulous of
resolutions and undertakings; What shall I do?

Stirring Spirits must be fomented, if I find no hope of doing good abroad, if
no evasion, I will in all events endeavor to make use of my experience to
subsist, not injurying my self within my self at home; I have scarcely to this
day become instructed how to forbear to oppress, how to favor, be charitable
to, and honestly indulge my self, but am in a much cleerer light for my guide
then formerly, and even now (which you see is hard for me to do) to make use of
it, I most humbly implore the Grace and Mercy of the Omnipotent, upon this
disconsolate, afflicted, deplorate world, and me, and end, Amen.

March 10. 1644. Un peu de tout Rien come il fault a la Francoise.



Chorus.
MAnkind cruel to thy self,
No beast of prey comes near to thee:
Thou need'st no other Rock or Shelf,
For Shipwreck, then thy cruelty.
Wolves thou destroyedst, more wolf then they,
They never prey upon their kind:
Nor joy to kill and to betray,
Where fair subsistence they might find.
Wolves in Sheeps clothing are the worst;
Poor Sheep, that with such Shepherds meet!
Our sins do make us thus accursed,
Ensowring all that would be sweet.
No warning nor forbearance could
On our obdurate Souls prevail:
We still do all, but what we should,
Our fatal sufferings to entaile.
Be wise at last by your own cost,
Exempt your selves from common scorn:
Else King and People, all is lost,
All into blood and pieces torn.
God and your Neighbor take to heart,
God alone can help impart.
IF you are a Formalist, one who does Stupere in Titulis Imaginibusque; here is
scarcely so much as a tittle for you, exercise your severity somewhere else,
this does neither invite nor defy you; Master of it self, and its own
entertainment. It rather forbids you as an unwelcome guest; Non omnibus dormit;
what most by chance, and something by design (as most things go) the most
important pieces carry their Date, you must accordingly distinguish the times,
like me, they are no temporizers, neither affectedly precisely following, nor
over Monsterlike contemptuously differing. I have known the Drapery of a
picture drawn some time past, to the life, altered to the Modern fashion, it is
endless and senseless; Then was then, and so ought to appear, and pass.
Take measure of my Writings by their birth, and of me by what I am, something
must be allowed to the Scene and other respects: I forbear to particularize
upon the present times, I hope they will favorably requite me in their
censure: These four last unhappy years I mean, and the calculation of this end
of 1644. March 13.

FINALIS.

