Allowed to be Published,

Anno Dom. 1688.
Natural Allegiance, AND A National Protection, TRULY STATED: Being a Full
ANSWER TO Dr. G. Burnett's Vindication of Himself.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1688.

Remarks on the Second Part of the Reflections of Dr. Burnett, on the
Parliamentum Pacificum; being an Answer to the Vindication of himself.
SECT. I.
AN Apology for so many Months silence Vid. page 1.
(which is sometime Interpreted, a Consent to the Accusation) would be now as
requisite and necessary for our selves; and be better excused by the long,
deliberate, and serious Consideration, that has been had of what is here Writ;
than that of our Authors, from his uneasiness in Writing: Himself, and his
Admirers, I am sure, think he Writes very easily, Vid. his Papers.
and the many Calumnies he has cast upon our English Government, and the Prince
that Presides in it, in multiplied Reflections, in repeated Libels, aggravated
with Arrogance and Applause, only from their being the most Audacious Crimes,
and the severest Satyrs on the Crown: This does certainly declare, that they do
not come from him with such a deal of difficulty, but are more probably, the
sudden Productions of his easy ^^ile: The hasty Transports of an Vid. Letter
to my Lord Middleton.
avowed and Animated Passion, or the gratifying the Popular Fame he has here
acquired, partly for his Meritorious Learning, and more by his studied
Affectation.

Had this Paper but the half of that Modesty it pretends to, it could not with
so bold a Paragraph.
Front term those pieces that have been published in defense of a Prince and
Government he defames, but so many Libels, only because they have tossed about
his Name; I cannot see how they can be called so, unless this Celebrated Name,
to which so ^any are ascribed, like some Cabalistick Spell can make a
Metamorphosis, and blot the very Papers that offer but to mention it: Those are
looked upon as the greatest Libellers by the Civil Law, that invade and abuse
the Civil Atrox injuria estimatur, Si Magistratus, etc. Inst. 4. Tit. 4. Si ad
seditionem: Vis Publica est. Vid. Pacii Analys. ibid.
power and the Magistrate, which if it tend to Sedition, is there called, a Vid
Tuld. hic. c. 5. per l. Un. C. Si quis Imp. maledixerit. Quisque vel cogitavit,
etc. Vid. C. 9. and 6.
Public Invasion.

Had our Author, that Christian Temper, which he tells us he proposes for a
Pattern and Imitation: I humbly conceive, he ought to have been so humble too,
though such an High Priest, and kept the Priest from being so high, as to
revile the Prince, that Divine Pattern our Savior, is indeed the greatest
Example of such a sort of deference and submission; that would make him such a
Christian; as to pay it to his King, though Pagan; and that though Dr. B. were
of the Opinion of Mr. I. in the point of Vid. Julian's Popery and Paganism.
Popery.

In the next place, his Apology for the States of Holland, is but little better
than what he makes for himself; Vid. Ibid. page
for the Protection they have given him, might proceed from the
Misrepresentation he has given them, and their Lordships we thought would have
had too much Honor for Crowned Heads and their own Allies, than to protect a
person that Libel'd and abused both; at least, if they allowed him the
privilege of a Naturalized Subject, K. of France and England in his Reflect.
they could not indulge him a Liberty that must be denied any Native; that is,
to offer to defame the Proceedings of those Princes, whom not only their Sacred
Character should preserve Inviolate, but whom, themselves were obliged by
solemn Leagues and Articles of Alliance, (Sanctions that in such National
Concerns are more seriously to be observed) to maintain in their wonted Honor
and Esteem; and to deliver up such Foreign Fugitives; or punish at home such
Domestic Offenders as do endeavor to diminish it: The little Reflection that
was past upon their Government, one Vid. Parliam. Pacif.
would have thought might have been past by too, by one that reflects upon ours
so much; and Statesmen will allow, even Grotius himself, that the Aggressors in
such Violations, authorize the returning of the like: If our Author can prove,
that the States have been worse used, than he has used the King of Great
Britain; or, that the least Animadversion was ever made on their Government or
Constitution; till His Majesty had suffered so much from his most Injurious
Pen, we will then submit to that punishment, which the Pensioner, and the
Doctor, do desire, and be heartily sorry for that Atrocious Calumny, which
they say, has so much deserved it.

I have therefore in all the preceding Treatise omitted such Expressions as
might give an offense, though they could be said with truth: I have given
Historical Accounts of the Proceedings of those Catholic Princes, whose Memory
and Religion, Persons and Persuasions, our Author thinks it his Duty barely by
Reflection to defame, and if Holland has happened to be concerned in the
History as well as France, and Germany, who can help it? the Doctor might as
well commence a Quarrel with Heylin's Geography; (for Historians in a Trade can
never agree) as to make us answerable to States, for an History of the times,
and only for relating the Transactions of those very Papists and Protestants,
that made such a wonderful alteration in this Western part of the World; and
even an account extorted from us, by those Rhetorical Reflections, (which from a
greater Zeal against Popery, than any regard to sincerity and truth) I am
confident he has made: Neither does this Justification of our selves like our
Author's Defamation of Princes, consist for the most part only in Flourish and
Tropology; and I might add, in a little Malice, mingled with his much Learning
and Wit; but the Writing of an History is to be defended by the Law, and though
it were of all Nations, is no Libel; by the very Jus Gentium: The World could
never be said to sit in Judgment upon Sir Walter Rawleigh, and the short
History we have given of the Foreign Reformations, make us no more accountable
to States abroad, than our Author is for the History of our own at home; though
I must confess, I do not expect any thanks from Holland, because he had his
from the House; so that if those Passages, by which he so laboriously would
stir up the resentment of the Vid. Reflect. a part, page p.
States, have only a respect to Matter of Fact, to History; and that of
Reformation, the Laws of Nations make it no Injury, and I hope, none of our
Neighbors will teach us any better Law.

Injurious Defamation, consists properly in Reflections, which of late is our
Authors excellency, his common Topic, Title, and Peculiar; and what Reflects
upon the fame of private Persons, or Public Societies, in feigned
Compositions, either of Si quis ad infamiam, Carmen Libellum, aut Historiam,
etc Institut. Lib. 4. Tit. 4.
Satyr and Lampoon, both by Civilians, and other Lawyers, is truly called
Libel. And therefore, I suppose it was, and for that only reason, that the
Learned Delendum esse verbum, aut Historiam, quod nec Theop. agnosclt,
nechabent libri Emendatiores. Vid. Jul. Pacii Analys. Scholiis Schotani. Id.
Annotator on the Institutions of Justinian, in his Chapter of Injuries, would
have the word History expunged from being appropriated as a part of Legal
Defamation; which (says he) an Eminent Author does not allow of; neither
(indeed) do the more Corrected Books mention it: I have thought good to
Apologize with this too, that our Adversary may not retort again, that the
States are worse used than himself, whom we would still respect, while Our
Allies, though this Author should persist to Libel Theirs.

This Protection, (since he is pleased farther to insist on) we shall a little
further debate, with all deference, to those that give it him; and though he
offers to Answer all that relates to himself, I hope to show that there is a
great deal yet left unanswered; and for that Compliment, he passes upon our
Style, for foul Language, we have in return, given a more civil Character of
his. Id. Page
If a Man were to judge of the Manners of a Clime, from the Deportment of the
Inhabitants, I know from whence we might expect foul Language: I confess, I
cannot contend with our celebrated Author for that popular Fame that attends
his way of Writing; which least it should be confined, and too narrow for his
unproportionable Merit, himself has taken care in Vid. Reflect. on Varill, and
Reflect. on History of Reform. at Oxon. and several of his late works.
some Pompous Expressions to diyulge, but though not so copious; still I do not
find my self so straightened in such a scanty Style, as to be forced to have
recourse to Scurrility; the late Bishop of Oxford, for his Vid. the Enquiry,
Buffoon, Scaramouch, Harlequin. Drawcansyr. Baboon. And Quaere, If foul
Language?
Fiocco's sake, might have been better treated, since his own Name in the end
of it, to which the Enquirer never read, manifested it to be his; and the same
License that has so alarmed him, authorized it in the Front, yet some sober
Persons presume to think that Enquiry a very Scurrilous one; which with
Reverence to the Sea, and respect to the Sacred Function, had been better
forborne, neither was there in all our Papers, to the last, the least Reflection
upon our Adversary, that transcends the boldness he has taken with his Majesty
and the Crown; neither was I conscious of any particular Opprobrious Term, for
which he could reproach me, unless it were a Crime to call him an Vid* Parliam.
Pacificum. page 44.
Impostor, that puts upon us for History the Defamation of the last Those that
speak to the dishonor of the King's Parents, and Progenitors, are by the Laws
of Scotland, within the Acts of Leasing making, and to be punished with loss of
Life. Jac. 6. p. 8. c. 134.
Kings Memory, and that of all his Predecessors; the meeting with such Passages
might a little provoke an undecent expression; for which even sedate thought,
or the mightiest modesty will hardly permit me now to beg his Pardon.

Having thus past through the Praeliminarys of his most peculiar Vindication,
with as much Compliment as may be, we are come now to consider the Contents of
it: And first, what further Defense our Adversary has made, and how far he has
answered to his second Citation that was sent him out of Scotland?

SECT. II.
WHatever are the Complaints of Dr. B. against his Countrymen, I cannot see how
he could have wished for a better Country to have put himself upon his Trial
in; a Nation that governs it self by the Laws of all Nations, as well as the
Municipal ones of their Land, and even Vid. Lib. cui Tit. Reg, Majestat. A
Transcript from the Roman Law. Vid. Duck. de Authorite. l. 2. c. 10.
those framed, and composed according to the wise Institutions of the Emperor
Justinian, as just a Legislator as Solon himself, whom our Author insists on
Vid. Vindication of himself. p. 3. Id. page 1.
for his Naturalization: Those Caluminators, (to give our Author a right
understanding of the word) those false Accusers, whom he would have accordingly
punished, have there but little encouragement for Perjury: I wish we had here
but as much severity to intimidate Villains from such Practices: It is there
that these Caluminators, by a sort of Arithmetical Justice, (as the Vid.
Stierius Praecept. Ethic. c. 14.
Moralists term it,) or by that Eternal Law of Equity, among the Romans, the
Lex Talionis, are exposed, upon detection of their Perjury and falsehood, to
the very Punishments that the Party must have suffered, had their Evidence been
true, and this not only by the Ex Lege Remnia irrogatur ut (...), fronti
Caluminatoris inuratur, vel idem supplicium de quoreus periclitabatur. Vid. D.
4. 16. 1. c. 9. 46. 6. Zouch. Elem. pars 7. Sect. 10.
Civil Institutions, which with them take place where their own is defective,
but by their very * Parliamentary, as well as the Imperial Sanctions, and
particularly, by that of King Vid. Jac. 6. p. 11. c. 49.
James 6, which comes home to our Adversary's Case, He that Calumniates any
Person of High Treason, and the Party be acquitted, incurs the same Crime and
Punishment that the presumed Guilty must have undergone, had he made good his
Proof; a Criminal has but little reason to fear a false Evidence, where such
fearful Consequences do attend it; and our Author has as little Justice to
demand their being punnisht accordingly; since the proceeding upon a second
Citation, does not prove, that he was acquitted upon the first.

Had there been but the same Provision by our own Laws, against the falsehood of
Accusation, which our Author is so afraid of, I am afraid it would have saved
some of that Society, which his Pen so Persecutes, from Perishing so miserably
by the Breath of some Miscreants, that might more boldly stop another Man's,
when there is nothing left to choke them but their own Lies and Forgeries; and
who, perhaps, were the sooner brought to a shameful death, when their Accusers
were never in any danger of their Lives: I could never meet with any Objection
against this most equitably proceeding, but only that it might be a
discouragement to such as might otherwise detect any Treason or Conspiracy; but
since the Accuser has the same security for his Indemnity, or Life, against him
that will venture falsely to accuse him of Forgery, that the person had whom
himself, perhaps, justly accused, I cannot conceive, but he may proceed as
boldly in confidence of the truth of his Depositions, as if there were no such
Identity of Punishment annexed.

But our Author again, has less reason to condemn his Accusers there; since the
Subjects of that Nation are more particularly bound by an Car. 2. p. 2. Sess.
2. cap. 2.
Act of Parliament, that declares it their Duty, to depose upon Oath, when
called by Authority, their knowledge of any Crimes against the Public Peace,
and more especially, for corresponding with Fugitives and Rebels; so that
supposing their Testimony true, which being upon Oath, we must have as much
Charity for, as our Author's Protestations, they could not avoid, both by their
Law, and Allegiance, to testify all that they knew; and till they are made
appear by Reciprocal Oaths, and as strong Circumstantial Evidence, to have
given in false Informations, they cannot be looked upon as Page 1.
Calumniators, much less, punished accordingly.

And here I cannot but take notice of another convenience his Law does allow
him, though the manner of his Process is so injuriously reproacht. I am sure it
is a defect in our own, and which nothing but the tender regard to the
Sovereign's safety can excuse; and that is, the having the Evidence for his
Innocence, sworn against the King, as well as that which for the King is
brought to prove the Guilt; for Judges, or Jurors, (whatever is pretended) must
be more influenced by that regard that is given an Oath, than to the bare
Testimony of an Evidence that lies under no such Obligation.

I shall not positively take upon me to define whither by the Practice of
Scotland, it is absolutely necessary to Vid. Vindication page 2.
specify the particular Laws, upon which a Citation is founded, our
Inditements we all know; set forth only in general, and contrary to the Statute
in that case provided: And I cannot imagine, but that the same Learned
Advocate, who in his first Citation did so largely set forth in so many several
Statutes, the Crime that affected him; could (had it been absolutely necessary)
have omitted it in the second, since they need not have been so far to seek for
any Special Law, when some of the former that were cited, would have served
also for this, for the declining of the Sovereign Authority, and putting
Treasonable Limitations upon the Prerogative of the Crown, or upon their due
Obedience, and Allegiance; is by an Act Car. 2. made Rebellious and
Treasonable, and 2 Act. 1 Sess. of Car. 2.
if so, an entire transferring this Allegiance, and renouncing all Obedience,
will amount to more than a mere limitation of it, and the declining of his
Authority, is by an express Act of King James made High Treason; which by the
same Translation of Allegiance it must rationally, 8 Parl. Jam. 6.
as well as legally, be concluded, he does decline.

But it is observable, that in this second Citation, to Vid. Vind. p. 2.
which he excepts, he is proceeded against by the Advocate, upon the Common
Law, Acts of Parliament, and Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, which general Form
is not used in the first, and so may supersede any special Law, being set
forth; as it is usual among us when Men are Indicted at Common Law, there is no
need of any Statutes being expressed; but since our Author desires special Law so
much, I think there are many other Statutes of that Kingdom, that I am afraid,
will affect him too much, if this Expedient of transferring Allegiance be but
once found to fail him, and it is those that Vid. 1.3.4. Act of Parl. K. James
6. Vid. 10. Act 10. Parl. Jac. 6. all expressed in the first Citation.
ordain, that no person presume to speak, or Write, on purpose to Reproach, or
slander the King, or the Government, or misconstrue their Proceeding, whereby
dislike may be moved between the Prince and his Subjects, and this upon pain of
Death: I am afraid many of our Authors works will rise up in Judgment against
him, where this is to be made the matter of his Process.

In the next place, it is plain by this Citation, that even in Scotland, there
may be Treason by the Common Law, and where by that it is set forth, I humbly
conceive, there needs no more particular Law to be specified than with us in
England, for by common Law, even there, can be meant no more than what our Coke
makes it here, common Usage; and if I mistake not, a Duck. de Authoritat. Lib.
2. c. 10.
Learned Lawyer of ours from the Concession of their own Jo. Leslae. de moribus
Scotor. Lib. 1. C. Leg. Scot. Constat autem jus Scotorum sicut and Anglicanum,
ex consuetudinibus Scotiae.
Countryman whom he cites, is of the same Opinion; so that this Authors
Argument, will in short, resolve it self into this Interrogatory, whither of
that which Common Law makes High Treason; a Special Law is required to make a
Man guilty?

SECT. III.
THe Dr. in the next place observes, That no Similitude Ibid. page 2.
of hands is in Criminal Matters admitted of for proof in Scotland, and that
such Evidence is but a general presumption. I confess, we have here in England,
the Lady Carr's Case against it, and Mr. Sidney's, and Vid. Trial.
several others, in which hers has of late been always overrul'd; but whither
they have any President for it in that Country cannot assert, but if it be of
any Authority, that which a Learned Duck de Authoritate. Lib. 2. C. 10. Constat
ex rerum Scoticarum Scriptoribus, in Judiciis, ad leges suas, and post eas, ad
jus Civil teneri.
Author observes upon the Authority of the Civil Law in Scotland, that in their
Administrations of Justice, they are tied to their Municipal Laws, and where
that is deficient, to be guided by the Civil, then any one Criminated for High
Treason, there must expect but little favor, especially in matter of Evidence,
and Presumption; for though the Imperial Decrees are as tender of the Life of a
Man, and have as great a regard to innocence, as any Laws we have in England;
though they say too, That it is much better to spare the Guilty, than Condemn
an Innocent; though they generally give it in the Satius est Impunitum relinqui
facinus nocentis, quam innocentem damnari. Sic inquit Ulpianus, Divus Trajanus
Severo rescripsit. D. 48. 19. 1. 5. Zouchei. Quaest. etc. 9.8. Vid. etiam,
ejusdem Element. par. 7. Sect. 9. Vid. Legem Juliam. Inst. Tit. 18. Lib. 4.
Negative, That no one can be condemned upon Presumption; yet in their Crime of
Lesae Majestatis, they all say it is excepted; and their very Sons and Servants
upon a bare presumption of their Guilt shall be Condemned; and this Lose
Majesty is a term not altogether an Alien to the Laws of Scotland, but what I
am sure there is in frequent use, so that it may be possible, even according to
the grounds and practice of the Scottish Laws, to find a Man guilty, upon
smaller proof, than our Author may imagine; and if he consider the many Acts of
Parliament that were past, even in the Reign of their first Protestant Prince,
King Jam. 6. (and I hope he will condemn nothing of the Reformation) that
declared, and ordein'd what was High Treason, even in the largest extent, and
all which are (I think) sufficiently specified in his Vid. 1.3.4. Act 8 p. K.
J. 6. 10 Act 10 p. of K. Jam. 6. 144 Act 12. p. of K. J. 6. with several of
some other Kings.
first Citation: Then I humbly conceive, he will have less reason to complain of
the severity of his Prosecutors, and the Injustice that is done him.

I have this further to offer, it is expressly provided there by 10 Act 10 p. K.
Jam. 6. and 2 Act 2 Sess. 1 p. K. Chapter 2.
two several Statutes and * Acts of Parliament; that to Write in Reproach of
the Kings Person and Government, The Earl of Orkney was Condemned for signing a
Treasonable Paper of Combination with his Neighbors at home. Treason by Ja. 6.
p. 10. Dr. B. signs his League and Alliance with Foreign States. Treason. 1
Car. 2. p. 1. Sess. 1. c. 5.
or by Writing, to put Limitations upon their due Obedience and Allegiance,
shall be adjudg'd Rebellious and Treasonable; if this by their Law is Statuted,
or ordained (as certainly it is,) this Similitude of hands must be allowed a
Proof, or the Intention of the Law must be utterly Insignificant, for it is
Morally impossible in such cases to give in any other Evidence; it cannot be
imagined that those who make such Treasonable Construction with their Pen, will
permit any persons to be present at the Penning it; Praesumptiones gravissimae
sufficient ad paenam capitalem, si delictum sit occultum and difficilis
probationis: Julii Clari sententia. Vid. Zouch. Quaest. praedict.
and then all Laws will allow that for Evidence, where greater cannot be had,
or expected: And I cannot see, why a serious Letter, solemnly sent, under his
own hand, to a Public Minister of State, about an affair which all the World
knew himself solely concerned in, should not be accounted one of the Violenta
praesumptio est plena probatio, says my Lord Coke.
strongest Presumptions, and which our Law too calls the fullest Proof, and
this violent presumption; in his case, I humbly conceive, was founded, as it
ought to be, that is, Violenta praesumptio infertur ex justis causis and
Circumstantiis. Vid. Zouch. El. de Evidentia causae. c. 9.
on just Causes and Circumstances; for certainly, there was just Cause that
gave them to believe, that our Author was the Author too of that Letter to my
Lord M. and many Circumstances that seconded the belief of it, since he there
represents the very Causes of his Writing exactly consonant with the
Proceedings here, and since it might well be imagined from the nature of its
Composition, that none but Dr. B. was the Writer, some things are so notorious
that they need no proof even by Notorium probatione non indiget. Baldus ad C.
9. 2, 7.
Law, and our Author would have been loath that any should have doubted it,
from the peculiar excellency of the Style, and the reputation that himself
says, his Works have gotten in the World.

It may not perhaps, be here too impertinently observed, that the sending these
Papers to a Public Minister of State, made them from his hands so many Public
Eandem fidem obtinet, sides Instrumentorum quam depositiones testium, maxim si
sint publica. C. 4. 21. 15.
Instruments, when communicated by the Secretary to the Advocate of Scotland;
and I know some Laws that say such Evidence is as good as a Deposition upon
Oath; and as our Common Law calls it in other Cases; so this may be here called
a Civil Record.

In short, the sole Question will be, whither in this Controverted Letter; and
Papers, that were sent to the Secretary, there was any thing contained that Vid
Letters, and Papers.
reproacht his Majesty's Government, or limited our Authors Allegiance; when it
threatened a slanderous Recital of the affairs of the Kingdom, and declares his
Allegiance actually translated; which the two recited Acts do literally declare
rebellious and treasonable? or whither they are only some Vid. Vind. page 1.
ill chosen Expressions? for which we have only the Presumption of Dr. B. (and
if general Presumptions, as he says, are no proof, much less can a particular
one be so) especially if you consider him, as a Party concerned, and that no
Law will allow him to Nemo Idoneus testis in re sua intelligitur. Vid. D. 9.
22. 45.
testify for himself: This ill chosen Expressions is such a modest mitigation
of what his Scottish Law calls High Treason; that I cannot help my self to such
another Instance of civil Excusation and Apology, than that which another
Celebrated Author, now an Inhabitant about the same Provinces, and probable,
correspondent with ours, (though we do not hear of his Allegiance translated)
made for a Doctor too; but one whose Works have less reputation in the World,
who was pleased (upon the consideration of the contrariety and Contradiction of
Oat's in his Evidence and Discourse) to grant that Vid. Mr. H^nt's Postscript.
p. 41.
he was a little Apert and Incurious in his Conversation; an Apertness and
Incuriousness which the Statute has been so bold as to punish for Perjury; such
a faculty has the fame of an Author, or the quaintness of his Style, to give a
Politer turn, to those unpolisht terms, and rigorous Expressions of reason and
the Law.

The next thing that falls in our way, is somewhat Vid. Vindication p. 3.
of the same nature, and which he would so softly insinuate, that the being
declared in the Writ a Rebel, does only intimate, that he is Contumacious: Had
our Author's Case indeed, been only the refusing to pay his Debts; and the King
only been his Creditor, I confess, I could then have had milder thoughts of the
Rebellion that is implied in his Letters of Horning; but since it is so far
from that, that the Doctor declares, he owes his Majesty nothing, not so much
as Allegiance, which Vid. Ut supra.
their Laws declare Treasonable; I am afraid there is somewhat more that
affects him, than barely but a formal Contumacy and Contempt: It is the matter
in the Citation, with submission to his more peculiar opinion, that empowered
his Majesty to demand his punishment or surrender from the States, and not his
being pronounced Rebellious at Edinburgh, or the Peire of Leith; it is not for
the Rebellion in the Writ, but for the Treason that the Citation contains;
which I humbly conceive, by his Nonappearance for the space of a whole Year,
he has Convicted himself of: I fancy he had made a better Parallel of this
Scotch Horning, had he compared it to our English Outlary, and instead of
putting it into the Chancery, had brought it into the King's Bench; Writs of
Rebellion, we all know, are Matters of form with us in that Court; but no one
will agree here, that when a Man is Out-lawed for High Treason, he is no more a
Criminal, than he that runs into Holland for fear of an Execution, by the
Bailiff, and not of the Hangmans. It was the misfortune of a Vid. His Rest. on
Varill p. 55. Sir Tho. Armstrong's-Case.
friend of His whom he would make to be murdered, to meet with the difference,
and yet Justice too; whatever have been our Authors injurious and multiplied
Reproaches, almost in every Print, upon the just Much less Reflection on a
Chief Justice was ad judged a Libel with us, in 18 Ed. 1.3 d. Inst. c. 76. and
by the Laws of Scotland for defaming a Judge falsely to be punished at the King's
Will. Jam. 5. p. 7. c. 104.
Judge than then Presided: The peculiar resentment of our Author, and that
perhaps, for some just disappointment, has so plainly occasioned those unjust
and repeated Reflections on that Loyal Peer, that as his Honor and Integrity
supersede all Vindication, so this Authors defect of Sincerity, is betrayed
beyond defense, and the result only this, that his Lordship may be said to lie
much above those lewd Calumnies, and but little Under.

SECT. IV.
BUt for all what our Author does so plausibly suggest, doubtless, there must
be a great deal of difference between a Criminal Process, and a Civil Action;
which if there be, then the Issue that is directed thereupon, though in
formality it may be the same, must in matter and substance greatly differ, and
the Consequences that attend it, as I have touched upon before, are of as
different a nature; which when the term is elapsed, the one will only affect
your Estate, the other both that and your life; for though in both Cases you
lose the benefit of the Laws; yet when the Crime is High Treason, you may more
properly be said to forfeit the Protection of the King; but for that, our
Author had provided for before hand, and from his own Vid. Six papers, page 39.
Maxims anticipated that forfeiture, by the renouncing his Obedience.

But further, I am well informed, that though the Dr. would make all his
Process to be but a formal Citation; and that there is no cognizance taken of
the matter it contains, that even in Scotland, a Citation, and Indictment, are
indeed the same in signification, though they are two different words. The first
form they are forced too, when the Criminal absents himself; and the second
(though the same in substance) in the form of a Libel, he is to plead to when in
Custody: Had the Citation expressed nothing of the Crime, then I confess, our
Authors Arguments had been better applied, but I cannot conceive now, without
the greatest Absurdity, how a Citation can be issued out, expressing the
Matter, and yet no Cognizance to be taken of the matter it expresses; if a
Citation be a Judicial Act, then sure what is therein contained, is as
judicially taken notice of: But though this second Citation seem so surprising
to him, he cannot be such an only Stranger to his own Jerusalem, as to know
none of these things, unless the flying into Egypt has made him an utter Alien
to the Commonwealth of his Israel; nothing is more common in his Country, then
that the King's Advocate when he discovers some new Matter of Fact against the
Criminal, to issue out a second Citation for his Appearance? This is called an
Additional Libel, in which there is no need to assert, and set forth any
Special Law, because it usually refers to the first, in which the Laws are
specified; and since our Author ends this Citation with an etc. we are left in
the dark as to the latter end of it; and perhaps, he may Vid. Vind. p. 2.
as unsincerely have left out some of the beginning; but though he had been
more ingenious; and this last Citation had no reference to the former, some
that understand the Law of Scotland too, do not agree with our Ibid.
Authors Informers, but are of Opinion, that where the King's Advocate does
accuse a Person of a Crime, that is in its own nature Treasonable; and what
implys the Pains and Punishment that is due to Treason, that then it is time
enough for the Advocate to set forth the Special Law for it at the Bar, and the
Judges will as certainly find the Libel, or Indictment, Relevant, which is like
our Grand Juries in England, finding of the Bill, and this practice (if I
mistake not) of naming no particular Act or Statute in High Treason, is as
usual with us here, it runs through all the forms of our late Trials and
Inditements, which only mention against the Statute, in that, or the like Case
provided, and leave it to the Attorney, which is but another sort of Advocate,
or the Judges, to declare what Statutes they proceed upon; but because general
Assertions may be no proof with some that will dispute any, though the thing has
been so often objected by the Prisoners, in all our late Proceedings, and
always so answered by the Judges, yet our Author will particularly find Mr.
Sidney, a a Man of no easy temper to be satisfied, to be forced Vid. his
Trial, page 7.
to submit to it; and this Judge, that our Author has so injuriously defamed,
to tell him as much Justice, That when he came to his Trial, the Attorney might
tell him what Statute he went upon, and give in Evidence any Act of Parliament
that comprehends Treason; and as the Scots did of old Symbolise with us, from
the Vicinity of the Countries, so somewhat in their Their Books of Reg. Majest.
much after the manner of our Glanv. de legibus. So also their Parliam. like
ours. Vid. Duck. de authoritate. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Laws and Constitutions, as well as with the more ancient of the Romans; so I
were almost assured that even in this modern practice which our Author
disputes, we might have somewhat of agreement too, which I would not venture to
affirm positively, till I were by a Person of Honor and Ingenuity, and of the
same Country further assured; neither is it improper to this place to observe,
that though our Author insists on the insignificancy of the Term Rebel in the
Letters, or Writ that declare him so, for his Nonappearance; that it may there
have a double signification, both with relation to his Contempt to the Laws,
and the Crime that he is charged with against the Prince, the Univocal sound of
the same word, will never do him any Service in his Aequivocal Interpretation
of the Sense; and the little kindness that he has to the Society one would
think should make him as afraid of an Aequivocation, or a Mental Reserve, as of
the very Mass it self; yet such is his reasoning, notwithstanding that
Antipathy he has against the Name; for this is plain, that the Demands that
were made of him, from the States, is founded upon the Matter and Substance,
and not the formality of the Word; for where it is formally used in Civil
Actions, there Letters of Relaxation are granted to the Partys if they satisfy
the Debt within a Year and a Day, and so acquitted, which shows that the Term
Rebel, is there merely used for form; but where in the other case he is a
presumed Rebel, both by Matter and Form; there, though he be Relaxt of his
Letters of Horning, by his Appearance, yet he might be hanged for a Rebel after
he appears; and I suppose, that may be one of the Reasons, why the Reflecter
stands out in Contempt, but then he ought to have considered further of what
follows in his Country usually in such cases, which makes a greater difference;
that after the publication of these Letters, and a year elapsed; in his case,
the King's Advocate can issue out another sort of Writ, called Letters of
Intercommuning, whereby all the Subjects of that Kingdom are forbid to converse
with him, to supply him with any Necessaries, upon the Penalties of High
Treason; and this to extend, not only to such of the King's Subjects as reside
at home, but to any that are Inhabitants with him in Holland, or if he had
translated himself and his Allegiance with the Hollanders to Japan.

So that from this it will appear, that even by the Law of Scotland, a Man
(against whom the Writ of Horning is directed, importing High Treason) is a
Rebel of an higher nature, till he come and take his Trial, and that before the
Letters of Intercommuning are issued out; and though Terms in Treatises are to
be taken in the common acceptance (as our Author tells us) not as in Courts of
Justice, yet Lib. 2. c. 16. Sect. 84.
Grotius will tell him too, that there is also a great Liberty to be allowed to
conjecture in Homonimous Expressions, and Amphibologys, and that Terms of Art,
such as Majesty, and Parracide, and we may add, Rebels and Fugitives must be
all explained by Men most skilled in the Law.

But because there can be no fairer way of dealing with your Adversary, but by
consuting him even from his own Concessions, (for Arguments that are
Diametrically opposite, do but in a more Eloquent manner, give one another the
Lie) we will suppose with him for once, that these Letters that denounce him a
Rebel, mean nothing, but that he is a little Contumacious, that they are merely
but so many Writs of Rebellion, which here that Honorable Person he so
reviles, does many times issue out of Chancery; we will suppose our Author
retired into Holland, only for some disorder in his affairs, or for a little
imaginary Debt; yet even in those very Civil Actions, the Laws of Nations allow
such a Latitude, that Letters of Request may be made to the Foreign State, and
if they are denied, those of Reprisals Vid. Rolls Abridgment, fol 530. a Case
to this purpose.
may be granted; and if Private Subjects have such Remedys, it will be hard to
deny a Prince to demand satisfaction for a public offender; and the Dilemna
was never so much as doubted; but that a Trial was to be ordered by the
Foreign State, or the Criminal surrendered to the offended one; I gave our
Author several Presidents for these Proceedings; but he that pretends to Vid.
Parliam. Pacif.
answer all, left them all unanswered; I shall present him more of the same
nature, when we come to a more proper place, but it is somewhat more apposite
here, since he would make his Treason but a sort of Civil Action, and himself
no more than the King's Debtor; to tell him, that in Edward the Second's time,
some Merchants of Florence having received the King of England's Rents, run
away with the Money to Rome; the King sends his Request to the Pope, demands
the Goods to be secured and their Person seized, and neither of them denied.
The like was done to one that fled into Lorrain with 500 l. of the King's
Money; the Duke upon demand, seizes the Person, and secures his Goods wherever
they were found, till he had satisfied to the full, so that I hope from hence
may be concluded, that even a Man that does not Vid. Vind. page 3.
pay his Debts, or retires into Holland, only for a disorder in his Affairs,
may give our Government a right to demand him: For if it be granted in the Case
of a Forreigner, it will be good in a Native's, a fortiori.

To sum up all the Substance of this Point, It seems very strange, that the
Proceedings of the Justice in Scotland, should be so Arraigned, where the Laws
are so favorable to Offenders, as to make the very Judges the greater
Criminals, if they should offer to do the least wrong, and Injustice, and
liable to the most Jam. 1. p. 2. 6. 45. Jac. 5. p. 7.104.
rigorous Punishment; where the Witnesses are in such danger for their given
false Evidence, that they expose themselves to the Punishment of those they
accuse, if they can be ever convicted of the Perjury and falsehood, and that
whither it be Pecuniary, Corporal, or Capital; and where by particular Jam.
6.11. p. c. 49.
Act, Calumniators in High Treason, are (if the accused Party be acquitted)
guilty of the same Crime, exposed to the same Punishment. And it will be no
easy matter, when they are exposed to such terrible Consequences for the
Perjury, to procure Knights of the Post, though it were to serve even an
Interest of State; Vid Six Papers. p. 49.
to fasten pretended Crimes (as our Author has it) on those they have a mind to
destroy: There is a Society our Author has a mind to destroy; and I think some
of the Members, not long since, were as miserably destroyed, for want of this
Severity with us, against such Profligate Evidence as accused them: The Dr.
knows this to be true, and is so far for verifying it, that he would have his
1. Note* That the second Citation does not invalidate the first, much less
prove the Witnesses forsworn, and he confesses, that the Matter agrees with the
former, Id. p. 3.
Accusers accordingly punished, even before they are Convicted of any falsehood,
and himself not so much as tried, or acquitted.

Thus have I done all that Justice to a Nation, even in its Judicial
proceedings, that they could expect from a Forreigner, from his little
Learning, and less Examination into their Laws, which he found, even upon that
little he has made, both agreeable with the ancient Roman Equity, in many
things Consonant with our own, and in some cases recited already, beyond ours;
more equitably Just, so it will seem somewhat harder to be born, that this
Nations Justice should be so much arraigned by him that is their own Criminal,
but because our Authors wonted Vanity, may not arrogate the inglorious Fame, of
being the first Invader of the Judicial Proceedings of his Country, he has only
borrowed from Judices quantum in se est, lationes legum impedire, civium bona
Judicum, arbitrio esse concessa: eorumque esse perpetuam potestatem; Imperium
plane Tyrannicum, Buch. lib 14 Rerum Scotic. ad Ann. 1532.
Buchanan, that went before him; who has told the World that their Judges were
but so many Interrupters of Justice, that the Subjects property depends only
upon their Arbitrary power, and that the Government is truly Tyrannical; and
such a courteous Historiographer to his Country (as he may be well called, an
Original;) so it was our Authors Peculiar to transcribe him, and could never
have been Copied by a better Historian.

SECT. V.
THe Memorial of the Marquis de Albeville, I cannot pretermit without somewhat
of Vindication; though Vid. Vind. page 3.
the Missive of Mr. Fagel, that was given him against my own Works, I more
willingly pass by; our Author when he not only reflects upon that Instrument,
but ridicules it, transcends not only the bounds of a modest Writer, but parts
with all deference to a Crowned Head, as well as his Allegiance; the Character
of an Envoy is the most immediate representation of the King, and every Act of
his, but another of the State; and whatever Liberty our Author pretends to,
their Lordships might have had more Honor than to suffer the Memorial of his
Majesty of Great Britain to be Burlesqu'd; Vid. Their Extract, out of their
Register, on the King's Memorial, An. 1664. Answered by Sir G. D.
but by them it may be better excused, since it has been so much their practice
before, or I must suppose, as Dr. B. does in his Satyrs and Sarcasms upon the
King, Vid. 6. pap.
that even this was done without their knowledge; and that though the Author
has subscribed his Name.

The substance of the first Memorial (as himself has Vid. Abstr. of the K.
Memorial in Vindicat. p. 3.
abstracted it among the Reflections he has made upon me; I shall in short
resolve into these three Interrogatories.

1. Whither our Author has defamed the King and his Government, and represented
him as a Persecutor, and his own life in danger? 2. Whither by Law, any of the
Kings Subjects could seize abroad on Criminals to our State, in what manner
soever? 3. Whither the States ought to have punished our Author, and his
Printer?
As to the first, whither the King has been defamed by him and the Government?
If the Question be taken in general terms, it might as well be doubted, whither
we had any Government, or King? and after all those elaborate Libels that have
been published; most of which, himself has owned; and for the rest no more Moral
Evidence can be desired to ascertain them to be his: It would be an affront
upon Humane Reason to dispute it. Has not the Justice of the Nation been
arraigned by him in all its Proceedings since his Majesty's Reign? have not his
Vid. Six Papers page 1. Id. p. 3.
Ministers of State been made the most fearful Mercenaries? have not the Judges
on the Bench been represented by him in the Sayings of Mr. Sidney, as so many
Blemishes to the Bar? Has not the Scarlet of those Twelve men been made by him
almost as Criminal, as if it were only the color of their guilt, instead of
the Badg of their office? Has he not charged them plainly with Corruptness, or
Ignorance, Infamy, and a Scandalous Vid. id.
Contemptible Poverty; as if he had made use of his own Province and Sacred
Function for the defaming of his Sovereign and Prince, and would have applied
his Text of making his Judges of the Land out of the meanest of the People: Has
he not threatened them with the Exaltation of Tresilian, and fated them to a
further Promotion, that of being Hanged? Has he not in the most opprobrious
terms exposed the Chiefest Minister in the State, pronounced his executing of
Justice a Campaign; an Act of Hostility to all Law, his Vid. id. p. 22. p. 33.
serving His Majesty; an outrageous Fury, and his Zeal for his Sovereign, but
so many Brutal Excesses: Are not the King's Counselors Id.
cursed, for a few Creatures whom the Court has gained to betray the Kingdom?
Vid. id. p. 24.
I am sure he has met with no such foul Language in all our Animadversions,
though I may modestly say, it might have been better laid out upon him, than
where he has bestowed it. Is there, in short, any part of the Government that
he has not traduced, or any of its Proceedings that are not most scandalously
represented? If this can be called a defaming of the Government; or if in the
worst of Times the Government was never so defamed, then that Word in the
Memorial, was not shuffl'd in with haste, unles it were Vid. Vind. p. 4.
because the multiplied Reflections were so notoriously plain, and there was no
need to deliberate whether the Government was Libelled.

Then for what Respects the Defamation of the King, (whose Reputation, I
suppose, might be sufficiently wounded through the sides of his Officers, and
the Blemishes he has cast upon the Administration of Affairs) but our Author's
Sublime would have been lost in the Condescension, had it rested there, and not
reached at the Throne, and the Person of his Sovereign; and represented him as
a Despiser of all Fame, Vid. Six Papers, p. 1.
and as an Heroic Practiser upon some few fearful Mercenary Spirits. Not a
Declaration (which His Majesty makes his own Act by signing it,) but by him in
the severest manner has been Satyris'd, and his Sacred Word in every one of
them exposed with scorn and derision.

The term of Vid. Six Papers, p. 9.
Absolute Power in the Toleration to Scotland, is represented as a Roman Piece
of Tyranny; and he might for once, with March. Merc. Polit. Numb. 67. 79.
Needham, in his Mercury, made his King another Tarquin; or with Mr. Sid. in
his Vid. His Trial.
Politics some Caligula, as well as Legibus Solutus. But I must tell this
outrageous man, That this Absolute Power is no such new Term in the Scotch Law,
and that there are particular 1 P. Car. 2.
Acts of Parliament for the declaring of the Prince, Sovereign and Absolute:
But this descant upon the Point must be carried to that height of Defamation
upon His Majesty, as if he had renounced Christianity it self, and no Oaths
were able to oblige him; and his being to be Vid. id. p. 9.
obeyed without Reserve, was only to render him a Turk, as well as a Tarquin: I
confess, those his Representations do carry it some sizes beyond the Grand Vid.
p. 21.
Seignior's, and are a pretty Essay of his toward the Description of a
Mohammedan Government: But as he is pleased to observe in another place, Did the
Obedience of the P. 14.
Bowstring obtain with all sort of Subjects, such Authors might well be ordered
and obliged to send in their Heads. How is the Person of his Prince treated in
those dishonorable Reflections he has made upon his sitting some time since,
as his Brother's Commissioner, in Vid. p. 13.
Scotland; where if Injustice, and Ingratitude, Treachery, and Design, be such
Charges as can blemish the Reputation of a Prince, Harrison himself could never
have blackened his Father more: But if we look back upon England again, (for our
Author thinks his Libels defective, if they do not villifie the King through
all his Dominions, and they leave one of the Crowns untarnish'd, or the least
Jewel of it without a Cloud. Therefore Ireland is touched upon too in some of
his Papers.
) The Additional Excise (which those that were more concerned in than this
Author, never complained of) is by him made one of His Majesty's Invasions of
Property; the Disorder of Soldiers applied to the very Person of his Prince,
and his Permission. The Execution of such as desert their Colors, Vid. Six
Papers, p. 22.
but so many Murders, occasioned by the King and his standing Army, in time of
Peace, and an attempt upon the Property, (as he will represent it) of the
Nation in gross; and all this rank Sedition aggravated under a Satirical Irony
and affected Supposition of its being all done without His Majesty's knowledge.

And this, I hope, is sufficient Proof that he has defamed the Person of the
King, as well as his Government, and that the Envoy did not commit an oversight
in Vid. Vindication of himself, p. 4.
his haste, when he inserted it. And these I think are such rude Reflections,
and severe Recriminations against the King and the Crown, that they are not to
be defended from Seditiosi sunt qui plebem contra Rempb. etc. C. 9. 30.
Engendring Discord between K. and People, Treason and Leasing making, 10 Act.
10 P. Jam. 6. Jac. 1. p. 2. c. 43.
Sedition, and the most dangerous attempts to disturb the State, by any Pen,
but that pestilent one which makes them. The Service the Dr. does the Church of
England by this preposterous way of befriending it, I am afraid will hardly be
acknowledged by Her, for such a Favor, unless She mistakes Her Interest, out
of a Zeal to promote it, and renounces those loyal Principles to which so long
She has so Justly pretended: And I am sorry to see, that by some of its Members
the Improvement of ill Principles shall in the same man be applauded, which
themselves have formerly, when he was not arrived to that pitch of Wickedness,
condemned, even in the same Person that has now amongst many too much of
applause. It is known, that our Author had once some of the Greatest of its
Pillars, that opposed his Preferment, P. 6.
and himself complains of it too: And I hope it was upon that good Principle,
that they found his to be but bad. His Metropolitan of Scotland, I am told;
once was consulted for his Character, when he first came out of his own
Country, and he, I think, gave him none, that could recommend him much to ours;
or the Church:

So that when impartial People see those that he has represented for his Vid.
Vindic. of himself. p. 6.
Enemies, and perhaps who well might be so, when as I am informed he let them
know, upon their old opposing of the Bill of Union of Dissenters, that he hoped
to see the time that the Established Church might be glad of one, of
Comprehension for themselves, when they see those so celebrate him for a
Friend, and this same Person that was at such Enmity with them, so wonderfully
changed and endeared, it will certainly give some occasion to observe, That
sincere Honesty can never consist in both the Extremes; that if our Author was
once such an ill man with them, he can never be meliorated now, only by being
worse; and that either the Dr. and the Church were both in the fault, for their
falling out before, or very much to be blamed now, for such a contradictory
Combination and Agreement.

But I know too, that many good men still, of our Established Church, think D.
B. still to be the same man, and that his unseasonable Services might have been
better spared, since it is so plain, that his Pleading for the Church, proceeds
from the opportunity that he takes by it, to maintain his own Quarrel, and to
libel the State, and that the defending of the Bishops now with such an
unwonted affectation, is only done for the defaming of the King with the better
Grace.

As for the other part of the Interrogatory, whither the King has not been by
him represented as a Persecutor, and to have designs upon his life; shall be
made as apparent, and that it was well by the Envoy, put into the Memorial, and
as ill by this Author, in his Vindication excused.

First then, he must admit the Charge of this unjust accusation of the King, or
what will, I know, be more grievous to a man of such applauded Parts and
Performances at the Pen, His excellent style, to be guilty of an incoherence
and impertinency; for immediately after a long Representation of his Suffering
under a severe Vid. Six Paper, p. 49. 50.
Process, and which we know is always at the Suit of the King, after he has
represented himself so ready to sacrifice his Life, after some Descant on the
Evidence that were to testify at his Trial; then most emphatically follows,
That it is yet too early to set on a Persecution for Religion; subsequent words
must always have a Relation to their Antecedent, and a celebrated Historian
can never be said to forget his Grammar; neither can it be thought that out of
respect to His Majesty, he would violate any Rules in Orthography, who in many
places, to defame him, has made use of The Liege Letter, an absurd Fiction.
Reflection on Q. Mary and Varillas.
Absurdity and Vid. Vind. page 3.
Contradiction.

The lame and ridiculous Excusation that he forces out even in spite of Sense,
and opposition to Fact, will not serve the Turn. * These Men are two words that
will do him no more service than the Vid. First Part of Refl. page 7, 8.
Still Seems, and those I think I have made appear, were not such ill chosen
Expressions, but a dullness of Apprehension, that made them raise such a Dust.
It is plain by these Men, can never be meant as he would make us believe, of
his Informers; for in the preceding Paragraph he clears all his Witnesses,
Evidences, Vid. Page 20.
and Informers, by their own Declarations and Subscriptions, from being able to
say any thing that could affect him; and certainly these Men, that he was
satisfied, had nothing to say against him, were not thought by him to be those
Men that intended to destroy Him.

I will in this case make him a better Excuse out of a charitable Construction,
than he has yet made for himself; I hope without that foul Language he lays to
my Charge, I had convinced him in my former Animadversions, how foully he had
fallen upon the King, and that may have made this last of his Papers a little
more modest, and himself so far humbl'd, as to be pleased to give us a milder
Interpretation of his Words, than ever was his Meaning in their first
Composition and Original; for they being ranged among the rest of those Papers
that have so much of that unimitable boldness, in the blemishing of His
Majesty's Person and Government, Quaere. Whithis may not be called Evil
Information of the King to his Leiges, which is Leasing making by the Laws of
Scotland. Jac. 5. p. 6. c. 83.
cannot be presumed to be more civilly meant: Our Author knows (if he will but
pardon the Application of his Ecclesiastical Function to a Civil use) that it
is the Practice of the men of his Profession, to discover any dubious sense of
the Scriptures, or the Fathers, by having recourse to Texts and Contexts, by
considering the several Parts of the Works, how they cohaere; and from such
Collateral Relations to make their most reasonable Constructions; if I may
therefore deal with the Dr. in his own way, I hope to make it very plain, That
by These Men might be well meant by him, the King, and His Ministers that had a
mind to persecute and destroy him: If he can paint Him as a Terror to his
People, with his fearful Mercenarys, because possessed with his own Religion,
may not he think, he may persecute and destroy them for the sake of theirs; and
that when our Author in his repeated Reflections, has so barbarously observed,
that for Religion it self, Vid. His Reflections, or Parliament. Pacific. 1 par.
page 2. Six Papers page 2.
he must unavoidably do it; does he not apply the decry'd Persecution in
France, to the King of England, that Proclaims nothing but Indulgence; and that
this Page 10. p. 14.
King, to countenance him, will copy after him; that his Absolute Power may
declare us Heretics, to be burnt without Reserve; has he not forced the King's
own Words of Invincible Necessity, to extend to Tortures, Dragoons, and Death
it self, where necessities are not invincible? And if by these must be meant
only Informers to destroy you, how comes the Government it self to be made
Mohammedan; and His Majesty's Page 21.
Oath that he has made to be administered in Scotland, but an Page 14.
Obedience of the Bowstring, an Order to send in their Heads and destroy
themselves? I am apt to think our Author has forgot himself, when he would
palliate and excuse a Reflection upon the King, or that he may be surprised at
the repetition of his own Extravagance.

SECT. VI.
THe next Question that comes to be Considered, is, Whether by the King's Laws,
every one of His Subjects was warranted to seize on such Offenders, in Vid. 1
page
what manner soever? if so, then the Dr's. Exceptions are more hastily made
than the Envoy's Memorial.

The seizing such Offenders, I had given him several Presidents of before; but
our Author that pretends to Answer all that concerns himself, has indeed left
it all Vnanswer'd: By the Statute Laws of both Kingdoms (setting aside the
natural Leigeance that obliges them) the Subjects are bound to detect all such
as enter into Vid. L. Coke Inst. Vid.
any Treasonable Conspiracy against the King and Government, and cause their
Persons to be Jac. 6. p. 14. C. 205.
apprehended, and that upon pain of being * punished as Principal Offenders; and
this shall extend to all Subjects of the King of Great Britain, wherever they
reside; and more particularly, by the Laws of Scotland, the Letters of
Intercommuning extend to all their King's Subjects whatever Country they
inhabit; neither will that Expedient of a translated Allegiance excuse them;
neither can it be imagined from even our own Law, but that all Allegiance, and
Obedience, is inseparable even from those Subjects that reside in another
Dominion, and even in the Service of a foreign Prince, since we have an 3 Jac.
c. 4.
Act that makes it Felony for any to go to any Neighboring State, or another
Prince's Territories, without taking an Oath of Obedience to their own Prince;
this my Inst. 3. c. 23.
Lord Coke extends to Democratical Governments, and Republics, as well as
Principalities; and that to those that go thither, even without any design of
entering into Foreign Service, barely for omission of taking this Oath of
Obedience, before they went out of the Kingdom; a Law though it has been looked
upon like a dead Letter, and so little executed, yet will serve to let us know,
that this Precedent Oath was required; to prevent the pretense of suspending
your Allegiance by any foreign Naturalization, which though it may privilege
you in another State for the present, could never annull that Antecedent
Obedience, that by your Birth you owed, and by your own Act had sworn to your
Natural Lord; so that it supersedes all doubt, but that by the King's Laws Vid.
his Abstract of the Memorial.
all his born Subjects, wherever they reside, are bound to observe those Laws
among themselves, and if such Offenders as our Author can be seized by the
King's Subjects at home; they are as much obliged and warranted if they have
Power and Opportunity, in what manner soever to put it in Execution abroad.

Where Reason and Law do Justify such proceedings, it does almost supersede
any Necessity to defend it, by Presidents, and Arguments, from Practice and
Fact, but even for that, as we are not deficient; so we will not be wanting to
produce them; though we had satisfied the World in it before, and one would
think our Author too, since he has not offered to return to them the least
Reply.

The Case of Dr. Story was so truly represented, Dr. B's 13 Q. Eliz. 1571.
too, and yet no otherwise than the truth of the Fact, and that as it is
related by Fox, so truly parallel, that I cannot discover the least disparity,
unless it be in this alone, that the one is a famous Doctor in Divinity, and
the other was only as Celebrated a Doctor in the Civil Law, which since our
Author would not take notice of, when he was answering all that Related to
himself, we will repeat it here a little more at large. Vid. page 1.


Story was Imprisoned upon Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, only for
having been zealous in the concerns of his Religion, in the Reign of Queen
Mary: The Famous Fox gives no other reasons for it, but represents him (as you
might expect) under the color of Cruelty and Persecution, though indeed he
acted as a Lawyer, and an Advocate, and so could not be charged with those
Consequences that attended his Vocation, no more than the King's Council in
Criminal Causes can be said to kill a Man whom the Law Condemns, or the
Advocate in Scotland to Persecute Dr. Burnett, because it is he that Complains
of him in the Citation: However, Imprisoned as he was, he makes his Escape,
gets over into Flanders, is naturalized, resides at Antwerp, acts by special
Commission under the Governor; but being reported here, to have animated Spain
to some Hostilities against England, as our Dr. does the Dutch to Vid. 1 par.
of Refl. p. 5.
resentment of Injurys which signifies the same, this by the Laws of Queen 13
Eliz. Dyer 298.
Elizabeth her self, being adjudged High Treason, and this having been Cardinal
Vid. 3 Inst. c. 1. In Anglia sparsum est semen ut vix a Turcico, etc.
Pool's Case, who was accused for encouraging the Emperor to invade his own
Country, by writing of Books, that made the King almost as ill as the Turk; or
as our Author expresses it in his Vid. Six Papers.
upon our Kings Absolute Power, by the * Bow-strings of Turkey, and the
Mohammedan Government. These things, (though acted beyond Seas, being in her
Reign adjudged Treasonable, as appeared in the Case of Patrick O Cullen, an
Irish Man, for a Treason at Brussels; (and our Author cannot with Justice,
Hill, 36 Eliz.
reflect upon any Resolutions in her Reign, only cause they justify against
him the Proceedings of the present;) People then having these sort of Judgments
and Apprehensions of Dr. Story's Case in the Matters that our Dr. Burnett now
disputes in his own; they contrived this Plot, that one Mr. Parker should set
Sail for Antwerp, being a Merchant, and by some means, or other (says Fox)
bring over this Doctor into England; and that is, as I humbly conceive, to
seize on him there Vid. Vind. p. 4.
in what manner soever; Parker repairs to Antwerp, and Fox. Acts and Monuments,
page 21 52. Land. Edit. 1583.
(as our Author phrases it) suborned some Persons to lie so far for the matter,
(though it cannot be believed that they had any dispensation for it,) as to
signify to him there was prohibited Books aboard in the Ship, into which, when
they had Deluded the Doctor, they as soon set Sail with him for England, where
by the way I cannot but observe, that this Celebrated Martyrologist calls him
Traitor and Rebel, even before he was Tried; but to his Trial he was brought;
and there as I formerly represented, pleaded his Vid. Dr. Bs. first Letter to
my Lord Mid.
Allegiance translated from her Majesty, to the Sovereignty of the King of
Spain, and that for seven years ago; that he was his Sworn Subject, Vid.
Baker's Chron. p. 349. Dyer p. 298. 300.
and therefore (as he well deserved) says this Book of Martyrs; he was
Condemned as a Traitor to God, the Queens Majesty, and the Realm, (and as says
another Author) because all his Pleadings were overrul'd per form of Nihil
Dicit, the Judges resolving (as I recited in the former Treatise) that no man
can renounce the Country wherein he was born, or abjure his Prince at his own
Pleasure; and with this agrees expressly the Civil Law, as hereafter shall be
shown: The barborousness of whose Execution, being cut up alive, and in his
Anguish, after dismembring, striking the Executioner, must be more Condemned,
than the Process against him, and cannot be excused by such an Author's
outrageous Zeal, in terming him a Bloody Nimrod, Tyrant, and a Persecuter; and
to make the Parallel, between the two Doctors more plain, the Encouraging, and
promoting an Invasion of her Majesty's Kingdom, was laid to Story's charge too,
and adjudg'd High Treason upon a Solemn Debate of the Judges. * Vid. Dyer, fol.
299.


I cannot find that Spain, (though otherwise sufficiently incensed against the
Queen for the Countenance and assistance she gave to the Disturbers of his
State) ever made this seizing of a Naturalized Criminal, even in time of Peace,
any Article for the Justifying of a War, or so much as complained against it as
a Breach of the Laws of Nations; and why? Because it was never then disputed,
but by the Kings Laws, every one of his Subjects was warranted to surprise, or
to seize on him there, in any manner whatsoever: Our Author must make himself
more Ignorant in History, than he would make our Envoy in the French Tongue; if
these sort of Proceedings never occurred to him in his reading: but because we
are apt to forget such Passages as may chance to displease us in their
application, I hope to make it appear, (without being reproacht for foul
Language, or less respectful to that reverend Character he bears; then himself
has been to that Honorable Person that represents his Majesty,) that the Dr.
has not taken the pains rightly to inform himself in this matter, and refresh
his * Vid. Vind. p. 3.
Memory with an Instance or two more.

Vid. Heath's Chron. 62. part 4.
Corbet, Okey, and Barkstead, some of the Regicides, upon the Restoration of
the late King, and some that were excepted out of the Act of Oblivion for being
Men eminently concerned in that Execrable Murder, were in the Province of
Holland, at Delph and other places, seized by Sir G. Downing the King's
Minister, and the Assistance of the Dutch themselves, with the order of the
States, and by the Marshal of the Town.

The seizing the P. of Furstemburg, and now Cardinal, in a free Town, though an
Imperial City, in the service of the French, was justified by these Dutch Vid.
Their own Netherland Historian.
because he being a natural born Subject of the Emperor's, he was found
undermining of his Government.

And that which is fresher in our Memories, and with which I had refreshed our
Authors in the former Treatise, is the Case of Sir Thomas Armstrong, when he
lay under the same Circumstances, being Outlawed for Treason; which in England
is the same with the Scots Letters of Horning, and I think somewhat more than a
Writ of Rebellion out of Chancery. This Gentleman, by the Procurement of His
Majesty's Envoy, then residing at Anno 1683/4.
the Hague, and the help of his own Servants, with the assistance of some of
the Officers of the Town in which he was taken, was seized at Leyden, sent over
into England, and by a Rule of Court ordered to be executed; as is usual where
the Outlawry is not allowed to be reversed: And, I know Dr. B. remembers this
so well, that he has past an Invidious Reflection for it, both on our
Government, and Mr. Vid. Continuation of Reflection, p. 59, 55.
Varillas; though he is forced to grant, even where he would willingly make this
Proceeding against the Knight but a sort of Judicial Murder, That the
Condemning Men in Absence has been always Practiced by our Law, where the
Absence was Wilful; and we all know it is so too by the Laws of Scotland. P. 54.
And I hope no one will imagine, that the Dr. was detained in Holland against
his Will. And as I have already advised our Author, out of Tenderness and
Respect, so it is still my opinion, That it would have been a wiser Reflection
upon his Case, to consider, that by the King's Laws every one of his Subjects
is warranted to seize on such Offenders, in what manner soever, then to reflect
upon nothing else, but the Justice of the Court that Condemned Him, and the
Memorial of His Majesty that demanded the Dr. And this Transaction is not an
antiquated President, that our Fathers have told us, but what we have seen with
our Eyes, and heard with our Ears; though I cannot hear that the The Attempt that
was made since upon another Person, at the Hague, was of another nature, and of
which they might with more reason complain.
States ever returned us any public Remonstrance against it, as a Breach of
Privilege upon the Law of Nations; And why? Because by the King's Laws every
one of his Subjects was warranted so to do.

I could carry this view of History further, notwithstanding the Dr's severe
Droll, on the Envoy's Memorial of Dead or Alive, to aggravate his pretended
danger; and tell him of Subjects that have executed their Prince's Justice,
when he has been but in bad Circumstances to demand it; and the Dr. has heard
of Attempts upon an Askam, a Lisle, and a Dorislaws: but ill Practices must
never make good worse Proceedings, and such a Revenge as no Nature will allow,
can never be justified by a Law of Nations; so that his fears are as idle and
needless, as his aspersing His Majesty for it are most vainly Seditious. The
best that he can make of these Circumstances that affect him, is to be a better
Subject to his natural Prince, and then he will need no Protection from any other
Lords.

And now, to conclude with what His Majesty's Memorial might well do too, *
That the States ought Vid. Vindic. of himself, p. 3.
to punish both him and his Printer.

The deference that was due to their Lordships from any of the Subjects of the
King of Great Britain, is as Temporal too, I hope, as the Dr's Allegiance that
he has transferred to them; and we are bound to retain no longer a respect,
than they are found to continue that firmness of Alliance, which, as I may well
say now, has been too much violated: So it might have been wished, by both
sides, the Dr. had never brought it to so much as a Dispute; and though out of an
humble regard to their Government, I do not presume to prescribe Measures to
their State; I do not pretend to tell the States what they ought to do; yet I
may, I hope, with all Humility, tell them what the States have done.

1. These High and Mighty States of Holland and West-Friestland, to the
Protection of which the Dr. Vid. Six Pap. page 50.
does so zealously recommend himself, did in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth Vid.
Reidan. Annal. Belg. Lib. 6. Anno 1587.
decree death to such as should in Libels and Reflections dare to revile Her
Majesty: And I did not doubt, but that their Lordships would have been as
tender of the Honor of Our Present Prince, as their first Ancestors were for
that of his Predecessor, especially if they had considered him, under a more
August Title, and much more extended Dominion; and that their Queen of England
may with Modesty be styled a less Monarch than the King of Great Britain.

2. There is an old Edict, as I am well informed, and that still in force, a
solemn unanimous Act of the whole States Generals, united; which condemns to
perpetual Imprisonment all Persons, Aliens as well as Subjects, who shall in
their Dominions, by Writing or Printing, publish any Letters or Libels, to the
defamation of His Majesty the KING of Great Britain.

3. By Virtue also of this ancient Decree, did a learned and ingenious Minister
of the late King, Sir W. T. then residing at the Hague, cause the Sieur John
Rothe, and one Mr. Byer, Brother to the Book-holder of the Dutch East India
Company, with their Printer, to be seized; Sir John was clapped up in the
Rasphouse; the other in Anno 1676.
the Stadthouss at Amsterdam; where they are said to be still Prisoners,
notwithstanding they were Natives, and that is more than naturalized, and
related to men of more Power and Wealth than our Author can pretend to. This I
have had attested to me, by some men of Understanding, and one of them one of
the King's Subjects, that seized them; so that by their own Laws, as well as
the King's, they were warranted to do so, and the States bound by their own
Presidents to punish both Him and his Printer.

The Original Libels, for which they prosecuted both the Author and the
Printer, I have ready to produce; and it was not alone the Prince of Orange's
Cause that occasioned their Prosecution, but Vid. Eenige Swear beschuldinge
tegen de Prince van Orange, etc. p. 2, and 7. p. 2. Dat de Prince, etc.
consuleert over de wictigste saken dese Republiik, Met syn Ooms', den Koningh
van Engelandt, en den Hertogh Van York. p 7. Dat de Staten even Van de Prince
Misbryiickt en qualiick gehandelt worden als het Parliament in Engelandt van
hare Koninck.
His late Majesty, the Present * King, and the Government of England, being all
Libelled in the same Reflections, animated our King to demand Satisfaction also
for Himself, since the same Author had represented Him and His Royal Brother as
so many Conspirators with the Prince, and reflected upon His Majesty, as
betraying and usurping upon his Parliaments, after the same manner that His
Highness did Design upon their States.

These High and Mighty States did then think it their Duty to do Justice to His
Majesty of Great Britain, and to His Present Majesty, though then without a
Crown, who might, I hope, as well expect it from them now, while He wears one:
They published their Placaets then against such an Author, and his Printer, both
them, and their Orders, I have by me to show; looked upon them, and termed them
too lying, scandalous, and Seditious Pasquils, Vid. Their Placaet printed too
by Mr. Fagel's Scheltus, at the Hague, 1676.
promised Three Thousand Gu'lders for the Discovery, and bringing the Author to
Justice; and Two Thousand to any one that should detect the Printer: But Time
has shown us now the reason why these High and Mighty Men could not comply with
His Present Majesty in punishing Dr. B. or his Printer; vid. Miinheer Fagel's
Missive printed by the same Scheltus.
though they thought so much my self to deserve it. These Libels were avowed only
to facilitate this Invasion, and the King could have no Justice, only because
they kept more in Reserve than the Dr's Society, or the deepest Jesuit, (i. e.)
to do him the greatest Injury. Time has shown us now, (as our Vid. Reflect. on
Parl. pac. part 1. p. 5.
Author was pleased to tell us, some time since) not only the unjust
Resentments of these States, but the false Pretenses they made, of their being
Ready to do His Majesty Justice, and so verified a fortiori, that my just
Accusation, which our Adversary was so sollicitous they should Resent. And
Those Vid. His Refl. part 1.
that never dealt yet so fairly with Princes, have now shown themselves more
fair in a superfluous Faith, to one that put himself upon them for a Vassal.

SECT. VII.
AND now, in the next place, to come to what concerns Fugitives, the Articles
of Peace agreed on between this Crown and their State. Vid. Vind. of himself,
p. 4.


Fugitive Criminals, and their Protection, has been often, and was ever of old,
much controverted between Sovereign Princes and States; and so far did the
Romans once invade the Power of Protection, that they procured the delivering
of Hannibal, by the King of Bythinia, though he was only the noblest of their
Enemies, and owed not the least Subjection to Rome, whose Favor he defied, as
well as often had defeated their Force. This was indeed a Reproach to Prusias;
as Sir Walter History of the World, l. 5. c. 6. Sect. 2.
Raleigh says, upon whom Flaminius an Ambassador from the Romans had prevailed,
that it made him unworthy of the Crown he wore: Which Protection, as Grotius
observes, is due to the Oppressed, though not to Wilful Malefactors; and in the
Case of a defeated De Jure Bell. and Pacis.
Enemy, cannot be pretended unlawful, unless by the express Articles of a
League; and if in that case it shall extend to an open Enemy, it will, a
fortiori, to the Subjects of either State, that were in such an Alliance, and
with a more superlative reason to such as owe a natural Allegiance to their
Native Prince, and only a Temporal Obedience to that State wherein they live.
This Local Subjection my Lord Coke will allow to be 3d. Inst. c. 1.
due from Aliens; so that during their stay there, their Allegiance is as much
translated to the Foreign State, as it can be done by the Act of
Naturalization, or our Author can pretend to: for the Naturalizing Foreigners,
may empower them to greater Privileges in the place wherein they live, as does
our Denization too, but can never make them less Subjects to their natural
Lord, to whom, as Natives, they belong: For when Grotius De Jure Bell. and Pac.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
observes, that no Confederate has a right directly to apprehend and punish the
Subjects of another Confederate; and instances in Decius, who when bound by
Hannibal, was upon pleading it set at Liberty: He is there only to be
understood of such Subjects as are natural born Subjects and Natives, and not
made so by a formality of Law: And yet this Author, that is favorable enough
in the Point, is of opinion too, That if a Native should act any thing against
an express Article, agreed on between a neighboring Nation, with whom they are
in League, the King or State are obliged either to punish or deliver up the
Offender to the Persons injured: And since our Author makes his Vid. Vind. p. 3.
Marriage such a Warrant from Solon's Laws, for his Naturalization, that same
Lawgiver I must tell him, would not admit any Strangers to be enrolled among
his Citizens, unless they were banished out of their own Country for ever, such
whom their Country did renounce, and not those that renounce their Country. And
though this Marriage might have given him some ground for his being naturalized,
I hope it gave no Color for the translating his Allegiance; or else it would
sound a little Unlucky, that his being Married in another Country, should
occasion his being Horned in his own.

But then, in the Case of Rebels and Fugitives, we Vind. of himself, p 4.
shall find again a vaster difference than in all the rest.

By the natural Law as well as the municipal ones of the Land, the King has a
Right to the Service of Vid. 11 Hen. 7. c 1. Vid. Calvin's Case, K. Jam.
all his Subjects; can command their return or removal from or to any place
abroad; and nothing has been more frequently practiced; and they refusing to do
this, (which has been as often obeyed both by whole Bodies and Societies of
Merchants, as once in the Hamburgh Company, to Stood; and some others) though but
as single Persons, has been always adjudg'd Rebellious, and is indeed so by all
Law; even where no such criminal matter, as High Treason, and the refusal to
appear, does make the Offender so. Now, though our Author went out of Scotland
fourteen Years ago, and Vid. id. p. 4.
left England by the King's Leave, yet if upon His Command he does not return,
I humbly conceive, that truly in a Legal sense he may be styled Rebellious, and
a Fugitive; though there was no Crime that stained him deeper with that
Appellation, or gave him more occasion for his Contumacy and Flight; for the
flying from Justice after the expiration of the term of Appearance, is that
which makes him a Fugitive, though he departed the Realm with all the solemn
Leave and Permission imaginable: So that the second Memorial of the Marquess
was founded upon as much Reason, and upon which this Author would as vainly fix
as much Absurdity; where I too cannot but take notice Vid. ib. Vid. 1 Let. to
my Lord M. Vid. 2d. Let.
how he labors to make that an Inconsistency in the Memorials, which he
endeavors to reconcile in all his Writings, viz. That of being the Subject of
the States, and yet to be punished as the King's Subject, for to them he is
willing to be thought but a Temporal Subject, and yet at the same time to
retain for His Majesty, as his Natural Lord, all Duty imaginable: And I must
confess, had not his unhappy Expression of translated Allegiance been Treason
by the Law of Scotland, and which, the English ones too say, cannot be by such
an Coke 7 Rep. fol. 90. Dyer fol. 300. Also Dr. Story's Case. ut Supra. 13 Eliz.
Abjuration transferred; he had not pronounced himself a Rebel and a Fugitive,
under his own hand; and by his Letters to the Secretary, before those of
Horning were issued out of Scotland: the most favorable Construction that
could have been put upon it, was, (did not his Malice against His Majesty and
His Government, betrayed by his Reflections since, prevent an excusing it) That
his professing so much Divinity and the defense of the Gospel, had hindered, or
excused him, from the discovering how deeply his unalterable Allegiance was
founded by the Law.

The Celebrated Case of his Countryman Mr. Robert Calvin, (and the Doctor, I
know, upon another account, reverences the Name) which my Lord Coke has so
largely reported, has carried Allegiance to that pitch, Coke 7. Rept.
that I think it is not so easily translated; he calls it Allegiance and
Obedience inseparable from every Subject; as soon as born he makes it to
Commence, before the first Fol. 4. B. f. 5. A.
Oath of Obligation is taken in the Court Leet; for this Opinion he cites too
the Scotch Exposition of Mr. Vid. his Exposition ad Regiam Majestatem.
Skeen, who (I find) says this sort of Liegiance is due to the King alone, with
exception to all others; so that as my Lord Coke observes in this point, the
Laws of both Countries agree; and this Naturalization being but what Lawyers
call an acquired Allegiance, cannot (as I observed before) Eradicate, or defeat
by such a formal Contract, that natural Obedience, that is so deeply rooted.

It is positively asserted in that Case, That the King has Fol. 8. A. B.
Potestatem habet in partibus transmarinis, fidem and fideles in partibus
transmarinis.
a Command over his Subjects, as well out of the Realm as within, that they owe
him Faith and Fidelity in Foreign Countries, and from thence he concludes, (as
I hinted before) that Abjuration, (which is an Act of Law, and by which you are
forced many times to forsake your Kingdom for a Penalty) cannot excuse you from
your Natural Obedience, though under an exile; for (says he) the King may in
mercy restore him; much less then, I may conclude, against our Author, shall a
Voluntary Abjuration, translate his Allegiance, and which was overruled
against Dr. Story, that he could not do it at his pleasure; though De Jure
Bell. Lib. 2. cap. 5. Page 4.
Grotius is indeed of another Opinion in the point of Banishment, which does
not come up to our Authors Case, he being desired to return; and the Heraclidae
had a better pretense when they were banished Argos, to plead their being no
longer Subjects to Eurystheus; yet even Grotius grants there, that by the Roman
Law, where a Citizen forsook his Native Habitation, he was obliged still to
such Offices as should be imposed on him, and to pay Contribution; which
implys, that even in Governments Democratical, birth lies such an Obligation by
Nature to the place where one is born, from which we cannot so soon recede by
our own Artificial Acts and Pretenses: And as he has granted too, that no
number of Persons, or particular one, can desert his Country, if the Public be
injured by it; so I may conclude, that no number of Mutinous Men, or single
Seditious Subjects, can by any Expedient whatsoever, extricate themselves from
their Obedience, and be protected in it; where the Justice of the Nation is
both affronted and evaded, and consequently the Public Peace in danger to be
disturbed.

But as our Author could not but take notice of the Page 4.
great difference there was between the Memorials, so I cannot but observe the
same in his defense, and Vindication; in one place he intimates his claiming
and desiring the Protection of the States; and in another, values himself and
his Innocence, upon his never having desired it; I applied my self (says he)
immediately to the States Vid. Page 3.
of Holland, to be Naturalized; and in the next Page appeals to the States of
Holland, if ever he made any Applications to them.

But we must consider further, what States and Princes have done to Persons
under his Circumstances; whereas, all the Answer that was given to the Envoy,
about his be coming their Subject, did (in short) amount to this; They first
Naturalized him, that they might protect him, and then say he was under their
Protection, because he was Naturalized; but to do all Justice, even to those
that do not design, to any people, or to us to be so much Just; the offering to
put our Author to his Trial there, would be somewhat of satisfaction to the
Laws of Nations, as well as our own; had it been but as sincerely put in
Execution, and that which has already been objected, had been sufficient matter
to have founded any Process, had it ever been in reality designed; and as we
have shown what they themselves in the same Circumstances have done, and by
some of their Edicts and Decrees are obliged to do; so we shall with the like
deference to their Authority, represent a little larger Draught to their View,
of what other Nations have granted in such Cases; and in which all Statesmen,
and even some of their own do agree.

It is an indisputable point, and from the Laws of both Kingdoms plainly
appears, that by the Letters of Horning, in the Case of High Treason, the
Criminal is declared, a Rebel, and a Fugitive, for the worst of Crimes that can
make him so; and by our Writ of Outlary he is looked upon as such in the like
case; and can (if seized before the Year be expired) if the Court think fit, be
denied to reverse it; and though but very lately, it was offered from the
merciful Inclination of the King and the favor of the Court, to one Holloway's
Case of Bristow.
that was fled to one of our Plantations for High Treason, yet it was as soon
afterward denied to another, Sir T. A.
we have mentioned before, who suffered as Justly without it; this being
considered, the Act of flying makes them not only Fugitives, but Traitors, as
much as if they had been Tried and Convicted by a Judicial Process, from the
Construction of our Law; and therefore I suppose it is the common Quaere in the
Cases of Felony, whither the Criminals fled for the same, it being always to be
interpreted, the greatest Argument of their Guilt? Now no Judge, either of Law,
or Reason, but will allow, that a person (though occasionally withdrawn) that
refuses to appear when a Citation is issued forth, but is as much a Fugitive,
as if he had but immediately fled upon his being Cited; and this being our
Authors Case even when it is best excused; we will consider, how by the Laws of
Nations he is to be treated.

It was a Saying of Tertullian, that against Public Enemies every Man is a
Soldier; and I suppose, that may imply that every Subject, when a Criminal is
declared so, is warranted to seize him in what manner soever: by the Law of
Nature, says Grotius, every innocent De Jure Bell. Lib. 2. c. 21.
person has a right to punish a Malefactor; and it is only the result of our
being settled into Civil Societys, that leaves to the respective Bodies, both
the Right and Liberty to punish Offenders against themselves; though this does
not hinder Foreign States from punishing them, which they must do, or deliver
them up, if desired, to the Injured one; and since neither of them has been
done here, though both demanded; it cannot be well justified by the partial
Arguments of the Doctor, and as little to be defended by the Pen of a fairer,
or a better Advocate: This sort of Dedition, Sacred History affords us
sufficient Examples of, as well as the Profane, I had given our Author some
that I think related to himself; but since he supposes he is not concerned to
Answer them, I shall send him so many more.

We shall not insist upon Sampson's Case, and that of the Benjamites, (since
our Author pretends to engross all the Divinity, and will not grant us so much
as to understand the Doctrine of the Arrians) and it is more than he will forgive
us now, the touching upon Tertullian, or a Text of Scripture; neither shall I
lay any great weight upon what was done by the Lacedaemonians when they were
denied by the Messenians some that had fled to them only for Felony and Rape;
neither need I show, how even great Commanders, or Princes, have been so
unfortunate as to be demanded; as Cato desired the Senate to deliver up Coesar
himself, to the Germans, and our Usurper as impudently expected it from France,
and these States, in the case of our Exiled Sovereign, neither shall I repeat
those Presidents I have formerly applied, that which is more proper in this
place, shall be what relates to the stirring up Sedition, or disturbing the
Peace of a Foreign State, which no Government can tolerate in their own
Subjects, or Fugitives. Thus did the Romans demand from the Carthaginians, that
Amilcar Livii Lib. 2.8.
should be delivered up to them, because he had solicited the Gauls to rebel
against them. And thus did the Athenians make public Proclamation, that
whoever should plot any mischief against Philip, and fly for protection to
Athens, should instantly be delivered up to him. Phil. Com. Lib. 1. c. 1.
The Duke of Burgundy being required by Lewis XI. of France, to deliver up De
la March, for writing somewhat against his Government, was answered by the
Duke, that though he was not in the least the King's Subject, yet if it could
be made out, he had said, or done any thing against his Majesty's Honor, he
would see him punished as he deserved.

And though Grotius observes in their favor, that they are not absolutely to
be delivered, yet grants they must (if that be refused) be necessarily Punished;
and this was the Complaint of the Aelians against those of Lacedoemon, that
they would do neither; and where the same Author observes, that our Europoean
Princes have in the last Age Connived at the protection of some Malefactors,
yet he grants it is only in lesser Crimes, never to be allowed to those that
are disturbers of the Public Peace of their own Country, or directly excepted
against in the Articles of any League. Gylippus the Lacedemonian discoursing
upon this point of protection, says it was ever intended only for such as were
unfortunately miserable, and not for those that are maliciously wicked; and
Misereri oportet qui propter fortunam non ma litiam in Miseriis sunt. Vid.
Cicero, translat.
Demosthenes says the same, and I shall submit it to the Judgment of the World,
as well as to the States, whither our Authors Malice against the King and
Government, has not brought him to his misfortune.

All the old Cities of refuge, which we read of in the Sacred Writ, were only
granted to such unfortunate Offenders as we mentioned before, and all the
Presidents that can be brought where their delivery has been refused, as the
Chalcidenses did Naaplius to the Groecians; King Pepin those that fled to him
out of Normandy; the Emperor Lodovicus Pius those that ran to him from Rome;
and the Gepidoe, Ildigisales to the Romans, was either, where the accused had
cleared themselves upon a Trial, or where they fled from a Tyrannous
Persecution; and that I suppose is the reason why our Author would represent
himself so Vid. Six Pap.
Persecuted, and make the Case of the Vid. Vind. of himself, p. 5.
Fugitives of France to be his own.

I cannot but remark here upon the Modest Request, that by the Vid. 1 Memorial.
first Memorial was made against the Dr. and which he treats too, with as great
rudeness, and derision, which desired civilly, if they would not deliver him
up, only that he might be banished out of their Dominions; this, I humbly
conceive, was a Condescension, where it might have demanded his Trial, and
punishment for High Treason; this was such a reasonable Request, that all
History, and Law, give a greater allowance, as in the former Presidents has
been shown; and in this, as by some, we shall now show, was never in the least
controverted; so did the * Cymaei, who when they would not deliver up Pactyes
the Persian, yet notwithstanding, they would not offer to keep him, but sent or
suffered him to fly away to Mytelene; and Perseus King of Macedon in his
Apology to Martius, writing about those that had betrayed Eumenes, says, As
soon as upon your Information, I found these Men in Macedonia, I commanded them
immediately to depart my Kingdom, and for ever interdicted them all my
Dominions.

The denial of this, I am sure, is more to be admired, than defended, and the
Dutch might think themselves as injuriously dealt with all, if ever they should
happen to be so denied, if Private Subjects shall have such a right of
Prosecution? if in Civil Actions Creditors can demand it for a Debt? how can it
be justified, when in an offense against the Crown, and the highest too, it is
denied to one of the greatest Princes in Europe.

Our Author utterly mistakes it when he would make Vid. Page 4. 1 Consid.
us believe, That by the sense of the seventh Article, all Condemnations being
to be under Public, and Authentic Letters, must be meant of the Record of the
Sentence being to be transmitted them: A body would have thought a Copy of it
might have served the turn, for Records are not so soon parted with out of
Westminster Hall; I do not know what may be done out of the Archieves of
Scotland, or their Registers there of their Journal Books, but if I mistake not
by a Law of his Country, Letters of Horning, and their Executions, are not to
be proved by Witnesses, and that forbidden by Ja. 6 p. 6.
Act of Parliament; so that it is impossible to make such proof as can attest a
Copy; and for the Journal it self, I suppose they would hardly send; but by
that Article may be as well understood, that an Envoys Memorial representing,
that by the Laws of his Country such a person stands Condemned, that this is of
it self a Public and Authentic Instrument, when it comes from the hand of
such a Public Minister of State, and therefore in the forementioned Case of
the Prince of Macedon, as soon as he received but information that such Men
were retired into his Territories, he immediately interdicted them, and
immediately upon the demand of Bothwell, Queen Elizabeth said, she would either
deliver him up or send him out of England.

But such Arguments as the Schools call ad hominem, with some People are most
prevalent; therefore as I do not in other things pretend to prescribe measures
to the Dutch, of what they are to do, so I must offer one Instance more of what
in this case too they have done, and that without proof or examination.

It Is known then, that they of Holland not long since delivered up the Cook
that had been in the Conspiracy with the Countess of Soissons of France for
poisoning; and he that endeavors with his Venom and Malice to Alienate the
Subjects Hearts from the King and his Government by the misrepresentation of
him, and his Proceedings, which by the Law of the Land is called Treason, must
by that of all Nations be concluded to have forfeited that right of Protection,
which as has been shown, in such offenders, it does more particularly refuse
to favor.

In the Article of the Crown of Denmark, for the securing 5 Article Feb. 4.
1660.
and returning us any Regicides, that should be found in their Dominions, or
should hereafter repair there, it was agreed, that upon the first notice to
that Crown, as soon as the King was told of their being there, they should be
apprehended, put into safe hands of their own Officers, or of such as the King
of England should appoint to take them into Custody, and this was observed,
without any expectance of any Record of their Sentence and Attaindure.

As to his second Consideration as it relates to the common Acceptance of the
Word Fugitive and Rebel, when the concern is national, they may either be
construed according to the Municipal Laws of the Country, or the Laws of all
Nations, and by both of those, his Construction of the Terms, as well as of the
Merit of his Cause, will be certainly Condemned; for a Fugitive, (as we have
intimated before) by the Laws of both Kingdoms, is so reputed from the time of
his absenting himself after Citation; though he were innocently absent long
before; and by the Civil Law, according to which, all Leagues and Treaties are
to be interpreted, and take their Acceptance; he that is accused of the Crimen
Laesae Majestatis, is criminated for a Rebel, and therefore it is promiscuously
called too, the Idem perduellio dicitur Zouchaei. Elem. p. 4. Sect. 9. etsi is
proprie perduellionis reus est qui hostili animo adversus Remp. vel Principem
est Armatus. Vid. Ibid. and D. 48.4.11.
Crimen Perduellionis, though properly in strictness, he is only guilty of the
latter, that comes, Armed in an Hostile manner to Invade the King, or the
Commonwealth. I wish our Author could help himself better in his Explanations,
which for any thing that he has offered yet, he must be concluded in the
Articles of Treaty, which have been so often ratified and confirmed, and which
deny any Protection to declared Rebels, and Fugitives: And this was the Opinion
of the Dutch Vid. Their own Netherland Historian.
themselves, in the Case of the P. of Furstemberg, whom they looked upon as a
Rebel, for not obeying the Imperial Mandatum Avocatorium, as well as for
bearing of Arms against the Emperor; and by the same reason the Regicides
might as well have been refused us, because many of the Kings Judges never bore
Arms, but even that it seems our Author does not decline, to make himself in
his own sense, and the Literal one, a Complete Rebel. 1. Letter.


The Third Consideration is, his being Naturalized by the States, before he was
Prosecuted by the King.

Did that Naturalization (as our Author in his Letter does falsely imagine)
eradicate all that Relation he has to his natural Prince, and Liege Lord, did
it really translate that Allegiance which he pretends it does? much might be
argued from it in his defense, but since so many Presidents have been brought,
that have proved it quite otherwise adjudg'd, and seconded with as much reason
as my little stock could afford, and that strengthened with the resolution of
all the Laws, it must be concluded, that his being the States Temporal Subject,
does not make him less the King's natural one, and if Local Protection, as he
observes, is so inseparable from Sovereign Power, I am sure by what has been
said, Natural Allegiance will appear to be more so, so that his defense here,
is only the very Crime that is in question; which like the glorious ills of the
Roman Hero, must only be maintained by doing greater.

But because I would give all the satisfaction imaginable, we will carry this
point of a Natural Allegiance being Inseparable, some few steps further, and
see first, what the Laws of all Nations say of it, and then what we find said
in those of our own; and for the Imperial Law, in this point, it is positive,
that every one becomes a Subditus quisque fit, primum ratione nationis. Zouc.
part 4. Sect. 2.
Subject truly, and originally, with respect to that Nation under which he was
born: And by this word Nation, (which those Authors use to express it by) I do
understand, that Government is more properly to be intended; for I know, that
People may be born the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, and yet without
Vid. Act of Parl. de Natis ultra Mare. Vid. Crooks Rep. Banks's Case.
his Dominions, though not his Government; and is the Common Case of those that
are born in English Factories beyond Sea, which by a Fiction in Law, transfers
the place of birth to be within the Diocese of London, and the County of
Middlesex: And this, if I mistake not, is the Resolution of Banks's Case in
Crooks Rept. so careful is our Law, lest any natural Allegiance should be
transferred to a foreign State, that to avoid it, it transfers the place of
your Nativity in another Country, to the Territories of your own Prince; and
therefore we are told by Civilians, Partus non tantum Parentis, verum etiam
reipub. nascitur, cujusmodi ad Rempub. relatio Exui non potest, D. 37, 8, ^, 12.
That every man is not only his Parents Offspring, but that of his Kingdom or
Commonwealth, and this relation to his Country he cannot renounce or
translate. This is positive against our Author's Assertion, that has occasioned
his Prosecution in Scotland, where he says, it is already, and actually
translated; when by the Laws of that Country, the very bare limitation of his
Allegiance had been Crime enough to have cost him his Life. And so plain and
full are the Laws of Nations in this Case (and which a Country that is partly
governed by them cannot contradict) that they say no one can Origin propria
nemo potest voluntate suase eximere, nec si aliam assumat, quod assumptio
originis, quae non est, veritatem naturae non Perimit, c. 10. 33, 4. D. 5. 1, 6.
Divest himself at his So also say our own Laws. Vid. Dr. Storys Case ut Supra.
Dyer 300.
Will and Pleasure, of this original relation he has to his Prince and place of
Nativity; no, though he assumes unto himself another: For the assuming a
pretended Origination, (and naturalizing is no more) does not extinguish that
natural one which in reality he must ever retain; neither by Neque mentiendo,
neque recusando Patriam, veritatem mutare potest, Zouch. ibid.
falsely renouncing of his Country from which he had his birth and original, can
he change the Truth and Nature of the thing. And this was so loyally,
learnedly, and judicially resolved in the very same words, in the recited Case
of Dr. Story, by all the Judges in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, (who is celebrated
even by our Author, and others, for employing none but men of the greatest
Understanding in the State) that it must supersede all Objection; and if the
Civil Law will not by our own Municipal Resolution of the Judges of the Land,
Dr. Bur, must be silenced and convicted, even from a Process in the 13 Eliz.
Reformation, and an Historical Consutation out of Mr. Fox.

These Imperial Laws do so expressly oppose our Author's Expositions, that they
call him a Transfuga est, qui ab Repub. Defecit, and Deficere dicuntur qui ab
his quorum suo imperio sunt desciscunt, D. 4. 5, 5.
Fugitive, that falls off from his Country and Commonwealth; and this
Defection they define to consist in renouncing their Obedience to that
Government, under which they were born; and this Native, in the Phraseology of
their Law, they call an Originarius and Incola in eo differunt, qued ille
perpetuus hic pro tempore subditus exsistit. Zouchaeus Elem. Jurisp. p. 4.
Sect. 2.
Original, (a term which our Antagonist is no Stranger to, having naturalized
it into his Works;) but the sense of it here signifies a natural born Subject,
whom, Civilians say, differs from an Inhabitant, and adventitious one in this,
that the one owes a perpetual subjection, and the other but a Local and
Temporal one; and this perpetual Obedience, that is so inseparably required,
from what has been said, does appear unalienable; and what course our Author
has taken to translate it, cannot apprehend, if it be so transferred, (as for
the concern and sake of his Cause more than from any Conviction from his
Reason, he would persuade himself to believe) then, whenever there should
happen to be any breach between those Crowns, or States, that were at present
in good Amity and Correspondence; Such Deserters are by their own Conclusions
qualified to fight their own Prince, and Invade their own Country, and perhaps,
for that end, our Author maintains the Paradox of this rebellious Position; for
Allegiance being once renounced by him, as well as Passive Obedience, there
remains nothing but to exercise an Active Valor, and the verifying his being a
Rebel, even in his own sense, a Man that has born Arms against his Prince. Vid.
Vind. p. 4.
For where Obedience and Birth is translated, there remains no Obligation, and
ty, to Duty, or Relation: but I am afraid, should such Expositors upon their
Allegiance, by the fortune of the day be made Prisoners of War, they were not
to be treated as Common Enemies, but as so many Rebels, and Fugitives: It will
be too late for them then to have recourse to the Postliminium of the Romans,
when they have made themselves Renegadoes; when they have renounced their
Allegiance, by so solemn an Act as their own hand writing, they cannot return
themselves again to their former Rights and Privileges, they may be received
indeed, (as Civilians say) but then it must only be to punishment; and upon
these Principles, I suppose the Laws of Scotland proceed, when it makes such a
Renuntiation, Capital.

Captive Enemies; that are taken in the Act of Hostility, have generally by the
Laws of Arms Quarter allowed, and Liberty to depart; which is more, or less
observed; according to the dealing they meet withal from one another; but
should one be found, that by a voluntary abjuration has renounced his King and
Country, amongst their Enemies, either in Arms, or without, in Camp, or in
City; he is to be put to Death as a Deserter, and Fugitive; and this is
confirmed, by constant practice, as well as warranted by all Law; and where the
person owns his Allegiance, actually translated, he makes himself the same
Criminal, as if he were in League with his Princes Enemies; though that is a
Circumstance that will much aggravate the Crime; and the being under the
Protection of his Friends and Allies, Vid. Grotius Lib. 2. c. 21.
only hinders the Prince from entering their Territories, with an Army to demand
him; but that cannot debar him from his right of demanding his punishment, or
Dedition.

So much for what Civilians say in this matter, and it may not be improper to
superadd, what common Lawyers, upon the Case have resolved; my Lord Vid.
Calvin's Case.
Coke, to this purpose observes, that natural Allegiance being an Act and Habit
of the mind, it cannot be confined within any place; and from thence would
infer, that his Countryman Calvin in his Controverted Case, could not be said,
when he was in England, he owed the King of Scots, no natural Obedience; and
that natural Leigance should have any respect to a Local one, was an
insufficient Plea, and upon the whole, it was concluded, that a natural Vid.
His Vind. page 4. Nullis claustris Coercetur, nullis metisrefraenatur.
Allegiance could not be Vid. id. Calv. Case. Jura naturalia sunt, immutabilia.
constrein'd with any force, or confined within any limits; it is concluded
there, that this Allegiance is due to the King by the Law of Nature; that this
Law of Nature, was long before any Municipal one of the Land, and that it is
part of our own Law, and must be for ever immutable; and what is due by the Law
of Nature, a Moral Vid. Aristot. 5. Ethicor.
Heathen will not say can be translated and transferred; and therefore this
Allegiance could not be denied to be due even to Tarquin, though there were
then no Civil Institutions among the Romans that confined it; being before
Papirius had reduced any into Writing; and if with the permission of this most
Polemical Divine, I may be allowed to attempt upon his Province, those
inculcated Texts, of being subject to the higher Powers, and that, not only for
fear, but for Conscience sake, seem to me, to have a more immediate respect to
those that are their Natural Princes; and to the Law of Nature, which did most
conscientiously oblige them, more than any fear of Municipal ones, and Civil
Institutions.

I agree with our Author, that the point of Naturalization Vid. Vind. p. 5.
is an Universal Practice; and the right of granting it is inseparable from
Sovereign Power; so Novel 78.5.
Antoninus Pius gave the Jus Civitatis to much Forreign-People that repaired to
Rome: And though our King cannot naturalize without an Act of Parliament,
(which I cannot see but might have been admitted, as a point of Sovereignty, it
being of old allowed to his Original Ancestors, the Roman Princes, and the
denying it fixing somewhat of Sovereignty in the three States;) yet by our Law
now, he grants Letters of Denization, which is as Coke's Report. fol. 25.
inseperably assix'd to his Royal Person; yet still this being Denizen'd, or
Naturalized, shall never alienate that Allegiance you owe your Natural Prince;
much less, protect a man from the Justice and resentment of his Lawful
Sovereign, for if it cannot be defended in those that are born Subjects of a
Foreign State, it cannot be imagined justifiable in those that are
Naturalized; for though that puts you in a conditionas if you had been a
Subject born; yet it is with relation only to personal defects, to qualify you
for the Privileges of a Native, and not to exempt you from the Obligations you
owe to the Laws of God and Nature.

By what has been said, and somewhat more that I shall now say, I hope he will
retract this opinion; That Vid. Vind. p. 5.
the Obligations of Honor, that all Sovereigns come under, to protect whom
they have naturalized, against all things but their own Justice, is no dark
point of Law, and that it is what every Prince Practices.

That Obligation of Honor, (were there no Leagues to oblige them,) would on the
contrary, command them not to justify those Crimes in Naturalized Subjects,
which they cannot defend in their Natives; he is so far from clearing this dark
point of the Law, that he has made it only more obscure; and indeed, put the
Law quite out, like the Expositor that Writ so much of Fiat Lux upon his
Window, till he had darkened the whole Room: And for the practice of Princes it
is plainly against him; some Presidents there are where Protection has been
much insisted on, as when the Venetians defended Pope Alexander against the
Emperor Frederick; but I hope our Author will not make his Case that of a
Sovereign Prince, when the Chalcidenses refused to deliver up Nauplius to the
Greeks, (as we have observed before) it was after they had found him Innocent
by a formal Trial; and that obstinacy of the Gepidae, (even by which they
perished) was not for protecting a Criminal in the Case of High Treason; and for
a more Modern Instance; when Queen Elizabeth demanded Morgan, and others 34
Eliz. Cambden, fol. 25.
out of France, and was refused, it is apparent, it was upon a particular
revenge the French King proposed to himself by way of Retaliation; for he would
not so much as offer her to put them to a Trial there; which all Authors do
indisputably agree in, ought to be done, and which the Vid. Answer to 2d.
Memorial.
Dutch themselves in his own Case grant to be reasonable, though they do not
put it in Execution; for he told her plainly, Si in Anglia quid machinati sunt,
Regem non posse de eisdem cognoscere. Cambd. ibid.
that he could not (that is more truly) Would not take any Cognizance in France
for any thing they had done in England, though what the Queen pursued them for
was High Treason too: But when we come to Consult the History, we as soon come
to see the Reason too; and that was returned in the very answer of the King's,
viz. that the Queen had not long before In suum regnum Mongomerium Principem
Condaeum, etc. ad misisse Comd. 1585.
received Montgomery, the Prince of Conde, and other French Fugitives, into her
Protection; and truly, if we consider her as encouraging all the troubles of
that Kingdom, and his Subjects that she assisted when in Arms against their
King, in a cruel War, and that against her own Articles of Peace, it cannot be
expected she should meet with much Complement from such a King, or the Common
Justice that the Laws of Nations would allow; neither would it be a rational
Conclusion from Particular Instances, and those ill applied, to subvert a
Universal Rule of Reason, Equity, and Right.

This Obligation of Honor that all Sovereigns lie Vid. Vind. p. 5.
under, to protect, whom they Naturalize, against every thing, is, I think,
another of his unlucky Reflections, and that upon the Honor of all Princes. I
cannot tell You what sense some sort of People may have of this Honor, that
don't use to stand much upon having any; but Crowned Heads, that are generally
the Fountains of all that is Honorable, treat one another with more respect.
The sense that the Ancients had of this Obliging Honor, was briefly this: Dion
Chrysostom says, that among the many Mischiefs that attend Governments, and
cause all this Discord and Disturbance, he counts this for one; The protecting
Criminals and Offenders, that fly from one City to another; That the next
Degree to Treason, is to harbor and Protect Traitors; and next to the
Renegadoes are those that receive them. This is observed by Grotius, Lib. 2* C.
21. Quintil. Declam. 255.
Grotius out of Quintilian, and our Authors offering to put this Principle upon
the States, is by the Consent of their own Grotius, the greatest Libel upon
their Lordships; they might have been more honorable and wise, than to permit
a particular Person's Crimes to Be paum'd upon them, for an Interest of State,
and a single man's Offense, (that can hardly be said to be a Subject) to make
their Government suffer by a national Imputation: And thus Aeschines, in his
Answer to Demosthenes declares, in his Treaty with K. Philip, for the Peace of
Greece, That the Malefactors themselves, and not their Cities, should suffer
for their faults; which nothing but the punishing or delivery of the Criminals
can excuse; and for this reason the Cerites presently left it to the choice of
the Romans, which they would have? And as I observed above, I thought the
States, would have been more truly honorable, than to entertain such Maxims of
Government for a point of Honor, and that the Wise Administrations they have
many times shown, would not have permitted them to receive it, as a point of
Wisdom or Policy, and that from an Instance, that these their most Learned
Statesman that ever their Country afforded, (or indeed any other) has applied
to the Case, Ibid.
and that is Basilius's sending to Cosroe's, for one that was his own Subject;
but being declared a Rebel and a Fugitive, tells him, he hoped he would be so
prudent, as not, Somewhat to this purpose said the Romans, when they sent for
Jugur^ba.
by Protecting him, to countenance such a President against himself. And
indeed, this has been in this last Age, the real occasion of debauching it into
our Author's degenerate Principle of Honor, when by the first Breach upon its
Purity, other Princes were disengaged from those Obligations that they had to
it, and forced by a most preposterous piece of Gallantry, to recede from the
very Rules of Real Honor, for fear of putting up of Injuries, and failing of
the satisfaction of a glorious and honorable Revenge: And in this sense indeed
I can submit to the Saying of our Author, That it is practiced by all Princes
as often as there is such Vid. Ibid.
occasion for it.

And therefore I can further agree with him, that Vid. Vind. p. 5.
the States are no further bound by it to the King, then the King is bound by
it to the States, unless we could fancy a Deeper Obligation in a Monarch to
adhere to the Rules of right Honor from his Royal Blood, than can be expected
from their mixed Constitution, in a Democracy; and this Mutual Obligation, as
appears from the repeated Arguments of History, Reason, and Law, is as
Reciprocally obliging, where there are no Leagues or Articles to make it more
binding; but where there are, it only supersedes all doubt, and makes it almost
a Forgery to dispute it: And should a Dutchman naturalized (as he puts it in
his inverted Case) be demanded for so high an offense as High Treason, His
Majesty might doubtless deliver him up, or Punish him, if convicted, upon a
legal Trial of his Peers, and that by the Laws of all Nations, were it not
specified in any particular League; for as it is proved before from all the
Topics of Argument, that Law or Logic, History or Fact can afford, that this
Naturalization being but at best an Acquired Allegiance, cannot eradicate that
natural one that is immutable: it privileges them only in things that respect
their private persons, and not against the Public Relation they retain to
their Country; it cannot legitimate him, if he be there born in it, a Bastard,
and can no more make him a good Subject, if he be fled from it for a Rebel.

The Custom and Right of our being tried here, per Pares, is with submission,
nothing to the purpose; for Vid. Ibid. p. 5.
in Leagues and Alliances, we being to be guided and governed by the Civil Law,
if such a Criminal be delivered up, it supersedes his Trial; and if he be tried
according to our Common, it prevents his Delivery; and if it be for such Crimes
as are punishable by the Laws of Nature and Nations, (as Treason and renouncing
natural Allegiance were ever reputed;) it may be tried by the Imperial Law, as
well as the Municipal ones of any Land. These are Transactions of States, and
Measures of Government, that must no more be confined to our Acts of
Parliament, than is the sovereign Power of making War and Peace, (and upon
which both of those commonly depend;) but our unfortunate Author continues only
in this, his unlucky touches, so usual against his own Interest; for if he is an
Englishman (which in this Case, out of Favor we'll grant him leave to fancy
himself) he ought to be tried by his Peers, and the Custom of their Country,
not admitting such a sort of Process; the Evidence being transmitted hence by
way of Memorial or Proof, it would only give our Government a juster Reason to
demand him, and theirs from the peculiar Proceedings of our Municipal Law, to
think, they cannot do him full and speedy Justice in the Court of Holland. Vid.
p. 4.


And in Matters of such mighty moment, as the Concord and Amity of Crowns,
Leagues, and Alliances, of Princes, and States, private Persons may lie under
an Obligation of Honor and Honesty, and perhaps Piety too, that may not be
very pleasing to such an Offender; that is, to make a voluntary Dedition of
themselves, to prevent any dangerous Contests, and public Calamities that
might ensue, or at least to retire out of those Territories, where an obstinate
Continuance may create an unhappy Disturbance: This might be counted a more
becoming Prudence, instead of an Vid. Vind. p. 5.
unbecoming fear. This, some Casuists have thought the Duty even of the most
innocent Persons, and is only more obliging upon those that lie under the
Suspicion of the greatest Guilt. This, though he be not bound to it by Right,
yet he may be obliged in Charity; and those which are no Acts of Justice, yet
may be done out of Piety and Love, which as they cannot be performed without
Praises, so they cannot well be Omitted without blame: And it is our Author's
peculiar Affectation, that with Page 6.
relation to the Public, he is free from the very fault of Omission: but he is
too apt to value himself upon his Excellencies, and even such as cannot be well
called his own, though the greatest Advantage he has, and that is, the being
protected against the Resentments of the King of Great Britain, was of such an
inconsiderable value, as hardly to be Page 5.
worth the asking. Our Author might have forsook the Country, as tender as he
is of the Rights of it; which would have remained perhaps more unviolated than
some Princes may think, those of all Nations are in his protection; I know, the
persuading such an Hero to a voluntary retirement, is much such another Task
that an Ingenuous person undertook to persuade our Usurper to Hang himself; but
as that killing might have been indeed no Murder, and been better justified
than any of the Cases and Arguments of Dr. Don to persuade us to that
unpleasant diversion of a Felo de se, Vid. His (...).
in his Learned Treatise of Suicidium, viz. from the great Obligation that
Tyrant would have laid upon his Country; so I humbly conceive, both the
Countries, to which our Amphibious Subject does owe an Obedience, had been
better obliged, had he, what he so scorns, withdrawn of his own accord, it had
superseded a National Page 5.
Contest, about a private person; who as high as he is, that we are so below
his Answer, is really, notwithstanding Page 6.
his value and vanity, is more turbulent to both States, than in either of them
considerable.

This Expedient was neither ridiculous, as perhaps, it would have appeared to
our Author, nor Impracticable, as from some Instances shall appear; so Pactyes,
the Persian, as is recorded in Herodotus, when he was not delivered up by the
Cymaei, of his own accord, for an Expedient for the Peace of both States, fled
to Mytelene; and Phocion to his Friend Nicocles, went a little further, who
thought, that least things should come to an extremity, if Alexander demanded
him, he ought to deliver himself up. It was the saying of a Noble Roman, that
if his Enemy had surrounded him at Sea, and threatened a sinking of the Ship, if
he were not delivered up, to preserve his Friends from danger, he ought to
Sacrifice himself to the resentments of his Enemy, or the mercy of the Sea; and
(without the help of Horace) the Metaphor of the Vessel, may be fitted to
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, when History has here told us, how much of
misfortune has befallen Principalities, from these unhappy differences about
Mean and Private men, but though our Author does so swagger it out with his
Excellencies, and Sublimes, his stoutness, and maintaining of his Post; such
Application to the present Case, Vid. p. 5.
would I hoped once have been for ever superseded from the prudent
Administrations of two such flourishing Governments, and the Public Peace
never have been interterrupted, upon the account of a Man, that is too mean for
an Article of War, and who, if His Majesty's Honor had not been so highly
invaded from the Permission his Libellous Defamations have met with, is as much
below a Prince's Resentment, as he is beneath the Protection of a State.

The Case of the French Fugitives, who are received Vid. Id. p. 5.
here, and which by the greatest abuse in the Application, he would make to be
his own, is, as I just touched upon before, quite foreign to his purpose: They
indeed deserve pity and protection, when such Offenders merit as much
Punishment; Their Crimes are truly like those of the Primitive Christians, only
the Religion they Profess; and They are but ill used, when Criminals that are
prosecuted for High Treason against their Prince, draw such unlucky Parallels,
and make a Judicial Vid. p. 5.
Prosecution of the highest Offender, to be the same with a terrible
Persecution they suffer for no Offense. Mr. Varillas, after all his rude
Reflections, ought to return him Thanks for making Heresy to be Treason and
Rebellion too; those Crimes, as has been sufficiently shown, were never
Tolerated, never protected, nor ever can be in any Kingdom or State, neither in
naturalized Subjects or Natives, against foreign Princes no more than against
themselves at home; whereas * Athens, and all Cities, have been ever reputed
Sanctuaries for the It was for such they set up there their Ara Misericordiae,
says Pomponius.
Persecuted and Afflicted; and France it self cannot cumplain, as we see it
neither does, against such a Charitable Reception, since their own King Pepin
received and protected all those that fled to him out of Normandy for a
Persecution: And the Emperor Ludovicus Pius did the same to those that for the
like fled to him from Rome; as they may see by a An. 817.
Decree of his in their own Tom. 2.
Gallican Councils: So that our Author Libels them as much when he applies
their Persecution, as he belys our King, when he says he is vid. 1st. Memorial.
Persecuted.

SECT. VIII.
ANd now to sum up this contested Point for the Honor of His Majesty, and
that of the English Nation; both which are not a little concerned in the late
Transactions that have past between us and our Neighbors, both with relation
to the Case of this Celebrated Author, and some other of his Subjects which
comes much to the same, out of an humble deference to those that were in
Alliance with their State; He might less have presumed to censure, and reflect
on ours; but our Author made the more bold to Invade the King first with his
Libels, to facilitate that Invasion he had encouraged with force and Arms;
being adopted into the Treachery of the Dutch, (which in him was Treason) he
might more confidently flourish with his Pen, when he saw the Sword a drawing:
And since this turbulent and pernicious Pen, which from its Excellency and
Applause, is only qualified for to do the more of mischief, has met with so
much of Permission, as to justify it self against so many several Memorials of
the King of Great Britain; and that in a Paper in which I am my self so much
concerned, where (if he will not take it for foul Language too) I must thank
him for abusing me in so good Company as the King and his Ministers, and this,
with prefixing the Glorious Fiocco of his renowned Name, to the Front and Finis
of as confident a piece, to let the World know he would no longer be Incognito,
and the States too, that they ought to take notice of it; since all this
appears in Holland, as open as with us any of our Imprimaturs, I hope I need
not Apologize much, for a little Liberty that I take, and that the Author of
the Parliamentum Pacificum, ought no more to be punished at the Instance of Mr.
F. only for having made but a modest Reflection upon the Paper of a Minister;
then was the Author of so many Virulent ones (upon the Memorial of His Majesty
solemnly presented;) for the defaming of his Government; and it is a real
Maxim, even among the Laws of Nations, that the defensive side has always the
most to say in its justification, and that little remark that I first past upon
some of his Papers, (his very person being unknown to me) was really the result
of those many Malicious Reflections Six Papers.
he had made long before, upon the very person of His Majesty, and the
Administration of his Government; and these publicly dispersed, as I was well
informed, for the depraving of the Minds of the King's Subjects abroad, and
translated too into other Language for the making the King and his Ministers
more universally odious, and Contemptible to Foreigners themselves: And sent
us over here for a pack of Presents, that like the Box of Pandora, when opened
by Epimetheus, contained only all kind of Evils, for the infecting us with the
worst of Diseases and Calamities that can befall a Kingdom; the Distrust of the
Prince, and the Discontent of the People.

The Question that does really arise from these Observations, is shortly this;
How much His Majesty was concerned to represent this to that Government under
which these His Defamations were made? And how far it affected that Government,
in which He made these Defamations?

1. The Obligation of Honor that all Sovereigns Vid. Page 5.
come under, is of great weight and Consideration with our Author, when it must
obliged them to protect all sort of Criminals, and how comes it to be so
inconsiderable, when some satisfaction is sought for, even for the greatest
Crime, High Treason, and the highest indignity: I confess, in Countries where
more profitable Maxims obtain, it is a good Aphorism, that he is the Most
Honorable, that has Got most, and Honor as well as Godliness with some
People, may be great gain; but this is not the Case with Crowned Heads, and a
Power truly Sovereign, they are obliged to the most tender regard of their
Honor and Dignity, and the least Violation of it unregarded and neglected, is
a stain upon their very Purple; and this has been formerly confessed by the
readiness of those people, to give satisfaction to the least resentment of
Queen Elizabeth, that perhaps are not so forward now to give a satisfactory
answer to the demand and Memorial of His Majesty; the difference lying only in
this, that they were then the Distressed States, and now the High, and Mighty
ones.

The Reputation of a Prince does so far, I confess, (if we may with the Poet,
compare great things with small) Symbolize with that of the meaner sort, and
the Credit of a Merchant, (and which I know with such a Trading People, must be
mightily valued and esteemed) that the stock of his Honor, and Wealth, his
interest in his Subjects, his strength at Sea, and his Forces at Land, like the
others estate; his Bank, his Effects, his Esteem, are for the support of his
Dignity, to be advanced rather by Fame and Report, even beyond the real
Proportion that they bear, and then how injuriously must He be dealt withal;
when by slander, and reproach, he shall be represented Vid. Six Papers.
oppressing of his Subjects, contemptible to his Neighbors; his Forces
vilify'd, and his Affairs perplexed; and we all know a Commonwealth Famed, only
for a reputed Bank, that carries, perhaps, and bears up Quod si Respub. Veneta;
Regibus aequalem dignitatem sibi ascribit, quanto meliori Jure Faederatum
Belgium. Hornius dissertat. Hist. And we know an Author that styles them Regum
Domini.
it is best reputation in the World upon this very Bottom; and in all their
Civil Actions among themselves, insist mightily for reparation, where any
private Credit is lessened; or from Foreign States where it is publicly
undervalu'd; and if this be their Common Law, I am sure their Civilians Etiam
stant Reges and Regna suo nomine and Existimatione; quare nomen augeri oportet,
and Culpa fuerit relaxare vindictam. Alber. Gentil. de jure. Bell. Lib. 1. c.
28.
teach Princes too as good a Lesson, that Kings, and Kingdoms stand upon their
Fame and Esteem; and that this Fame of theirs is therefore to be defended; and
that it would be a Crime in them to forgive, or forget to vindicate it; and all
Casuistical Divines (if we may tell our Author any thing that appertains to his
own Profession) do resolve, that Sovereign Princes, cannot remit those
Indignities that are done to themselves, so soon as private Persons the
Injuries that are offered them; because their Subjects have a share in the
Affronts that are offered to the Sovereign, which if he should put up, (it
being an Injury to the public) such a Dispensation and Indulgence would indeed
be only void and invalid.

Had the Memorials of His Majesty, which this Reflecter here has represented so
Vid, Vind. Page 3.4,
ridiculous, so groundless, and insignificant, and this with the Public
Imprimatur of his Pompous Name, been only for Injuries done his Subjects, his
Subjects could have more honestly acquiesc'd, and less resented a Reparation
refused, and those, from the Butcheries at Amboyna, to the Business of Bantam,
might all have been more handsomely forgot; but where their Prince himself, and
his Fame, by the most virulent Pen, and a Fugitive's too, is Persecuted and
traduced, and that openly, by an Author that scorns to be Anonimous; this
cannot be so soon put up at home, and requires a more signal Reparation from
abroad.

And thus it most pertinently comes now before us in the next place to
consider, how far a Kingdom or a Commonwealth is affected, (from the general
Opinion of Casuists, Statesmen, and Historians) by those very Misdemeanors,
which against a foreign State, their Subjects, and then a fortiori, any
Fugitives may commit. In the Vid. Our Answer to the 1st part of Dr. B's Refl.
former Treatise it so fell in our way, that the touching upon it could not be
well avoided, but even there it was referred to be more fully manifested in
this more proper place, and which shall here be as faithfully performed.

It is agreed then by all those Writers, That all private Injuries become
public and national ones, where any Kingdom or Nation does Vid. Albert.
Gentil. id. L. 1. C. 18,
neglect to punish them in their own native Subjects, or make satisfaction to
the Party injured; What then must be inferred, where the Injury has been
offered to His Sacred Majesty, his Public Ministers, and this from a born
Subject of his own, and subjected only to them from a Naturalization acquired?
And De Jure Bell. l. 3. c. 20.. 40.
Grotius himself carries it so high, that even in things done contrary to
friendship, there shall be implied a Violation of Peace, and certainly the
permission of any Indignity, or connivance the least Contumely that has
occasioned so much War, must be accounted an unfriendly Act: They further say,
that a Government which does not prevent by express Commands, such Reflections
as our Author has made on their Friends and Allys, is looked upon it self, as
concerned in their making; for defect of such a Prohibition Qui non Prohibent
Tenentur. Si Universitas negligit illud factum emendare illaqueat ipsa se.
Alber. Gent. Lib. 1. c. 21.
: They say, that a Community that neglects to make amends for such a Fact,
involves it self in the guilt of it; and it is said by the Celebrated Agapetus
in the Works of a Prince, the Standard of all Law, and Royal Equity; that in
such Cases, it is the same Crime not to Justinian: parest delinquere and
delinquentes non prohibere.
prohibit the Offenses of others, and your self to be the Offending Person.

Our own Ornament of the Civil Law, and the late Zouchaeus de Jure faeciali.
Part. 2. Sect. 5. Quaest. Utrum injuriae a subditis illatae; principem vel
populum afficiant.
Celebrated Professor of it at Oxford, has sufficiently discust this Case, and
settled it too, in showing how the injuries that are offered, only by private
Subjects, can affect the Prince and People; but because such Partial Authority
may not obtain with strangers; and our Authors translated Allegiance, may have
exempted him from giving that Credit to those that could once have been called
his Countrymen; let us see what Grotius himself says, into whose Country he is
adopted.

It is generally held, (as he confesses) that no Community of Men is answerable
for the faults of any particular persons, and that gives occasion to the
constant Clause in Leagues, de Publico Consilio, and this was allowed of by
Livy, as an Excuse for the Locrians in the Senate of Rome, and to the Rhodians
also in the same Senate; and to the Vejentes, pleading their Ignorance of their
Subjects having assisted the Romans Enemies; but all this is no warrantable
excuse to any Civil Society, Principality, or Commonwealths, where any Act of
Omission can be proved in the Public, that contributed to the promoting, or
permitting any Private Man's offense: St. Chrysostom; whom Vid. Grot. de jure
Bell, L. 2. c. 21. S. 2.
Grotius there Cites; (and our Reverend Author cannot reject a name so
Reverend) has the best excuse that comes nearest to this Case, and argues thus,
That it was not the common Crime of the City (or Community) but only of some
Strangers, and Foreigners, that do all things rather rashly, inconsiderately,
and out of ignorance of the Laws: But even this is not excusable, where such a
City, or Community shall connive at any Fugitives, or Foreigners, committing
such a Crime, who must there, Contract the Guilt by Imputation, for not having
hindered it before it was committed; to this does he apply the Arguments of
Cicero against Piso, of a Consul that permits others to offend; of the saying
of Salvian, That he that has a power to prohibit an ill Act, and omits it, does
in effect command it; and that Sovereign Princes who are able to prohibit
Crimes, approve them, if they permit them to be done, and who are bound to take
care that others offend not: And another of St. Augustine himself, That he that
does not in such cases resist and oppose, seems to give his consent; and this
being a piece of Divinity, that interferes with the Politics; (as Grotius
observes) our Author, Vid. Vind. page 7.
I hope, will pardon this little Digression out of the Province he has put upon
me: And for the Roman and Fabian Laws, of Masters being punished for the
permission of their Servants Faults; Parents for their Childrens, knowing of
the Commitment, and being able to restrain it, (both which are too apparent in
this Contested point) all these Cases arising only from Natural Equity, or
Religious Rules, and Observances, are all by their own Statesman, and a Vid.
Grotius ut Supra.
most Learned one too, applied by a parity of reason to Princes, and their
Subjects, their Kingdoms, or their Commonwealths.

King David in the business of Rabbah, and the Ammonites, made it the Crime of
their City, for not hindering those Indignities done him by some their
Inhabitants. And if we may venture once more upon our Authors Province, St.
Chrysostom in his Oration involves De Stat. Orat. 1.
all the Inhabitants of Antioch, in the Crimes of the Statues, because though
committed only by a few, it was not punished by the Community, which general
Imputation (he says) could have been avoided, had the Offenders been expelled
the City: After so Sacred Authority, it would be superfluous to add any
Examples from such History as is called profane; but Politics (as our Author
says) being more our peculiar Province, we may expatiate a little further upon
some Presidents drawn from the Practice of the Ancient Governments among the
Greeks and Romans, as not improper for this place; seeing the most modern
Constitutions, and most renowned States, and Republics, do commonly take their
Measures from them. Thus the Grecian Princes were Condemned for not delivering
up of their Iphigenia; and Polybius blames the Aetolians mightily, who while
they would not willingly appear Enemies to Philip, yet suffered some of their
Subjects openly to act against him, and when the Queen of the Illyrians would
have excused her self to the Senate of Rome, that the Depraedations of some of
her Subjects were done without her Knowledge, or Approbation; she was answered,
that no Prince could plead ignorance, of what was frequently, and publicly
done; and that she was answerable, for not forbidding that injury to her
Allies, which she must be presumed to know. Our Authors most Injurious
Reflections on the King and his Government, have been repeated, often Published,
and openly owned; so that there is but little need of that proof that may be
desired, and I wish there were less too, for these Unhappy Applications.

Those that tell us, Vid. Resolution of the States Generals.
That it is such an agreeable thing to nature, That he who is born free, should
have the liberty of settling himself, wheresoever he shall think it most
advantageous for him, I fear, will find too, from what has been here said, that
the Laws of Nature, and Nations, (as agreeable as they represent them) are
utterly against the transferring all Allegiance, after a Dominion introduced; I
confess, such a Notion is agreeable to Nature, had we no other Commonwealth but
that of Mr. Hobs; and there would be no need of insisting upon Articles of
Peace, when we were bound to be in no other State but that of War.

De Jure Bell. L. 2. c. 5. Sect. 24.
Grotius himself, upon this point of natural Liberty, though he gives it as
great a Latitude as any of his Countrymen can desire, cannot extend it beyond
the Restrictions of all Municipal Laws, and therefore grants, that in some
Countries it is not lawful to renounce their Nation, or forsake their City; and
mentions for an Example, that of Mosco; and though by the late Laws among the
Romans, any Citizen might remove his Habitation to another City, yet was he
still obliged to execute such Offices as should be imposed on him where he
first dwelt; and a special Proviso by those Laws, to compel him to pay his
wonted Contributions; neither were they to depart out of all their Territories
without leave; but even that Author when he has made this Natural Liberty to be
much restrained by Municipal Law; concludes, that it is not so agreeable, even
to Nature, and that no number, or great Companys of Subjects, can be allowed to
desert their Country, though some particular Persons may, and to Cap our
Authors Allegory, on the Dispensing Power, of the Reflect. 1 part, p. 5.
Dutch Dikes, and the difference of pulling of a flower, and breaking an Hedge;
this Author applies to this Case too, that it is one thing to draw water out of
a River, and another thing to turn the Course of it: So that although this
Translated Allegiance and Naturalization, were so agreeable to Nature in the
particular Person of Dr. Burnet, yet from the resolution of this their own
Lawyer and most excellent Statesmen, it is the most disagreeable thing in the
World, to extend it to so many Regiments, and whole Companies; for as he wisely
concludes from the necessity of the end, (which by all moral Maxims must create
a right;) by the same Parity of Reason, such an unbounded Liberty of settling
one's self, might be extended to a greater Majority, even to the Dissolution of
the whole Civil Society: And to this I might add, That the Consideration that
ought to have been had (upon some Vid. The Dutch Answ. to the King's Memorial.
Resolutions some People have of late given) of Our Subjects that were
demanded, being all Soldiers, as well as such a number of People, did make
such a general Naturalization more disagreeable to Nature; since Soldiers must
be naturally supposed, and that in Peace as well as War, to be more immediately
requisite to the Conservation of a Government, than a single Person, whose
Profession it is not to bear Arms; or only a particular Champion at the Pen,
that under the Obligations of the Gospel of Peace, does only disturb the State,
and would make the Church it self too, truly Militant.

And so highly Injurious has this assuming the Subjects of another Prince been
ever resented, especially when in Great Bodies, and that aggravated when the
Persons were Military men, that Zonoras discoursing of King Lazus, who had
Revolted from the Persians to the Romans, makes it a Just Cause of War, between
those Romans and the Persians, because the Roman General had drawn over unto
himself the Subjects of the King of Persia. This is granted too by the Learned
Grotius, and he insists Lib. 2. c. 5. sect. 24. Lib. 3. c. 20. sect. 41.
several times upon the same Passage, for a President. His Majesty's Memorial
almost in the same words expresses the Saying of Sabinus, That though every man
has this natural Liberty, or the power to make himself a Member of what City he
pleases, yet he cannot of the Right of Dominion, after another has been
introduced; and therefore Grotins adds the authority of Paulus, That by the
Laws of the Romans, all Fugitive Servants were liable to the right of
Reception, whom their Masters can over claim, and they must still remain their
Servants, and that it is the greatest Injury to detain them from their Service:
And certainly then the Sovereign will have as great a Right to that of his
Subjects. So that it is indeed somewhat to be admired, to see so lately the
Laws of Nature and Nations alleged to Justify a Matter to which they both
are so plainly repugnant, and by those very People, against whom their own most
applauded Author is the best of Advocates, and who plainly Lib. 3. c. 9. sect.
11.
tells us too, in another place, Ibid. lib. 3. c. 20.
That it is unlawful to receive such as are bound either by Oath or otherwise,
to perform any Service or Duty to another Prince; and since their Lawyers tell
them so, it will not be Improper to look a little into our Law, and see what
that tells us.

By the Stat. of Hen. 7. 11 H. 7. Calvin's Case, Jac. 1.
and the Resolution given in K. J. 1. it is Plain, the King of England cannot
be deprived of the Service of any of his Subjects, who are bound to serve him
in Peace as well as War, both within the Kingdom and without, that natural
Allegiance is unalterable and unseparable, whatever Liberty of Translation Some
may pretend to; and by a particular Act of Parliament of K. James, (as upon
another occasion was before observed) the Serving of Foreign 3 Jac. c. 5. 3d.
Inst. c. 23.
Princes with a Translation of Allegiance, is particularly provided against by
the requiring an Oath of Obedience before they go over, and making it Felony to
go without: And, What can be implied from this, but their Obligation to return
when called and commanded? And this is extended by the Comment of my Lord Coke,
to a going over without serving, or to Domestic Service as well as Military:
The whole Design of the Statute seems directed more especially against
Soldiers entering into Foreign Service, and by a more particular Branch of it,
binds them Vid. Form of the Obligat.
not only to take their Oath of Obedience, but also to give two sufficient
Sureties: And it was a Case once that came into Question, Dyer 298.
Whither the going only to live out of the Kingdom, without Leave, were not a
Contempt, and an Offense punishable, and to be construed as a Desire to
withdraw his due Obedience? And it is plain, that Queen Elizabeth, (whose Memory
the States ought to Reverence, as well as our Author) after She had given Leave
of Absence in a Foreign Service, for some Years, upon a Refusal to return on
the sending her Privy Seal, that Commanded it upon their Allegiance, Id. fol.
375. B.
proceeded against the Persons as Fugitives, seizes, confiscates, and sells
their Estates and Inheritance.

If these then are the Laws of England; if this has been resolved in the Reign
of a Princess, whose Proceedings no Protestants will dispute, His Majesty's
Envoy might well declare, The King could Recall His Vid. the King's Men orial.
Subjects by his Royal Proclamation, or his Letters of Privy Seal, and that
they were bound to Obey those Orders upon very severe penaltys; and the
Memorials of the Marquess may, with the Wiser part of the World be thought to
contain a great deal of sense and reason, notwithstanding that our Author has
endeavored to Vid. Vindic. p. 3. 4.
represent most of them so absurd and ridiculous.

But then all Doubt is excluded and out of doors by a general consent and
accord of all Statesmen; and Vid. Ibid. ut Supra.
Grotius in particular, where it is decided by those Obligations that arise
from Articles, Contracts, and Agreements; and to this, those that have
contested it so much, by their own Consent and Resolution are bound, and have
concluded themselves; so that since a solemn Capitulation has been produced,
and which we need not insist on to make out, since so publicly known: The
Proceedings of His Majesty's Minister of State, (which our Author has
undertaken to reflect on and ridicule,) will appear to all understanding People
to be founded upon the Principles of natural Justice, common Equity; National
Laws, and private Stipulations: And it is too plain now, for what ends His
Majesty has been denied in so just Demands, which must redound with all
impartial People, as much to his Honor as to their Shame; and a successful
piece of Injustice has just as much Equity, as a prosperous Villainy has to be
entitled to the specious Name of abused Virtue.

But setting aside the unanswerable Argument of the Earl of O's Convention and
Agreement in 78, I cannot see, but the Contenders against it, and these
asserters of this Natural Liberty, had long before concluded themselves by
their own Act, in the Articles of two several Treaties, that of Surinam, in 67.
and the other signed at Westminster, in 73. for though by the first it was
stipulated upon the Place, that instead of this agreeable natural Liberty, all
the King's Subjects were to have the Liberty to remove themselves after the
transferring of the Place, to some other Plantations under His Majesty's
Obedience; which I hope implied, that their Allegiance was not to be
Translated, no not with the Soil it self; this was thought then so agreeable to
Nature, that it was admitted immediately as an Article, though it may be well
remembered how those promises too were kept; the King's Subjects indeed were
kept, and detained contrary to that very Treaty, and this Detention
acknowledged unjust by themselves in the 5 Article, in 73, and that it should
be lawful at any time for His Majesty to send Ships for his Subjects, and that
they have leave to depart with all that belong to them, and that they
themselves were to assist them in their return; and this was granted by
themselves to Grobbendonck at the business A. D. 1629.
of Bois le Duc, where they could not detain the King of Spain's Subjects for
theirs; much less than the K. of Englands.

And to which I shall only add, Id. Heath's Chro.
That also in the Year 6 they cashiered our Regiments, and would have had them
take a New Oath to their States, which they all generously disdained, refusing
to betray their natural Lord by that treacherous Expedient of translating their
Allegiance. And such an Aversion the whole Nation had then against this
political Project of our Author's Opiniatre which he so prides himself in, that
the Opinion of the whole Parliament was against him; and when the Dutch
proposed this new Oath, they past a Bill of Attainder against all such as went
over into their Service, and that though the Laws had made it Felony before;
these, I consess, were Heroical Attempts of the Dutch, upon the Subjects of the
King of Great Britain, to tempt them to betray their Master, (but our Author
being experienced in that point, wanted no Temptation) and if he will have one
Heroical Attempt more upon Honesty, we know how his new Masters betrayed us,
who when our Ambassadors were entering, their Town to treat, most Heroically
entered our River to burn and destroy; and who (though we are so falsely upbraided
with a French League) did once really conclude a League with France to betray
England, which (as I am well informed) the late King had under their own Hands
to produce; and now, this Heroical Invasion, without the least denunciation, is
most becoming the Dutch, and another Instance of their fair dealing with
Princes, but Time may show, that England dare not only resent this, but revenge
it too.

Could it possibly have been avoided from the Contents of his Papers, I would
not have given our Author the Glory (who of his own accord is too much given to
affect it) of making his Cause that of a Nations; but since in this very piece
he has labored so much to make it so; and those that are his Defenders, by
Public Instruments, Solemn Replys and Resolutions, (which our Adversary here
with his Name affixed, openly insists and relies on) have thought fit to
interest themselves so far in his defense, His Majesty's Honor requires as
defensatory an Apology, and our English Nation, as well as private Pens,
reduced to a necessity of maintaining it: Argument I am sure is an inoffensive
Weapon, especially when only used by them that perhaps have some reason to be
offended, and till our Author returns us as much Reason and Law, President and
Examples from History and Fact, to justify his Cause, (as I may perhaps with
Modesty say) has been here offered to overthrow it: The Memorials of the King
of Great Britain, in spite of this Author's Reflections, will appear to the
reasonable part of the World, and all People unprejudiced, to be well grounded,
and notwithstanding the Reply from the States, to be still unanswered.

SECT. IX.
AND now to come to this Vindication of himself, of which there has been
nothing like it, unless it be the words in the Title Page, he Charges me for
laying to his Charge several P. 6.
Papers that I do not prove upon him: I confess, I cannot Swear to the Truth of
them, neither can it be expected that I should, unless I were in the same
Confederacy with our Author, for the defaming of his Country and his King, and
had been a Vid. p. 6, 7.
Scribler more despicable and mean than any but himself can make me, (i. e.)
his Amanuensis: But though he will not allow P. 2.
Similitude of Hands to be Proof enough to hang him, I hope Similitude of
Styles and of Circumstances of Affairs may be sufficient or good Evidence only
to guess at an Author, and a bad Man. More particular Proof of my Charges might
I suppose been as well referred to his legal Trial, as he does his Innocence
and Defense, his Justifying and Clearing of himself; but since he is not
contented even with that Charge, (which he dares not deny) I must show the
World upon what it was grounded.

1. The Papers then that I arraigned for his, in one of Vid. Parl. Pac.
the former Treatises, and that for the most audacious Reflections on the
Crown, and almost on the Memory of all His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, were
those Sir that as confidently carry in their Front this Author's celebrated
Name; They are Printed in Holland, which from the Letter, and Paper, and manner
of Printing, I can prove (being no such Stranger to Dutch Books,) and it may be
easily guest from whence we might expect Dr. Burnett's. These Papers are all
Pag'd in Common with those Letters of His that were sent to the Secretary of
State, on purpose, I suppose, to let us see they were all of a piece: They
contain all of them either the peculiar Concerns of this Author, or else (what
is as much his peculiar Province) the highest Defamations of the King and his
Government; which for farther satisfaction I have in this Treatise specified
and repeated. These Libels were long before, by a Praeliminary Menace 1 Let.
to my Ld. M.
of Displeasing His Majesty with a Recital of Affairs, threatened to be sent us;
and the Dr. was indeed so civil, before he began his War with the Crown, to
send a solemn Denunciation, and the defying of his Prince was an arrogance so
agreeable to such a Subject, that it supersedes Proof, and a Man need not seek
far to find out the Champion: Though I must confess too, that the foolish
affectation of his having had such a Vid. Ib.
share in Affairs for this Twenty years, (did not the Author's Vanity prevail
against the Truth of the Fact, and a probable Credibility) one might be brought
to believe then none of Dr. Burnett's. I do not hear of his having been to
either Crowns a Secretary of State, or a Privy Counselor; and by what has
appeared, he was ever reputed the worst man in the World, for to be one a
Secretioribus Consiliis; since, if we can credit his own Relation, Vid. Vind.
p. 7.
only of my Lord Lau -- d's Affairs, and the Character he had from an
Archbishop of Scotl. he was not well qualified for so much as one a Sacris
Domesticis. Some things are so Vid. Baldus, ut Supra: Notorium probatione non
indiget.
plainly probable, that they supersede the pains of any Proof; and that Moral
Certainty we have of his having writ these Six Papers, is as good as
Demonstration.

The next Papers that I have quoted as his, are the Reflections on Mr.
Varilla's; no one that I ever yet met with, did ever mistrust them for any
others; and himself has taken all the Care in the World, that they should be
known for his alone.

His Itinerary Letters that I have touched upon, I hope he does not dispute, or
has not taken so much the Liberty of a Traveller, as to have occasion to be
ashamed of the Relations.

The Enquiry against the Book of the late Bishop of Oxon, has so much in it of
our Authors malice, and revenge, that it would argue a defect of Reason to
distrust it; the Cardinals Fiocco came in (as an Allegory, I suppose) only to
let us know, the Author had been lately at Rome; or else, it was most
ridiculously applied to the Bishops being Incognito, when he had subscribed his
Name, it is some Argument of his being its Author, that Dr. Burnett is the
first Man, and most defended in it, though a better Doctor, and who, I think,
is more dignified, as well as more hardly dealt with; (than from his Learning
and Doctrine to be made a Fanatic, and unlearned) might have merited a more
ample defense: The mighty work that it makes with Manuscripts, and Originals;
the great relyance this Paper has on the Liege Letter; let us know too at what
Door Page 1. Page 7.
to lay it, and if the extolling of himself, and his History of Reformation,
shall be any Argument against his being the Author, it must be only with those
that are unacquainted with his Arrogance; his excessive vanity, and foolish
affectation, which I must profess, is only more ridiculous in a person that has
so many pretenses from his Reading and Learning to be more wise; these
Sublimes, these Exalted Flights do not agree with his late Vid. Vind. page 1
6.7.
humble Imitation; and the Condescension of making his Person mean; though we
Despicable Scriblers, must be even below that; so that I suppose, at best, this
seeming Modesty was forct in only to serve a turn; and his opiniatre is
retained under the more praeposterous affectation of an humble Pride; but I
must in this acknowledge our Authors Civility, that amidst the reproaches of
Despicableness, Mercinariness, Ignorance, and Scribbling, I am less scurrilously
treated, than this Paper of his has the Prelate, whose Dignity might have
defended his Person, though it had been less Learned, and Ingenious: foul
Language is as little to be found in our own Writings; and I fancy I have shown
out of other Peoples, where there is much: no common confidence could accuse us
for that Undecency, that had so much reason to reflect upon it self, and blush
at the Accusation.

The Memoirs of the late King's Life, I charged him with no further, than
himself had threatened the World with the Writing them, and so only anticipated
their Credit and Authority, since they were to come to us from such hands; and
if he fancies that I fasten an Answer to the New Tests upon him, which is Vid.
Par. Pacif.
none of his, I do seriously confess to him, that the Paper I there cite, I
never conceived to be so, neither had reason so to do, since there is another
to the same subject, that is only more seditious, and which among the Six,
himself does own.

Thus, I hope, the Injurious Accusation of doing him such injustice, is but ill
grounded, since it has been so well shown both to him and the World, upon what
ground I went; neither does himself think fit to deny any single Paper I have
put upon him for his; and for his Preface to Lactantius, I had no occasion to
take notice Vid. Vind. p. 6.
of it, since what vilify'd the Kings Government, came only under our
Consideration: I confess, I remember the Piece Printed at Oxford, and that
before our Author was so famed for Printing, and that with better Notes, than
it has now a Preface: the best part of which is only borrowed from Bishop
Tailor, though so much owned by Dr. Burnett; but seeing he takes it so unkindly
we should pass it by, I cannot but civily give it these few rational remarks.

1. That our Authors then running down a Persecution, Vid. This Preface to
Lactant.
was rather the Result of his revenge against some of the Church of England,
that kept him from running up: It only shows how ready he is to write on all
Subjects, to satisfy his resentment, or Ambition: and when he tells us (so
Mysteriously) of what hereafter may appear to his Enemies amasement; I cannot
but imagine that he Vid. Vind. p.
has somewhat in Reserve, (which from a Conviction of his Error) is a
Contradiction to his Writings, and all that he has either said, or done: And I
know he could heartily dispense with his Inclination to Indulgence, rather than
have it owing to the Grant, and Gracious Dispensation Vid. Praef. Page 24.
of his Prince; whom even in that very Piece he does endeavor to represent
from the tys of his Religion, under all the Indispensable Obligations to
Tyranny, and Persecution; and makes the great Turk even there too (from the
Mohammedan Faith) to be less obliged to be a Tyrant and a Persecutor; this is
certainly, not so consistent with Christianity, to represent the Professors of
the same God and Savior, worse than so many Musulmans, and unbecoming that
Charity, which more immediately appertains to his Function, and which himself
at the same time does so much seem to affect.

Whatever have been the Policys of States, and private Interest of designing
Men, among the Governments that are in the Countries where the Roman Catholic
Religion is professed; it is the most uncharitable Reflection, (as well as most
unreasonable) to make it Page 45. Yet note, that even in this Preface he grants
Persecution to have been more pardonable in the beginning of the Reformation:
and of this mind long before him was Aerodius, even in the Case of Heresy, P.
Aerod rer. judicat. Lib. 1. Tit. 6.
the Delight of a Church, to Bath her self in Blood, Common Christianity, and
even Human Nature cannot admit of such a Cannibal Accusation, and is a Calumny
carried a pitch above Julians; and if Papists must pass with us for Pagans,
they may with Modesty be called, Human Creatures too, but we must pardon in our
Author, the making them so many Monsters, since from our Saviors Character of
a Liar, and a Murderer, he has made them so many Page 25.
Devils too: These Barbarous Reproaches, I think savor somewhat of those
Brutal Excesses, with which he has taken the Liberty to upbraid men of no
little figure; and if this Preface be such an Argument of his mighty
moderation; I hope I have in decency, done him Justice now, in taking notice of
a Discourse which he has so gloriously arrogated to be his own.

And for those Reproaches he says I have cast upon Vindicat. p. 6.
him, and with which I do pursue him, which make it so below him to Answer such
a Scribler: I have not relied upon my own Judgment in this matter for a Reply,
but Consulted even some that are no such Enemies to my Adversary, that can as
well applaud his Writings, as do Justice to mine, who can find nothing in them
of foul Language, or Reproacb; and I believe I have shown them now where both
are to be found: If the representing out of his own Papers, the most
Reproachful Reflections on the King and His Government, be reproaching of the
Author, I must acknowledge my self very guilty of this Misdemeanor; and I
cannot help it, if I am become his Enemy for telling the Truth, or discovering
his Falsehood; but some will be apt to think he was most of all his own Foe,
when he ventured upon such a piece of Confidence, of reviling the King and His
Government with the worst of Reproaches, that inveterate Malice, mingled with
abusive Wit, could dictate and invent; with what face will such an Offender
find fault, (unless with such an one as cannot be covered with Confusion) of
whose bitter Words the Lords Anointed did of old complain; That under their
Tongues was Mischief and Vanity, Tongues speaking proud things, that said their
Lips were their own; and who is Lord over us? The spitefulness of Doeg was but
an Original of this Dr's, devouring Words, all Words that might do hurt, and
with Lies too, cutting like a sharp Razor; and if ever that Royal Psalmist had
reason to make his Complaint of Reproaches, I am sure His Majesty may, that is
as much Reproach't:

This Exalting of himself to such a Sublime, in setting others though unknown,
so below him; has given me occasion to know more of the Quality of this Hero,
than perhaps I should otherwise have inquired into, and cannot find from the
Scots Herauldry, that the Name and Family is so famous, (though his Father is
here represented by him, as great as any Patriot of his Country) the Standard
of Loyalty, and Protector of Property; the Enemy Vid. Page 6.
to all Arbitrary Power, as well as Rebellion, whatever has been this Noble
Authors Extract and Descent: it is certain he does not much Credit to the Dust
of his Ancestors, to taint their Honor with a Degradation; and instead of
adding to their Achievements, to bring them to be torn at the Market-Cross.

I confess if that would ennoble him, I am informed he has good luck with the
Ladys, and that he was formerly married Vid. Reflect. 1st. part, p. 8.
(for I do not scorn (as he says) such a simple Expression) to a Person of
Quality: but I hope he will not boast too much of that Happiness, lest it
should put people upon Enquiry, how unhandsomely he came to attain it, which I
am told too, was by none of the most reputable means; but neither will this
elevate him to that height, as to make others so much below him; for by our own
Laws of Honor, and the old Decrees of the Emperors, Women of Quality are
reputed no longer so, Dig. 1* 9. 8.
when they marry below themselves.

Our Authors meritorious Services to the Court, I cannot discover, though he
Vind. p. 6.
magnify's it much; but what will not an unimitable piece of Vanity aspire to?
His Merits were never so many to make him much known to the Government, unless
his endeavors may be called so, to do it a disservice, and some Creatures are
most known by the Mischiefs they do, his preferment from his own Confession,
was never so high, and some Vid. Ibid.
Objects are below the Displeasure of a Court.

And here I cannot but take notice of the most inveterate piece of Malice, that
has yet past his Pen, though before we had Papers that were virulent enough, and
as full of Venom and Viper; he tells us, that he is credibly informed, (which
imports his belief of the Matter of Fact) that many have been interrogated with
Tortures Vid. Vind. p. 6.
to Accuse him: Had he not designed it as the severest Recrimination on the
Crown, he might have expressed to us the Place where, whither Scotland was the
Scene of this severity, and not left it to the Judgment of unthinking men to
conclude it, a Court contrivance here; he knows our Laws admit of no such
Cruelty; neither (as I am too credibly informed) was it practiced with relation
to him there; their Laws and Customs, I confess, admit it in extraordinary
Cases, as well as Foreign Countries, where the Rack is many times as rigorously
extended as his Boot at home, but then I am satisfied it is upon the same
grounds, which by Consulting of Foreigners upon this judicial severity I found
in these summary Processes, they proceeded on, and that it is exercised only
where they find the Evidence so strong, and the Proof so presumptive, that
nothing but the Prisoners Obstinacy can oppose it, and that they are never
tortured but in Capital Cases, where their Confession is only wanting to
confirm their Guilt; where the Proof is so plain, that they could be executed
without it; and upon which one of our Jurys might find them Guilty.

The Charge of Betraying his Master, being somewhat of an heavy one, the guilt
against the Rules of common Gratitude and Morality, a petty Treason, one would
have thought this Author in a Vindication of all Vid. p. 1.
that relates to himself, would have made his Innocence very plain; but this
defense is indeed like all the rest; Vid. Vin. p. 7.
he excuses his not being able to betray a Master, because he never had one
that could properly be called so; and that he was ever raised by the King,
above the serving any Subject: I never heard of this high preferment that did
Vid. Vind. p. 7.
so incapacitate him, unless it were that at the Rolls; and in that, I am sure,
he served a Subject, and had a Master in more Senses than one: This is such a
Quible, and Equivocation, that Cambridge (whose true Learning, and Ingenuity,
in the common Reflection is so much, and so injuriously abused) can never be
supposed to have furnished him with such an Insipid Jest; and that Provident and
Learned Body, that perhaps out of a prospect of his ill Principles, did once
(as some say) refuse him to Preach, will as little approve of such a subterfuge
in his defense: It is strange that this Author that uses to be so full of his
slights, should here so poorly stick at words: The Reflection I made, was
grounded upon the known, and now his own confessed Story, of betraying the late
Vid. ib.
D. of L. a Story that he Consciously owns I am not the only Author of; but it
seems, his Master was not thus betrayed, because (says he) this Noble Lord was
never such his Master; I cannot, I confess, imagine what this manner of excuse
can mean; unless he thinks from the Propriety, and common Acceptance of the
Term, I represented him as an Apprentice to the Duke; for otherwise, the
Defense is very lame; it imported only in general, with all impartial people,
that he had betrayed a Patron, a worthy Friend, or a Person of Honor that had
made him his Confident, for the first I am credibly informed, that he was
patronis'd, as a Chaplain there, that he has been seen to officiate as such at
that Table which he made a Snare; but had this been but in the Case of a Common
Friend, or Confident, I humbly conceive, the Treachery had been the same, the
Jealousy that occasioned that great Ministers anger, it seems, was well
grounded; and the Doctor tells us no more than this, That the Duke always
thought he would betray him; if this Vid. Ib.
can be called a Vindication of himself, the Reproaches he accuses me of, may
pass for his Encomiums?

But for another Argument e Confesso, what can declare Vid. Ibid.
more fully his falsehood to be a propense, and revengeful malice? and (which he
would make a necessitated Discovery) then his disclosing of his own accord, the
Proposal of a Scottish Peer, about Invading England, who was liable to the Laws
of it, and that to a Member of its Parliament, and who, perhaps, he knew too to
be no friend to this great Minister whom his suspected Principles had made so
much his Enemy, Can our Author reconcile this to common sense? That the telling
a person of Honor, and a Member of the House such a Tale, was not betraying
it, or not the same, as if he had published it on the House top: Oats and Tongue
told their Tale of a Plot to a person of Honor, and Member of the House, upon
which it was so set about that it was known to a great many others, upon which
they were sent Vid. Page 7.
for to the House; and will our Author say these Men were unwillingly brought
to own a detestable piece of Forgery? and which I am credibly informed his was
too, for that late Loyal Peer is said to have justified himself so far, that
all that he offered at was only, that his Majesty might be able to make more
use of his Subjects of Scotland by his being enabled to call for their Service
in England, to serve him out of their own Realm, as well as within, which was
consonant, and agreeable, not only to reason, but to some express Vid. Acts
Parl. of Scotland.
Acts of Parliament, both of that Kingdom, and our own; and which, it is more
than probable, this Doctor too, from the resentment Vid. 11. H. 7.
that he had of his Sufferings under that great Ministers anger, did improve
also into a Plot of an Army, Ib.
a Scottish Invasion, of Spoiling, and Subduing the English.

It is pretty to observe how this Excellency of our Author does indeed consist
in Writing, that is, in Black, and White, when with a touch of his Pen, any
Actions shall appear in what color he pleases; he tells us of a Perfect
Reconciliation that ensued between this great Minister, and himself, but says,
That upon some reasons of Ib.
his own, their meeting was deferred, or, not thought convenient; and I am much
of this Authors mind, that upon some reasons the Duke had, he did not think
convenient to meet him; it was a good Argument of his Lordships Cunning and
Policy, and as little proof of this perfect Reconciliation; Vid. page 7. Coll. 2.
that Celebrated Statesman was never suspected yet for want of Wisdom; and it
is a known Maxim, That a Man may betray me once by his being a Knave, but the
second opportunity makes me a Fool.

And the Attestation this Author appeals to, of that Ibid.
Noble Peers Nephew, is all of a piece with the rest of his Vindication, (that
is) nothing of truth in it, or nothing to the purpose; I have taken pains to
enquire into this matter; have consulted my Lord M. that Honorable, and
Ingenious Person he so injuriously reflects on, and find nothing of that
Paragraph to be true, but his Lordships being now of the Roman Communion, and
that was as invidiously forced in by our Author, for a Reflection upon his
being reconciled, but the greater abuse it must needs be, to fasten a false
thing upon a Person of Honor, who ought to be handled with more regard to
modesty and truth, than if our Author was treating only with Mr. Varillas, or
reflecting upon his Scriblers: He Cites this Honorable Person, as a Witness;
but if he has none that could do him more service, should he appear to his
Citation, I am afraid it would go hard with him at his Trial: He appeals freely
to Page 7.
his Lordship for bringing very kind Messages to him from my Lord Duke; and
signifying them to him after his death. I confess, our Author ever gives
himself a freedom with great Persons, which is but a part of his peculiar
Vanity, to Aggrandise himself; but I must freely tell him too, this is found to
be false; it is strange, that it must be the misfortune of so Lord L. Lord R.
Lord M.
many Lords to suffer by such a dangerous Correspondent; this Noble Person
remembers none of these very kind Messages he brought him, nor any that the
Duke ever sent; and that his Lordship might be more fully satisfied, not
relying wholly upon his own Memory, it being almost six years since, as an
Argument of his greater integrity and Ingenuity, has also as freely appealed to
a person from whose Function, as well as favor, our Author can expect nothing
but Justice: and that is a Divine, and his own Favorite, who first introduced
my Lord to his unhappy Acquaintance; whose Return is, That he assures his
Lordship there was not a word spoken by his Lordship in his hearing, (who was
present at the two several Meetings they had) of any Message from the Duke of
Lauderdale to the Doctor. The Original Answer I have by me, as also, the Copy
of the Letter, his Lordship sent.

So that I must conclude too, I cannot leave this without taking notice of our
Authors sincerity; and assure him Vid. Reflect. on Parliam. Pacificum 1 part.
page 3.
when ever he makes a better Vindication of his own, I*ll pardon him the
groundless Reflection he has put upon mine.

He tells me, in the next place, I pity Mr. Varilla's defeated condition, and
so indeed I do Dr. Burnett's too, who wants nothing to his being baffled, but
the modesty to acknowledge it, he is as unlucky here in his Appeals, as I have
made him appear in some of his Reflections, since the Learned Author at Rome,
and the other at Paris, to both of which he has appealed, have both Vindicated
Schelstradt and Le Grand.
themselves in particular Treatises against this bold Appellant; and our Author
can make no further defense unless he intends to decide it by Combat; and I am
much assured, his Appealing to his Friends there, about Monsieur Vid. Vind. p.
7.
Var. not pretending to justify himself, and receiving an Order from the King,
to insist no more on the Dispute, is as unfortunately false, and which we have
taken care to enquire into; whatever are Mr. Varillas his faults, of which he
cannot be excused; there must be much of Allowance made him for being a
Forreigner, where the Exactitude of Names, as well as times, may fail him; our
Author might be at no little loss, were he to Write their French History;
though an Historian of France has lately Corrected that of his Reformation; and
(as some think) with good reason too; but I must still retain this opinion,
that a Native must always have better opportunity, and be better qualified for
the giving an Account of his own Country, from the easy Recourse that he can
have to Records, and Originals, and from the more natural Apprehensions, and
Conceptions he must have of the State of Affairs, and the temper of his Nation,
than any Alien, though so long Educated in that Foreign Country of which he
would Write an History, that he might be said to be Naturalized; and this may
make (perhaps) even Polidore Virgil, whom many Appeal to, and our Author once
too much, to be less Authentic in our Affairs than he is commonly taken for,
and whose Authority (if I mistake not) is somewhat suspected, if not Condemned,
by a Celebrated Writer, Sir Henry Savill; and here I Vid.
cannot but take notice, that our Author in as Celebrated Piece of his, puts in
this Polidore Virgil, as an Auther Vid. Reflect. upon his Cont. History of
Heresy. Vid. Errat.
of equal Credit with Mr. Varillas, perhaps, guided by instinct; but all the
while means (as himself assures us afterward) honest Harpsfield: This sounds at
first sight, as bad as Haveit for Sir Thomas Wiat; this was sure no fault of
the Press, neither could Mr. Varillas forgive him for all his Errata, should
his Reflection be answered (as one would think by the beginning, he did the
Book of the Bishops) (i. e.) before he read to the End.

Our Adversarys fits of Arrogance often return upon him, and if the Tumors of
his Body, were but commensurate to those of his Soul, he must needs die in a
Dropsy; to be pufft in Mind, and to have proud Looks, was the Detestation of
King David himself, and then but ill suits a Divine, that is so often bound to
read his Psalter; our Author would have me succeed to that Despicable Writer,
(as he calls Mr. Varillas;) but Page 7.
if his Observations upon that Gentleman be true, he has made himself the
Successor to all his Foolishness, and Affectation, in setting such a Value upon
the Excellencies of his own Sublimes.

The Contradiction I Vid. id.
fixed upon his Writings concerning the Temper, and Disposition of Queen Mary,
will stand, in spite of his Distinctions, and Endeavors to evade it. It has
been the constant practice of these prejudiced, and inveterate Historians, to
make her very Nature cruel and bloody, and from an Unrelenting Severity; and
some unmerciful Inclinations perhaps more Impartial Authors cannot clear her;
and it is plain, that his Encomiums upon that Reflect. on 3 Tome of Mr. Var. p.
150
instance of her Clemency, was clearly the Result of his Brutal Rage, against
the Proceedings of the chief Minister of His Majesty's Justice; and that very
Devil (whom for a touch on the Vid. Praeface to Lactantius.
Papists) he represents for a Liar, and a Murderer, should have been made the
God of truth and mercy, rather than have wanted an elevated reproach, and a
Scurrilous Aggravation, against that Honorable Person, whom in every Paper he
so scandalously stigmatizes; this was only to show how Vid. His Reflect. on
Varillas Continuation.
Rebels were hanged up by Hundreds, by him whom his more exalted confidence,
has since called the Vid. His Apology.
common Hangman: That lewd Character, and foulest Language, was only a
Duplicated Libel on the late King's Memory, his Judgment, and his Minister of
State together, the falsest Aspersion, and entire Fiction; the Character being
in all its parts so disagreeable, is of it self a sufficient Proof, that it was
none of the late Kings, whom this Author, upon another occasion to abuse his
Memory, has Vid. His Enquiry.
extolled for an Excellency in that way; but he that (though an unworthy
Preacher of the Rolls) would have been a Master of the Temple, may be angry if
disappointed, for the sake of a better Man; These Excesses could never have
been made Brutal, but by one that can as brutishly represent them; and this
Body of Divinity, to gratify its passion, does only divest it self of
Humanity, and translates it self too into one of those beasts of Ephesus, it
fights against Principalities and Powers, against Paul too, as well as Peter;
this Satyrist himself must pardon this passage, when he reflects upon that
Majesty, and the Ministers of his State, he has in such a scandalous manner,
Libelled, and Traduced.

I made it appear in that Treatise, that his Contradiction was truly such,
according to the very definition Vid. ibid. Vind. p. 7.
of the Schools, with a dicitur de eodem, for if Queen Mary, was to be made
Cruel in Matters of Religion, that Rebellion was really upon that very Score,
and the Spanish Match but a mere pretense, and therefore I Have proved upon him,
that for his God, he can ly. And though some disgusted Papists might join with
him, his Followers were (to a very few) all Protestants; and his Reflections
upon that place, at best, but a presumptive Forgery: for this Match is confessed
by Sir R. Baker's Chron. p. 318.
Historians, to have been of the two, most advantageous to Qu. Mary, that they
resolved once not to stir till K. Philip came; that so their taking up Arms
might have the better Color; and the Queen complained to the Londoners, that
though he pretended only the crossing of of the Match; yet his Audacious
Designs, were to seize upon her Person, to have the Custody of her, and the
Command of her Counselors, and it is strange, since her Cruelty was such in
Matters of Religion, she should be so merciful to those that really Rebelled
for it.

Those Acts and Monuments, which in all other things Vid. Fox 1419. Vid. Dr.
B's Praeface to Reformation.
must be so believed, and of which himself has so good opinion, as to give them
his Panegerick; how comes it to pass, that they must here have no Authority at
all; Those tell us, That it was for Religion too, they Conspired among
themselves, and made a Rebellion, of which this Wiat was one of the chief
Beginners, who said, that upon this Match, (and as he said, many else
perceived) the Queen and Counsel would Establish the Popish Religion; and in
that Monumental Speech, he Records of the Queen, are these express words, That
their Pretense, as they said was at first against the determined Marriage, but
that since she had sent certain of her Privy Council unto them, to demand the
cause of their Rebellion, and it appeared unto the said Council, that the
Matter of the Marriage seemed to be but a Spanish Cloak, to cover their
pretended purpose against our Religion: I cannot see, but this with all
Protestants, must pass for truth, if they believe the Martyrologist, and that
Vid. Reflect. on Var. Cont. p. 150.
before the partial Account that may be put upon us in a Paper of his Sons, and
the false Reflections of a prejudiced and disingenuous Author: But mark the
agreement of these Writers, Dr. Burnett, only where it makes for his purpose,
tells us of a very small number that were made Examples upon this Insurrection,
but Mr. Fox says, though there was but about an hundred killed, yet of those
that were taken, a great many were hanged and Executed; they were hung up by
Fiftys, though not by Hundreds, if we believe the How Is Cont. of Stow's Ann.
page 622.
History of Mr. How, and even this Vid. Abridg. of Reform. l. 3.
Author himself confesses so much: it cannot be denied, says Dr. Vid. His
History of Refor. Ann. Reg. Mar
Heylin, But that the restitution of the Reformed Religion, was the matter
principally aimed at in the Rebellion, though nothing but the Match with Spain,
appeared on the outside; the hope they had of the Earl of Devonshire's Marrying
the Princess Elizabeth, and restoring Reformation, animated the Western part,
as well as Wiat did the South, and so satisfied were Protestants, that pure
Religion was the Cause, that Goodman writes a Panegyric upon this very Sir
Thomas's Exploit, to this purpose: Wiat that did his Duty for the Maintenance
of the Gospel: Wiat with whom all ought to have risen that profess the Gospel:
O Noble Wiat, that art now with God, and those Worthy Men, that died in that
happy Enterprise: Lastly, This very Authors words are to this purpose, upon the
place, All that loved the Vid. Dr. B's Reform. Part 2. Lib. 2.
Reformation, were against the Spanish Match; and tells us, that Wiat in his
Proclamation at Maidstone, (where note, that is the only one we hear of his in
History) though he pretended nothing but the Liberty of the Nation, yet privately
assured all the Reformed, he would declare for them; and since there is such a
Concurrent Testimony of all sort of Writers, of different Complexions, and even
his own, is it not the most shameful piece of Impudence? to offer to obtrude
such a Forgery upon the World, for which he can have no other foundation, than
this Account, which he Vid Reflect. on the Continuation of Mr. Var.
Prints of his Sons, contrary to the sense of all Historians? Is it not more
than probable, that this Relation was feigned to excuse the Father? And are not
all Familles concerned, as much as they can, to keep up their Reputation? If he
has made no better Inferences from his consulting the rest of the Records that
concern the Reformation, than he pretends to draw from this Original, he has
done it the greatest disservice in the World, by his Imprudent Partiality, and
Inconsiderate Conclusions.

But to confirm further the falsehood of this Relation, upon which our Author so
imprudently relies, Vid. Dr. B's Histor. of Reformation, which has not a word
of it.
I do not find from several of our Annals and Chronicles, that this same Sir
Thomas Wiatt (as his Vid. Reflect. on Mr. Varilla's 3d. Tom. 140.
Reflections say) was ever sent Ambassador to Charles the Fifth's Court; I have
traced it from Hen. I find in Hen. the 8th's Reign, Sir Henry Knevet and
Gardener to be Ambassadors to that Court, in 1541. and 1545. and Sir phil. Hoby
Resident there in Edw. 6. Reign, 1548/9:
the 8th's Reign down to Queen Mary's; Dr. Heylin makes no mention of it in his
History; neither does our Author, as himself confesses, Record it. in his own;
but this new Discovery is brought in now for a Supplement, as he says, to
supply the Defects of it. If this be his sincerity so much applauded, I am
afraid even Mons. Le Grand must have a great advantage against him. But what is
somewhat remarkable, upon my enquiring into this matter, I find one Sir Thomas
Wiat, about the 33 1641.
of Hen. 8. Bak. Chron. p. 300. 8 Edit. Land.
sent Ambassador to the same Emperor, but who died of the Plague while he was
going thither; but whether this might not make the Mistake, or that one of his
Sons, or of the same Family and Name, succeeded in the same Embassady, I submit
to the conjectures of those that will, I hope, make better Conclusions than our
Author; I am sure it is but a bad one that he makes from the same business,
that is, because no mention was made of B. Poynet's, Abridg. l. 3.
being in the Rebellion, by his Name not being among the many that were
attainted for it; he not in it, when it is very probable he was left out only
for his Deserting them before they came to London, since those Writers that
accuse him of being an Accomplice, acknowledge too, that he Counseled them to
shift for themselves, took his leave of them, and went into Germany; and it is a
general practice upon all such Revolutions to Animadvert chiefly upon those
that are seized, and have been the most obstinate, and persisted to the last in
such rebellious Undertakings: And I do not see why Dr. Heylin's Authority in
this Point; when he imparts also to An. 1. Reg. M.
us, the Particulars, should not be of as much force as Dr. B's, when he gives
us but a general Assertion from his one Supposition and Conjecture: And I
cannot but take notice, how in the Account of this Affair, our Author would
excuse those Rebels, and calls it but a Vid. Hist. Ref.
sort of an Attempt upon Winchester House, when both Mr. Fox, and Dr. Heylin
agree, that they sacked it, and defaced all the Bishops Library. That Author,
in spite of his unjust Character, in his Proud, and Censorious Vid. Praef. to
his 1 Vol.
Praeface, has said too much against Papists, to be suspected for one, or hired
for it; and who has not shown so little bitterness against their Doctrines, and
Persuasions, as to be thought only to write on one side, and to favor them so
much; he showed himself so far a fair Historian, as plainly to lay open the
saults of both Parties, and represents the Sacrilegious Proceedings of King
Edward's Reign, with as much abhorrence, as the Persecution of Queen Mary's,
and the Description of that, I am sure, he has not in the least favored; it is
confessed, he had not recourse to those many Records, that, perhaps, since;
have not been so well explained, or truly Copied; neither did he design his
Work so Voluminous; but his Sincerity seems somewhat beyond theirs that have so
confidently traduced it: and from what has been here said, may be observed too,
That Vid. His Apology.
there are some degrees of shame, over which when people have past, they cannot
be put out of Countenance.

And now I hope I shall clear my self from his last Accusations, having so
successfully been able, (even from his own malice and mistakes, to defend my
self against all the rest) He says, That in State Matters I have not blemished
him much; but he must mean Vid. Vind. p.7.
it for the same reason, that he has not blemished any Minister of State,
(i.e.) by his own being so full of blots and blemishes.

He Vid. Ib. Vind. p. 7.
Accuses me for venturing upon a point of Divinity, which (as he says) is above
me, since I were only entertained to Scrible upon the Politics: Scribler and
Scribbling are the best Terms that always our Arrogant piece of Opinatre
bestows upon Persons that write with more sincerity, though not with the same
popular Fame that this piece of Arrogance affects; but so many times does a
Mountebank attract the Mobile with his pompous Name, and his having appeared so
much upon the Stage: I cannot see upon what this prodigious Vanity should so
inestimably value himself, unless it be for that Function which in any other I
shall always respect, and which himself has in All endeavored to defame.
Luther was condemned for his undecent Reply to our Henry the 8th. and that by
those Protestants for whom he was the first Champion at the Pen: And sure the
Church of England must be ashamed then of such a Defender, that villifies his
King with Reproaches that would be a Scandal to a Dutch Scavenger: Had the
Proceedings against the Dr. been so severe, a submissive Acquiescence would
have better become his Coat and Character; and where he says he had so many
Enemies, procured him more Friends; People are apt to pity those that take
Hardships patiently, when their uneasiness may make them seem to merit it:
Whereas his Vindications only divest him of the Habit he wears, the Cassock of
an English Divine, cannot Conceal so much Sedition, a Cloak of Amsterdam will
become it better, and cover it more. But though he makes Politics my sole
Province, and Divinity so much above me, it may appear I understand as much of
it as this comes to, though I don't make it my Trade; and it might be wished
this Dogmatist out of the Pulpit, did not put upon us for Doctrine so much of
his Politics too; but it seems with such vain men as our Author, all Human
Learning, as well as Divine, must be looked for like the Keys (for which we
condemn another Church) to be hung at his Girdle; I cannot see, but I might
venture as boldly upon his School Divinity, as our Author upon the
Court-Politicks: And for my being entertained for that purpose, is but another
Instance of Dr. Burnett's Faithfulness in his giving of Characters, which is
still at a venture; those that are better acquainted with me, know best what
has been my Entertainment, and I can defy even Malice to make out my being
Mercenary; but we see now for what he was entertained in Holland. Whatever
Reflections may be past upon our Writings, they have been always really the
Result of defending the Crown against all Antimonarchical Principles, and such
seditious Reflections, by one who shall never be brought to make any Mollifying
Distinctions or Modalitys, for the sake of any Persons or Persuasions, that
behave themselves disrespectfully to their King, and shall ever condemn those
that have done it, as much as what our celebrated Author has been so long a
doing.

I have seen so much of Government abroad, as to learn, that there is no
Country that takes so much Licentious Liberty with their Prince, as our own at
home, and whatever side was faulty, did think it my Duty, without being
entertained, to tell them of their faults: Could our Author prove me (what he
calls Another, an Hired Vid. His Apology, p.5.
Buffoon, whom against his Apology I leave to defend himself (if he can from
being hired) being a more celebrated Pen, and one that was always willing,
that the Government by none other should be defended; for Pension and Pay will
make the most Loyal Services a Trade, and so we must give some people leave to
put in for a Monopoly.) Our Author might have then perhaps more handsomely past
upon us the Reflection; but since from the First most famous Attempt against
the King's Succession, to his own late Libels upon the King, I have with the
same zeal and sincerity vindicated his cause against Authors as celebrated as
himself, and that without the least satisfaction, but what Duty and Loyalty
could afford, which indeed, like the best of Virtue, is the best Reward unto it
self: This Reflection will come from him now with no good Grace, especially if
he reflects upon some Application himself made to the late King that he Libels;
and upon the * Account he gives us of the carrying on his own Works, which, if
I mistake not, was Vid. His Pref. to Refor. 1 vol.
not compast without a Collection too, and his kind Benefactors not only
Courted out of their Manuscripts, but their Money.

But since our Author would make me so Ignorant in this Notion of Arrianism, I
shall let him know, I a little understand it, and that he much misunderstood
me; The Doctrine of Arrius is delivered down to us as a Disbelief of the
Divinity of our Savior; Vid. Vind. p. 7.
that which gave the first occasion for it, was indeed what has caused the many
Perplexities about Religious Matters since, and that is the Sophistry of such
Polemical Divines, that make but a piece of Metaphysics of their Faith and
Religion, and must needs give Expositions and Solutions upon what without
examining they are bound even from the very Bible to believe: The Bishop of
Alexandria, upon a solemn Assembly of his Clergy, falls upon a speculative
Discourse of this Mighty Mystery, and manages it so confusedly, that Arrius
fancied he was introducing an Heresy before him, viz. the Sabellians, and
while he was concerned against the Uniting of the Persons, divides their
Natures, and to defend the Trinity, destroys the Unity. This I take to be
Arrianism; This the occasion of it; This the Source Neicene, Athanas. etc.
of our being perplexed with so many explanatory Creeds, which I could never
comprehend so necessary, though thought sit to be made so Canonical.

Now the nice Disquisition about these matters, I thought, might be better
omitted, and even the searching into Manuscripts about it, at least the
troubling the World with the Account; Since such unhappy Curiosity in these
Scholastic Speculations occasioned the very Heresy against which we contend,
and since it is an Opinion that has no footing in all our Western Churches,
whether Catholic or Protestant, not so much as in a single Heretic: It can be
no Service to the Christian Religion in general, to retrieve those Discourses
that among unwary men and illiterate might create Doubts and Disturbances. Much
less can it be defended, the giving the World to understand, Vid. His Letter
from Zurich.
that the plainest Text that we have in our Bibles against it, is not to be
found in their Original Manuscripts; for since those Sacred Books are by the
indulgent Charity of the Reformation, and the reasonableness of all Peoples
reading what they are bound to believe, permitted to the meanest Capacities,
the plainest words will best Satisfy such, who cannot so well gather it from
some dubious Expressions, which though clear to such a Doctor, to them may seem
dark, especially when that light they relied on, is so officiously put out.
This was the true ground of the Reflection, and This what he grounds upon an
Accusation as false; for any one that views the Vid. Parlia. Pacif.
Passage, will find I accused him only for dealing thus boldly about the
Trinity; and it plainly appears, that it had been better for the Church, if
such busy men had never been so bold: I charged his Person with no Opinion,
but only this Unhappy Consequence of his Fatal and officious Industry. So that
when he says I represent him as an Enemy to the Divinity of Christ, though he
would not be thought to Vid. Vind. p. 8.
lie for God; yet for Man, for himself, what is worse, for an ill man he does.

FINIS.

