

A DECLARATION Of his Excellency, George Lord Goring Earl of Norwich, with the
Gentry and Freeholders of the County of ESSEX, in Arms for the prosecution and
just defense of their general Petition, and solemn Engagement; And their
offer unto all such Officers and Soldiers as shall repair unto them.
COuld prosperity make us insolent, this overture should be the story of our
present fortunes; how numerous, how unanimous, how associated, how befriended,
or (in a word) how Heaven and Earth conspire to our deliverance: Consider with
what assurance we have managed our very despaires, and raised our selves to
this height out of nothing. Consider withal, that we move still by the same
resolves, as we are favored and encouraged by that hand of providence which at
first raised us.

From this posture (Gentlemen and Fellow Subjects) we salute you in a temper of
love, and Christianity, disengaged (we assure you) from any interest or mixture
of revenge or fear: Peace is the end we aim at, and by peace, if it be
possible, we propound to accomplish that end.

To which purpose, upon a sad and compassionate thought, how many innocent
souls are seduced by the imposture of a pretended Liberty; and how many more
corrupted, by their own importune necessity, into an erroneous and unfortunate
engagement; all which must in probability perish, except they may be recovered
by the offer of this and this only expedient.

What Officer or Soldier soever, now in arms against us, shall before the 21.
of this present July, make his repair unto us, or any part of our Forces, and
there enter into an Engagement, not to act any thing against us for the future,
shall have his Arreares audited and paid: And we do further oblige our selves,
to interpose unto His most sacred Majesty for an Act of Indemnity; the
success whereof from our Gracious Sovereign Lord the King we at all doubt
not. And for the performance on our parts, we tie our Honors, and the Faith of
the County; Avowing withal, that we design nothing of alteration either in
Church or Commonwealth, but what this present Parliament has declared to be
the duty of good Christians and Loyal Subjects.

July 12.
Printed in the Year 1648.


