A DISCOURSE Concerning the Pretended Religious Assembling In PRIVATE
CONVENTICLES WHEREIN The Unlawfulness and Unreasonableness of it is fully
Evinced by several Arguments.

By John Norris M. A. and late Rector of Aldbourn in the County of Wilts.

LONDON, Printed for James Norris, at the Sign of (...) King's Arms without
Temple Bar. ^^^^.

PUBLISHER To The READER.
THough there be no great need of a Preface to the following Papers, yet partly
to comply with custom, and partly out of a Reverential respect to the dear
memory of the Author, my deceased Father, I thought it convenient to premise
something by way of Apology to the Reader.

And that he may not be disappointed in his after Entertainment, 'twill be
requisite for him in the entrance to understand, that he is not here to expect
a Discourse recommended (...) by strokes of Oratory, neat turns of expression,
and harmonious Cadencies, this being no way (...) (as Aristotle says in his
Rhetoric) agreeable to the nature of the thing, which being a determination of
a Question, calls for no other ornaments than plainness, perspicuity and
solidity.

And as such a Rhetorical mode of Writing suits not with the nature of the
work, so neither with the design of its Composition. For this Treatise was
principally intended by the Author, for the instruction of ordinary and
unlearned persons, and particularly those of his own Congregation, and
accordingly he made it his business, to bring it to the level of their
Capacities,

Of what advantage this work may be to the learned World, it becomes not me to
presage, only thus much I believe I may say, that the Cause has not suffered
under his hands, and that as Peace and Unity was his aim, so Truth and Victory
is his attainment. and this is all the Apology I think needful to make in
behalf to the Author.

Now, as to what concerns my Publication of this Posthumous Treatise, I am
aware but of one objection that may be made against it, which is, that the
World is well stockt with excellent discourses on this Subject already. This I
acknowledge to be true, but no way available to the purpose for which it is
alleged. For first, may not the same be said of almost all the Arguments that
are? And yet this is not thought sufficient to bar all after-undertakings. And
besides, there are different ways of managing the same Subject, and how stale
soever the latter be, yet the former may be always new. According to that of
Seneca, Etsi omnia a veteribus inventa essent; hoc tamen semper novum erit,
usus and inventorum ab aliis scientia and dispositio. Besides, there is as much
(if not more) in the advantageous proposal of an Argument, as in the Argument
it self, and it often happens, that by the mere placing a thing in a new light
conviction is wrought, when the very same consideration in another posture
proved unsuccesfull.

These Considerations, together with the prospect of being beneficial to the
public, prevailed with me to concern my self in this Publication, and are (I
hope) sufficient to justify the undertaking to others. For sure that person
would betray a very narrow and selfish spirit, who declines an opportunity of
doing good with the fruits of another's labor, as his charity to the Poor must
needs be very cold, that refuses to be the Steward of another's Bounty.
Farewell.

John Norris,
Allsouls College June the 1st. 1684
A Seasonable Question fully discussed.
Viz. Whether in a constituted Church, where there is a constant preaching
Ministry established by Law, if a Silenced Nonconformist Minister, shall come
in to reside or inhabit, or otherwise intrude himself into any Town or Parish,
and there (without leave and against the will of the Magistrate) set up a
course of Preaching or other Ministerial acts in Private Meetings (commonly
called Conventicles) it may be accounted the Ordinance of God, or means to
beget and increase Faith, or any other Saving Grace, in the hearts of such as
shall go to hear him.

IN the Entrance of my discourse upon this subject, I shall not spend time in
explaining the terms of the question; they are so easy and obvious to every
understanding, that they need it not. Without therefore any farther Proeme, the
negative (with submission to better judgments) I shall defend: And that it is
not the Ordinance of God as a means of grace, conducing ought to the Salvation
of men's souls, I hope, and will endeavor to make appear to any sober and
considerate Christian, upon these Eight following grounds.

ARGUMENT. I.
THat cannot be the Ordinance of God, or means of grace, that is, ipso facto, a
sinful act. For God, whose words and ways are all of them holy, just and good,
has appointed, ordained, or allowed nothing that has any thing of sin in it:
And it were no less than blasphemy to say the contrary. God does not warrant
any man to do evil, that good may come by it, no not the least evil, for the
procurement of the greatest good, either to our own, or the souls of others.
The Apostle rejects the very thought of such a thing, with horror and
detestation, as knowing Romans 3. 8.
damnation to be the just reward of it. It is a good saying of Cajetan upon
that place; Secundum sanam veramque doctrinam, peccata non sunt eligenda, ut
media ad quemcunque bonumfinem; According to sound and true doctrine, sins are
not to be chosen as means to procure any good end whatsoever. And mark his
reason; Quia suapte natura repugnat peccato, quod sit eligibile; It is contrary
to, and disagreeable with the nature of sin, to be at all matter of our choice;
Propterea nec propter se, nec propter aliud bonum, est eligibile; And therefore
it is not to be chosen, either for it self, or for any good that comes by it.
They are neither good intents, nor good events, that make good actions. All
(...) Will Worship is abominable to God. His express Precept is, Deuteronomy. 6. 17*
18.
Ye shall diligently keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, his
testimonies and statutes, and do that which is right and good in the sight of
the Lord. And his Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
Ye shall not do every man what is right in his own eyes. The Commandments of
God would soon be made of none effect, if every one in the Church should do
what best likes him. Shall the Master's will depend on the pleasure of the
Servant, or the Servant's upon the master's? He cannot be approved by him that
employs him, who busies himself in a work most suitable to his own humor, with
neglect of what is given him in Command. Had a good intention been enough to
have justified an action, Saul had done very well in sparing Agag, and the best
of the spoils of the Amalekites; and the kingdom of Israel might have continued
to him and his house. And Saint Peter had never been called Mat. 16. 23.
Satan, by our Savior, as not savouring the things of God, but of men. for
dissuading his Master from going up to Jerusalem. The means, as well as the
intention, must be good, if we would have our actions pleasing to God. We grant
God may, and does often, bring good out of evil; but that is no thanks to those
that do it. Evil can naturally produce nothing but evil: It must be no lose
than the infinite Wisdom and Almighty power of God, that must overruled it into
good. (...) p. 10^.
As good Ends cannot justify Evil means, so neither will evil beginnings ever
bring forth good conclusions, unless God by a miracle of mercy create light out
of darkness, order out of confusion, and peace out of our passions. And as he
has not allowed us to do any evil, for the obtaining or procuring of the
greatest good, so he needs it not. Job 13. 7.
Will thou speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? q. d. his
cause, his glory, needs not any ^in of ours to promote it. He will never thank
any man for seeking his honor by sinful means; he can get himself glory, and
save men's souls otherwise. He will say as Achish, 1 Samuel 21. 15.
Have I need of madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman
in my presence? The way God has taught us to gorifie him by, in seeking or
procuring the salvation of our own, or the souls of others, is always to do
that which is good; and though he can bring good out of evil, yet he never
Commands, ordains or allows our evil for that end.

But such Preaching and Meetings as are in question, are sinful acts. Which
will appear (as by other reasons which shall be showed hereafter, so in this
place only) because they are done in disobedience and opposition to the known
Laws of the Church and Kingdom wherein we live, and which we stand bound in
Conscience toward God, to observe and obey. I begin with the Laws of the
Church.

The Eleventh Canon of the Church of England says,

Whosoever shall affirm or maintain that there are in this Realm other
Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations of the King's born-subjects, than by the
Laws of this Realm are held and allowed, which may rightly challenge to
themselves the names of true and lawful Churches, Let him be excommunicated,
and not restored, but by the Archbishop, after his repentance and revocation
of such his wicked error.

The sense of this Canon is large and comprehensive, and contains in it,
virtually, a prohibition of all Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations
whatsoever which are not allowed by the Laws of the Land: as the Meetings in
question will, and (God willing) shall be made appear to be. Neither can it be
restrained only (if at all) to any other Meetings, than such as are under
pretense of joining in religious worship, not authorized by the Laws of the
Land, which (according to the title of the Canon) are called Conventicles; for
there can be no other unlawful Meetings, so called, for any other end, but
only these two, viz.

First for Ministers and Laymen, or either of them, to join together, to make
Rules, Orders or Constitutions in Causes Ecclesiastical, without the King's
authority. And that is censured and forbidden as unlawful in the twelfth
Canon. Or else,

Secondly, to consult about a course to be taken, to impeach or deprave the
Doctrine of the Church of England, the book of Common Prayer, or any part of
the Government or Discipline established in the Church: And this is forbidden
under pain of Excommunication in the 73 Canon. Any other end, for any other
unlawful Meeting or Assembly, other than what is aforesaid, cannot easily be
imagined. therefore (unless we will make the Reverend, Pious and Learned
Authors and Composers of those Canons and Constitutions which are so solemnly
established by Supreme authority, guilty of a gross tautology) this Canon
flatly prohibits all Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations (except the public,
which are commanded and allowed by the Laws of the Land) of any manner of
persons, in private houses, or elsewhere, which under pretense of religious
worship, take upon them to be called Churches.

Besides, it is expressed in such terms, as are commonly competible to none,
but such Meetings, as are under pretense of religious worship. What other
Meetings are commonly called Congregations, or do challenge to themselves the
name of Churches, but such Meetings as are in question?

The place and order of the Canon, do prove the same; for immediately after the
impugners of the King's Supremacy, the public worship of God, Articles of
Religion, Rites and Ceremonies, Government established in the Church of
England, the Authors of Schism, and maintainers of Schismatics in the Church,
are censured; is subjoyned this Canon censuring Conventicles, as being the
Nursery of all the former.

In the 71 Canon; all Ministers whatsoever are forbidden to preach or
administer the holy Communion in any private house (except in be in time of
necessity, when any is either so impotent, as that he cannot go to the Church,
or very dangerously sick) under pain of Excommunication.

In the 72 Canon it is ordained, that no Minister whatsoever shall without
license from the Bishop of the Diocese, first obtained and had under his hand
and seal, presume to appoint any meetings for Sermons or Exercises, in
Market Towns or other places, either publicly or in private houses, under pain
of Suspension for tho first fault, Excommunication for the second, and
Deposition for the third.

Now if a Minister may not do this in his own Parish, but only in a case of
necessity, much less may a stranger intrude himself into another man's Parish,
where there is a Preaching Ministry established by Law, and there set up a
course of private house-preaching, administering of Sacraments, and performance
of all Ministerial acts, where there can be no need of his so doing, so much as
pretended.

But is will be thought by some that the Laws and Constitutions of the Church,
are not so greatly to be regarded, as that the breach of them should be
sinful; and that her Canons lay no such obligation on Conscience, as that the
neglect of their observation and contrary practice should be criminal. Nay such
is the state and condition of our times, that is is rather thought a virtue to
despise them, than any fault to disobey them: And they are reputed most pure
and holy, who with greatest boldness quarrel and cavil against the Authority,
Government, and Lawful Precepts of the Church.

Yet certainly the judgment and practice of Christians in former ages, was
otherwise. When virtue and true piety did more abound, they made more
conscience of observing the Precepts and Constitutions of the Church, which
were made for decency, order, and good government. And if any frowardly,
wilfully, or constantly lived in any opposition, or contrariety thereunto, they
were adjudged as evil doers. Basil. de Spir. Sanct. c. 27.
Nec his quisquam contradicit, quisquis sane vel tenuiter expertus est, quae
sunt jura Ecclesiastica. And truly I see not why the same regard and respect
ought not to be shown in the observation of the Laws of our Church now, as
has been to the like Laws and Canons in former and purer times.

Especially if we enquire into these four things:

1. What Power the Church has to make Laws, Canons and Constitutions?

2. Who were the Authors and Composers of these, of our Church?

3. What is the subject matter of them?

4. What has been the judgment of Divines, of unquestionable learning,
judgment and piety, concerning Laws, Canons and Constitutions of this nature?

Concerning the first. That the Church has a maternal power to decree, and
make Laws to bind all her children, is such a clear truth, as no sober person
(I think) will question.

By [ Church] I understand not all the number of the faithful, but those, that
have the lawful rule and government of the Church. Which is the sense, that
our Savior Christ uses it in, when he says, Mat. 18. 17.
Dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church; for, there is Ecclesia collectiva, and
Ecclesia representativa. I take it in the latter sense.

By [ Laws] I understand not any new Article of faith, Nihil euiquam largiri
potest humana indulgentia, ubi intercedit and legem tribuit divina
praescriptio. Cyp. Epist. 4.
or any thing contrary to what God has commanded in the holy Scriptures. For
it is a true maxim (whoever was the Author of it) Potestas descendit, non
ascendit. None have power in those things that are above them, but in those
things which are beneath them. So the Church has no power in those things,
which are above her, but in those things which are below her. Now all Doctrines
of faith, and other things already commanded of God, are above the Church, and
out of her reach, so that the cannot meddle with them, by any Law de novo,
otherwise than to see them duly obeyed and observed.

But as for things of an indifferent and adiaphorous nature, serving to
external order and decency, in these she has power, to ordain and make Laws
and Constitutions, though not contrary to, yet other than what are already made
in God's word, holding still, as near as the can, to the general rules of
Scripture. The doctrine of Salvation is always, in all places, the same, and
can never be changed: But external rites and order, are alterable and variable
according to the diversity of time and place, and the variety of the minds and
manners of men. The Church of the Jews had power of ordaining other things,
than what were expressly set down in God's word, and that for perpetual
observation. She ordained the two days of Esth. 9. 20, 21.
Purim as perpetual festivals. 1 Mac. 4. 59.
Moreover, Judas and his brethren, with the whole congregation of Israel,
ordained, that the days of the dedication of the Altar should be kept in their
season, from year to year, by the space of eight days, from the five and
twentieth day of the month Casleu, with mirth and gladness. This feast was
instituted by Judas Machabeus and his brethren, when Antiochus Epiphanes was
expelled out of Jerusalem, the worship of God restored, and the Temple
(profaned by the Heathen) again consecrated, which was about 167 years before
the Coming of Christ. Which feast was yearly kept ever after, and our Savior
Christ himself Joh. 10. 22.
honored it with his own presence. And if the Jewish Church had that power,
why then has not the Christian the like? And that the Primitive Church of
Christians had, and did exercise the like power, is plain to any that shall
read Act. 15. and 1 Cor. 11.

Secondly, The Authors and Composers of these Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, were the reverend, learned and godly Bishops, Deans, and
Archdeacons, and other Clergymen of every Diocesee, within the Province of
Canterbury; met together Act. 24. 18.
neither with multitude nor with tumult, but lawfully and duly called and
summoned, by virtue of the King's Majesty's Writ, and receiving legal
confirmation of that which was done by them. So then, the composers of those
Canons, were such persons as were ordained of God to rule the Church, and to
order what in their Wisdom should be thought convenient, to whom in all things
(not contrary to God's will revealed in his word) we are commanded obedience,
Luke 12. 42. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

Thirdly, The subject matter of these Canons and Consitutions is of such things
as concern External order, decency and edification, which God has not
particularly determined in Scripture, but has left to the rulers and
governors of the Church, to ordain and appoint within the compass of that
general rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14 26, 40.
Let All things be done unto edifying, and in order. In which place, those
things that concern the external polity of the Church, are generally expressed,
but the particulars are not mentioned, but left to the wisdom and liberty of
the Church.

Fourthly, What have been the judgment of Divines (of whose learning and piety
and Church of God never yet since their times, made the least doubt or
question) concerning Laws, Canons and Constitutions of this nature? They have
always thought them sacred and venerable; and their observation an act of
Religion and Obedience to the general commands of God. Instead of many, take a
few testimonies of Divines of the highest rank, both foreign and domestic. Two
I shall quote out of learned Zanchy, Hier. Zanch. T. 4. de (...)* These. 4. p.
202.
Quatenus hae leges consentaneae sunt cum Sacris Literis, aut saltem non sunt
dissentaneae; Eatenus and verae sunt Ecclesiasticae, eoque admittendae, and nos
illis obedientiam debemus ac reverentiam; So far forth as these Constitutions
are agreeable with the Scriptures, or at least, not disagreeing with them, so
far forth they are truly Ecclesiastical, and to be received, and we owe
reverence and obedience to them. And he gives his reason in these words: Si
Consentaneae sunt hae leges verbo Dei, qui illas rejicit, verbum Dei rejicit.
Si non repugnant, contemnit Ecclesiam Dei qui illas contemnit; Contemptus autem
Ecclesiae, quam Deo ingratus sit, apparet, cum aliis ex locis Sacrarum
Literarum, ubi illam magnificat; tum maxim ex Evangelio, Mat. 18. 17. If those
Laws are agreeable with the word of God, he that rejects them, rejects the
word of God; if they are not contrary to the word of God, he that rejects
them despises the Church of God; and how odious a thing unto the Almighty it
is, that any should despise his Church, as it appears in many places of
Scripture, where the Church is magnified, so especially in Mat. 18. 17. whrere
God has commanded that that person should be accounted as an heathen man and a
Publican, who hears and obeys not the Church.

Hear the same Learned Author again. Hier. Zanch. T. 8. obs. in Confess. suam
cap. 25. Aph. 10. 11.
Credo ea, quae a piis patribus in nomine Domini congregatis, communi omnium
Consensu, citra ullam Sacrarum Literarum Contradictionem definita and recepta
fuerunt: Ea etiam (quanquam haud ejusdem cum Sacris Literis authoritatis.) A
SPIRITV SANCTO ESSE. Those things (says he) which have been concluded and
received by the Holy Fathers, gathered together in the Name of God, agreed on
by Common-consent, and without any Contradiction of the Scripture (although
they are not of the same Authority with the Scriptures,) Yet, I believe even
those things to be from THE HOLY GHOST. Hinc fit, ut quae sunt hujusmodi, etc.
Hence it comes to pass, that those things which are of this nature, I neither
will disallow, nor dare I with a good Conscience. Quis enim ego sum, etc. For
who am I that I should dissallow that which the whole Church approves of? So
far that worthy Author.

The next, whose judgment in this case I shall produce, is Mr. Calvin, in his
Commentary on the Epistle to the Corinthians. Calv. Com. in 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Quinetiam hinc colligere promptum est, has posteriores (scilicet Ecclesiae)
Leges, non esse habendas pro humanis traditionibus; quandoquidem fundatae sint
in hoc generali mandato, and liquidam approbationem habent, quasi ex ore
CHRISTI IPSIVS. Where showing the difference betwixt the tyrannical Edicts of
the Pope, and the Laws of the true Church, in which, discipline and order are
contained, he says; Whence it is easy to be gathered, that the Laws of the
Church, are not to be accounted humane traditions, seeing they are founded upon
the general precept of the Apostle, and have as clear an approbation, as if
they had been delivered from the mouth of Christ Himself. For, says he
elsewhere, Calv. Instit. L. 4. c. 10. sect. 30.
Dico sic esse humanam traditionem, ut simul sit divina. It is so an humane
tradition, as that it is also divine. Dei est, quatenus est pars deeoris
illius, cujus cura and observatio nobis per Apostolum commendatur: hominum
autem, quatenus simpliciter designat, quod in genere fuit indicatum magis quam
expositum. It is of God fo far forth as it is a part of that order and decency,
the care and observation whereof is commanded, and commended to us by the
Apostle: It is of men so far forth, as it simply names or signifies that, which
was in general uttered, rather that particularly expounded.

Take a third testimony from that burning and shining Light of the French
Church. Molin. de just. tr. 2. disp. 27.
Licet quae a regia and aliis Legitimis petestatibus rite praecipiuntur, sunt
de jure positivo: quod tamen illis postquam ita constitutae sunt, pareatur, est
de jure divino; cum Legitimae potestates omnes a Deo sint, Deique vices in suo
ordine teneant; dumque illis obedimus, eorumque praecepta observamus, Deo
pariter in illis paremus, Deique praeceptum and voluntatem exequimur. Although
those things which are commanded by the King's Authority, or other lawful
Powers under him, are of positive right: Yet it is of divine institution that
we should obey them in those things, which they command; seeing all lawful
Powers are of God, and supply the place of God in their several orders:
Therefore while we obey them, and keep their Commandments, we obey God in them,
and so fulfill the Will and Command of God.

Learned Beza shall be the next that shall give in his verdict to this truth;
Beza Epist. 20.
Nam etsi Conscientias proprie solus Deus ligat, etc. For although God alone
can properly bind the Conscience; yet so far as the Church with respect to
order and decency, and thereby to Edification, does rightly enjoin, or make
Laws, those Laws are to be observed by all pious persons; and they do so far
bind the Conscience, as that no man wittingly and willingly, with a purpose to
disobey, can either do what is so forbidden, or omit what is so commanded,
without Sin.

To these above named add we in the last place the verdict of our own learned
and judicious Mr. Hooker. Hooker Eccles. polit. L. 5. Sect. 9.
To the Laws (says he) thus made id est according to the general Law of
Nature, and without contradiction to the positive Law of Scripture) and
received by a whole Church, they which live within the bosom of that Church,
must not think it a matter of indifference, either to yield, or not to yield
obedience. 1 Cor. 11. 22.
Is it a small offense to despise the Church of God? Prove. 6. 20.
My son keep thy Father's Commandments (says Solomon) and forget not thy
Mothers instructions, bind them both always about thine heart. It does not
stand with the duty we owe to our heavenly Father, that to the ordinance of our
Mother the Church we should show our selves disobedient. Let us not say we keep
the Commandments of one, when we break the Laws of the other: For unless we
observe both, we obey neither. And what does let, but that we may observe both,
when they are not one to the other in any sort repugnant? Yea, which is more,
the Laws of the Church thus made, God himself does in such sort authorize, that
to despise them, is to despise in them, him. Thus far that most judicious
Author.

Yea one of the reformed Churches have put it into their very Confession,
Confess. Suev. in Harm Confess. 8. 17. p, 290.
That those Laws of the Church deserve to be esteemed divine, rather than
humane Constitutions.

From all which it appears, that Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions are
not merely man's Laws, but God's also; both because they are composed and
framed by those Fathers, by divine Authority, and have their general foundation
in Scripture; and also because they are ordained for the Glory of God, for
Edification, order and decency of the Church, and the better fulfilling and
keeping the Laws of God. For as we have a Command from Christ, to tell the
Church when any one is refractary and perverse: So have they which are
complained of to the Church, that Command from Christ also, to hear the Voice
of God in the Church, and in disobeying the Church, they disobey God. And if
Children and Servants, are bound by the Law of God, to obey their Parents and
Masters in all things that are reasonable, honest and just, and in their
obedience, they obey and serve God himself (Ephesians. 6. 1. Col. 3. 20. 24. Tit. 2.
9. 10.) then it can be no less pleasing to God, that Christians, who live in
the bosom of the Church, should be obedient and conformable unto the lawful
Precepts and Constitutions of their spiritual Mother, the Church of Christ, and
the Rulers thereof. It is very truly said by Calvin, Semper nimia morositas est
ambitiosa. A frowardness and aptness to quarrel with the proceedings of the
Church, is accompanied with ambition and pride. It is not because the Church
takes too much power on her, but because they would be under none. It is
ambition, to have all Government in their own hands, that is the Cause, why
some will not be subject to any.

All which has been said of this matter is agreeable with the Doctrine of the
Church of England; who in her twentieth Article says, The Church has power to
decree and make Laws. So in her 34th Article: That whosoever through his
private judgment, willingly and purposely, does break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the word of God, St. Paul
calls Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions of the Church of Corinth (...),
traditions. 1 Cor. 11. 2.
offends against the Common order of the Church, hurts the Authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the Conscience of the weak Brethren. Where, by
(traditions) I suppose is meant the Laws and Canons of the Church, as the words
following do intimate, which speak of the Common order of the Church, and
Authority of the Magistrate.

Thus much of the Laws of the Church.

Neither are such meetings only against the Laws of the Church, but against
sundry statute Laws of the Kingdom also, in that behalf made and provided.

In the Statute of 35 Eliz. 1. 35 Eliz. 1.
It is provided; that if any person or persons above 16 years old, shall refuse
to repair to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, to hear
divine Service, and receive the Communion; or come to, and be present at, any
Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings, under Color or pretense of any Exercise
of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes: And if any person shall
obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel or usual place of
Common Prayer; or by any motion, persuasion, inticement, or allurement of any
other, willingly join in, or be present at, any such Assemblies, Conventicles,
or Meetings, under Color or pretense of any such Exercise of Religion,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as is aforesaid (which refers
to other Statutes formerly made, and yet of force against Conventicles, as well
as this one) shall be committed to prison, and there remain without bail,
until be conform, and until he make an open Submission in the words set down
in the Statute. viz.

I. A. B. do humbly acknowledge and confess, that I have grievously offended
God, in contemning her Majesty's Godly and lawful Government and Authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing divine Service, contrary to the
godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and in using and frequenting unlawful
and disorderly Conventicles and Assemblies, under Color and pretense of
Exercise of Religion: And I am heartily sorry for the same, etc. And I do
promise and protest without any dissimulation, that from henceforth I will from
time to time obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes in repairing to
Church, and hearing divine Service, and do my utmost endeavor to maintain and
defend the same.

Neither can it be pretended (as it is by some) that this Statute was made, or
stands in force, against any other sort of People, than those in question, viz.
against Popish recusants only and not against Protestant dissenters, as they
call themselves: The answer is easy out of the words of the said Statute. For
in the beginning of the Statute, the Persons that are concerned in obedience to
it, are expressed in these general and large words. Any person or persons
whatsoever above the Age of 16 which shall refuse to repair to Church, and
willingly join in and be present at any Conventicle or Meeting, etc. Which
words comprehend and take in Persons of all Religions, Sects and Persuasions
whatsoever.

And whereas the penalty of the Statute to all that shall refuse Obedience and
Conformity to it, is abjuration of the Realm, or to be proceeded against as
Felons. There is a Proviso toward the End of the Statute, that sixeth the
penalty altogether upon Protestant recusants, and not on Popish; In these
words: Provided that no Popish recusant, or feme Covert shall be compelled or
bound to abjure by virtue of this Act. And lest the Popish recusants should be
the only Persons therein meant or intended, the Conventiclers of our Age make
themselves more perfect Recusants than that Statute supposes: For whereas that
makes absence from the Prayers of the Church, for one Month together, a Crime
sufficient to render them obnoxious to the penalties of that Act; these men
(for the most part) withdraw themselves for many Years together, and, for ought
I see, if they are let alone, resolve so to do all the days of their lives.

In Anno 22. Caroli 2di Regis, there was a Statute made to prevent and suppress
seditious Conventicles (as the Title of that Statute truly calls them) wherein
Every Person of the Age of 16 years and upward, that shall be present at any
Assembly. Conventicle or Meeting, under Color or pretense of any Exercise of
Religion, in other manner that according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which Conventicle or meeting there
shall be 5 persons or more assembled together, is made liable to suffer the
penalties of 5 s for his first fault, and for his second 10 s (and so onward)
the Preacher to suffer the penalty of 20 ll. And the owner of the house or
ground, that shall wittingly and willingly suffer such Conventicle, Meeting, or
unlawful Assembly to be held, to suffer the penalty of 20 ll.

In the late Act for Uniformity, This treatise was written and composed before
the Statute to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles Car. 2. 22 was made.
all Nonconformist Ministers and disabled and prohibited from preaching any
Sermon or Lecture indefinitely, either public or private. And for as much as
the King's Majesty by the Law of God and the Land, of right is, and ought to be
master of all the assemblings together of any of his Subjects; therefore what
Meetings soever, are not allowed and authorized by the Laws of the Realm, are
adjudged by the Learned in the Laws, to fall within the compass of those
Statutes, that forbid and punish Riots and unlawful Assemblies; and are, or
may justly be presumed to be, in terrorem populi, and in the Event it is to be
feared, will prove to be contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King.
And by the 2. H. 5. 8.
Law, all the King's Liege-people are commanded to assist in the suppressing of
them, upon pain of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the King.

Notwithstanding all which good Laws, this practice has continued in the
Church these several years, and still does (notwithstanding His Majesty's
reinforcement of their execution by his late Proclamation) in open defiance and
contempt of all Authority, as if the Laws of the Church and Realm were but
fulmen inane, a shadow of a Cloud, that vanishes as soon as it is made; and as
if obedience to Magistracy were no part of Christian duty.

Concerning these Laws of the Realm (to silence clamor) I will touch lightly
at five things.

I. That the King being next under God, within his Dominions, supreme in the
Church on Earth, has Power and Authority over the Persons of Ministers, as
well as of any other his Subjects. He being Custos utriusque tabulae, having
both tables committed to him, as well the first that concerns our religious
duties to God, as the other that concerns our civil duties to men, may and
ought to make such laws as conduce as well to 1 Timothy 2. 2.
the peace and order in the Church, as as godliness and honesty. Aug. tract.
11. in Johan.
Pertinet hoc ad reges seculi Christianos, ut temporibus suis pacatam velint
matrem suam Ecclesiam, unde spiritualiter nati sint; (Says St. Augustine.) He
may upon just Cause depose, discharge, and put to silence, any Minister
whatsoever within his Dominions, as to the Execution of his Ministerial
function, either in public or private. Ministers, as well as others, are under
civil jurisdiction. for Romans 13. 1.
Every Soul is bound to be subject to the higher powers. And Bern. Epist. 4. 2.
ad Archiepis. Senovensem.
St omnis anima, cur non est vestra? Quis vos excepit ex universalitate? If
every soul, then the Souls of Ministers as well as others: For who excepted
them from the universality? Qui dicit omnem, excludit nullam. He that says
every Soul, excludes no Soul. It was impiously said of Bellarm. de clericis.
c. 28.
That the Clergy ought not for any cause to be cited before the civil
Magistrate, or to be judged by him; it being absurd that the sheep should judge
the shepherd. Christ himself taking upon him man's nature, was subject to
humance Authority, submitting himself to Caiaphas and Pilate, so far as to be
apprehended, arraigned, condemned and executed.

True (says Bellarmine) de facto, Christ was subject to Pilate, but de jure,
he ought not to have been so: And that power over him which he did acknowledge,
was given to Pilate from above, John 19. 11.) was only a bare permission.

To which we answer; Ans. 1.
if we simply respect the Dignity of Christ's person, being the Son of God,
then we acknowledge that he neither was, nor could be subject to any man. But
if we consider the dispensation of his incarnation, and that form of a Servant
which he took on himself, whereby he became Man and under the Law, then de
jure, as he was a Jew, he was a Subject to that power, which at that time had
the rule. And what Pilate unjustly did against Christ, that, we grant, God did
only permit; But he had a lawful Jurisdiction over his person, not by God's
permission only, but by his effectual will.

But suppose it were true which Bellarmine says; Ans. 2.
yet the Example of Christ makes never the less for the Confirmation of the
truth, for which I allege it. For if he submitted himself to a power over him
that was usurped only, and not approved of by God, but barely permitted; then
certainly they are very far from the Humility that was in Christ Jesus, that
refuse to be obedient and subject to just and lawful powers, which are
ordained of God and set over them. And therefore when Christ said, date quae
sunt Caesaris Caesari, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he spoke
as well to the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, as to the People.

St. Paul, whose apostolical authority and spiritual Weapons, were able to
bring down every opposition, yet acknowledged that he must Act. 25. 10. 11.
be judged by Caesar, as his lawful Superior. Bellarmine's distinction of de
facto, and de jure, will stand him in no more stead here, than it did before;
for to say, the Roman Emperor was St. Paul's Judge de facto, but not de jure,
is to do St. Paul a manifest injury. For if the emperor had no right to judge
him, why would he then make use of the benefit of an appeal to Caesar Act. 25.
11.
when no body compelled him so to do? and why did he at another time shelter
himself under the Privilege Act. 16. 37.
of a Citizen of Rome? By his very professing himself to be a Roman, he does
acknowledge himself to be subject to the same Laws, and to the same Lord, that
other Romans were; and that he had no more exemption or immunity from
subjection and obedience to the Roman Laws, than that Tribune who said Act. 22.
28.
with a great sam have I obtained this freedom.

The Scriptures do give us an instance of King Solomon's deposing Abiathar from
the Priesthood. The text says 1 King. 2. 27.
that King Solomon did thrust out Abiathar from being Priest before the Lord.
Neither does the Holy Ghost mention this historically only, as thing done; but
by way of approbation, as a thing well and rightly done. This the Jesuits
themselves (who are the only men, I know, who question the Sovereign power in
this Case) confess. Remarkable to this purpose are the words of one of them.
Suarez. defens. fid. Cath. l. 3. c. 26. number. 7.
Alii non dubitant dicere Solomonem in eo facto injuste egisse, usurpando
potestatem, quam non habebat; ego vero id affirmare non audeo, propter verba
Scripturae quae ex Cap. 3. allegavi: Et quia apud antiquos patres and
expositores non invenio factum illud inter peccata Solomonis numeratum, sive in
culpam tributum. Some (says he) doubt not to say that Solomon in that Act did
unjustly, in usurping more power than did belong to him: But I dare not say so,
both for the words of the Scripture, which I have before alleged out of the
third Chapter; and also, because among the ancient Fathers and Expositours, I
find not this Act of his, reckoned for any of Solomon's sins, or him blamed for
it. The words which he says he alleged out of the third Chapter, are these. 1
King. 3. 3.
And Solomon loved the Lord his God, walking in the ways of David his Father,
only he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places. Which exception
(says he) shows that Kings Solomon until that time, had kept the Commandments
of God, and consequently sinned not in that fact in deposing Abiathar. And if
the Kings of Israel might execute such power, why not the Kings of England
also? Who will say that the Power of Christian Kings and Princes is shorter
now, than that of the Kings, of Judah, and the religious Princes of the
Primitive Christian Church was? That the nursing Fathers under the Gospel are
abridged in Authority, of what they were under the Law?

And the reason, and wisdom of this Nation in Parliament, has adjudged this
to be a just Cause of such deposition and silencing of any, when he shall
refuse to submit, and be obedient and conformable to such Laws and
Constitutions, as they have declared to be Act. of uniform. p. 68.
Very comfortable to all good People desirous to live in Christian
Conversation; most profitable to the State of the Realm, upon which the Mercy,
Favor and Blessing of Almighty God is in no-wise so readily and plentifully
powered, as by Common Prayer, due using of the Sacraments, and often preaching
of the Gospel with devotion of the hearers. And Ibid. page 71.
that nothing conduces more to the settling the peace of this Nation (which is
desired of all good men) nor the honor of our Religion and the Propagation
thereof, than an universal Agreement in the public Worship of Almighty God.
Which is a thing so amiable and excellent in it self, that it has extracted an
acknowledgment and commendation of it from the Mouths of the Divines of the
Presbyterian persuasion themselves. For in a Book of theirs entitled, A
Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, published by the Ministers and
Elders met together in a provincial Assembly, November 2 d. 1649. They have
these words. Vindicat. of Presbyt. p. 119. 120.
It is the Duty of all Christians to study to enjoy the Ordinances of Christ,
in unity and uniformity as far as is possible. (Which our Liturgy sets up, by
prescribing the manner of it. Whereas otherwise all will be left to the chance
of men's wills; which (says Doctor Hammond) View of the Directory. p. 23.
can no more be thought like to concur in one form, than Democritus's Atoms to
have met together into a world of beautiful Creatures, without any kind of
providence to dispose them.) For the Scriptures call for unity and uniformity,
as well as purity and verity. And surely it is not impossible to obtain this so
much desired unity and uniformity, because that God has promised that his
Children shall serve him with one heart, and with one way, and with one
shoulder. And that in the days of the Gospel, there shall be one Lord, and his
Name one. And Christ has prayed, that we may be all one, as the Father is in
him, and he in the Father. And he adds a most prevalent reason, That the World
may believe that thou have sent me. Nothing hinders the propagation of the
Gospel so much as the division and separation of Gospel-professours. If it be
God's promise, and Christ's prayer, it is certainly a thing possible to be
obtained, and a duty incumbent upon all good Christians to labor after.

Secondly, as it cannot be denied that the Civil Magistrate has authority over
the persons of Ministers, so it is as true, that he has power to act for the
regulation of all their Ecclesiastical meetings and assemblies; though not to
act in sacris, Yet circa sacra, non ad docendum, quod est sacerdotale, yet, ad
jubendum, quod est regale. As Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 24.
Constantine the Emperor told the Bishops whom he invited to a banquet, (...).
Ye are Bishops within the Church, and I am ordained by God's Grace a Bishop
without the Church. That the King of England (says Sir Henry Spelman) Sir H.
Spelman de non tem^r. Eccl. p. 21, 22.
is persona mixta, endowed as well with Ecclesiastical authority, as with
temporal, is not onley a solid position of the Common Law of this Land, but
confirmed unto us by the continual practice of our ancient Kings, ever since
and before the Conquest, even in hottest times of Popish fervency: For this
cause at their Coronation, they are not only Crowned with the Diadem of the
Kingdom, and girt with the Sword of justice to signisie their temporal
authority, but are anointed also with Reges sacro oleo uncti sunt spiritualis
jurisdictionis capaces. 33 Ed. 3. Tit. Aid de Roy. 103. ex Dom. Cook Rep. part
5.
the oil of Priesthood, and clothed stola Sacerdotali and vest Dalmatica, to
demonstrate this their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; whereby the King is said to
be in Law, the Supremus ordinarius, and in regard thereof among other
Ecclesiastical rights and prerogatives belonging to him, is to have all the
tithes (through the Kingdom) in the places that are not of any Parish, for some
such there be, and namely, diverse Forests. Magistrates (we grant) can neither
preach the word, nor administer the Sacraments, any more than Vzziah could burn
incense, or offer Sacrifice to God: Yet they are nursing Fathers of the Church,
not to give the milk of the word and Sacraments, but of disclipline and
Government. During the old Testament times, the King's power extended Sanderson
de oblig. Consc. Lect. 6. Sect. 31.
to the instituting and commanding of such Religious meetings, as do no where
appear to be either instituted, or commanded of God, or his Servant Moses. v.
g. The solemnity of the Passover, which was to be kept by the Law of Moses but
seven days, by a special Command of 2 Chronicles. 30.
King Hezekiah, with the consent of the people, was commanded to be kept other
seven days. The Feast of Purim, in Commemoration of the deliverance of the
Nation of the Jews, under Ahasuerus the Persian King, was instituted by Esther
9.
Hester and Mordecai. Moses only Commanded one day of Fasting to be yearly
observed, (viz.) in the seventh month; But the Kings and Magistrates of the
people instituted other yearly solemn Fasts: So that in the times of the latter
Prophets, there were four yearly Fasts observed, (viz.) besides that yearly in
the seventh month, three others Zach. 8. 19.
in the fourth, fifth, and tenth month. Now if they may by their authority
institute and enlarge, why not then as well abridge and restrain; Provided the
public assembling together of God's people, according to Divine appointment,
be no-way prejudiced or infringed. If the Magistrate may appoint, then he may
forbid too: Law, reason and sense teach, that appointing and forbidding belong
to one power.

Thirdly, neither can there be any ground of quarrel made against the justness
of these Laws forbidding Conventicles. For (as it is well observed by Mr. Jo.
Mart. in Sermon. on Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
a worthy Divine before me) that Law is undoubtedly just, in which there is a
concurrence of the justice of these four causes of Law, wherein the whole of a
Law does consist, ( viz.) the justice of the final, efficient, formal and
material causes of Laws.

1. The final Cause of End of a just Law, is that it tend to the common and
public good. And of this the Lawgivers are to be Judges, and not the Subjects.
And most unreasonable it were that what the Lawgivers shall adjudge to be for
the public good, should be made to yield to private and particular men's
interests.

2. The efficient Cause of a just Law, is the lawful power of the person, or
persons in authority, that made the Law. Otherwise Laws are only so in name,
and not indeed. And as Aquinas, Aquin. 1, 2. quest. 96.
Violentiae magis quam leges, They are rather acts of violence than Laws. And
it is a sure rule in Logic, Causa aequivoca non infert effectum; a sentence
passed by one that is no Judge, binds not the party.

3. The right form of a Law, is that it be a rule of rectitude for humane
actions, according to the guidance of distributive justice, giving to every one
according to his demerits.

4. The matter of a Law, must be a thing that is good according to the rule of
universal justice, at leait indifferent.

A Law wherein these 4 things concur must needs be good and obligatory to all
persons that are concerned in it.

Now in which of these the aforesaid Laws against Conventicles are faulty, I
know not. Perhaps some will say, in the latter; the Matter of it is not good,
to lay a restraint on Religious Assemblies and Meetings.

It were so indeed, Answ. 1.
if Religious Assemblies and Meetings were forbidden. But I think it will
appear in the sequel, that these in question are not such, whatsoever some
conceive them to be.

It were so, Answ. 2.
if all Religious Meetings or Assemblies were forbidden: But (blessed be God)
it is otherwise. We have still Act. 19. 39.
(...). the public, ancient, lawful and orderly assemblies allowed, commanded
and encouraged by Authority, in all places of the Kingdom; and only such
meetings by the Law forbidden, as are private, new and disorderly, and tend to
Faction and Schism, and such other evils as are not without trembling to be
mentioned.

Lastly I answer, Answ. 3.
with that learned Casuist Dr. Sand. de obligat. Consc. Lect. 6. Sect. 15.
Sanderson, that it is not necessarily requisite, that whatsoever is
established by Law, should be bonum positive, that it should be an act of
virtue; but it is sufficient if it be bonum negative, that is, nothing sinful
or morally evil, as all vices are. Otherwise there should be no room for Laws
about middle and indifferent things. And suppose a Law should be defective in
regard of the efficient, final, or formal cause; yet if the matter of it be
such, as may be done without sin, ^t binds the Subject to obedience. And that
the forbearance of such illegal meetings as are in question, may be done
without sin; and that those dissenting brethren, who have been ejected for
their noncompliance in Uniformity to the present legal establishment, being
under a legal restraint as to the use of their Ministerial Function, may
without sin forbear the irregular use of their gifts and labors in the said
private meetings, to the undermining and confronting of the Laws, the increase
of Sedition, Schism, and diverse other Horrid Evils, I think is out of question.
Learned Beza thought so, or else he had never returned such an answer, as he
did, to that Case of Conscience which was proposed to him, by certain English
Ministers, who in the Reign of Q. Eliz. were silenced for nonconformity. The
case proposed being, Whether they might, or ought not to preach,
notwithstanding their being prohibited by man's law? His answer verbatim is,
Bez. Epist. ad quosdam Eccles. Anglic. fratres. p. 97.
Tertium illud, nempe ut contra Regiam Majestatem, and Episcoporum voluntatem
Ministerio suo fungantur magis etiam exhorrescimus propter eas causas, quae
tacentibus etiam nobis, satis intelligi possunt. He was so far from thinking it
lawful, that he trembled at the thought of such a thing, that they should
exercise their Ministry contrary to the Queen's Laws, and the will of the
Governors of the Church. And the same has been the judgment of Antiquity in
the like case. The ancient and orthodox Fathers of the Church, being met
together in Council at Antioch, in the first year of the Reign of Aurelianus
the Emperor, and in the year of Christ (according to Eusebius) 269. decreed
Council. Antioch. Can. 4.
Non licere Episcopo vel Clerico si exauthorizatus fuerit ministrare; That if
any Bishop, being condemned by a Council, or any Presbyter or Deacon by his
Bishop, should presume to Preach, or meddle with any thing of, or belonging to
the Sacred Office of the Ministry, there should never be any hope for him, ever
to be restored again by any other Council or Synod: And all that Communicated
with him, should be cast out of the Church. As may be seen more at large in
that Canon.

Of the like judgment were the Divines of the Presbyterian-way touching those
learned, Godly, and orthodox Ministers, who suffered ejection out of their
livings, and deprivation of all they had, in the late times of troubles, by a
pretended authority of Parliament, for their adherence to his late Majesty of
ever Blessed memory. When the Earl of Northumberland discoursing with Mr Calamy
about the supplying of above fifty Churches in London, void of Ministers, told
him, That they must restore some of the sequestered Clergy of London, and admit
them to preach again, for unless they did so, the Parliament could not find men
of ability to preach in London: Mr Calamy replied, God Forbid. As it is
recorded and published to the world, in a Book called Persecutio undecima,
Printed in the year 1648. page 42. And if the thought of the Restoration of
those worthies to their Office, how unjustly soever they were suspended from
it, was (in the judgment of that person) rejected with indignation, as a thing
offensive and either forbidden, or wished to be forbidden of God; how much more
execrable and abominable a thing would he have thought it to be, if they should
have taken upon them (as some now do under a lawful power) to preach again,
without any readmission by that power that silenced them, yea in opposition and
defiance of it?

And because no testimony is so fit to convince any party as that which
proceeds from their own Mouths; Let therefore the Judgment of a Mr. William
Bradshaw unreasonableness of separation. page 90, etc.
Nonconformist (otherwise a Person in Learning, Sobriety and Solidity
inferior to few of his generation,) be heard and weighed in this case. He
writes in defense of our Church assemblies, against those who being silenced
for Nonconformity, (as he was) yet (not as he did) separated themselves from
the public Congregations; and not enduring to have their Mouths stopped, or to
sit down in silence, thought themselves bound (according to the Example of the
Apostles, Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29.) to exercise their Ministry, though not in
public, yet in private Meetings, notwithstanding any Legal prohibition to the
contrary.

First he distinguishes betwixt the calling of the Apostles, and that of the
Ministers now. The former, as they had their ministry immediately from God, so
had they the designation of that ministry to their persons immediately from God
also. And therefore the exercise of it was not restrainable, or to be forborne
at the Commandment of men. The latter, though their ministry be from God also,
yet have their Calling to that ministry or the designation of that office to
such and such particular persons, from men in God's ordinary way, and cannot
exercise that function, but by virtue of that Calling which they have from men.
And therefore (says he) in common sense they ought to obey man, forbidding
them the exercise of a Calling, which they do exercise by virtue of a Calling
from men. Otherwise there should be no power so to depose a man from his
Ministry, but that notwithstanding any Command from the Church or State, he is
still to continue in the exercise of his ministry, and should be bound to give
that example, which the Apostles did, which is not only absurd, but a conceit
tending plainly to manifest Sedition and Schism.

Afterward he has these words.

Neither were some of the Apostles only forbidden, so as that others should be
suffered to preach the same Gospel in their places; but the utter abolition of
the Christian Religion was manifestly intended, in silencing them. But over
Churches, whereof we are Ministers, are no private and secret Assemblies, such
as hide themselves from the face of a persecuting Magistrate; but are public,
professing their worship, and doing their Religion in the face of the
Magistrate^ and State; yea and by his Countenance, Authority and Protection:
And we Are set over those Churches, not only by a calling of our People, but
also by Authority from the Magistrate, who has an armed power, to hinder such
public actions; who is also willing to permit and maintain other true
Ministers of the Gospel, in those places where he forbids some.

And thereupon the said Author makes this threefold Conclusion.

1. If after our public Calling to minister in such a known and public
Church, not by the Church only, but by the Magistrate also; the Magistrate
shall have matter against us (just, or unjust, as to our obedience it matters
not) and shall in that regard forbid us to minister to our Church, I see not by
what warrant in God's word, we should think our selves bound notwithstanding,
to exercise our Ministry still; except we should think such a Law of Ministry
to lie upon us, that we should be bound to run upon the Swords point of the
Magistrate, or oppose Sword to Sword, which I am sure Christianity abominates.

2. Yea, suppose the Magistrate should do it unjustly and against the Will of
the Church, and should therein sin; yet does not the Church in that regard
cease to be a Church, nor ought she therein resist the Will of the Magistrate;
nor does she stand bound in regard of her affection to her Minister (how great
and deserved soever) to deprive her self of the protection of the Magistrate,
by leaving her public standing, to follow her Minister in private, and in the
dark; refusing the benefit of other public Ministers, which with the good
leave and liking of the Magistrate, she may enjoy.

3. Neither do I know, what Warrant any ordinary Minister has by God's word,
in such a case, so to draw any such Church or People to his private Ministry,
that thereby they should hazard their outward Estate and quiet in the
Commonwealth, where they live; when in some competent measure, they may
publicly, with the grace and favor of the Magistrate, enjoy the ordinary
means of salvation by another. And except he has a Calling to minister in some
other Church, he is to be content to live as a private member until it shall
please God, to reconcile the Magistrate unto him, and to call him again to his
own Church.

From which words of this learned Nonconformist, it may easily be gathered,
that those persons who are now, by the unquestionable Legitimate power of the
Kingdom, for their Noncompliance with the present legal Establishment in the
Church, deposed from their Ministry, Firmum est genus probationis quod etiam ex
adversario sumitur, and veritas etiam ab inimicis veritatis probetur.
if they contain not themselves in quietness and silence, as other private
Christians; do, and ought; but will without a Call of Authority, undertake
still to preach the word, and draw People after them to their private Ministry;
Novatian. de Trin.
they are condemned by the most sober, and judicious of their own party; Amici
contra amicum; and inimici pro inimico invincibile testimonium est.
and the case of them and their followers, is adjudged to be far different from
that of the Apostles, and primitive Christians; their practice unwarrantable by
the word of God, L. Vives de instrument. probabilit.
and manifestly tending to Sedition and Schism.

But what speak I of the single Testimony and Judgment of one man of that way
and persuasion (though a learned and judicious one) whenas we have extant to
the World the like verdict agreed upon long since by the joint consent of
sundry Godly and learned Ministers of this Kingdom, then standing out and
suffering in the cause of inconformity, and published by Mr. William Rathband
for the good of the Church, and the better settling of men's unstable minds in
the truth, against the subtle insinuations and plausible pretenses of that
pernicious evil of the Brownists or Separatists. For in the 4 th. page of that
Book; First, they justify themselves against the objection of that faction, in
yiedling to the suspensions and deprivations of the Bishops, acknowledging
their Power to depose, who did ordain them; and their own duty to acquiesce
therein, and in quietness and silence to subject themselves thereunto, in
expressions so full to my present purpose that I should have transcribed them
for the Reader's satisfaction, were it so that I had not been prevented by the
reverend and worthy Author of the Page 345. vide. the last page of this
Treatise. 156. where the words are to be seen.
Continuation of the Friendly Debate. As to that place of Scripture. Act. 4.
19. 20. which they acknowledge to be very unskilfully alleged by the
adversary, they make this threefold answer, to show the difference betwixt the
Apostles case and theirs.

First (they say) they that inhibited the Apostles were known and professed
Enemies of the Gospel.

Secondly, the Apostles were charged not to teach in the Name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospel; Which Commandment might more
hardly be yielded unto, than this of our Bishops, who are not only content
that the Gospel should be preached, but are also preachers of it themselves.

Thirdly, the Apostles received not their Calling and Authority from Gal. 1. 1.
men, nor by the hands of men, but immediately from God himself, and therefore
also might not be restrained nor deposed by men; whereas we, though we exercise
as function, whereof God is the Author, and we are also called of God to it,
yet are we also called and ordained by the hands and ministry of men, and may
therefore by men be also deposed and restrained from the exercise of our
Ministry.

I cannot think that any of the Learned sort of the Non-conformists now are
ignorant of these things, nor, that (if their hearts were known) their
Judgments differ (in this case) from that of their ancient brethren; but I fear
the busy upholders and promoters of Conventicles in our Age, notwithstanding
their prohibition by Law, to preach at all, sin against their own light and
conscience in so doing. But I proceed.

4. Now Laws being thus made against all such unlawful Meetings, and all such
His Majesty's Laws being no way contrary to God's word; all his Subjects stand
bound in the obligation of obedience to them, and that for conscience sake
(Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 1.) And under pain of Damnation if they
wilfully resist and disobey, Romans 13. 2. And therefore it is, that in the
Schools, they call disobedience to the King's Laws, Sacrilege: for though the
trespass seem to be directed but against a man, yet in that man whose Office
(and consequently his person) is sacred, God is opposed, and his ordinance
violated. The King's Laws though in themselves, in regard of their particular
Constitution, they put no special obligation upon us under pein of sin and
damnation; yet in a general relation to that God, who is the original of all
Power, and has commanded us to obey Authority, their neglect or disobedience
involves us in guilt, and exposes us to Sin, and consequently to Damnation.
Confess. Suev. cap. 14.
Civilibus legibus quae cum pietate non pugnant, eo quisque Christianus paret
promptius, quo fide Christi est imbutus before; Every Christian, by how much
the more he has of the grace of faith, by so much the more ready he is to
conform to the Laws of men, which are not contrary to the Laws of God. All
power is of God; That therefore which* Authority enjoins us, God enjoins us by
it, the Command is mediately his, though passing through the hands of men. Aug.
Hoc jubent imperatores, quod jubet and Christus; quia cum bonum jubent, per
illos non nisi Christus jubet; When Kings command what is not disagreeable with
Christ's Commands, Christ commands by them, and we are called to obey not only
them, but Christ in them.

But is not suffering, Object.
obedience? And if men are willing to submit to the Penalty of the Law, is not
that sufficient to discharge the Conscience from the guilt of disobedience?

Casuists, Ans.
that are of that Judgment, say, it holds true only in those Laws (whereof
there are but very few in the World) that are purely penal: And the Laws which
we now speak of are not such, for these are partly Moral, binding to do, or to
leave undone some moral Act; Sanderson de obligat. Consc. p. 304. etc.
and partly Penal, in case of Omission of what the Laws command, or Commission
of what the Laws forbid, then to undergo the Punishment the Laws inflict. Now
in these mixed Laws, suffering the Penalty does not discharge the Conscience
from the guilt of sin. For it is a rule of sure truth which Casuists give in
such cases, Omnis praeceptio obligat ad culpam; Every just Command of those who
have lawful Authority to command, leaves a guilt of sin upon those men's
Consciences who do not obey. The reason is, because where a Law made by lawful
Authority requires active obedience, and imposes a Penalty in case of
disobedience, the Conscience of the subject stands bound primarily and
intentionally to the performance of the duty therein enjoined. As for the
Penalty threatened, that is a secondary and accidental thing to the Law, added
to keep up the reputation and esteem thereof, in the minds of those who are
concerned in it, and to affright them from the neglect and disobedience of it.
So that, though the suffering the Penalty of the Law, in case of the
transgression of it, be as much as can be required of the Lawgiver, yet God, by
whom Kings reign, and who requires subjection to Authority, and that for
Conscience sake, will not hold such persons guiltless, that do not the things
commanded in the Law.

The malefactor satisfies the Law at the time of his execution, but who will
say, that without repentance of his fact, the guilt of sin remains not still
upon his Conscience, or that he shall be acquitted at God's tribunal?

5. Neither are they the Laws of the Church and Kingdom of England only, that
are against such Meetings and Ministry as are in question; But the godly Kings
and Princes of the primitive Christian-Church have ever made the like. Eusebius.
de vit.. Constant. L. 3. c. 63.
Eusebius tells us, that Constantine the Great made a Law, that no Separatists
or Schismatics should meet in Conventicles; and commanded that all such
places, where they were wont to keep their Meetings, should be demolished; and
that they should not keep their factious Meetings either in public places, or
private houses, or remote places, but that they should repair to their
parochial Churches. And in the next Chapter he says, that by that Law, the
memory of most of those Sectaries was forgotten and extinguished.

Sozomen reports Sozom. L. 7. c. 12.
that Theodosius the great, decreed that the Sectaries (whose petition for
liberty he had first torn in pieces) should not assemble together, but all of
them repair to their own public Congregations, otherwise to be banished their
Country, to be branded with some infamy, and not to be partakers of Common
privileges and favors with others. And our neighbors and brethren of Scotland
of the Presbyterian judgment, did in one of their late general Assemblies,
since the enacting of their solemn League and Covenant, make a special Canon
against all private Meetings; the direct tendency there of being to the
overthrow of that Uniformity by them covenanted, to be endeavored in all the
Churches of the three Kingdoms.

The very Heathens themselves, by their Laws have made all such Assemblies
illegitimate which the highest Authority did not cause to meet, though they
were (...), to do solemn Sacrifice to their Gods (as may appear by Solon's
Laws) and in their practice, they have showed themselves ready to yield
obedience to their Governors, in desisting from such irregular Conventions
when they have been required.

Though Demetrius his Assembly came together disorderly, and of their own heads
Act. 19. 29.
rushed into the Theater, and there kept a shouting and Crying two hours
together, some one thing, some another, not knowing, most of them, wherefore
they came together: Yet when the Town-clark (who had Authority) did dismiss
them; they added not one fault to another, but broke off their disorderly
Meeting presently. And they show themselves more refractary than Demetrius
himself, who do otherwise.

And, if it be well considered, the practice in question will be found to
interfere with it self; and to carry in the very face of it a convincing
Testimony of its evil and unwarrantableness. For if it be lawful for these men
to preach in private Meetings (as they do, and have a long time done) why do
they not take upon them to adventure to preach in the public and
Church Assemblies also? What is it that makes them abstain from the latter, and
yet take liberty in the former?

Is it in obedience to the Law of the Land, which forbids them to preach in
public? The same Law forbids them to preach in private also. It cannot be
denied but that one is forbidden as well as the other. Then this must needs be
turned upon them, why do they not obey in the one as well as in the other,
since they cannot but acknowledge that both are forbidden in the same Law?
surely if it were the Care and Conscience, and desire to obey lawful
Authority, according as Christian duty binds them, that makes them silent in
public; the same Conscience, the same care and desire would make them sit down
in silence in private also.

If it be said, that they therefore abstain from public preaching, because it
more exposes them to the danger and penalty of the Law, than private does:
Then this must be retorted upon them also, that their obedience is not such as
God requires, for Conscience, but for wrath. Good men obey for Conscience; but
those that obey for wrath, have not the fear of God before their Eyes. For,
none contemns the power of man, unless he has first despised the Power of God.

And shall that be accounted by any sober Christian, to be the ordinance of
God, or means of his appointment to beget grace in men's souls, that is so
repugnant to good Laws, both of Church and State, which we all stand bound in
Conscience to observe and obey; is contradictory to it self, and has in it
that, which proclaims to all that will open their Eyes to look into it, its
unlawfulness and sin? God forbid.

ARGUMENT II.
THAT cannot be the ordinance of God, or means of grace, that is contrary to
that order which God himself by his word has established in his Church. For
God is not the Author of disorder and confusion; But the Devil. In the Church
God's Command is for order in all things: 1 Cor. 14. 33. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. And St. Paul did as well rejoice
to see Coll. 2. 5.
the order as the faith of the Church of Coloss. Only Job. 10. 21, 22.
Death and Hell have no order. And it is a kind of death to a godly Christian
to see disorder in the Church of Christ, and his Service. For what is a Church
without order, but a kind of an Hell above ground? Where order is wanting, what
is a Kingdom but a Chaos of Confusion? Yea,

But such a Ministry, and such Meetings and Assemblies as are in question, are
contrary to the order God has in his word established in his Church. For the
order God has set in his Church is, that his People should be distinguished
into flocks, and that every flock should have its own shepherd. It is God's
ordinance (says Mr. Hildersham) as it is agreeable to good order, Hild. on
Joh. 4. p. 242.
that Christians should be sorted into Congregations, according to their
dwellings, that they who dwell next together, should be of the same
Congregation, and from thence the name (...), a parish, first came. As it is
against all reason and scripture, that a people scattered about, some here, and
some there, in several parts of the Country, should voluntarily associate and
combine themselves in a distinct body, under what Ministry they please, and
that best suits with their humor, and call themselves a Church, as the manner
of some is: So it is agreeable with the very light of nature, and dictates of
right reason, that a people in a vicinity and neighborhood dwelling together,
ought to join together with those of that neighborhood, according as most
conveniently they may, for the worship and service of God. We read of the
Church of God at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. And Blake defoed. p. 225.
of seven Epistles written from Heaven to seven several Churches, all which had
their abode at the places whence the Churches bare their Names, these are
scripture Churches; says a Presbyterian.

It is the ordinance of God that every. Flock or Congregation should have their
own pastor, Act. 20. 28.
Take heed to the flock over whom the Holy Ghost has made you overseers.
Timothy appointed Titus Tit. 1. 5.
to ordain Elders in every City. i. e. wheresoever there was a body of people
for a fit Congregation, there must be a Pastor or Elder placed. Whence it
appears that even in the Apostles days there was a distinction of Churches, and
Congregations; for the Elders had their flocks over whom the Holy Ghost made
them Overseers. The like is said of Paul and Barnabas Act. 14. 23.
that they ordained Elders in every Church. Hence (says Calvin) Calvin in loc.
may be gathered the difference betwixt the office of those Elders, and that of
the Apostles. These had no certain station in the Church, but still went up and
down, hither and thither, to plant new Churches, Romans 15. 19. 20. 23. 24. 1
Cor. 4. 17. Act. 1. 8. Romans 1. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 11. 2 Cor. 10. 14. 16. But the
other were by God's appointment fixed and tied to their own proper
Congregations and Flocks, Act. 14. 23. Act. 20. 28. Tit. 15. ^1 Pet. 5. 1. The
diminutive (...), used in Luc. 12. 32. Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 3. Not (...),
Jansen. in concord. evang.
does intimate as much; for, parvum gregem significat, it signifies a small
part of the great flock distinguished from the rest.

And indeed the state and condition of the Ministers, and Ministry of the
Church requires, that every Pastor should not take care of all the Flock or
Church, but that rather they should have certain portions or Congregations of
God's People, committed to them particularly, amongst whom they should bestow
their care and pains. For this cause St. Paul took course to send certain
Ministers to certain particular Churches: as 2 Timothy 4. 10. 12.
Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia, and Tychicus to Ephesus. Vnde
rectissime colligimus (says a Baldwin.
Learned Casuist) auditores ordinariis pastoribus contentos esse oportere, ne
eos in crimen (...) conjiciant.

So it is God's ordinance that Flocks and Congregations should be contented
with, and depend on their own Pastors. This appears by that charge of the
Apostle. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 15.
We beseech you brethren to know them (to own and acknowledge them) that labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake. Heb. 13. 7.
Again, remember them that have the rule over you, which have spoken to you the
word of God. And again Heb. 13. 17.
obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy and not with grief. In both places the Command of God is for Obedience to
Pastors; not any, such as people themselves according to their own humors
shall choose; but it is (...), in the seventh verse: and (...), in the 17 th
verse. In both places, YOUR RVLERS, such as are lawfully set over you by those
that are in Authority in the Church. And even as St. Paul commends Epaphroditus
to the Philippians as their ordinary Pastor, and commands them Phil. 2. 29.
to receive him in the Lord with all gladness, and to hold such in rep^tation.
So, he does the like to other Churches, commanding them to honor and obey
their own Pastors; which he would never have done, if it had been lawful for
people, with neglect of their own Ministers, to follow whom they please.

People are much mistaken, if they think, they are so much at their own
disposal, as that they may put themselves under the teaching and care of what
Minister they have a mind to, though never so excellent and orthodox. For,

1. First, God is not so careless of the precious Souls of his People in his
Church, as to leave them at random to shift for themselves, every one according
to his own foolish fancy; but does dispose of them himself by his good
providence, by the hand of those, who from and under him have Authority so to
do, to the care and charge of Pastors of his own appointment, the respective
Ministers of those Parishes and places where they, with other of his People, do
cohabite. And therefore the form of our institutions to our several charges,
runs in these words, Curam and regimen omnium animarum parochianorum tibi
plenarie in Domino committimus. The definition that our Savior Christ gives of
a Church, is, a John. 10.
Shepherd and his Sheep that will hear his voice. A lawful Minister, and a
Flock or Congregation lawfully committed to his charge make up a true Church.
Hereunto accord the Judgment of the Fathers. St. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
in an homily de recipiendo Severiano, begins thus; Sicuti capiti Corpus
cohaerere necessarium est, ita Ecclesiam Sacerdoti, and Principi Populum. As it
is necessary that the body cleave to the head, so it is likewise of necessity
that the Congregation cleave to the Priest, and the People to their Prince. To
which the saying of St. Cyprian agrees. Cyprian Epis. 69.
Illi sunt Ecclesia, plebs sacerdoti adunita, and pastori suo grex adhaerens.
The Church is a Congregation of believers united to their Minister, and a flock
adhering to their Shepherd. For people then to imagine that they are at their
own liberty to forsake their own Ministers, and to wander whither they please,
is a Principle that tends directly to the destruction of the Church, and is
contrary to the very nature and being of it. Should the Flocks of these
wanderers do as their Masters do, leave and run away from their shepherds,
and go whither they please, and feed where they please, their owners would
expect to see but little good come of them.

2. Secondly, a man^fest injury will thereby be done to their own Pastors, be
they never so vigilant, to be forsaken of their own People, as if they were
deficient in the discharge of their duties and offices amongst them. For, if it
be lawful for one to do so, then it is lawful for ten, and if for ten, then
for an hundred, and so consequently for all; and so a Pastor may be forsaken
of all his People; which how contrary it is to the order and rules of the
Gospel, I leave to any person of sober and staid Principles to judge.

3. Thirdly, It will be matter of offense to others (who are prone to live Grex
totus in agris unius scabie cadit. Juv.
by example more than by rule) and an occasion to them to do the like: and so
by this means all that obedience and duty, that by divine Precept, is due to a
Minister from his People, would soon perish and come to nothing.

4. Fourthly, An universal liberty of sinning without control or restraint
would by this means be introduced amongst People. For if they may have liberty
to wander from one Minister to another, at their pleasure, they will have none
at last, to have the cure and care of their souls: neither will any one dare
faithfully and freely to rebuke them for any thing they do amiss, for fear
lest they should forsake him also, and still be seeking out to some other. And
this is a most cursed condition by the verdict of Ps. 119. 176. Jer. 5. 6. 7.
17. Zach. 10. 11. -- 11. 10. 15. -- 13. 7. Mat. 9. 36.
God himself, for People to be without a particular Pastor of their own; as
sheep without a shepherd, wandering now here now there, exposed to Dogs and
Wolves, Seducers and Deceivers.

5. Fifthly, It is a sinning against and crossing divine Providence, and
carries much of impiety and unchristian Ingratitude in it: God's gracious
promise to his People is Jer. 3. 15.
I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you
with Knowledge and Understanding. Now when God shall be graciously pleased, to
make good this promise to a People, and they (therewithal not contented) shall
out of a vain Curiosity, light and needless affectation of Novelty, (for as the
case in question stands, it can proceed from no other Cause) flock after
Strangers and Usurpers, even to a forsaking, either in whole, or in part, their
own faithful Pastor, it is just with God to blast all such Ministry, and to
make all their pretended preaching, become but Job. 15. 3.
a reasoning with unprofitable talk, with Speeches wherewith they can do no
good: And to withdraw his blessing from such unthankful Peoples attendance on
it, so as that Mat. 13. 14.
hearing they shall hear and not understand, and seeing they shall see and not
perceive. And as God threatened the Jews in the like case Ezekiel. 14. 7. -- 9.
so may he justly punish such ungrateful Malcontents, with a certain and
efficacious permission of them to be deceived, led into, and hardened in all
kind of damnable Errors, by their pretended teachers, And so, what Gastius
observes of the Anabaptists, may be made true of all such humourists, Gastius
de Exord. Anabapt. p. 495.
Quia a veritate avertunt aures, ideo Deus permittit illis doctores, non qui
lingua medica sanarent ulcera ipsorum, sed qui pruritum ac scabiem affectuum
ipsorum commode scalperent. Because they turn away their Ears from the truth,
therefore God sends them teachers after their own Lusts, not such as should
with wholesome tongues heal their sores, but with their nails scratch the itch
of their lusts and affections. They may chance to gain some empty notions,
(...) of science falsely 1 Timothy 6. 20.
so called, but nothing of sanctified or saving knowledge.

And if a man look with an impartial Eye, on the practices of these persons,
that transplant themselves out of the Garden of God's Church, into the waste of
these unlawful Assemblies, he may soon discern the visible tokens of divine
displeasure upon them and their ways. Such barrenness of true Holiness and
Christian-charity, such wilful hardening in ways of Schism, pride and
profaneness (I speak within the compass of mine own sad observation and
experience, not with any desire to blazon the Crimes of any, but to declare my
heartbreaking sorrow for them) as if that curse pronounced by our Blessed
Savior against the fruitless Figtree in the Gospel, were executed on them,
Mat. 21. 19.
Let no good fruit grow on thee hencesorth for ever. Their faith seems to be
mere faction; all their Religion but a professed disobedience to their
Superiors, and a studied opposition to the truth of that which (through the
Mercy of God) is established in our Church: their holiness, to be always
finding of faults: and, stulto zelo pleni (as says Melancthon) being filled
with foolish zeal, they will like nothing but their own inventions. As soon as
ever they fancy themselves to be converted, they can teach their King how to
govern, and their Ministers how to preach. They can tell what Laws are fit for
the Kingdom, and what Orders for the Church; yea, they are presently so
illuminated, that they can see every blemish in both, when in themselves, their
companions and families, they cannot see beams and intolerable Evils.
Eagle-eyed abroad to spy faults in others, and look into things that concern
them not, but as blind as Beetles at home. Like flies, Hist. animal. p. 384.
they will fasten no where, but on the gall or sore (if there be any) in Church
or State.

And whereas Christ in his Gospel has commanded us, that Phil. 2. 3.
each should esteem other better than themselves; especially where nothing
appears notorious in men's lives to the contrary; these men will be peremptory
and Pope-like in their definitions, on all that are not of their way and
practice, counting and calling them, Carnal, the men of the world, the wicked,
etc. and engross to themselves the Names of Saints, the Godly, God's children
and people, with exclusion of all else that are not of their practice and
opinions, from having part or lot in that business or privilege. It is holiness
enough for any, to be one of them.

The Character which the ancient Nonconformists give of the Separatists of
their times, does as exactly fit these of ours, as if it had been made of
purpose for them.

It is Grave and modest Confutat. published by Mr. Rathband p. 61. 62.
evident (say they) their zeal has been like the rash and indiscreet zeal
spoken of and reproved in the Sons of Zebedeus. And savoureth altogether of
Uncharitableness and not of Love: for as all they that have once declined to
that Schism, are found to be exceeding proud and disdainful toward all that
are contrary minded; yea even such as (before they were infected with that
Leaven) were patterns of all Love, Modesty and Humility unto others; so will
they not acknowledge nor reverence any of the most excellent graces that God
has given to any of his Servants amongst us, nor so much respect them as
Papists will do. No, they profess greater detestation and despite to the most
godly and most sincere men amongst us, than they do to such as are most
notorious in profaneness and malice to the truth. And for shameless lying,
spiteful railing, and scurrilous and Ruffian-like profaneness which they
observe and describe at large in them, I have not found that these come any
whit short, but rather (I fear) overpass the deeds of their Predecessors. So
that I find that note of St. Augustine to be most true, which he observes out
of the Parable Luc. 10. 30.
concerning the man that fell among Thieves. It Is said of him that he went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho. Jerusalem was the Church of God, the Ps. 87. 1, 2,
3, Ps. 128. 5.
holy City. There was the Temple, and public place of the worship of the God
of Israel. Jericho, a type of the world, unkind to Josh. 2.
God's spies, as the world is to his Ministers; where God had no public
worship at all. Betwixt it and Jerusalem, there was a Desert, infamous for
frequent Robberies and Murders there committed: in which respect it was called
ADOMIM, for the store of Blood there shed. There was King Zedekiah taken 2
King. 25. 5.
by the Army of the Chaldeans, when he fled from Jerusalem. And thither the man
bended his course. Whereupon St. Augustine notes, si non descendisset, in
latrones non incidisset, had he not gone down from God and his Church, he had
not fallen into the hands of Thieves: so long as he had kept himself in God's
way, he would have kept him from all harm and danger: But if he will go from
the Chruch, let him go whither else he please, God will give him over into the
hands of Thieves, who shall strip him, wound him, and leave him half dead. Our
Church-forsakers in these days have sped no better than that man did then, but
since they left out Jerusalem, the place of God's public worship, they have
fallen into the hands of Thieves, that great and old Cheater, the Devil and his
Instruments, the Seducers of our times, who craftily lie in wait to deceive:
And these have stripped them of their Raiment, all that external appearance of
Peace, Charity, Modesty and Humility, that formerly they seemed to be clothed
withal, and have not left them so much as one ragg remaining to hide their
Nakedness: wounded them in their minds and judgments with errors and
falsehoods; in their Consciences with Superstition and vain devotion; in their
affections with utter aversness and crosness to all that is orderly and imposed
by Authority; insomuch that they are left half dead; some life remains in them;
to any thing that is evil and forbidden, they are quick and active, but to any
thing that is truly good and enjoined, as dead as a stock: Jer. 4. 22.
wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. Such is God's Justice
and Severity on those that leave Jerusalem for Jericho.

In a word; if all of this sort of People throughout the Nation, be as those
with whom I have to do, (and I know there is the same corruption in the
Natures of all, though there may not be the same eruption in all) God and
Godliness have not greater enemies, nor the Devil greater instruments to
advance his Kingdom, in the introduction of Atheism and Profaneness; than
themselves. God's public worship and worshippers are matter of their loathing
and scorn, and if ever any of them afford their presence to any part of it, it
is of purpose either to quarrel at or deride it. And as he whom they serve goes
about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, so do they make it their
business to beget prejudice in the hearts of all with whom they converse,
against their own Ministers and Ministry, and to make Proselytes to themselves
and their party, of the worst and easiest sort of People. The pretext of Piety
and Conscience is both the Veil wherewith they hide their unparallelled Pride,
Malice and Hypocrisy; and their Bait wherewith they catch simple Souls in
their Net. Ezra 4. 1, 2.
As at the building of the Temple under Zerubbabel, the adversaries making show
of helping forward the work by setting their hands to it, pretending they
sought the same God the Jews did, proved themselves to be the greatest Enemies
to God's People, and hinderers of the building by their colored Friendship; so
I know not any whose courses are more to the disturbance of the peac^, and
prejudice to the enlargement of the Church, and furtherance of Religion, than
these men that would be noted for a Form of Godliness, but indeed deny the
Power of it.

I heartily wish, that in their lives they would henceforth stoutly consute
this Character I have given of them, which yet comes far short of what by
woeful experience I have found in them: And when I see it done, I shall as
gladly retract what I have written, as with sorrow of heart I have uttered it.
In the mean time I return from what I have digressed.

If a greater excellency of gifts and parts in one Minister above another, be
pretended, as a cause of their wandering; they forget what St. Paul wrote to the
Corinthians, when there grew Schisms and Divisions amongst them, upon the
account of the diversity of gifts which they observed in their Teachers. 1 Cor.
1. 12.
I am of Paul (says one) his matter is powerful, his Doctrine sound, his
Method plain. I am of Apolla (says another) he is an Eloquent man, mighty in
the Scriptures, him I prefer. I am of Cephas (says a third) his preaching I
most affect. I am of Christ (says a fourth) I care for none of all the former,
they are but men, I will therefore have my dependence wholly on Christ, with
neglect of the instrument. But what says St. Paul to all this? V. 13.
Is Christ divided? Can he be the head of such diverse and disagreeing bodies,
being himself but one? Is he divided from his Ministers, so as not to work by
his Spirit, in the hearts of his People, with his word preached by one, as well
as by another? Can ye allow of one self same Gospel, as Christ's, being uttered
by one Man, and loath it being uttered by another? Will ye acknowledge Christ
to be the chief Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, the great Doctor and
Prophet of his Church, and yet think that he will not make his word
successful, for the Salvation of those whom he has ordained to Eternal life,
by what Ministry soever he shall appoint? For who is 1 Cor. 3. 5.
Paul, and who is Apollo? But Ministers by whom ye believe, even as the Lord
gave to every man. They are but the Ministers of Christ, and such as do^
nothing of themselves; but God so works by them as it pleases him. I Romans
15. 18.
will not dare (says one of them) to speak of any of those things which Christ
has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word or deed.

The Ministry is God's ordinance, and depends not upon the worthiness of him
that is employed in it; but it has its virtue, force and efficacy, from the
blessing of God and inward operation of his Spirit, which works where, and
in, and by, whom he will. Christ himself converted very few, in comparison of
the many converted by his Apostles. Those Ministers whose parts are most
Seraphical, cannot at their pleasure infuse grace into their hearers hearts. 1
Cor. 3. 6.
A Paul may plant, and an Apollos may water, but it is God that must give the
increase. So as that neither the one nor the other, are any thing in
themselves, without God's blessing, which the weakness of the instrument shall
not hinder, as making most for the Honor of the supreme Agent to work by it. 2
Cor. 4. 7.
We have this treasure in Earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of Men. All God's Servants are not alike gifted; some have
five talents, some ten, some but one; yet all may be his faithful Servants,
and may have their gifts given them to profit withal. And from any of their
gifts, any may learn and profit, if the fault be not their own Who th^ives more
in grace than they, who conscionably attend and depend on their own godly
Pastors; Who go more empty away with the shell of Religion only, when others
have gotten the kernel, but such as love to wander and heap ^p to themselves
Teachers of their own choosing? The first sort find the p^eaching of God's word
to prove wholesome food to them; which though it seem coiurse, and to be served
in with great simplicity (like Daniel's diet Dan. 1. 15.
which was but Pulse and Water) yet because it is God's allowance, allways has
his blessing with it, and makes his Children so to thrive, that their
Countenances do appear fairer, and they are fatter in flesh, than the other,
who though they feed upon Varieties, and (perhaps) more curiously cooked
dishes, yet have Souls that are still thin and lean, and depart from their
banquets without any great satisfaction, for want of that blessing, without
which all manner of Varieties prove but wind and vanity. For Mat. 4. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, but by the word of blessing that comes forth of
God's mouth. Neither say I this of mine own private opinion, but the brethren
of the Nonconformity say the same. He that keeps in God's order, under a
meaner honest Minister, is like to be a more humble thriving Christian, than
he, that breaks that order under pretense of Edification. Says Christian
Concord. p. 36.
Mr. Baxter.

The ancient and godly Fathers of the Church, taking into consideration this
order, that God has established amongst his People, have both in their public
Councils, and private writings, always disallowed and forbidden the liberty
that People are apt to take of their own heads to wander from their own
Pastors, to hear Strangers. In the third Council of Carthage (where Saint
Augustine himself was present) there was this decree made. Placuit Council. 3.
Carthag. l. 10.
ut a nullo Episcopo usurpentur plebes alienae, nec aliquis Episcoporum
supergrediatur in Dioecesi suum Collegam. Be it ordained that no Bishop usurp,
or have any thing to do with another's People, or enter into the Diocese of
his Compartner in office, to meddle or make there. And this Canon extends its
obligation to Ministers of inferior order, in reference to each others
Congregations, as well as to Bishops in relation to their Dioceses. For Aquin
supple. 3. par. 9. 8. A. 4.
Sicut Episcopus se habet ad Dioecesim suam, sic sacerdos ad suam parochaim,
says Aquinas. As it is with a Bishop, with respect to his Diocese, so it is
with a Minister in respect of his Parish. Sine spe sunt (says Cyprian. L. 1.
Epist. 6.
that holy Martyr St. Cyprian) and perditionem maximam de indignatione Dei
acquirunt, qui schisma faciunt, and relicto Episcopo, alium sibi foris
Pseudoepiscopum constituunt. They are without hope, and procure to themselves
the greatest destruction through the just indignation of God, who make Schisms
in the Church, and leaving their own Bishop, appoint and set up another, a
false Bishop to themselves. Again Ibid. L. 1. Epist. 3.
singulis pastoribus portio gregis est ascripta, quam reger quisque ac
gubernet, rationem sui actus domino reddat. To every Pastor there is a portion
of God's People committed, which he ought to Rule and Govern, as one that must
give an account to God for them. And says the same holy man farther, Oportet
eos quibus praesumus, non circumcursare, nec Episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem
sua subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere. It behooves those over whom God
has set us, not to run about hither and thither, nor by their false and crafty
temerity, to break the Concord and good Agreement that ought to be amongst
Ministers.

In the Canon Law it is ordained Injure Canon. L. 3. decret. Greg. Tit. 29. de
paroeciis.
Vt dominicis and festis diebus presbyteri, antequam Sacra celebrent, plebem
interrogent, si alterius parochianus sit in ecclesia, qui proprio contempto
presbytero, ibi velit Sacris interesse; si inveniatur, statim ab ecclesia
abjiciant. That on Festival and Lord's days, the Ministers, before they beg in
Divine Service, shall ask the people, if there be any Person of another Parish
in the Church, who neglecting his own Pastor, desires to be present at divine
Worship there; and if any such be found, they shall forthwith thurst him out of
the Church. And in another pleea it is thus decreed. L. 5. Tit. 38. de
paenitentiis and remissis.
Omnis and quilibet confiteatur proprio Sacerdoti: siquis autem alieno
Sacerdoti voluerit justa de causa coufiteri peccata, licentiam prius postulet
and obtineat a proprio Sacerdote cum aliter ipse illum non possit absolvere vel
ligare. Let every man confess his faults to his own Minister: but if any upon
just cause desire to confess to another Minister, let him first ask and obtain
License so to do, from his own Minister, seeing otherwise no other can absolve
or bind him.

Of the same judgment in this case, have the reverend Brethren of the
Presbyterian persuasion declared themselves to be; not only in their Sermons
to their people (which I have sometimes heard) but I have seen an Act, and can
produce it, of the assembly of Scotland, Entitled, An act against such as
withdraw themselves from the public worship in their own Congregation. Wherein
the said Assembly in the zeal of God For preserving order, unity and peace in
the Kirk, for maintaining that respect which is due to the ordinances and
Ministers of Jesus Christ, for preventing Schisms, noisome errors, and all
unlawful practices, which may follow on the peoples withdrawing themselves
from their own Congregations, do ordiain every member in every Congregation to
keep their own Paroch Kirk, to communicate there in the Word and Sacraments:
and if any Person or Persons shall hereafter absent themselves from their own
Congregations, except in urgent Cases, made known to and approved by the
Presbytery, the Ministers of these Congregations whereto they resort, shall
both in public by Preaching, and in private by admonition, show their dislike
of their withdrawing from their own Minister, that in so doing they may witness
to all that hear them their due care to strengthen the hands of their fellow
Laborers in the work of the Lord, and their detestation of any thing that may
tend to Separation, or any of the above mentioned Evils: hereby their own flock
will be confirmed in their stedfastness, and the unstable Spirits of others
will be rectified. Like as the Minister of that Congregation from which they do
withdraw shall labor first by private admonition to reclaim them; and if any
after private admonition given by their own Pastor do not amend, in that case
the Pastor shall delate the aforesaid Persons to the Session, who shall cite
and censure them as Contemners of the comely order of the Kirk. And if the
matter be not taken order with there, it is to be brought to the Presbytery.
For better observing whereof, the Presbyteries at the several visitations of
their Kirks, and provincial Assemblies, in their censure of the several
Presbyteries shall enquire hereanent. Which enquiry and report shall be
registrate in the provincial Books, that their deligence may be seen in the
General Assembly.

The contrary course here amongst us of this age, has been taken notice of by
godly Christians beyond the Seas, as our great fault, and contrary to the
practice and custom of the reformed Churches of God abroad. Honorius Reggius,
a learned man, has taken the pains to gather together out of Mr. Edwards his
Gangrene, and other Authors, no less than 180 errors practiced in England,
since the year of our Lord 1640. And has divulged them to the whole World, to
the great shame of our nation, and scandal to our Religion; whereof this is the
125 th error Honor. Reg. de statu Eccles. in Anglia. p. 95.
Partem Libertatis Christianae esse, non audire proprium Ministrum; sed ubi
libeat, and a quo plus Commodi speretur. That it is a part of Christian
liberty, for people not to hear their own Ministers, but to attend that
Ministry which they like best, and from whom they hope to receive the most
profit.

I never heard or read that this disorderly practice was tolerated or allowed
in the Church of God in any part of Christendom, but once, and that was by
virtue of a License and privilege granted by certain Popes to the Mendicant
Friars to intermeddle in matters of Parish Churches, Ex scriptis Godfri. de
fontantis.
as to hear Confessions, to preach and teach, with power thereunto annexed to
gather the benevolence of the people for their labor. Which occasioned such a
contention in France between the Prelates and the Friars there, An. Dom. 1354,
that the Prelates of France convening and Assembling together in the City of
Paris, caused by the Bedles to be called together all the Students, Masters,
and Bachelours of every Faculty, with the chief Heads of all the Religious
houses, and Friars in the University of Paris; who being all congregated
together in the Bishop of Paris his house, where there were present 4
Archbishops, 20 Bishops; and all the rest of the Bishops throughout the whole
Kingdom of France, except those who were necessarily absent, with full consent
did send in under their handwriting, a complaint against the insolency and
Presumption of the Friars. The Bishop of Episcopus Byturisensis.
Byters Preaching in that Assembly on that Text of St. Paul, Ephesians. 3. 18. ut
sciatis quae ^it longitudo, latitudo, altitudo and profunditas charitatis, took
occasion to show, That by the vigor of true charity every man ought to hold
himself content with that which was his own, and not to intermeddle or busy
himself farther than to him appertained or belonged to his Office. For there
(says he) all order Ecclesiastical is dissolved, whereas men not containing
themselves in their own precincts, presume in other men's charges where they
have nothing to do. But this Charity (says he) now-adays waxes cold, and all
Ecclesiastical order is confounded, and utterly out of order. For many there be
now-adays which presume to thrust in themselves where they have nothing to do,
so that now the Church may seem a Monster. For as in a natural body appears a
Monster, when one Member does the office of another; so in the spiritual body,
which is the Church, it may be thought like-wise.

Against the same evil and ungodly practice of the Friars in our Land and
Nation, at the same time, did that famous, godly and learned, Richard
Armachanus Archbishop and Primate of Ireland, inveigh in 7 or 8 Sermons
preached on purpose in London: For which being cited by the Friars before Pope
Innocent the Sixth, to appear: So he did; and before the face of the Pope
valiantly defended both in word and writing, that it was better for the
parishioners to leave the Friars, and to resort to their own Pastors, for that
the ordinary Pastor is properly appointed of God unto that Ministry which he
exercises amongst them, whereas the Friars were but only permitted of man
thereunto: and therein he stood constant unto the Death. For these are the
words of John Wickliff (as they are quoted by Act. mon. T. 1. p. 533.
Mr. Fox) Ab Anglorum Episcopis conductus Armachanus novem in Avione
conclusiones coram Innocentio 6, and suorum Cardinalium coetu, contra fratrum
mendicitatem audacter publicavit, veiboque ac scriptis ad mortem usque defendit.

Now if this be the order which God has established in his Church, That People
should be divided into flocks, that every flock should have their own Pastor,
and that they should depend upon him; then he can by no means endure to see a
breach of that order in his service, that he has set. How much it has
displeased him, appears in that famous instance in 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Because
they sought him not according to the right order, therefore God made a breach
upon them. And what that breach was both of order on the Peoples part, and of
punishment on God's part, may be seen, Cap. 13. 9, 10. Vzzah, out of a very
good intention put forth his hand to stay the Ark when it was in danger of
falling, and therefore was smitten with sudden death; according to the just
threatening of God, pronounced before. Number. 4. 15.
They shall not touch any holy thing lest they dye. God will be worshipped and
served, not only in his own ordinances, but in his own order also. There are
many duties, Arnob. Cont. Serapion.
quae cum bona sint opera, perniciem pariunt, cum non eo ordine quo sunt
constituta peragantur; which though they be good works, yet the doers of them
may be damned, because they do them not in that order they should. Upon this
account Mart. Luther sharply reprehended those of Wittenberge, who in his
absence had abrogated the private Mass and Idols; had celebrated the Lord's
Supper under both kinds; had taken away auricular Confession, superstitious
differences of meats, invocation of Saints, and many other Popish fopperies,
and intolerable abuses in the Church; Melchior Adam: in vi^. Luth. p. 123.
non quod impie fecissent, sed quod non ordine. Not but that the work was good
in it self, but it was ill done, because not done in a right order; and
therefore it was justly culpable and blameable in them. Circumstances of
actions often mar the substance. In divine Worship our care must not only be
to the matter of the service, that it be good, but to the circumstances also
wherewith it is attended, that they be warrantable by God's word, or at least,
not contrary thereunto. God requires that even the Lev. 1. 7. 8.
wood, and every part of the sacri^ce offered to him, be Genesis 22. 9.
in order. And does God look for order among sticks? And does he not much more
require order to be kept in the use of those means, by which he has appointed
to bring Souls to Heaven?

What gross absurdities would unavoidably follow, from such a manifest breach
of order in the Church? If one Minister may intrude into another's Parish and
Congregation, and there set up a course of private house-preaching, and other
ministerial Acts; why then may not the Bishop of one Diocese thrust himself
into the Diocese of another, and there take upon him to ordain Presbyters, and
exercise Episcopal jurisdiction, whether the Diocesan will or no? Which as it
is contrary to all good Laws and Order, so has been always forbidden and
condemned by the Judgment of the Fathers of the Church assembled in Council.
Not only in that of Carthage, before mentioned; but also in a Council at
Antioch it was decreed Council. Antioch. Can. 13. and 22.
non licere uni Episcopo in Dioecesi alterius Episcopale officium exercere. And
in the 36 th Canon of those which go under the Name of the Apostles, it was
ordained; Episcopum non audere extra terminos proprios ordinationes facere, in
civitatibus and villis quae illi nullo jure subjectae sunt. Si vero convictus
fuerit, etc. That no Bishop shall dare to confer orders out of his own Diocese,
in any City or Village, which by no Law or Right is in subjection to him; and
if he shall be convicted so to do, without the consent or leave of those to
whom those Cities or Towns do belong, he shall be deposed, and those that are
ordained by him.

So likewise in Civil affairs, why then may not a Judge who is Commissionated
for the Northern Circuit, thrust himself into the place and office of him that
is appointed for the Western, sit on the bench, judge causes, and condemn
Malefactors in alieno foro? Which were the way to overthrow all Justice;
according to that known Axiom in the Law, Sententia a Iudice non SVO lata,
nulla est ipso jure. And, in Military matters, why then may not the Colonel of
one Regiment (or a Reformado Officer that has lost his Company and has none
left to command) intrude himself into another Regiment, and there take upon him
to muster the Soldiers, and lead a party? Which is the only way to open a
Flood-gate to all Confusion and disorder that is imaginable, to the Destruction
of Magistracy, Ministry, Judges, Armies, and all things.

Now order being a great part of God's Law, he that wilfully breaks good order,
makes himself guilty of the breach of the whole Law; and so makes void his Plea
for an ordinance of God which may be instrumental to beget faith or grace in
the Souls of those that attend unto it.

The Queen of Sheba when she had seen the good order of the Servants that
ministered to King Solomon, was so astonished with admiration, that 1 King. 10.
4. 5.
there was no spirit left in her. If order in a Family does so draw the Eyes
and Minds of the Beholders to it, how much more amiable is order in the Church,
which 1 Timothy 3. 15.
is the house of the Living God, where a greater than Solomon is always
present, and where the Glory of the Lord appears in the way and means of the
Salvation of Souls?

ARGUMENT. III.
THAT cannot be the ordinance of God, as a means of grace, that has no promise
of God's blessing made or annexed to it. For though it be a Paul that plants,
and an Apollo that waters 1 Cor. 3. 6. Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
yet it must be God that gives the blessing, or else all their labor will be
to no purpose.

I deny not but that there may be a very good use made of the meetings of
Christians together, otherwise than in the public Congregation, when they are
Lawfully and orderly regulated, without manifest breach of any Divine or humane
precept, without intrenchment upon, or infringment of any Gospel Order or
ordinance, and that they may so expect God's blessing on them.

Yet because Satan has stretched his hellish Subtilty to the highest, in these
last times (with too unhappy Success) to put easy and well-meaning people out
of the sure and ordinary way of God's blessing, by disparaging the public
Church Assemblies, and advancing private, irregular, and disorderly meeting
(where there is not that ground of expectation of Divine concurrence) into
competition with yea prelation above them: therefore (making a little more
than ordinary stay here) I shall endeavor to let the Reader fee how the Spirit
of God in Scripture has commended the public Assemblies to us, by affixing
more special promises of his presence with, and benediction of them, than on
any other, though ordered in all things never so rightly: and how it has
recorded the faith of good men in their belief of these promises, testified in
their esteeming, useing, and frequenting the public ordinances of God
accordingly. Ps. 87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, oh thou city of God.

To the ancient people of God, the Jews, the special promises of Divine
presence were made in their Church Assemblies. Exodus 20. 24.
In the places where I record my name, I will come unto thee and will bless
thee. Exodus 25. 22. -- 29. 42.
In the Tabernacle (says God) I will meet thee and Commune with thee of all
things. Which promises were always performed accordingly as may be seen in Lev.
9. 23. 24. N^mb. 1. 1. Numb. 7. 89. Thence it was that the Tabernacle of the
Jewish Church, had the name of Exodus 30. 6. 40. 34.
the Tabernacle of meeting, or the Tabernacle of the Congregation. To those
that attended God there, his blessing was assured. Ps. 65. 4.
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Court, he shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house
even of thy Holy Temple. Ps. 84. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they shall ever be praising thee.
Ps. 147. 13
He blesses thy Children within thee, O Sion. Prove. 8. 34.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors; says Christ the Wisdom of the Father. And that was the
reason of David 's so great love to the Church. Ps. 26. 8.
Lord; I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine
honor dwells. And of his desire Ps. 27. 4.
to remain in God's house all the days of his Life, that he might behold the
beauty of the Lord. And Ps. 48. 9. (...) Cum silentio expectare.
we have waited ( for so the word may be read) for the loving kindness of the
Lord in the midst of thy Temple.

There promises of God's special and extraordinary blessings, on the Church
Assemblies of his People in former ages, were so generally known and believed
of holy men in those times, that when any of them prayed for any spiritual
grace or mercy in behalf of any other, they usually expressed it in this from
Psalm. 134. 3.
The Lord bless thee out of Sion. -- 133. 3.
For there the Lord commanded the blessing even life for evermore. So again. --
118. 26.
We bless you out of the house of the Lord. They seem to be the words of the
Priests* whose office it was, at the dismissing of the Congregation of God's
People* to Number. 6. 24.
bless them in his house. They being appointed of God there to Deuteronomy. 10. 8.
bless in his name. Whose benedictions there pronounced, did not prove an empty
sound of words in the air, but from the Temple at Jerusalem, where they were
spoken, they mounted up to Heaven where they were heard and answered Car. 30.
27.
For the Priests and Levits arose and blessed the People, and their voice was
heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place, even unto heaven.

In which respect the public worship of God, is called Psalm. 105. 4. -- 42. 2.
his face and presence. Cain, for the Murder of his Brother, being debarred
the benefit of God's public worship, complains Genesis 4. 14.
I shall be hid from thy face, i. e. from the face and presence of God in his
Church: as appears afterward. ver. 16.
And Cain went out from the presence of God, and dwelt in the Land of Nod: i.
e. from the place of God's public worship, which in all likelihood, was
celebrated by Adam the Father, Ainsworth in Loc.
who being a Prophet, had taught his Children how to sacrifice, and to serve
the Lord.

Thither God's People resorted in multitudes: and David professes that nothing
in all his Life happened to him more pleasant, than to see such flocking to God's
house; and that he could go thither with them: as nothing aggravated his
misery more in his persecution by Saul, or by his Son Absolom's rebellion (for
it is uncertain whether of the two was the occasion of Psalm. 42.) than that he
could not have the happiness that formerly he enjoyed of being one of the first
and forwardest in going thither. Psalm. 42. 4.
When I remember these things (says he) I pour out my Soul in me. And why?
because there he enjoyed God in a more special manner than he could elsewher:
thither he came, ver. 2.
and appeared before the face of God. What longings he showed for God's public
worship at another time, when By Readiness persecution he was forced from the
Temple at Jerusalem, into the Wilderness of Judah, and wandered in the desert,
may be seen in Psalm. 63. Though it was grievous to him to fall from that
dignity and favor he formerly had, and wherein he flourished in Readiness court:
though it was hard for him to lose all his goods, to be alienated from all his
friends, to be forced to converse among strangers and infidels, and to expose
his life to all sorts of hardships and hazards, yet all these he counted small
and Light matters, in comparison of this one great evil, that he was forced to
be absent from Church, and to abide there, where there was no public Ministry
or worship of God. And therefore making no mention at all of any of those other
evils, he makes this his only request, that he might be restored again, ut
sacris publicis, Mollerg. inloc.
and Coetui piorum interesse possit, that he might have the liberty of God's
house again. Though he might, and doubtless did, converse with God in the
Desert, pouring out his Prayers to him, which was the only support he had in
his exile; And though no doubt those godly friends he had left about him (for
he had such in whose society he might take great comfort in his banishment, he
had both 1 Samuel 22. 5.
a Prophet, and -- 23. 9.
a Priest) did join with him in the private service of God, yet this contented
him not, he longs still for the public worship, bewails greatly the want of
it, his Ps. 84. 1-5.
speeches are all of the heavenly benefit of it, and the happiness of such as
had free access to it. He know he could no where perform divine worship, with
so free and glad an heart, with so much comfort and assurance of so large a
blessing, as in that place, where the Ministry was public, and where the
Multitude of God's people did serve and worship him. There he vows his service,
Ps. 35. 18.
I will give thee thanks in the great Congregation, I will praise thee among
much people. Ps. 111. 1.
I will praise thee with my whole heart in the assembly of the upright, and in
the Congregation. And calls upon others to do the like Ps. 29. 1, 2.
Give the Lord the glory due to his Name, worship him in the beauty of
holiness. It was no small blessing promised to good King Hezekiah, that his
recovery from his sickness should be so soon effected, that he should not be
detained from going to Church, but 2 King. 20. 5.
the third day he should be able to go up to the house of the Lord. The hearing
whereof was equal comfort to him, with the news of the enlargement of the lease
of his life. It has even been a sad affliction to the Souls of God's people,
to see the Church Assemblies neglected, and the Congregations more empty than
they were wont to be, and to be debarred the liberty of frequenting them, as
being thereby deprived of the most lively representation of Heaven on Earth, to
the obscuring much of God's Glory, which is seen and spoken of in the
Sanctuary, and the seducing them from the mutual and comfortable Fellowship one
of another in his ordinances, and from much refreshing and help they had by
these means. Zeph. 3. 18.
I will gather them which are sorrowful for the solemn Assemblies, who are of
thee, to whom the reproach of it is a burden. It Is the Character the Holy
Ghost makes of a true Child and Member of the Church, to be thus affected. When
ever God's people did show a more then ordinary desire to prevail in prayer,
they have showed more than ordinary care that the Assemblies might be as
public, and as full, as could be, as it is noted by Mr Hild. on Jo. 4. p. 118.
a worthy Divine of Ours. Joel. 2. 15.
Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the
People, assemble the Children, etc. In the Fast which King Iehosaphat
proclaimed, it is said. 2 Chronicles. 20. 13.
All Judah stood before the Lord, with their Little ones, their Wives and their
Children. And it was in the public place of God's worship, V. 5.
the house of the Lord that they met. The People of Israel went up to the House
of the Lord to ask counsel concerning their War with Benjamin. And this they
did more than once, and till they did so, they prevailed not. The like course
took king Hezekiah at his keeping the Passover to make the Congregation in the
house of the Lord (the Temple at Jerusalem) as great as he could. 2 Cron. 30. 1.
Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote Letters also to Ephraim and
Manasseh that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, and keep
the Passover unto the Lord God of Israel. And as there they have prevailed with
God in Prayer, more than they could any where else; so there God has taught
them more than they could learn any where else. Ps. 73. 16.
When I sought to know this (viz. the Doctrine of God's providence and wisdom
in the just and righteous management of the affairs of the world) it was too
painful for me (says David) till I went into the Sanctuary of God, then
understood I their end. When all means else did fail, the public Ministry,
(through God's blessing on it) became effectual to bring him to understanding
in this Mystery. Therefore he concludes, Ps. 77. 13.
thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary.

And as in Gospel Times we have the like promises of God's special presence in
the public Congregations of his People ( Mat. 28. 20. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rev. 1.
13.) so it was professed long before, that there the Godly should exhort and
stir up one another, to seek the true Knowledge of God and his ways, Es. 2. 3.
Mic. 4. 2. which was fulfilled accordingly, both in the Disciples of Christ
after his Ascension, Luc. 24. 53.
who continually were in the Temple; And also in the converted Jews and
Gentiles, who Act. 2. 46. -- 5-42. -- 19. 8.
continued daily in the Temple with one accord. So did the Christians in the
primitive times, in their Churches their Ministers did preach Act. 19. 8. -- 5.
21. 25.
as frequently as the persecution of those times would permit. And there the
People assembled themselves together to hear. They did not divide themsleves,
some of the Congregation going one way, and some another, but 1 Cor. 11. 20.
they came together in one place. And that place was the Church. 1 Cor. 11. 18.
-- 14. 30. Jam. 2. 2.
If not the public place of worship, so called, (as most think,) yet the place
where (by reason of the hot persecution of those times) the whole Church did,
or could meet together. And St. Hierome gives this commendations of the Faith
of the primitive Christians at Rome. Hierom. ut citatur a Centur. Magdeburg.
cent. 4. c. 6. p. 272.
Vbi alibi tanto studio and frequentia ad Ecclesias concurritur? ubi sic ad
similitudinem Coelestis tonitrui Amen reboat; and vacua Idolorum templa
quatiuntur? non quod aliam habeant Romani fidem; nisi hanc quam omnes Christi
Ecclesiae; sed quod devotio in iis major sit, and simplicitas ad credendum. In
what part of the World else is there such studious flocking and resort to
Christian Churches, as here? Where else does the Amen of the Congregation,
sound so loud, as that it seems to equalize a Clap of Thunder in the Air,
insomuch that the Idol-temples being left empty, are made to tremble therewith?
Not that the Romans had any other Faith, than the other Churches of Christ, but
they had more devotion and singleness of heart in believing. To this also
agrees the Testimony of St. Augustine, Aug. L. 3. de. Doct. Christi.
primi credentes in templo veteri Domino servierint; the first and new
Christians did serve God in the old Temple.

It will be said by some; to what purpose is all this that has been alleged
out of the old Testament, touching God's promises to, or benediction of the
Church Assemblies of the Jews? Their Tabernacle and Temple were holy places and
the sanctification of them was Levitical, and therefore now abolished, and not
to be applied to our Churches.

This passes with some for an objection that has force enough in the bowels
of it to overthrow and demolish the whole fabric of this my third Argument.

But if we carefully look into the inside of it, and not tamely deliver up our
hold, we shall find no such formidable matter in it. For, as for the City of
Jerusalem, the Tabernacle and Temple, they were, in themselves, places no more
holy or religious than any other places in the Land of Canaan were, or than any
other places now in England are: But they were therefore holy, Partly because
they had many things in them and their worship, that were typical and
ceremonial, which are now abolished. The Temple and Tebernacle were types of
the body and humane Nature of Christ. Ioh. 2. 19. 21. Heb. 8. 2. Heb. 9. 11.
And this (I grant) might be one reason that moved David in his banishment, so
earnestly to desire his return to the Temple. Ps. 42. 3. And in the beginning
of the New Testament, we read of certain holy and devout persons, that when
they prayed, Luc. 2. 37. -- 18. 10.
they went up to the Temple to perform their devotion. And those that could not
repair to Jerusalem, they might and did pray elsewhere, but it was Dan. 6. 10.
with their faces toward the Temple. And Partly, because God placed a memorial
Exodus 20. 24.
of his Name there: or caused his Name to be remembered there. i. e. did set
apart those places for his public worship and service, as monuments of him.
For as Absalom erected a Pillar 2 Samuel 18. 18.
to keep his Name in remembrance, so did God choose out those places to put his
Name there. And therefore they were called Deuteronomy. 12. 5.
his habitation. In this respect our Churches now are every whit as holy as
Jerusalem, the Tabernacle, or Temple there was, being places lawfully set apart
for God's public worship, to have his Name remembered and placed there. And so
the Tabernacle and Temple had this in them and their worship, that was moral,
and consequently of equal concernment to us now, as to the Jews then, that
public places ought to be assigned for God's public worship, every way
fitting and convenient for Ecclesiastical conventions, where all the
Congregation ought to meet, as in a place where God will vouchsafe to be more
graciously present in his worship, than elsewhere, according to all those his
gracious promises.

And touching the holiness of the Tabernacle and Temple, that is excepted
against in the objection, as being not to the present purpose: Let the answer
of that learned and pious Gent. Sir Henry Spelman in his book Page 14. 15. 16.
de non temerandis Ecclesiis, be heard and well considered, and the reader will
easily find what has been alleged out of the Old Testament makes much for my
present purpose: his words are these,

The Temple was sanctified unto three functions, which also had three several
places assigned to them. The first, belonging to the divine presence, and had
the custody of the holiest types thereof; the Oracle, the Ark, the Mercy-Seat,
etc. And was therefore called Sanctum Sanctornm, the Holiest of all. The second
was for ceremonial Worship and Atonement: viz. by Sacrifices, Oblations, and
other Levitical Rites; the place thereof being the Sanctuary, (wherein were the
holy Vessels) and the Court of Priest, wherein the Altar of burnt Sacrifice did
stand: The third was for simple Worship, Prayer and Doctrine (without any pomp
or ceremony.) And the place of this was the outward (Court called ^ Chron. 4.
9. -- 6. 12.
Atrium populi, and Act. 3. 11.
Solomon's Porch) which had therefore in it, no ceremonial implement at all.

The two first of these functions, with the places belonging to them, were
indeed particularly appropriated to the Law: for they were Ceremonial,
Mystical, Secret, Levitical, Iudaical and Temporal. Ceremonial, as celebrated
with much worldly pomp. Mystical, as figuring some spiritual things. Secret, as
either performed behind the veil or curtain, or else sequestered and remote from
the People. Levitical, as committed only to the administration of that tribe.
Iudaical, as ordained only for the salvation of that people. And Temporal, as
instituted only for a season, and not to continue. But the sanctification of
the third function, and the place thereunto appointed, was directly contrary to
all the points alleged to the former two. First it was for simple Worship,
Prayer and Doctrine, which were there to be performed and delivered in all
sincerity, without any Ceremony or ceremonial Implement used therein. Secondly,
there was no matter of Mystery therein to be seen; but whatsoever was Mystical
in the Law or the Prophets, was there expounded. Thirdly, nothing was there
hidden or secret from the People, but acted wholly without the veil and
publicly for every man. Fourthly it was not appropriated to the Levites, but
common alike to all the tribes. Fifthly, not ordained for the Jews
particularly, but for all Nations in general. And lastly, not to endure for a
time (as those other two of the Law) but to continue for ever, even after the
Gentiles were called, as well as the Jews; that is, during the time of the
Gospel, as well as of the Law. Therefore, says God, by Esaias the Prophet Es.
56. 7.
my house shall be called an house of prayer to all Nations. He said not, an
house of sacrifice to all Nations; for the sacrifice ended before the Calling
of the Gentiles, and so they could have no part thereof. Nor an house of prayer
for the Jews only, for then had the Gentiles (when they were called) been
likewise excluded: But an house of prayer to all Nations, i. e. Jews and
^^^ntiles indifferently, which theref^^e must have relation to the times of the
Gospel: and consequently the sanctification of that house, and of that
function, is also a sanctification of the Churches of the Gospel.

We read not therefore that Christ reformed any thing in the other two
functions of the Temple, for they were now as at an end. But because this third
function was for ever to continue in his Church, therefore he purged it of that
which profaned it, restored it to the original sanctity; And that the future
world (which was the time of the Gospel) might better observe it, than the
precedent, and the time of the Law had done, he reports and confirms the
decree, whereby it was ^anctified, It is written (says he) my house shall be
called an house of prayer to all people. He says, my house, excluding all
other from having any property therein; for God will be joint-tenant with no
man. And it shall be an house of prayer for all people, i. e. public, for
ever, and not private. The time also when our Savior pronounced those words,
is much to the purpose: for it was after he had turned out the Oxen and Doves,
that is, the things for sacrifice. As though he thereby taught us, that when
the sacrifical Function of the Temple was ended, yet the sanctification of it
to be an house of prayer ever remained.

Thus far this learned Gentleman, whose words (because every one to whom this
may come may not have that Book in readiness to peruse) for the readers
satisfaction, I have faithfully transcribed. By which judicious and learned
discourse it does plainly appear, that the holiness of the Jews Tabernacle and
Temple was not altogether Levitical, nor abolished, but of perpetual duration
in Gospel Times, and that our Churches now are holy as theirs were then; the
sanctification of theirs was the sanctification of ours; and therefore those
promises of divine presence and blessing made to them in their
Church Assemblies, do belong to us, as well as to them.

To such therefore as neglect the Church now, and say, they can serve God as
well elsewhere, as there; I say, It Is true, as we are private Christians and
single persons, so no doubt according as the exigence of our affairs require,
we may any where, or at any time, do God acceptable service. It was foretold
that in Gospel Times Mal. 1. 11.
In every place incense shall be offered to the Name of the Lord. And as St.
Paul bids us, pray continually, so our Savior, when you pray enter into your
Closets. But as we are members of the visible Mystical body, which is the
Church of Christ, so we are bound to constant attendance on the public service
of God, in his house. Though not altogether now in respect of the place, yet
still in respect of the Congregation that do and ought to meet in that place,
and the worship of God that is, and ought there to be publicly performed. And
very much in regard of the place too;

1. As it is a place freely given and surrendered up into the hands of God, the
great Landlord of the whole world, by the donation of the right owner, under
God, of the Land, and Founder of the Edifice.

2. As it is hallowed and dedicated to the public service of God in such a
solemn manner, as has been the custom and usage of God's people in all ages of
the world, both of the Jews in the Old Testament, and of the Christians in the
New, from the beginning, in the purest times until now, at the time when it
was delivered up into God's possession, and when the use whereunto it shall
ever serve, is established.

3. As it is accepted and owned by God, being thus given and set apart for him;
and he is pleased to take Livery and Seisin of it, as his house (which is as
really true of our Churches at their Consecration, though not as visibly, as it
was of 1 King. 4. 10, 11.
Solomon's Temple at its dedication.) for the performance of his public
worship and service, and intitles it himself Mat. 21 13.
My house of prayer. And the Argument which our Savior uses to prove his
property in that house, is taken from the use for which it was appointed; which
extends its force equally to our Churches now, as to the Temple at Jerusalem,
seeing they are both set apart to the same purpose, even for public prayer to,
and worship of God.

4. As it is a place to which God has by promise assured his own gracious and
heavenly presence and blessing, and where he may be and is enjoyed, in a more
special manner than elsewhere, and consequently where there is more profit and
good to be received by the service of God done in the Congregation and
assembling together of his people there, than in any other house whatsoever.
And therefore though there is not that holiness affixed to places now since our
Savior's coming into the World, as there was before, yet our assembling
together in the Church is as holy now as then, and better than elsewhere. And
wheresoever the Scripture seems to take away all religious differences of
places, as if no place were holier than another, (as in Mal. 1. 11. Ioh. 4. 21.
1 Timothy 2. 8.) It is true of inherent holiness, but not of relative. And this
must be always remembered to prevent mistake) that the Holy Ghost does no where
compare private and profane places, with public and consecrated, as if the
worship we do to him were as much to his Glory, or as good and profitable to
our selves and others which we do in those places, as that which we do in the
Church. But he compares public places then, with public now, and private with
private; and his meaning is, that not only at Jerusalem, and among the Jews
God shall have an house for his public worship, but in all Nations where he
shall be pleased to bestow his Gospel. God will not be worshipped in the Temple
at Jerusalem only, nor shall his presence be tied to that place more than to
other such like houses of God elsewhere; but he will have houses, which shall
be properly his own, and set apart for his public worship and service amongst
all Nations. It was a part of that heavy Yoke that was intolerable on the Necks
of our Fathers, that they must take long and tedious journeys, to come from all
Quarters of their Country to one place to worship; and that they did not dare,
no not in case of absolute nenessity, to perform public service in any other
place; yea that their very private Devotions were to be performed either Luc.
2. 37. and 18. 10.
in, or Dan. 6. 10.
toward that place: But now, besides our Closets for our private Devotions, we
have Churches in our several Towns, Parishes and Villages, where we may be sure
to have God present to hear, accept and bless us, if we can find honest and
good hearts to resort to them. Every place has God's presence, and therefore
is, in it self, alike sanctified for his service; but every place is not alike
separated from common and profane use, and dedicated and consecrated to God,
nor owned and accepted by him; and therefore we have no reason to expect God's
presence, or to meet with the like blessing in one place as in another. And
therefore (says that holy and ancient Synod at Gangra in Paphlagonia, under
Constantine the Emperor) Council. Gangrens. in subscriptione, habitum circa
Ann. Domi^i. 314.
Omnem locum aedificatum in nomine Dei honor amus, and Congregationem in
Ecclesia factam ob utilitatem communem recipimus. We do honor every place
built in the Name of God, and do reverence and receive the Congregation met in
the Church for the Common advantage. Churches then are holy, and to be
respected and frequented rather than other places, because of their holy Use,
and for the holy Assemblies there made. And therefore that same Council
decreed, Council. Gangrens. c. 5.
Si quis docet domum Dei contemptibilem esse, and Conventus qui in ea
celebantur, Citatur etiam in decret. did. 30. Can. 10.
anathema sit. Cursed be he that shall teach, that the House of God may be
slighted, or the Congregations that assemble therein. And in the next Canon,
they think fit to ordain, Can. 6.
Si quis extra Ecclesiam seorsum Conventus celebrrat, etc. Cursed be he that
shall keep any Convention out of the Church. And the same Synod (as History
Socrat. Hist-Eccles. L. 2. c. 43.
tells us) condemned and deposed Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, for
persuading such as refrained the Church and public Assemblies, to raise
Conventicles and Brotherhood in their private Houses. And in the Civil Law it
is decreed, In collatione quinta Authenticorum.
That the sacred Mystery or Mysteries be not done in private Houses, but be
celebrated in public places, lest thereby things be done contrary to the
Catholic and Apostolic Faith; unless they call to the celebrating of the same
such Clerks of whose Faith and Conformity there is no doubt made, or else that
are deputed thereunto by the good will of the Bishop. If any thing be done to
the contrary, the House wherein these things are done, shall be confiscated,
and themselves shall be punished at the discretion of the Prince.

It Is true St. Paul commands us 1 Timothy 2. 8.
Every where to lift up holy hands without wrath. But those hands cannot be
pure that are profane; and they cannot have other than such, who contemn the
Church. Hooker Eccles. polit. L. 5. Sect. 16.
As therefore we exhort all men every where to worship God, even so for the
performance of this service by the People of God assembled, we think not any
place so good as the Church, nor any Exhortation so fit, as that of David, O
worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. But now (alas) we live to see those
prophetique words, uttered by a Learned and judicious Gentleman above 60 years
ago, Sir Walter Rawleigh in his History of the World. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
to be verified and fulfilled to the utmost. He discerning then the great
increase and growth of Sectaries in this Realm said; That time would soon bring
it to pass (if it were not resisted) that God would be turned out of Churches
into Barns, and from thence again into Fields, and Mountains, and under Hedges:
and the Office of the Ministry (robbed of all dignity and respect) be as
contemptible as those places; all Order, Discipline and Church Government left
to the newness of Opinion and Men's fancies; yea and soon after, as many kinds
of Religions spring up, as there are Parish Churches within England, every
contentious and ignorant Person clothing his Fancy with the Spirit of God, and
his Imagination with the Gift of Revelation.

By all which has been said (wherein I hope the candid Reader will pardon my
Prolixity in this plain Vindication of the langu^shing Reputation of
Churchassemblies) it appears that the speciality of Divine promises are made to
the public Dispensation of God's ordinances, and that we may expect a greater
Blessing upon them, in our Church Assemblies, than elsewhere.

But I know no promise of God at all, made to such Preaching and Meetings, as
are in question. God has not engaged himself for a Blessing to any People,
waiting on him (as they count it) in a way out of his appointment, yea contrary
to it. But as he has forbidden to hear Intruders, Ier. 27. 14, 15. So he has
expressly said, there shall no Blessing at all accompany such a Ministry and
such attendance on it. Let that place in Jer. 23 32.
Jeremiah be noted, I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall
not profit this People at all, says the Lord. Sive vera praedicent, sive
falsa, Says Vines Sermon on 2 Pet. 2. 1. p. 9.
a Presbyterian Divine: Whether they preach that which is true, or that which
is false. The question is, not de facto, but de jure, not what they teach, but
by what warrant. Thence it was, as Tarnov. de. S. minist. c. 8.
Tarnovius thinks, that our Savior Christ rebuked the Devil, and commanded him
silence not suffering him to speak, when he confessed and declared the most
necessary and Soul-saving truth in the World, viz. Mark 1. 25.
that Christ was the holy one of God, because he had no calling so to do. The
words of St. Paul are full to the same purpose. Romans 10. 15. Quisquis in
Ecclesia docet, non vocatus and missus a Christo, invadit alienam possessionem,
fur est and latro; venit, in nomine suo, non Dei; Christi minister non est,
verbum Christi non habet: imo ne quidem Ecclesiae dici minister debet, quem
ipsa non vocavit; turbator est boni ordinis, causa confusionis, quae non a Deo
est. Nic. Arnobd 9. in refutat. Cat. Racov. p. 724.
How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they
hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? The
Apostle speaks of such preaching and hearing as should beget Faith, and by
which, Grace is ordinarily wrought and increased in the Soul, and upon which,
People may expect God's Blessing. Now thus none can hear without a Preacher,
neither can any thus preach, i. e. profitably to beget Faith, except he be
sent. They cannot be succesfull in their Ministry without a Mission. They may
talk, as Usurpers; but not preach, as God's Ambassadors. They may satisfy the
Itch of the Ear, but they cannot be instrumental to work Grace in the heart.
God will not concur with that Ministry he sends not. Our Savior Christ Faith,
John 10. 8. All that ever came before me are Thieves and Robbers. Why, Moses
and the Prophets, the Priests and Levites were before Christ. Were they all.
Thieves and Robbers, and none of them true Pastors? The Emphasis lies in the
word [came] which being rightly understood, makes it as true, that all that
ever came, or shall come after Christ are Thieves and Robbers also, as well as
those that came before him. Hierom. ad verse. Pelag. l. 2.
St. Hierome's note upon the text makes it clear. Venerunt inquit Christus, non
qui missi sunt, de quibus Propheta, veniebant a se and ego non mittebam eos.
Our Savior does not say that all that were sent before him, were Thieves and
Robbers, but all that came before me. Plainly showing, that whosoever shall
come amongst the People of God his Church, to perform the Office of the
Ministry, of his own accord, without a lawful Sending, is a Thief and a
Robber, and none of Christ's true Sheep will, or ought to hear him.

But it will be said, Obj.
the Preaching and Ministry of such Persons as are in question, is the
Preaching and Ministry of Persons sent; for they are Persons in holy Orders,
and Ministers ordained.

1. I deny not, Answ. 1.
but that some of such Persons as are in question, may be lawfully ordained
Ministers (all are not, to my knowledge) yet it follows not presently from
thence, that they are sent to preach, or to perform Acts of the Ministry. For
it may so be in a true settled and constituted Church, that for a lawful Cause,
and by lawful Authority, a Person ordained may be deposed, and justly
suspended from performing any ministerial Acts; as Abiathar in the Church of
the Jews was by King Solomon. Otherwise, Ministers in their Office were
Lawless, and exempt from all legal and just Restraint and Censure. And although
a Person in holy Orders cannot have his Ordination ordinarily made void by any,
quoad internam potestatem, in regard of the inward Power of Order that is
conferred on him in his Ordination, so as upon his Restoration he need be
re-ordained; yet it may be made void quoad externam executionem, in regard of
the outward Execution of that Power in the Church, either in public or
private, either for a set-time or season, or else during his Life. It is in the
Power of the Church and Governors thereof, to suspend a Minister from the
Execution of his Office, though it be not in their Power to raze out that
Characterem insculptum, that intrinsical Authority received in his Ordination.
And a Person so lawfully suspended by Authority, as is said, may he in such a
case execute the Office of the Ministry, or may he not? If so, then Acts of
lawful Authority in the Church signify nothing; Governors and Government,
and Churchdiscipline is a mere empty Name, and but a Cipher. Then might
Abiathar have executed the High-priest's Office, Notwithstanding King Solomon's
Exauctoration of him. And so the Ordinance of God in the Church, to which all
stand bound in Conscience, to be Romans 13. 5.
in subjection, will be made void and of none effect. If not, then such
Ministers as notwithstanding their legal Restraint, or suspension from
Execution of their Office, do yet constantly execute the same, by preaching and
other ministerial Duties, otherwise than by the Law they are allowed, cannot be
said to be sent of God, since they are inhibited by God's Vicegerents on Earth;
and consequently have not that sending, which the word of God says is
necessary to those, whose preaching is to be instrumental to work Faith, and
other saving Graces in the Hearts of God's People.

But what calling or sending can such a Minister as is in question, Ans. 2.
pretend to, for his setting up a Course of Housepreaching, or other
ministerial Acts, in the place or Parish, where there is a public constant
preaching Minister established by Law? If he has any, it must be either
extraordinary, or ordinary, for there is not a third way of calling or sending,

Extradordinary calling or sending is that, which is done by God himself
immediately, without the Concurrence or Ministry of any humane Help or
Authority. Gal. 1. 1.
Not of man, nor by man. Either,

1. By divine Vision or Revelation: and thus St. Paul was called and sent to
preach the Gospel at Macedonia Act. 16. 9, 10.
A Vision appeared to Paul in the Night, saying, come over into Macedonia and
help us; And after he had seen the Vision, immediately we endeavored to go
into Macedonia, assuredly, gathering that the Lord had called us to preach the
Gospel unto them.

2. By secret impulse on men's spirits for this work, wrought by the
extraordinary Power of God in the Primitive times. Such was Act. 8. 5.
Philip the Deacon's going to the City of Samariah, and preaching the Gospel
unto them, after the dispersing the Church at Jerusalem. Such also was the
Calling of those who at the same dispersion, first preached Christ at Phoenicia
and Cyprus Act. 11. 19. 20.
and the Hand of God was with them, though otherwise they were but private
Persons.

Now I think no wise men will pretend to these extraordinary Callings or
Sendings in these days. It is sufficient to say they are extraordinary, and
such as but in like Cases cannot be expected, Extraordinary only take place
where ordinary are not to be had. The internal and extraordinary sending is
secret and invisible, and therefore it is not sufficient for a man to say that
he is sent of God, seeing every Heretic may say the same; 2 John 7.
but he ought to prove his extraordinary and invisible Calling by the working
of some Exodus 4. 2. -- 8. 19.
Miracle; or by some special testimony of Scripture. Joh. 5. 36. Mat. 10. 8. 2
Cor. 12. 12.
It Is true John Baptist had (...) immediate and extraordinary Calling* Joh. 1.
6.
and yet wrought no Miracle, (that was reserved for the Messiah, of whom he was
the immediate Forerunner, to manifest himself unto the world by) but then, that
Calling of his was foretold, and witnessed by plain testimonies of Es. 40. 3.
Mal. 3. 1.
Scripture. And the manner of his Birth, and Condition of his Life (as it was
well known to all Israel) were no other than miraculous and extraordinary.

Ordinary calling or sending to any place, to preach the Gospel, and to execute
the Office of a Minister there, in a settled and constituted Church is, when a
Person in holy Orders has the cure and care of a Flock or Congregation of
God's People committed to him, to preach the Gospel to them, and to perform all
other ministerial Acts amongst them, by the Ministry of those Men, who under
God, have Authority so to do, according to good and wholesome Ecclesiastical
Laws and Constitutions in that behalf made and established. Perk. de digminist.
page 459. and 462.
God calls ordinarily by his Church, her voice is his. Therefore whenever
the Church of God, that is, the learned, wise, godly, and such as the Church
has publicly appointed for that purpose, says to any thou shall he sent to
such a place, thou shall go for us; then does God call; Says Mr. Perkins.
Sending implies the Act of another that has Power and Authority to send, He
cannot be said to be sent, that comes to a place, and there takes upon him to
preach and do all ministerial Acts, of his own accord. He comes not in
Christ's Name, but his own. And a Christian can in nothing show himself more
impudent, than in embracing such, as Teachers sent from God, that come in their
own Names. Joh. 5. 43.
If one come in his own Name, him ye will receive: says Christ to the Jews,
blaming them much for it. And because there are so many that are apt to run
before they are sent, it is necessary, that wheresoever any Person undertakes
to preach the word, his calling to that work be clear and manifest, both in
respect of his own Comfort and the Peoples profit. Though St. Paul was
immediately called of God, yet he was sent to Act. 9. 17.
Ananias for imposition of his hands, that it might be clear to the Church that
he was called. And when he was to be sent to the Gentiles, he was again by
imposition of hands Act. 13. 3.
ordained or appointed to be their Doctor, that so his Calling might be
publicly declared to be lawful, and that none else might intrude into it. And
if this were necessary in him, who was immediately called of God, how much more
necessary is it in all those, who have not now that extraordinary Calling, but
only are mediately ordained and appointed to that work by those men, who under
God have power to send and appoint Pastors over the several Flocks of his
People in the Church?

Now if such a person as is in the question, cannot make out his calling or
sending, by one of these two ways, to such a Town or Parish, where he takes
upon him thus to execute the Office (or any part of it) of a Minister;
certainly then he has no Calling or sending at all: But is like one that shall
enter into another man's house, at the window, or some other way, than by the
door: and that (we know) is no fair possession of an house; he that enters in
at the windows, ought to be thrown out of doors. Of such our Savior says Joh.
10. 1.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber.
And, Qui autem non fideliter intra^ vit, neque pe^ Christum, quidni infideliter
agat, and contra Christum. Bernard. ut citatur a Tho. Mortono. Apol. cath. page
62.
if such, as they can be no other, who baulking the lawful and ordinary way of
entrance by the Authority of those, who derive their power on earth from
Christ, and break in without, yea against the Laws and Leave of their
Governors that act in Christ's Name and Stead) then are not they sent of God,
and consequently have none of God's promises of blessing annexed to their
Ministry.

This is that which renders the best actions that can be performed by the Sons
of Men, to be sinful, when they are done unlawfully, and by such as have no
particular Calling or Command for the doing of them. This does quite alter and
diversifie the nature of actions, so as that they are varied from what
otherwise they would be, to some other things. It is a rule as true, as old;
Bonum extra proprium subjectum, in malum mutatur; Every good thing, out of its
proper place and subject, is turned into evil. V. g. In the natural body of
man, the hand is a very good and useful member, for the offices of Common
life; yet if the hand be out of its proper place, and grow either out of the
Head or Leg, or elsewhere, where it ought not, it is no longer a good or
useful member, but a deformed and monstrous excrescence of Nature. In the body
politic or state, the execution of wrath upon him that does evil, is a very
just and good work; yet if it be done by one that has no Authority or
Commission, at least in such a place or circuit, it is not justice, but
murder. Ammon abusing his Sister Tamar by filthy incest* ought by the Law of
God to dye, Absalom killed him with the Sword; and in so doing he did the very
thing that Lev. 18. 9. 29.
God commanded: Yet Absalom sinned greatly in doing it, because he was not the
man that ought to have done it, but David the King. In the Ecclesiastic body,
the Church, the preaching the word is an excellent ordinance of God, for the
saving of them that believe, as 1 Cor. 1. 21.
foolish as the world do account it: But if it be performed by one that has no
Authority or Commission for so doing, nay, that is under a just and legal
prohibition and restraint from the doing it at all, it is not preaching, but
quite another thing, even what the Apostle calls it 1 Cor. 9. ^6. Job. 15. 3.
beating the air. Whenever a Commandment is limited to persons and places,
that Command makes it a sin to them, if they leave the thing required undone;
and the not commanding, yea, forbidding, makes it a sin to others that shall
do it, because it is the Precept that makes the thing to such persons, in such
places, to be lawful or sinful. Wrath has been revealed from Heaven on such,
as have rashly adventured on a thing that in it self has been very good, yet
had no particular Command for it. This appears plainly in the case of 2 Samuel 6.
6, 7.
Vzzah. Though his intention was good, yet it belonged not to him to touch the
Ark, for the charge and care thereof was committed to Numb. 4. 15.
others. It is the Policy of Satan, if he cannot prevail with men to abide and
abound in those things which are (materially) evil, but they will needs be
doing good, then he will draw them on to do that good unlawfully, without a
calling to it or warrant for it. And it were well that People who are so easily
misled by the specious pretext of good, were not ignorant of this Wile of the
Devil, whereby he deceives simple souls, not a few. When we set upon the
performance of any thing, it should not be enough to weigh with our selves how
good it is, but to look what warrant we have to do it. The manner of
performances is to be regarded, as well as the matter: For God stands upon
Circumstances as well as Duties. Deuteronomy. 6. 25.
It shall be then our righteousness, if we observe to do all the Commandments
before the Lord our God, AS HE HAS COMMANDED US. Say we do what is commanded,
yet if we do it not as he commanded us, it is not right in God's sight, who
requires that a thing be not only good, but also regularly performed. It is
not the material goodness of the work, that will free us from sin, but the
Command we have out of God's word for the doing it. Neither can we depend upon
any promise for a blessing, when we have not God's Precept for the action.

The promise of edification in faith, knowledge and holiness, is specially
appropriated to the Ministry of that Person, who is regularly and orderly in
God's ways, set over a Congregation. Christians own pastors have a more
special dispensation of the Grace of God given them, to them-ward; as St. Paul
the Doctor of the Gentiles had, toward that People, of whom he was appointed
the proper Minister. And (says Mr. Baines) Mr. P. Baines on. Ephesians. 3. 2.
If this were well considered it would cure in us that affectation of the
confluence of strangers, when our hearts do not so fervently embrace our own
Pastors. And it should instr^^^ People to depend especially upon those who are
set over them; for these are they who are furnished from God in (...) eminent
manner, with grace toward them* They are foolish sheep that know not the^ own
shepherds voice, and foolish People that know not their own Ministers.

And in reason, whose Ministry may we think God will bless, either his, to whom
the Flock is committed by himself; who 1 These. 5. 12.
is over them in the Lord whom Act. 20. 28.
God has made their overseer* who have Heb. 13. 17.
the rule over them, watching for their Souls, as those that must give an
account? Or his, who runs before he is sent, who has no lawful call to the
Congregation, ordinary or extraordinary; who has no relation at all to the
Flock, Joh. 10. 12.
whose own the sheep are not* he having no charge of them, nor any account to
make for them (other than for his irregular intrusion amongst them, taking upon
him to do that he has no right to do, and for seducing them away from their
own Pastor) be his parts and qulifications otherwise Angelical, and his
Doctrine never so Evangelical?

Pastors of Congregations are called 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Christ's Ambassadors to their People. It is their Commission that makes their
Embassy succesfull. Another, perhaps, may be of equal, or greater fitness for
the Employment, but he only that has deputation for the service, is received
and has audience. Those that have no lawful mission to a Congregation, but
intrude themselves amongst them, may speak the truth, as well as they that
have; yet of him that acts by lawful appointment, we may say, that he
preaches with Authority, and not like those that come in by stealth and
usurpation, and have no other right there to preach, than what themselves have
made. They are called Act. 20. 28.
overseers. It is not for every man to oversee the estate of another; they
only can do it, who by some Deed or Commission are empowered to undertake it.
Nay (which is a dreadful Consideration) they must so oversee the Flock Heb.
13. 17.
that they may give an account for their Souls. Is there any such charge given
to, or undertaken by those unsent teachers, who love to be heard and seen in
exercising their parts, but not in taking cure or charge of Souls? They are
called 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Stewards. It is not for any one to be a steward in another man's house, to
feed the Family; but for him only whom the master of that house shall appoint.
The ministerial parts performed by a lawful Pastou^ to his own Flock, are like
Genesis 49.
Jacob's blessing his Sons; another man might have done it as rhetorically,
and, perhaps, as affectionately, but not so effectually, because none had that
Right^ and Authority to do it, as he. Of all acts, those that are done ex
officio, by virtue of an office, and from a lawful designation and appointment
for the execution of that office, to, or for, such a Person or People, are
under a more solemn assurance of a blessing* It is no Solecism to say, God will
hear^ their Prayers, and bless their Pains, when he will neither hear, nor
bless the Prayers or Pains of any else. My Job. 42. 8.
Servant Job shall pray for you (says God) for him will I accept. Eliphaz and
his two friends were good men, yet God would not give answer to them, but to
Job only. See Genesis 20. 7. Es. 37. 4. Iam. 5. 14.

If that place in Mat. 18. 20.
Matthew be urged, to prove a promise of a blessing to such preaching and
meetings as are in question; Where two or three are met together in my name,
there am I present in the midst of them.

I answer, that although I conceive the primary and principal Intent and Scope
of our Savior in that place, was not to speak of religious Meetings, for the
preaching and hearing of his word; but of the Meetings of Ecclesiastical Judges
of the Jewish Sanhedrin in their Consistory (as the Context does declare) yet
because all God's promises are great and precious, and we ought not to lose
ought of them, but improve them to the utmost for his Glory and our Comfort;
therefore suppose it be taken and to be understood of religious Meetings also
(as it is so applied by the Church of England in her Liturgy, yet to no other,
but our Church Assemblies) yet (I say) that text annexeth a Promise only to
such Meetings as are in Christ's Name. Now the meaning of that phrase is
commonly expounded to be, at my Command. Nam in nomine Christi, idem est quod
e^^authoritate. So our Savior himself uses the phrase: Joh. 5. 43.
I am come in my Father's Name, id est, at his Command* as he expounds it
himself. Joh. 10. 18. -- 12. 49. -- 14. 31.
This Commandment have I received from the Father. So St. Paul uses the
phrase, 2 These. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 5. 4.
Now we command you brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; id est, by
the Authority of our Lord Christ, committed unto us by him, as if Christ should
command by Act. 19. 5. Significatur non forma qua in baptisando usi sint
Apostoli; sed authoritas Christi, ex cujus praescripto utebantur baptismo.
us. So every inferior officer amongst us, does use the phrase, I require you
in the King's Name, id est, by Authority derived from him. See Act. 4. 7.

And should we extend the promise, without restraint, to other Meetings under
pretense of religious Worship, than such as are grounded on Christ's Authority;
Chamier. T. 1. L. 2. c. 4. 5. 5. p. 15. vide Jewel's Reply to Harding 's
Answer. Page 116.


1. Then we should make our own wills, fancies and affections, masters of our
actions, and endeavor to bring down the presence of Christ to such irregular
Conventions, as are altogether disagreeing with, yea contrary to his Will and
Command, which were not only absurd, but impious to attempt or think.

2. Then also may a Congregation of 1000 People, divide themselves (contrary to
good Laws of God, his Church and the Realm) into 500 Couples, in so many
several places, and in so many several forms of worship, and yet expect
Christ's presence and blessing with them all, in ways so abominable to God, and
so apparently destructive to his entire body the Church, which he has
purchased with his most precious blood.

3. Where were then the threatenings of his withdrawing from our Assemblies upon
just occasion? God has said Es. 1. 13, 14.
Your Sabbaths, your Calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity
even your solemn Meetings; my Soul hates them, they are a trouble to me, I am
weary to bear them. And, I Amos 5. 21.
hate, I despise your Feast-days, I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies,
i. e. I will not accept with Favor (as I did Noah's Genesis 8. 21.
Sacrifice) their solemn Assemblies. In another place the Holy Ghost uses the
same expression, Lev. 26. 31.
I will not smell the Savor of your sweet Odours. It is a Judgment (says
Ainsworth) opposed to that blessing promised in v. 12. I will walk among you.
God threatens to deny his presence to their Assemblies, and one reason is given
by a Divine of the Presbyterian Judgment; Mr. Hutcheson in Amos 5. 21.
Because they were not any way of Divine institution, but of their own
invention, and therefore all along they are called your or thine.

Now show me where Christ in all the Old or New Testament, does either command,
or allow any such Ministry, and attendance on it, as is in question, and then I
shall acknowledge it to be the Ordinance of God, and that this promise belongs
to it: but not till then.

In the mean time I may well (without any digression) retort upon the
objectours, and tell them, that in my Judgment, they are far out of the way,
either of obedience to Christ's Command, or of hopes of enjoying his blessing
promised, who in resorting to such kind of Meetings, for which they have
neither a command nor promise, separate and withdraw themselves from the
public assemblies, and attendance on his worship and ordinances there, where
God has assured us of his presence and blessing, and whither he has enjoined
us constantly to repair. For as that Minister, who shall upon any pretense
whatsoever of his own forsake a Congregation over whom he was placed by God,
and go to another without any lawful call, is like Jonah, who being sent by
God to Nineve, sinned greatly in going to Tarshish, though he had preached
never so duly and diligently there: So those People who in any measure neglect
the public, for those private assemblies, are like Micah, who in the time of
the Judges, when there was a public Ministry in the place which the Lord had
chosen for that purpose, instituted a private worship and ministry in his own
house, a certain peculiar Levite being called and set apart for that work. And
no wise man that shall read his story, will think it safe to follow his
example. Well may such a Person flatter himself in his course, and say in his
heart, as he Judge. 17. 13.
Now I know the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. But
(as Iunius) Junius in loc.
hominis imperiti sermo est, and in pietate parum instituti. That saying of his
shows him to have but little wit, less religion, and that he was but in a
golden dream or Fool's Paradise all that while, though he thought himself wiser
and in a better case than his neighbors. But this was done when there was no
King in Israel, and every man did that which was right in his own eyes,
otherwise so abominable an act could never have passed so clearly as it did.

By such I would be soberly and soundly resolved of this demand. Are the People
of England in their present state and condition (assembling themselves together
in public places appointed for God's worship, under the teaching and ministry
of their lawful Pastors, that are set over them by Authority) a true Church,
or true Churches, or not?

If they say, no: they do that which God (blessed be his name) has not yet
done, unchurch us; and lay us under a judgment, which he has not yet laid upon
us, viz. a divorce from Jesus Christ. Jer. 14. 9.
Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave
us not. Si ecclesiam non habet Christus, nisi inter P. tantum, nimium pauper
factus est. Hieron. adv. Luciferanos.
Through the infinite goodness of the most high, we have wherewithal to
consute that unchristian and uncharitable judgment of theirs, since we have
both the matter and the form of a true Church.

The matter is a multitude of rational Creatures that profess saving truth
contained in the word of God. Simon Magus and the Eunuch upon their profession,
were admitted Members of the Church; and Members do constitute the body.

The form of a true Church is a gracious call into the dignity of the Children
of God, so as that Christ becomes ^nited to them. As the form of a man ^s the
Soul united to the body, so the ^orm of a Church, which is his body, (...)
Christ united to it. We have the lord and laws of Christ, and those he ^akes
effectual for the convincing of ^ll, and conversion of some. And this (...) an
irrefragable argument to evince (...) Church to be a true Church, even in the
judgment of the Presbyteria^ Divines themselves. For to those of the
Independent way, that separated from them, these are their words; Vindicat. of
Presbyt. p. 122.
We beseech you to consider, whether ye did not receive the work of conversion
from sin to God, which ye presume to be wrought in you, first of all in those
public assemblies from which ye now separate? And if ye found Christ walking
amongst us, how is it, that (...) do now leave us? If the presence (...)
Christ, both of his power and grace, be with us, why do ye deny your presence?
Are ye holyer and wiser than Christ* Is not this an evident token, that we are
true Churches and have a true Ministry, because we have the seal of our
Ministry, even the conversion of many Sons and Daughters to God? Does not the
Apostle Cor. 9. 2.
from this very ground argue the truth of his Apostleship? (...) it not
apparent that our Ministers are sent by God, because their Embassage is made
succesfull by God for the good of Souls? Did ye ever read of true conversion
ordinarily in false Church? Will the Lord concur with those Ministers he sends
not? Does not the prophet say the quite contrary? Jer. 23. 23. And therefore
either renounce your conversion, or be converted from that great sin of
separating from us.

Again, where there are the infallible marks of a true Church, there is a true
Church. But we have the infallible marks of a true Church, viz. the word of
Christ truly taught, and his Sacraments rightly administered.

First for the word of Christ. The Church is (according to the proper
signification of the word (...) a People called forth from the rest of the
world; Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
called to be Saints. Now the best note to know a People called, is by the
voice calling; this was ever an infallible mark of Christ's Church. First among
the Apostles, who were called out from amongst others, by the word of Christ,
to become followers of him. Then amongst others, as they were added to the
Church, they were called by the word; witness that great work of conversion
wrought by the Ministry of St. Peter, Acts. 2.
At one Sermon three thousand were severed from the rest of the world, and
added to the Church.

Next for the Sacraments, these rightly administered are certain marks of a true
Church; for they are the Seals set by God to his word, the signs of his
Covenant, whereby he binds himself to be our God, and receives us to be his
People. They are sure pledges of his love to us, which we really have, till we
come actually to be possessed of perfect holiness and glory with Christ* Whilst
we have these blessed ordinances of his amongst us, his word truly preached,
and his Sacraments rightly administered, it is not the rash censure of a few
giddy heads, that can unchurch us.

If they say we are a true Church then God is ever with us, ( Es. 45. 14.) in
our assemblies at all times, and in all parts of his worship. Matt. 28. 20.
Lo, I am with you always to the end of the world. An^ 2 Cor. 6. 16.
I will dwell in the^, and walk in them and will be their God, and they shall
(...) my People. Thence the Holy Ghost i^ Scripture, calls the Church, Ps. 74.
7. Ps. 76. 2.
his house the dwelling place of his Name, the place where his honor dwells,
the Presence Chamber of the great King, etc. And as the glory of the Lord did
Sensibly appear in the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 34. and in the Temple, 1 kings 8.
10. So does it now in our Church Assemblies, as really and truly, though not as
visibly, as then. 2 Cor. 3. 7, -- 11.
For if the Ministration of Death was glorious, how shall not the Ministration
of the Spirit be glorious? If the Ministration of Condemnation be glory, much
more does the Ministration of Righteousness exceed in glory. If that which is
done away was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious.

Now if God be present with, and in our assemblies, how dare any that are, or
ought to be Members thereof, absent themselves? Dare ye to withdraw at any time
from God's presence, whose face at all times ye are Psalm. 27. 8.
commanded to seek? I speak not of his omnipresence, in regard of the immensity
of his essence, which fills all places. God fills every place, and fills it by
containing that place in himself. But I speak of that special presence, which
he has promised to afford to his Church, manifesting himself in that place and
assembly more graciously, than elsewhere.

If then we retain our Conjunction with Christ, why do ye refuse Communion with
us? May we not therefore justly charge you as guilty of making a Schism in the
Body of Christ? That we may, by your own Doctrine. For (say the Presbyterian
Divines) Vindicat. of Presbyt. p. 113, 114.
If the Apostle calls those divisions of the Church of Corinth, wherein
Christians did not separate into diverse formed Congregations, of several
Communions, in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Schism, 1 Cor. 1. 10. may
not your Secession from us, and profession that ye cannot join with us as
Members, and setting up Congregations of another Communion be more properly
called Schism? And presently after they distinguish (out of Camero) of a
twofold Schism, negative and positive. The former is when men do peaceably and
quietly draw from Communion with a Church, not making a head against that
Church from which they are departed: The other is, when persons so withdrawing,
do consociate and draw themselves into a disitinct and opposite Body, setting
up a Church against a Church, which Camero calls Schism by way of Eminency. Now
if this were true Doctrine in those days, against those who were then concerned
in it; I know no reason why the space of a few years should so alter the case,
but that it is as true now against themselves, who now do what they then
condemned in others, viz. not only withdraw from our public assemblies, but
set up Church against Church. And therefore (to use their own words) Ye must
not be displeased with us, but with your selves, if we blame you as guilty of
positive Schism. And that is no small fault in the judgment of any sound
Divine, but a far greater than the fault, upon which they pretend separation.
The things for which they make a rent, are not so great a fault in the Church,
as the want of Charity in them which prompts them so to do. It is a sin of the
first rate, and one of the greatest size that a Christian can commit, in the
judgment of the Brethren of the Nonconformists themselves, though now it goes
down gli^ with too many of them, who not withstanding are obliged to the
extirpation thereof, not only by the common bond of Religion and Christianity,
but also by the second Article of their solemn League and Covenant. taken with
hands lifted up to the most high God; wherein they rank it with Popery,
Superstition, Heresy, Profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to sound
Doctrine and the power of godliness. Let the words of Mr. Baxter be noted as an
evidence of this truth. Christian Concord. page 119.
If the Scripture were Conscionably observed, men would take Church-divisions
for a greater sin than Adultery or Theft. Mutinies and Divisions do more
infallibly destroy an Army than almost any other fault, or weakness: and
therefore all Generals do punish Mutineers with death, as well as flat
Traitors. Our Union is our strength and beauty: commonly they that divide for
the bringing in of any inferior truth or practice, do but destroy that truth
and piety, that was there before. I like not him that will cure the headache by
cutting the throat; yea, it is a greater sin than Murder (says Mr. Paget) A
Murderer Haeresiog* page 78.
kills but one man or two, but a Schismatic goes about, as much as in him
lies, to destroy the Church of God. Yea, it is worse to make a Schism in the
Church, than to Sacrifice to an Idol, says Sermon. December. 25. 1644.
Mr. Calamy out of St. Cyprian.

And may Christians then play at sast and loose with the bonds of holy
Communion at their pleasure? St. Peter could say Joh. 6. 68.
Lord whither shall we go? thou have the words of Eternal Life. Where this
word is truly Preach^d in the way of Christ's appointment, and the rest of his
worship celebrated accordingly, woe be to those that are not found there also.
Christians in the pure and primitive times, did not take this Liberty in point
of Church Fellowship, but (by the acknowledgment of the Divines before
mentioned, and Oh that their Practices now did not contradict their words then)
Vindicat. of Presbyt. page 120.
All such who professed Christianity, held Communion together, as one Church,
notwithstanding the difference in judgment in lesser things, and much
corruption in Conversation. Cain was the first that ever separated from the
Church; Genesis 4. 16.
he went out from the presence of God. God is every where, the meaning
therefore is, from his Church, the place of his public worship, which was then
in his Father's Family. And will it be safe for any to follow such a President?

Jude 11.
The Apostle pronounces a woe to them that walk in the way of Cain. Those that
walk in his way, can expect no less than to arrive at the place whither he is
gone before. And if ye would know who they are that so walk, the Apostle tells
you, Jude 19.
these are they that separare themselves. Pareus his gloss on the words are not
unworthy observation: Pareus in Loc.
Quia sibi ipsi f^^gunt peculiarem cultum, ideo sese segregant ab eorum
Ecclesia ac coetu. They feign to themselves a peculiar way and manner of
worship, therefore they will not join with us in ours, but withdraw from our
assemblies; as if he had purposely described the humor of the men of our
times. However such may pretend to the Spirit, as if they were more Sanctified
than their Brethren, yet the Apostle by infallible guidance, pronounces them
Sensual not having the Spirit. And that is the reason they keep the Unity of
the Church no better. For (as Fulgentius says) Tales Fulgent. l. 2. ad Monim.
page 67.
itaque faciles sunt ad divisionem, quia spiritum non habent, in quo uno membra
Christi charam servant Spiritualiter unitatem. Such persons are prone to all
divisions, because they have not that Spirit, in whom alone all the Members of
Christ do Spiritually keep Unity among themselves, as a dear and precious
thing. As the Soul in man's Body does cease to quicken any Member sundred from
the Body, and the scattered bones in Ezekiel's Vision, received no life till
they were incorporated and knit together in one by Ezekiel. 37. 7.
Sinews, Flesh and Skin: so the Spirit of God, which is the Soul of this
mystical Body, denies the derivation of Grace and Comfort, to those that
separate themselves from it.

If they say, we are a true Church, and that they and their Party separating
from us and meeting in private assemblies, are a Church also, and so they do
not separate and withdraw themselves from the Church.

Then I say that their Church, in that case, refusing Communion with ours, is,
(at least) a distinct Church from ours; and so there are two Churches of
England in this Nation. And so they make Christ to have two bodies distinct
under one head; which is contrary to sundry plain Texts of Scripture. Cant. 6.
8, 9.
Though there be threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number, yet my Dove, my undefiled is but one. Romans 12. 5.
We being many are one body in Christ. And, 1. Cor. 12. -- 12.
As the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one body
being many, are one body, so is Christ. Again, Ephesians. 4. 45.
There is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, etc. And, 1 Cor.
1. 13.
is Christ divided?

There cannot be two such opposite Churches in one Nation, but one of them must
needs be an Harlot, and not the Spouse of Christ. And that their Church (as
they call it) and not ours, is so, may easily be made to appear to any man that
will vouchsafe to weigh matters in the balance of Reason and Judgment. The
whole World is divided betwixt God and the Devil; there is not a third Party
that can challenge any share in the Race of mankind. All Societies and
Companies of Men and Women in the world, are either the Church of Christ, or
the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 3. 9. Sit una Eva matter cunctorum viventium, and
una ecclesia parens omnium Christianor, Sicut illam maledictus Lamech in duas
divisit uxores, sic hanc haeretici in plures ecclesias lacerant; quae juxta
Apocalypsin Iohannis Synagogae magis diaboli appellandae sunt, quam Christi
conciliabuta. Hieron. ad Geruntiam. page 92.
An assembly of Saints, or a congregation of evil doers, Psalm. 26. 5. And that
theirs is not the Church of Christ, appears thus: Those assemblies or
congregations where there is no true and lawful Pastor, nor true and lawful
Flock, are not the Churches of Christ, but of Satan: for (as it has been
showed before out of the Scriptures and Fathers) Ecclesia non est quae non
habet sacerdotem. Hieron. advers. Luciferanos. p. 491. Ecclesia est grex
Episcopo adunitus. Cyprian. ad Rogatianum. Epist. 69.
a lawful Minister, and a Flock or Congregation of People lawfully committed
to his charge, make up a Church: that is the definition of a particular Church.
But their Churches (as they call them.) have neither true and lawful Pastors,
nor Flocks: therefore they are not the Churches of Christ, but the Synagogues
of Satan, and Congregations of evil doers. That they have no true and lawful
Pastors, is ^lear. 1. Because many of them that head those unlawful meetings
and assemblies, were never ordained by Prayer and Imposition of hands, as by
Gospel-Rules they ought to be, but are mere Laymen that take upon them to
preach and perform Ministerial Duties, that were never called thereunto. This
is true not only in the assemblies of the Quakers, but of others also, by what
name soever they may be called, that separate from our Churches. I know it to
be so in diverse places. 2. Those of them that were ordained, are (as to the
execution of their Ministry committed to them in their Ordination during the
time of their Nonconformity) under a legal suspension by the highest and
fullest Power and Authority of this Nation, to which we are all bound in
Conscience to be in Subjection. 3. Suppose that neither of the former were
true, yet they are not true and lawful Pastors of those that flock after them,
seeing they have not the Pastoral cure and care of the Souls of any of them
committed to their charge by any that, under God, have Authority in the Church,
but are commanded to contain themselves in quietness and silence. And that they
have no true and lawful Flocks in their Congregations appears in this, that
their Assemblies and Congregations consist altogether of wandering Sheep that
are gone astray from their own lawful Pastors, and sinfully separated from the
Congregations and Flocks, to which, of right, they belong, and gathered
together into a Schismatical and separate meeting and Society, and so make up a
Congregation of evil doers, and Synagogue of Satan. If this were rightly and
seriously considered, I think it would startle the minds and shake the
confidence of many of them, who bless themselves in their newfound way of
Religion and Worship, boast of their number, and compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes, that at least, they might be equally the Children of Hell with
themselves.

If they say our Church is corrupt, we have that amongst us that we should not
have, or, not that which we ought to have, I say then,

First, Suppose it be so, (which I think will yet require more pains than have
yet been bestowed, to prove) yet let them consider what Peter Martyr
judiciously says. Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 4. c. 1. s. 1.
Non ob quamcunque maculam Christi Ecclesiam ita Excidere, ut Dei non amplius
appelletur. Every little blemish in the face of a Church, cannot cast her off
from being God's. The Church in Canticles is said to be Cant. 6. 10.
fair as the Moon; which in the Hebrew Tongue is called Es. 24. 23.
(...) Lebanah, for her whiteness and bright shining: And yet the Moon is not
so white, but still some spots remain therein, and even incapable of
illumination from the Sun. Tertul. l. 1. cap. 5. Cont. Nation.
Coelum ipsum nulla serenitas tam colata purgat, ut non alicujus nubeculae
flocculo resignetur. In the clearest Heaven some specled Clouds may be
discerned. Aug. retract. l. 1.
Cum tota dicat Ecclesia quam diu hic est, dimitte nobis de^ita nostra, non
utique hic est sine macula and ruga: So long as the whole Church is commanded
to say, whilst she is in this World, forgive us our trespasses, she cannot be
imagined to be altogether without spot or wrinkle. Rather they discover
themselves to be most stained, to whom every small spot in the Church seems to
be altogether intolerable. Clav. adver. Anabapt. art. 2.
Cum sub specie studii perfectionis, imperfectione^ nullam tolerare possumus,
aut in corpore aut in membi is Ecclesiae, tum diabolum nos tumefacere superbia
and hypocrisi seducere moneamur. When under color of perfection, ye can endure
no imperfection either in the body or members of the Church; you must be
admonished that this your separation is caused by the Devil, who puffs you up
with pride, and seduceth you by Hypocrisy.

Secondly, We may not upon every slight ground (to please a fond humor) leave
the Society of God's People in the Church, for sake the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is, or go off from Communion with that
Church whereof we are, or ought to be Members. When an Ulcer breaks out in any
part of the body (suppose the hand or the foot) must that member presently be
cut off, or not rather be cured and healed by the use of plasters and other
wholesome medicines, or the pain and evil be endured with patience ^ntill nature
has tried her skill, and (as it will in short time) conquered the malignity of
the Distemper? And shall we then presently make use of the knife, as soon as
ever there arises some diversity of opinions in the Church, especially in
matters that are circumstantial in Religion? This were not Surgery, but
Butchery. Nay, suppose the very substance and body of Religion were corrupted,
and not only some light errors in circumstances were maintained, but there
were Heresy in Doctrine also, in this case we ought to be very tender of
making a Schism, and look well to our selves with what mind and affection we
do it. Suppose a Malefactor be really guilty and has deserved to dye, yet if
the Judge condemn him out of cruelty of mind, envy or spleen, and not out of
true love to justice and hatred of his sin, though the Sentence were for the
matter of it never so just, yet he were most unjust in pronouncing of it; so a
separation from a Church though for just causes, yet would be most unjust and
sinful, if it be done out of malice or any evil respect or affection
whatsoever. In such a case that is required of a Christian, which is required
of a Surgeon, who when necessity forces him to cut off a member, yet he
does it unwillingly, with grief, and after trial of all lawful ways and
^^eans to stop the evil, and to prevent the mutilation of the Patient. The
property of true Christian Charity, is, 1 Cor. 13. 6.
it rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth. That is iniquity which is so
diametrically opposite to Charity, which the Greeks call (...), which is a vice
that makes men not only to rejoice in the Calamity of others, but greedily to
such in all evil reports of them, and rejoice if they are true. Christian
Charity, where it is, works the same mind and affection in us toward our
neighbors as is in Parents toward their Children, who with joy admit of their
commendation, but will not so easily believe any thing that tends to their
disparagement, unless they either so it with their eyes, or have good proof
made for it; and then, not without grief of heart. Faults in a Church call for
our lamentation, not separation; should God separate from a Christian Soul,
because there is still some corruption of sinful nature remaining in it, the
condition of us all would be most miserable to Eternity. Did Christ separate
from the Church of the Jews, and not hold Communion with her, because she was
not what she had, or ought to have been? What the state of the Jewish Church in
our Savior Christ's time was, the Scriptures do abundantly show. In it was a
very corrupt Ministry, Mat. 15. 14. -- 23, 16.
blind leaders of the blind. They preached well enough; but did not live
accordingly, The Highpriests Office, which by God's Ordinance was to last
during Life, was now become annual, and basely bought and sold Joh. 11. 49.
for money. The People were wicked, impenitent, haters and ^^^secutors of the
Son of God. Their Doctrine was much corrupted and blended with false and
Pharisaical Mat. 5. 20. -- 48.
glosses. Many superstitious Ceremonies were used, and urged more strictly Mar.
7. 9.
than any of God's Commandments. Churchdiscipline very much perverted; Joh. 9.
22.
The Jews had agreed that if any did profess Christ, he should be
excommunicated. An horrible abuse was crept into the place of God's Service: A
Market, and Mat. 21. 12. Joh. 2. 14.
Money-changing set up in the Temple of God. And yet for all this our Savior
made no separation from this corrupt Church, but communicated with them (...)
all parts of Divine Worship. In his Infancy he was admitted a Member of that
Church Luke 2. 21.
by Circumcision. At the Purification he was presented before the Lord in that
Church, and Luke 2. 22, -- 23.
a Sacrifice offered for him according to the Law of Moses. When he came to
riper years he constantly kept the Church, came Luke 2. 46. -- 3. 21. -- 4. 16.
to the Congregation to Divine Service, public Prayers, and reading the
Scriptures. He received the Sacraments in their Church. Luke 3. 21.
Baptism, and Joh. 2. 13.
the Passover. Yea his conformity to the Jewish Church was not only in Divin^^
Institutions, but in Humane also; as in his observation of the Feast of the
Dedication of the Temple (mentioned Ioh. 10) does appear. He was so far from
breaking the order or custom of that Church. as that he conformed to it in
those things that were contrary to Divine Institutions. It was the ordinance of
God that the Passover should be eaten by the Jews Exodus 12 11.
with their loins girded, their shoes on their feet, and their staves in their
hands because they were to eat it in haste. Standing was a posture of readiness
for travel: and they used long Garments in those Countries, which would have
been an hindrance to them, if they had not been trussed up. The Apostle seems
to allude to this custom, when he says Ephesians. 6. 14.
stand therefore having your loins girded about. But because the Church of the
Jews, being now safely escaped out of Egypt, had by long custom omitted and
altered these Ceremonies, therefore our Savior Christ would not break or alter
the custom of that Church, but did as they did. He did not stand (...) the
Passover, but sat or used a leaning posture (for so the word (...) used by St.
Matthew does signify) as appears by the Evangelist. Mat. 26. 20.
When the even was come he sat down with the twelve. And all this to teach us
that we ought to be tender of violating the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
customs of the Church; not to grow into a profane contempt or neglect of any
part of public worship, for every imperfection and blemish, nor to separate
from a Church, though never so corrupt, so long as the Word, Sacraments, and
Doctrine of Salvation may there be enjoyed.

Corruptions of a Church are commonly by Divines distinguished into two sorts.
They are either such as concern the matter of Religion, which the Apostle calls
2 Pet. 2. 2.
demnable Heresies, in fundamental points of Faith and Holiness, which tend to
the destroying of the very being of a Church. Or else such as concern the
manner of Religion in circumstantials and ceremonials, which are matters of
lower concern, and inferior alloy: Such as (to use the words of Learned Bp.
Davenant) Non continuo ad fidem fundamentalem spectant Dav. exhor^. ad pacem.
p. 29.
sed ad peritiam theologicam, and fortasse ne ad hanc quidem, sed aliquando ad
curiositatem theologorum: belong not to the fundamentals of Faith, but
skilfulness in Divinity, and not to that neither, but rather to the curiosity
of Divines.

Now errors, even in fundamentals, may be in a Church upon a double account,
Bp. Hall.
either through infirmity and humane frailty, the best of us knowing but in
part in this Life: God allows no separation in such a case. The Church of
Galatia through infirmity, was quickly turned to another Gospel, and erred even
in matters fundamental, holding justification by works, and was fallen to the
observation of Jewish Ceremonies, which St. Paul calls beggarly Elements. Their
Apostle was become their Enemy, and that for telling them the truth. He was
afraid of them, lest all the labor he had bestowed amongst them, was in vain,
and was fain to travel in birth with them again; yet he owns them, and writes
to them as a Church notwithstanding. Or else, vitioso affectu immorigeroe
voluntatis, out of malice, when men know they do amiss, and yet persist
obstinately in so doing. In such a case separation may be with a good
Conscience. When St. Paul had preached in the Synagogue of the Jews, and they
would not believe, but began to blaspheme and speak evil of the ways of God,
Act. 19. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5. Hos. 4. 15. Rev. 18. 4. vid. Masoni vindi^.
ministerii. Angl. p. 167.
then he withdrew and separated from them. So that it must be no small matter,
that must be a sufficient ground to any one that means to keep a good
Conscience, to warrant his withdrawing from the public Congregation in any
part of God's worship.

If a man have not discretion, he may easily run himself into a great evil of
sin, whilst he seeks to shun a light inconvenience; and in avoiding that which
he thinks to be superstition, he may soon become really Schismatical and
profane, which is Amos. 5. 19.
as if a man did flee from a Lion and a Bear met him, or went into the house
and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him. Suppose there were some
evil mixtures in our administration of Church-worship, yet (in the judgment of
the Presbyterian Divines themselves) this is not a sufficient ground of a
negative, much less of a positive separation; For (say they Vindicat. of
Presbyt. p. 116, 117.
) the learned Author before mentioned (that is Camero) tells us that
corruption in manners crept into a Church, is not a sufficient cause of
separation from it. This he proves from Matt. 23. 2, 3. And he also gives this
reason for it: Because in what Church soever there is purity of Doctrine, there
God has his Church, though overwhelmed with scandals. And therefore whosoever
separateth from such an Assembly, separateth from that place where God has his
Church, which is rash and unwarrantable. And in the next Page, they say: He
that will never communicate with any Church, till every thing that offends ^e
removed out of it, must tarry till the great day of Judgment, when (and not
till then) Christ will send forth his Angels and gather out of his Kingdom
every thing that offends, and them that do iniquity. And though to excuse
themselves from the guilt of Schism, they that do separate, may pretend, that
they make not a^ open breach of Christian Love, wherein the nature of that
great sin does consist. Let their own words answer themselves, Vindicat. of
Presbyt. p. 118.
We grant that to make up the formality of a Schismatic, there must be added
uncharitableness, as to make up the formality of an Heretic there must be
added obstinacy: But yet, as he that denies a fundamental Article of Faith, is
guilty of Heresy though he add not obstinacy thereunto to make him an
Heretic; so he that does unwarrantably separate from a true Church, is truly
guilty of Schism, though he add not uncharitableness thereunto, to denominate
him a complete Schismatic. How unjustifiable then is the separation, which
some make themselves and cause others to make, in these days from our Churches,
which in their Constitution, for Doctrine, Discipline and Worship are the envy
of Rome, and the admiration of the rest of the Christian World: where there is
nothing Idolatrous in Worship, nothing Heretical in Doctrine, nor
Antiscriptural in Discipline; where there is nothing taught, believed, or done,
but what is agreeable with the word of God, or not contrary thereunto: And (to
speak in the words of the learned and godly Dr. Henry More) Inquiry into the
mystery of iniquity. p. 561.
a Church so thoroughly purged from whatsoever can properly be styled
Antichristian, and is, I am confident, so Apostolical, that the Apostles
themselves, if they were alive again, would not have the least scruple of
joining in public worship with us in our common Assemblies. Separation from
it, can be no less than the fruit of Pride or bitter Zeal, which tends to
strife, Jam. 3. 16.
And where envy and strife is, there is confasion and every evil work.

I have heard some Church-forsakers, when they have been told of their
Apostasy and falling off from the Church whereof they were Members, excuse and
please themselves in this, that they are not Apostates from the Faith, they
hold the same Doctrine, and believe the same Creed we do. Though in that they
do no more than Papists do.

But in the mean time they consider not. That,

1. This is an improvement and aggravation of their sin, (so far is it from
excusing the fault) to depart from a Church wherein they were born and
baptized, and which (by their own confession) continues sound in the Faith.
Separation is allowed by no Divines (no not by the Dr. Manton on Jude 12. p.
496.
Presbyterians themselves) but either in case of cruel Persecution, damnable
Heresy, or down right Idolatry. They then that separate from a Church where
there is neither of these, have the greater sin.

2. That the hainousness of the sin of Schism does not consist in renouncing
the Faith, but in the breach of Christian Charity, without which 1 Cor. 13. 2.
all Faith is nothing. A man may be very Orthodox in his Judgment, and yet be a
damnable Schismatic if he break that Union which ought to be religiously kept
amongst Christians, in God's worship especially. And because this breach is
manifestly perfected in refusing due Ecclesiastical Communion together,
therefore that separation is (...), called Schism.

3. That the breach of the bond of Charity is equally as dangerous and
damnable, as Apostasy from the Faith; and as destructive and inconsistent to
the nature and being of the Church one as the other.

4. What sufficient convincing proof can our Church-forsakers make, that they
are not fallen from the true Faith, as well as from Christian Charity, seeing
they are subdivided into so many several Parties and Sects, some whereof (and
not the smallest number, viz. the Quakers) are totally apostatized from all
Christianity; others are fallen in part, as the Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc.
And those of them that do now and then come to Church (perhaps because they
cannot tell how to dispose of themselves otherwise) studiously absent
themselves from the profession of our Faith contained in the Creeds; and if any
of them chance to be there at that time, yet they wilfully refuse to observe
and obey that godly and laudable command and custom of the Church, grounded on
good authority of God's word, to stand up to their Belief.

5. If they are not yet quite fallen from the Faith, yet their Schism and
departure from the Church, Omne Schisma, ubi progressu temporis inveteratum
fuerit, Haeresin aliquam sibi confingit, ut recte ab Ecclesia recessisse
videatur. Mason vindic. ministerii Anglic. p. 163.
is a fair step toward it; where are they likely to stay (unless God
marvellously stop them) who are departed from his house? The Prodigal Son's
leaving his Father's Family was the first step to all that lewd course of Life
that afterward he took. The Donatists of old, did not at first dissent in
matters of Faith from the Catholic Church, but their Schism did soon produce
Heresy; as an Ulcer or Wound being inflamed does soon beget a Fever. In the
mean time whatever they esteem themselves, or are esteemed of others to be,
they are indeed no more true Members of the Church, than Tares or Chaff are
part of the Wheat, or than Mutineers are part of an Army. Camero. tract. in quo
eccl. Romans pre. ad. exam. c. 14.
Haeretici and Schismatici non sunt ex vera Ecclesia, sed tantummodo Ecclesiae
immisti, sicut and excrementa sunt quidem in corpore, sed non de corpore.
Alsted. Lexic. Theol. p. 359.

Now whilst I write these things, I weep: mine eye, mine eye, runs down with
water; I cannot refrain my self but must cry out, alas, alas, for my dear
mother the poor distressed, distracted, and divided Church of England; I will
bewail thee with the weeping of Iazer, Quae gens, quae regio tulit tam multa
dictu gravia, perpessu aspera quam hodie nos? Non enim parts solum inter nos
sunt, sed partium (o patria quae salus te servet?) novae parts. Just. Lipsius.
de constant. l. 2. c. 20.
I will water thee with my tears, my bowels shall sound like a harp for thee,
and my inward parts like pipes. That thine own Children, like Jacob and Esau,
should so jar and disagree in their Womb, as to endanger the very life of her
that bore them, by their struggling. What, Brethren, have we not all one God,
one Christ, one Spirit, one Baptism, one Scripture, one hope of Eternal
Salvation? And can we not close and communicate together in the Worship and
Service, of that one blessed Creator, merciful Savior, and most sweet
Comforter? Are our differences about I know not what, grown to such an height,
that we cannot go to Church together, join in one confession of Sin,
profession of Faith, Prayer, each with, Dij talia Graiis, erroremque hostibus
illum.
and for other, hear the same Scriptures read and preached, and sit together at
the same Table, partake of that same heavenly Feast, to which we are altogether
most lovingly invited?

So great is the crime of our present Age in this, that Posterity shall never
be able to add to it. Oh tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of
Ashcalon, lest the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the Daughters of
the uncircumcised triumph. What will very Pagans say, when they shall see
Christians thus divided? As Clemens Alexandrinus brings in the Heathen
exprobrating our Religion for untrue, Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
Quia omnis secta Christianismi titulum sibi vendicat, tamen alia aliam
execratur and condemnat; because every Sect challenges to it self the Title of
true Christianity, yet one curses and condemns another. What can they
otherwise think, but that the God and Christ whom we all pretend to serve, is
(what he abhors to be) the author of confusion? Oh what Music is this in the
Ears of Papists to hear of our discords? Did Herod and Pontius Pilate agree as
friends to crucify Christ, and shall Christians that profess themselves to be
his Members, disagree as mortal Enemies, about their Service of him? Oh
Religion, Religion! Have thou not Enemies enough abroad in the World, that seek
thy destruction, but thy deadliest wound must be received in the house of thy
friend^ Like Joseph thou art basely sold by thine own Brethren, when thou art
bringing them necessary food: like Sampson, thou art betrayed into the hands of
the Philistines by those that pretend zeal for thee; and like thy blessed
Master, thou art delivered up to thy mortal Foes by thine own treacherous
Disciples: what Ocean can furnish mine eyes with tears enough to pour out, for
the scandal and matter of rejoicing, that these things do give to thine
adversaries; and for thy much feared ruin that this portends! Alas, Alas, that
those who pretend much tenderness in lesser matters, should make no Conscience
at all of endeavoring thy Preservation and Prosperity, by keeping the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace! What shall I say of those Men, but as our
Savior of his Enemies, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
The Lord open their eyes that they may see, and persuade Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem.

Oh all ye my Brethren, that make an unchristian separation from the Society of
your Christian Friends and Neighbors in the public worship of God, especially
you, to whom I stand nearest related, I beseech you in the bowels of our common
Savior, do not thus give advantage to the adversaries of our Religion, to
endeavor and hope for the speedy overthrow both of us and it; and in the mean
time to laugh in their sleeves at our divisions, saying, there, there, so would
we have it. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
I beseech you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no Schisms amongst you, that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Phil. 2.
1, 3.
If there be any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if there be any bowels of Mercies, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.
Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let
each esteem other better than themselves.

It is promised as a blessed Fruit of the Gospel, Es. 11. 13, -- 14.
the envy of Ephraim shall cease, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut
off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim; but they
shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines, toward the West, they shall
spoil them of the East together, they shall lay their hands upon Edom and Moab,
and the Children of Ammon shall obey them. Oh that all animosity and prejudice
were banished from the borders of our hearts, that so meeting together by
Troops (with primitive Concord Coimus in coetum and congregationem, ut ad Deum
quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus orantes. Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
) in the public places of our Assemblies, being banded together with a kind of
holy Violence, we may with one mind and one mouth, lay Seige to the throne of
Grace, and give God no rest (such Forces are to him most acceptable) till he
fulfill this gracious promise, that we perish not in our divisions.

Lord grant that all they that confess thy holy name, may agree in the truth of
thy holy word, and live in unity and godly love through Jesus Christ. Amen.

ARGUMENT. IV.
THat cannot be the Ordinance of God, conducing to the Salvation of Souls,
which is not only contrary to good and wholesome Laws; destructive to
Gospel Order; and destitute of Divine Promise; but is also contrary to
Gospel-commands. For God is not contradictory to himself, instituting or
ordaining that in one place of his word, which he forbids in another; but
throughout the whole Scripture he reveals one constant, and one uninterrupted
Tenor of sacred truth.

But the practice in question is contrary to sundry Gospel-commands; as will
easily be made out by instancing in two or three, instead of others.

The first I shall mention is that in St. Peter 1 Pet. 4. 15.
Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil doer, or
as a busie-body in other Men's Matters. The word in the Original is (...), which
in the proper and genuine construction of it, signifies Alienorum inspector,
sive curator. Composita vox ab alieno and Episcopo. Erasm. in lo.
a busy Bishop in another Man's Diocese; or a busy Presbyter in another Man's
Parish, that takes upon him to meddle in another Man's Cure, and to be doing in
matters that are committed to another Man's Charge; that is so well at leisure,
and has so little to do of his own, that (according to the Proverb) He
thrusts his Sickle into another Man's Harvest.

The Apostle reckons such a one among Murderers and Thieves, and other evil
doers, that so he may easily be known what he is, by such as the Holy Ghost
sorts with him. Now Murderers and Thieves and other Malefactors are made the
Companions of such, who without a special concession, or commission, undertake
to meddle in other Men's Parishes, with the Souls not committed to their Care
and Charge; and the Apostle gives equal Caveat against them all.

I know not therefore how such busiebodies can acquit themselves of the other
two sins also mentioned in this black roll. Of the latter, their guilt seems to
be too evident, in taking up wandering Sheep from their Folds, when they ought
rather to send them home to their own Shepherds: in setting their mark upon
them, owning them for theirs, and calling them by the name of their Church,
when as in truth they have no more Property or Interest in them, than the
Emperor of Vtopia has in the Pleiades: or the poor Athenian, in Horace, had
in the Ships which he saw on the Sea, and called his own, though he had no
other right to them, than what his extravagant and distempered fancy did
create. For what warrant have they to meddle with other Men's Flocks?

Of the former, (I fear also) they will scarce be found altogether guiltless.
For truly the Souls of their Proselytes, after they have been their followers a
while, seem to be so mortally poisoned with Schism and Separation, profane
contempt and neglect of the public worship and ordinances of God, with
despising of all Authority, good Laws, and Government, and many other dangerous
evils; and so metamorphosed, that from being Sheep (as before they seemed to
be) they turn Wolves, and are ready to worry their own Shepherds: as is found
true by too sad experience in all places where these men intrude themselves.

The Apostle does elsewhere reckon up idleness, as another Companion of this
sin. 1 Timothy 5. 13.
They learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house, and are
busybodies. Again, 2 These. 3. -- 11.
Working not at all, but are busybodies. And indeed this is the Root from
whence this vice springs. It Is true (in the former place) the Apostle makes it
muliebre vitium, the women's sin; but it is no wonder to see idlers of the other
Sex also, to become esseminate, and medlers in other folks matters, when they
have none of their own to be doing about. An idler is well at leisure, and if
he will not serve God in his own station, rather than he shall do nothing,
Satan will find him employment, in setting him to thrust his Sickle into his
Neighbors Corn. Cant. 1. 6.
They made me keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept.
Here are Vineyards opposed to her own Vineyard; false Churches, to true. For
Es. 5. 7.
The Vineyard of the Lord of Host* is the house of Israel, and the men of
Judah his pleasant Plant. When men keep not their own Vineyard, the keeping
whereof is committed to them of God, the Spirit that works in the Children of
disobedience, will set them to plant and keep Vineyards of his, Deuteronomy. 32. 32,
-- 33.
The Vine whereof is the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fields of Gomorrah; their
Grapes are Grapes of Gall, their clusters are bitter. What account these
Husbandmen will make hereafter, to him that is the Lord of the Vineyard, for
such kind of dealing, I wish they may in time seriously consider, ever it be
too late so to do.

Neither may we omit to observe how the Apostle in the before quoted place, does
(as it were) unchristian such a busy Person, and seems to make him no better
than a Pagan or Infidel. For he puts a vast difference betwixt the sufferings
of a busy Presbyter, and those of a Christian. 1 Pet. 4. 15, -- 16.
If a Christian suffer, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this
behalf. But- if such a busie-body suffer (as it is as much pity he should go
scotfree as any of his Mates in the Text) he has as great cause to be ashamed
as a Thief or a Murderer.

The Second Gospel-command I shall instance in, is that of St. Paul to the
Thessalonians. 1 These. 4. -- 11.
Study to be quiet, and do your own business. Quietness is here enjoined under
the notion and quality of an Art or Science; for we are commanded to study it.
Proprie est honoris consequendi gratia anniti. Piscat. in loc.
(...), seek with an holy ambition, thinking it an honor to live in peace. The
quietness there commended to our ambitious endeavor, I conceive, to import,
not a quietness from motion, but from commotion or troubling of others; a
contented calm conversation, opposite to tumultuous turbulence, and restless
intermedling with things wherein others are concerned. But how shall we attain
to be masters of this Art of quietness? The means most available that way, the
Apostle prescribes in the next words, (...), to do our own business, letting
other men's matters alone to themselves. For a man then not to content himself
with his own affairs, but to mix himself with other men's; and without any
lawful appointment or allowance, to thrust himself into another's Place and
Employment, is contrary to that quietness which Christians are to study, a
manifest breach of this great Gospel-command, and consequently inconsistent
with the ordinance of God.

A Third Evangelical precept, is that of our blessed Savior. Mat. 7. 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you do ye even so to them. Sic
cum unoquoque agas tanquam tu illius indueris personam, ille tuam. Hierocles
apud Stobaeum Sermon. 84.
It is a principle both natural and divine, enjoined by our heavenly Lawgiver,
as a ground and rule of all equity amongst men. Lactantius thus comments on it:
Radix and omnis fundamentum aequitatis est illud: vide ut ne facias ulli quod
pati nolis, sed alterius animum de tuo metieris. This is the root and
foundation of all equity for a man to be careful no to do that to another,
which he would not suffer himself; but to measure another man's mind by his own.

Now I appeal to the hearts and consciences of those Ministers, that thrust
themselves now into other men's Congregations and Parishes, and there in private
houses gather together a company of disciples and followers of the more giddy
and unstable sort of People, (for such they are for the most part, that not
content with the public labors of their own Pastors, flock to private
Conventicles) and set up a course of Preaching and other Ministerial Acts:
whether, if they were Pastors of Congregations (as sometimes they were) and had
a charge of a flock of God's People committed to them (for whose Souls they and
none else, must be accountable) they would take it well, or permit it (if they
could otherwise help it) that a stranger should thrust himself into their
Parishes, and lead away a number of their People to private Assemblies in
corners, to a dependence on them for teaching, and other duties, which they
obtrude upon them as the worship and service of God, even to the forsaking and
loathing of that, which is publicly established, for waiting on them in
private? And whether, when those men were in their Pastoral charges, and in the
late time, Anabaptists, Familists, and other Sectaries, did the like, as they
themselves now do, (set up private Conventicles in several Towns and Parishes)
they did not account themselves much injured thereby, and made their Pulpits
sound loud against it, nay, oppose it by all means they possibly could? Which
is a truth sufficiently known to all that have been hearers of them, or know
their practices.

Neither will it suffice them to say, those whom they then opposed were Persons
heterodox in their judgments, and corrupt in their opinions. For,

1. So may these House-creeping Preachers be also, Quicunque malis vitam
maculaverit actis, Ad tenebras pavidus refugit, ne lumineclaro Sordida pollutae
pateant contagia mentis. Juven. l. 2.
for ought any one knows* If it be sound Divinity they Preach, it is avowable,
and publication is a fair Argument of truth. Truth seeks no corners: it is
only ashamed to be hidden; as the Sun to be clouded or eclipsed. The desire of
Secre^ie and Privacy renders their Doctrines suspicious of falsehood and error.
In the dark, gross faults are not perceived; and they are evildoers only that
are said by our Savior 1. Joh. 3. 20.
to hate the light. While men do nothing but well, they need not conceal and
hide their doings. The very Heathen (as a Divine of ours observes) did worship
their Gods sub dio, without Roofs or Coverings Dr. Don.
in a free openness; and where they could, in Temples made with Specular Stone,
Honesta semper publico gaudent, scelera secreta sunt. Cur nunquampalam loqui,
nunquam libere congregari sustinent, nisi illud quod colunt, aut puniendum est
aut pudendum.
that was transparent as Cristal, so as that they that walked without in the
Streets, might see all that was done within. And even nature it self taught the
natural man, to make that an Argument of a man truly Religious, aperto vivere
voto; that he durst pray aloud, and let the world hear what he asked at God's
hands, which duty (says he) is best performed when we join with the
Congregation in public Prayers. St. Austin has made that note upon the
Donatists that they were clanculary, clandestine Divines, Divines in corners.
And in Photius we have such a note almost upon all Heretics; as the Nestorian
was called Coluber, a Snake, because though he kept in the Garden, in the
Church, he lurked and lay hid to do mischief. And truly so long as the
Preaching of the Gospel is not persecuted, and there is no prohibition to the
contrary, as ( 2 Chronicles. 28. -- 24. Act. 16. 6.
sometimes there was) it seems to me to be contrary to the very nature of it
(herein differing from the Law, that it is not confined to any one Nation or
Place, nor is subject to ( 2 Timothy 2. 9.
bonds or restraint) to be shut up in private houses, and taught in secret, and
not rather to be published in Churches and open Places of free and common
resort. The command to the Apostles was Act. 5. 20.
Go stand and speak in the Temple to the People all the words of this Life. And
accordingly was their Practice, Act. 9. 20. Act. 13. 14. 44. It Is true the
godly in times past, had their private Meetings, in Deserts, Mountains, Dens,
and Caves of the Earth. But the case is not alike with us, as with them. The
times then were of most bloody Persecution, when neither Preacher nor
Professor escaped the Fire; and therefore were enforced to conceal themselves,
and privately to enjoy those Comforts, and discharge those Duties and Exercises
of Religion, which they could not publicly be suffered to do. But those who
set up and frequent private Meetings now, may enjoy the preaching and reading
of the Word, prayers to God, confession of Sin, profession of Faith, and
benefit of the Sacraments, in the public Assemblies of the Saints: Yea, they
are not only allowed, but commanded by Authority so to do, but they will not.
Those Teachers then that in these Halcion days of the Gospel creep into corners
to vent their Doctrines, discover themselves to be, either,

First, Seditious and Schismatical, seeking to make Parties and Divisions in
the Church. Or,

Secondly, Proud and Arrogant, preferring their own Opinions and Doctrines,
Assemblies and Persons, before all other. Or,

Thirdly, False and Erroneous; for all damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of
Perdition, which pervert and destroy Souls, are thus brought in underhand
privily, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
by such as creep into the Church of God by stealth. At least, they are
destitute of that means of justification and defense of the truth, which our
Savior Christ had, and which all Christ's Ministers in a settled Church ought
to have, viz. to appeal to the public Audience. Joh. 18. 21.
That which is publicly Preached, may be proved and tried, but not so well
that which is taught in obscurity.

2. What the Judgments and Opinions of these Men have been, and that in all
those things wherein the Peace of the Church, and the Salvation of Souls of
Christians are concerned, I mean the Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, as it
stands established in the Church of England, the World has had sufficient
knowledge and experience, by the late bloody Wars and Persecutions raised
thereabout.

3. Lastly, The question is not (as has been said) de facto, what Doctrine
these men deliver in their private Conventions, but de jure, what right they
have to Preach any, in other Men's Parishes, as they do.

Such a Person then, whosoever he be, that does that to others, which he would
not have done to himself, nay, which he has opposed and disliked in others, is
(as the Apostle calls him) (...) ( Tit. 3. 11.
condemned of himself, as sinning wittingly, and wilfully spurning against a
known truth sparkling and shining in his Conscience. The waiting on such Men's
Ministry is so far from being the Ordinance of God, that he commands all men to
Tit. 3. 10.
avoid them.

ARGUMENT. V.
THat cannot be the Ordinance of God for the working of Grace, that has no
Scripture President, or warrantable Example, to ground it on. For all the
Ordinances of God, of this kind, besides his Mandate, have also their
exemplification in Scripture, God (ordinarily) working Grace in the hearts of
Men, then, as he does now.

But this private and house-preaching, by an intruder, in a constituted Church,
where there is a Preaching Minister established, has none.

I deny not, but it may be lawful in some Cases, to have all the parts of
God's Worship used in a private House. As,

1. In case of infirmity of Body, when People are not able to come to Church.
Ecclesiastical History tells us, that in the primitive times, diverse of the new
converted Christians were Baptized, some in Prison; as appears in the story of
Basilides in L. 6. c. 5.
Eusebius. And the sick in their beds; as Epist. ad Magnum.
Cyprian declares at large. And if any were hindered by Sickness that they
could not partake of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper with the Church, it was
sent home to them by a Priest or Deacon, if it might be; if not by some other.
As appears by the example of Serapion, in an Epistle of Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, to Fabius. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 44.


2. In time of Persecution, when the doors of God's House are shut up against
us, so as that we cannot have free access to it, or liberty to join together
with the Congregation in Prayers, hearing the Word, and receiving the
Sacraments; as it was in the days of King 2 Chronicles. 28. -- 24.
Ahaz. Thus Victor reports that in the Persecution by the Vandals, the
Congregations of Christians in Africa, being through the vastations of War
deprived of their Churches, did hold their Assemblings together for Divine
Worship, wherever they could. And the same Author tells us, that because of
the rage of the Arian Heretics, the Orthodox Christians had their Meetings in
private Houses. Or in such other like Cases of special necessity.

Yet our Savior Christ in the Jewish Church, as, before he was a Preacher, his
custom was to frequent the public Assembly in Luke 4. 16.
the Synagogue every Sabbath Day; so, after he set upon the execution of that
Function, he never used to Preach privately in Houses. Hear what he says
himself, when the High Priest asked him of his Disciples and Doctrine, Joh. 18.
19, -- 20. Matt. 26. 55.
Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the World: I ever taught in the
Synagogue and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have
I said nothing. His words are plain; yet because with some Men, Fancy and
Affection do prevail over their Judgments and Reason (according to that saying
of St. Austin, Aug. cont. Julian. l. 1.
periit siquidem judicium, postquam res transiit in affectum; and nostram
qualemcunque quia nostra jam facta est, praevalere volumus sententiam)
Therefore I shall endeavor to clear the truth of our Savior's Speech in that
saying of his to the High Priest; and show, that he was always a public
orderly Preacher, and never a private irregular Conventicler. And though the
contrary could be proved, yet it would make nothing for the irregular Practice
of some in this Age whom I am disputing against, seeing the question is of such
Persons only, as have an ordinary calling to the Ministry (whereas our Savior
Christ's was extraordinary) in a settled Gospel Church (whereas the
Iewish-Church was in Christ's time expiring, and the Gospel Church beginning,)
and are intruders into other Men's Charges and Congregations, as our Savior
neither was, nor could be, seeing he was the supreme Lord of his Church, and
Heir of all things.

In those words of his, First (says he) I spoke (...), openly. The word
properly signifies freedom and liberty of Speech; which Piscator thus explains
Piscat. in 1 These. 2. 2.
Cum quis omne id dicit quod ad rem pertinet, nihil veritus offensionem eorum,
quibuscum loquitur. When a Man speaks that which properly pertains to the
matter in hand, not fearing though it offend those to whom he speaks.
Oftentimes in Scripture it signifies, o^enly. And in this place Tremelius
renders it by aperte, and Beza by palam; both openly. So that our Savior
professes here, that his Doctrine, as it was heavenly truth, and delivered
without fear of danger, or hatred of Men, or persecution of the World; so not
in a Corner or Conventicle, but openly and in public.

Secondly, I spoke (says he) not to a few Select Persons, to a gathered
Church, but (...), to the World, i. e. To all sorts of Men in the World,
without any difference or distinction, either of Nation, Place of State, even
to as many as would come to hear me. Though indeed for the most part he
Preached in Iudaea and Galilee (whence he was called Romans 15. 8.
a Minister of the Circumcision) and says, Mat. 15. 24.
that he was not sent, save unto the lost Sheep of the house of Israel: yet
doubtless sometimes he Preached to a promiscuous Company both of Jews and
Gentiles, without making any difference, Matt. 15. 21.

Thirdly, I taught, says he, in the Synagogue. There was one only Temple
among the Jews, and that was at Jerusalem: but as in other Cities and Towns of
the Jews, so also in the Metropolitan City, besides the Temple, there were
Synagogues; which were public places appointed for Prayers, Sermons, Reading,
and exposition of the Law and the Prophets to the People. And in the Synagogues
at Jerusalem, and other Towns and Cities, Christ did most frequently and
constantly Preach, as the Scriptures do abundantly testify, Matt. 4. 23. Matt.
13. 53, 54. Matt. 21. 23. Matt. 9. 35. Matt. 12. 9. Mark 1. 21. Mark 6. 2. Luke
4. 16. 21. and 44. Luke 6. 6. Ioh. 6. 59, etc.

Fourthly, He says, I not only taught in the Synagogues, but in the Temple,
the most solemn and public Place. The Temple at Jerusalem was the place where
the Priests did offer daily Sacrifices, and taught the People; to which, thrice
in the year, all the Males, from all the Coasts of Iudaea, were to resort. In
this Temple did our Savior Christ very frequently Preach, Matt. 21. 23. Luke
19. 47, etc.

Fifthly, I taught, says he, where the Jews always resort; where there was a
full and free Concourse of all the Nation of the Jews, and many Gentiles also,
from all Parts and Quarters of Iudaea.

Lastly, And in private, says he, I have said nothing. As if he had purposely
and expressly denied himself to be, what they were apt to charge him with, a
private, seditious, and Schismatical Conventicler.

It Is true, that sometimes, through so great a resort of People to him, that
neither the Synagogue nor Temple could hold them, he was fain to take Matt. 4.
ult. with Matt. 5. -- 1, 2.
a Mountain for his Pulpit. Sometimes being not able to stand quiet, for the
throng of People that crowded him, he retreated to Luke 5. 13.
a Ship, that he might be the better heard, and taught the People from thence.
Yet all this was publicly and openly to the World.

As for Religious discourse with his Disciples, or others, in private Houses,
either by way of explanation, or repetition of his public Sermons, that we
deny not, but he often used it. For we read that when he was Mark. 4. 10.
(...) alone, they that were about him with the twelve, asked him of the
Parable. But as for substance of Doctrine, it was allways public. He never
spoke privately to his Disciples, or others, but they were the same things
which he Preached publicly. He spoke not other things to them in private, than
what he spoke publicly, but in another manner. And therefore even to that
exposition of his Doctrine, which he made privately to his Disciples, he adds
Matt. 4. 21. -- 22.
Is a Candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? And not to be
set on a Candlestick? For there is nothing hid that shall not be manifested? q.
d. these Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven are therefore revealed unto you,
not that ye should Preach them in Corners, but to the whole World.

As for that place of St. Mark Mark 2. 2.
which seems to speak of Christ's Preaching in a private House; though it be
craftily urged on ignorant People, yet if rightly understood, it cannot make
ought against what has been said. For I demand, was it a truth our Savior
Christ said, I always taught in the Synagogues and in the Temple, and in
private I have said nothing, or was it not? To say the latter, were no less
than blasphemy, and to give him the lie, who is the God of truth, who knew no 1
Pet. 2. 20.
sin, neither was guile ever found in his mouth. If it was a truth (as it must
needs, without monstrous impiety, be acknowledged to be) then he ever taught in
the Synagogues, and in the Temple, and in private he said nothing. The occasion
of it was, his being called in question for his Doctrine; his answer to which
plainly declares, that as for substantials of Evangelical Doctrines, he ever
taught them openly to the World in the Jewish Synagogues and Temple. Otherwise
it would have been absurd for our Savior to have said as he did Joh. 18. 12.
to Pilate, why ask thou me of my Doctrine? ask them that heard me: Behold
they know what I have said. For Pilate could not ask the Jews that were then
present of any thing that he had said in private, seeing they were none of his
private Companions or Followers.

If therefore there be any seeming Antilogy in any other Scripture, it is not
so in reality, but appearance; it may seem so to our weakness, but it is not so
in it self. For the Holy Ghost who is the spirit of truth in one place, is so
throughout all the Scripture, without any real contradiction to it self, any
where.

Therefore to that place of St. Mark I have two things to answer. First, Ans. 1.
our English translation in that phrase ( he preached the word unto them) does
not properly nor genuinely answer the Original Greek: which is, (...), he spoke
to them; or as Beza renders it, loquebatur eis sermonem, he made a speech to
them. And Tremelius, loquebatur cum eis sermonem, he talked or discoursed with
them. Doubtless about Gospel Truths and Heavenly matters. When ever our Savior
Christ preached, or spoke Sermon-wise, the Scripture uses other words to
express it by, as (...), to teach. (...) to preach or publish as an Herald, in
open place, in the hearing of a multitude: or (...), to preach the Gospel. But
as for the word here used by the Holy Ghost (...), it is never used in
Scripture properly and strictly to signify to preach; but to speak, talk, or
discourse; which differs much from preaching. For though it be true, that
whosoever preaches, speaks; yet it is not true that whosoever speaks,
preaches. In all Languages there have ever been held a difference betwixt
speaking and preaching. Solius sacerdotis est praedicare, loqui autem communis
vulgi. Yea it is observed by the most skillfull in that Language that this word
(...) amongst Greek Authors, is still used for the worst kind of speaking or
talking. But in the New Testament indeed, it is used in a better sense, but
never properly and strictly for, to preach; but to speak as we do in common
talk or discourse. When the Devil speaks a Lie he speaks it of his own,
Joh. 8. 44. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child. 1 Cor. 13. 11. Speak the
truth every man to his neighbor. Ephesians. 4. 25. And in many other places we have
the same word used, which were most absurd to render by the word, preach. So
that all that can be rationally or certainly gathered from that saying of St.
Mark, is no more but this: That our Savior Christ seeing such a multitude of
people flock about him, took an occasion to fall into a religious discourse
with them, and to talk with them of divine and heavenly matters: whether it
were by minding them, of what he had publicly thaught, or explaining his
Pulpit-doctrines to them, we need not much trouble our selves to inquire.

But suppose he did preach (though it was not privately, Ans. 2.
but openly enough to the World, as any one that looks into the history, as it
is recorded by the Evangelists, may easily perceive) in that house, or any else
(as by his Divine prerogative he might do what he would, and that which every
private Minister is not bound to follow him in) yet how it can be made use of
to countenance those, that set up a course of house-preaching, and that in
other men's Parishes, where there are Preaching Ministers established by Law,
and where they have no manner of allowance or Authority so to do (as our
Savior Christ had) nay being forbidden by Authority (as he was not) I do not
understand. As for speaking to or with the people, in that house or any other;
or making use of that, or any other private meeting, either in separation from,
or competition with, much less in opposition to, the public Ordinances of God
then in use (as our Conventicles nowadays are used) that was far from our
Savior's meaning or practice, who improved that, and all meetings and
occasions, in subordination and direct subserviency to the Synagogue-service
and Temple-worship of the Jewish Church.

And that Christ should be a public, and not a private house-preacher, the
Scriptures did foretell long before his coming: By the Prophet Esaias. Es. 45. 19.
I have not spoken in secret, in the dark places of the earth. And by Solomon
Prove. 1. 21. 22.
wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, she cries in
the chief place of Concourse, in the opening of the gates, in the City she
utters her words. All which was spoken of Christ, who is the Wisdom of God,
Col. 2. 3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And it is
observable what Iunius notes upon those words: She cried in the chief place of
Concourse; ubicunque est maxima frequentia, sumpta l^^cutio a concionum ritu.
The form of speech is taken from the rite, order, and approved custom of
Sermons, which were ever public. Hooker 's Eccles. polit. l. 5. Sect. 18.
For things are said to be preached, not in that they are taught, but in that
they are published in open hearing of all; says Mr. Hooker.

Thus it appears our Savior Christ was no private Conventicler, or house^
creeping Preacher. He disclaims it in himself, and disallows it in his
servants^ whom he forewarns not to seek him in Corners. Mat. 24. 26.
If they shall say unto you behold he is in the desert (among those that
withdraw themselves from the public worship) go not forth: Behold he is in
the secret Chambers, believe it not. q. d. When men shall tell you, in such an
House, Parlour, or Chamber, there is one that holds forth Christ most sweetly,
let us go hear him; go not forth, believe it not. For what sweet Doctrine of
Christ, his Person, or Offices, can you hear there, which you cannot or may not
hear in the public? Why then will you baulk the way of God's appointment, and
seek Christ in ways of your own invention?

Now it is a wonder, that such as will pretend to Christ's example in
circumstantials of the smallest sort, as gestures, vestures, and such like; yet
will take boldness wilfully and constantly to swerve from his pattern in
matters of such weight, as concern men's Eternal Salvation.

Neither did the Apostles of Christ after him, ever (as the Persons in
question) thrust themselves into the places and charges one of another; But as
the World was divided amongst them (to whom they were to preach the Gospel) so
they did not intrude into one another line. They did not (...), meddle with
the cure of Souls, committed to the care and charge of others, lest God should
say unto them, who required this at your hands?

This is plain from the words of the Apostle 2 Cor. (...)
we will not boast, (...) of things without our measure, or not measured out to
us. C. A. (...) and Bez. in (...)
Significat regiones quas Deus nostrae praedicationi non destinavit, nec
admensus est. He means those Countries which God has not measured out, nor
appointed them to preach unto.

It Is likely the false Apostles were wont to glory that they had been
Itinerants, and traveled throughout all parts of the World, preaching the
Gospel. But (says St. Paul) I will glory only of this, that I have contained
my self within those Limits and Bounds which God by his providence has set me.
He has appointed me such a portion of his People to preach unto, and Calv. in
Loc.
nihil aliud appetam, vel mihi sumam. I will desire no more, nor take upon me
to meddle with any more. (...), but according to the measure of the rule which
God has distributed to us. By the word (...) (which properly signifies (...)
vocavit assignatam sibi certam veluti arvi Dominici portionem, in qua excolenda
laboraret. Beza. in Loc.
a line to measure out Land, to every owner his proper portion) the Apostle
understands (by a Metonymy) a certain quantity and portion of God's Field, the
Church, in the tilling and manuring of which, he was to labor. And (says the
v. 14.
Apostle) we stretch not our selves beyond this measure of ours. q. d. I do not
meddle or make to preach in any of those places, where I have no right so to
do; nor to till that Field that is appointed for another man to labor in; nor
to plant the Gospel in those Countries, which God has committed to another
man's care and pains.

God divided the World amongst the Apostles, distributing to every one of them
a certain portion of his people, to preach the Gospel unto, measuring it out
unto them, as it were, by line. As the Land of Canaan was divided among the
twelve tribes of Israel, the Sons of Jacob. Ps. 78. 55
( He divided them an inheritance by line: the manner whereof may be seen at
large in the Book of Ioshuah) in like manner to the twelve Apostles was the
World divided; either by a Divine appropriation, or by a voluntary partition,
to every one of them was allotted his proper portion, where he was to preach
the Gospel and plant a Church. As C. A Lapide. vid. Platina in vita Petri.
to St. Thomas, India: to St. Matthew, Ethiopia: to St. John, Asia: etc. St.
Paul was to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and St. Peter to the Jews: Gal.
2. 7. It was a great sin which God caveats his People against Deuteronomy. 19. 14.
Prove. 22. 28.
to remove their Neighbors Landmark, whereby every man's inheritance in the
Land of Canaan was limited. A great sin it is in all places; And therefore
among the Curses pronounced against the Breakers of the Law, this is the third
Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
Cursed be he that removes his Neighbors Landmark: to which all the People
were to say Amen. The Hebrews had a saying Maymon. tract. de furt. c. 7. l. 11.
He that removes his Neighbors Landmark, and takes of his Neighbors Limit
into his own, though it be but one inch; if he do it by force it is rapine, if
he do it in secret it is theft. Accordingly, the Apostles thought it a great
fault in any of them, to enter into their Neighbors Limits, or to take to
themselves but an inch of their possession; and left that to the false
Apostles, to boast in another man's line, and to intrude themselves into those
places to preach, where any other was appointed for that work. Camero praelect.
ad Mat: 16. 18, 19. page 11. col. 2.
Solicit cavebant (says Learned Camero) they were exceeding careful not to
entrench one upon the other, or not to preach the Gospel in those places where
others were appointed to preach, nisi forte vel obiter, vel necessaria de
Causa, unless it were in transitu, only in a Journey, as St. Paul at Rome, as
he traveled into Romans 15. 24.
Spain, or upon some other extraordinary occasion. Therefore the Apostle says,
he did (...) Romans 15. 20.
ambitiously study and endeavor, not to preach the Gospel where Christ was
named lest he should build upon another man's Foundation: But to keep within his
Line, amongst the People appointed for his pains in the Ministry. Not, but that
he might, upon occasion preach elsewhere: for we read that he preached at
Damascus Act. 9. 20.
where those Christians were which he would have brought bound to Jerusalem.
But this was occasionally, not purposely. As a Minister now may do, when he
travels from his own place, and has occasion to stay abroad, upon request or
leave, bestow his pains elsewhere. As Clemens Clem. constit. L. 2. c. 48.
tells us it was the custom of the primitive times, that if any Bishop or
Presbyter came to another, he was entreated to preach. But concerning St.
Paul's preaching abroad out of his own precincts, whether upon entreaty, or
otherwise, we need not inquire, seeing he had an Apostolical power, which was
of universal extent in it self, and such as no Minister now can lay claim to.
His Commission was (as the rest of the Apostles were) general, and (originally)
not confined to any one place, as other Ministers are, but they were to teach
all Mat. 28. 19.
Nations. Yet because every one of them could not travel and preach in every
Country, therefore it pleased the Lord afterward in Wisdom, for good Causes,
to order it (as it were) by a second Decree, that Paul should specially have a
care of, and preach to the Act. 22. 21. Romans 1. 5. 1 Timothy 2. 7. Gal. 2. 7.
Gentiles. Yet this did no way diminish his Apostolical Authority, nor forbid
him from preaching at all to the Jews, or Peter to the Gentiles, if occasion
did serve; for of Paul it is expressly said Act. 9. 15.
that he was to carry Christ's Name both to the Gentiles and to the Children of
Israel. And it is generally believed that he was the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. And of St. Peter it is not doubted that he both at Antioch and
elsewhere, preached the Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles. The Apostolical power
did extend to all Nations, but the Convenience of the Church did require that
some of them should be fixed to one sort of People in one place, and some to
another. It Is true, St. Paul says he was 2 Cor. 11. 28.
troubled with the care of all the Churches. i. e. as he was an Apostle, so the
care of all the Churches lay upon him, quod ad jus attinet, and potestatem,
(says Camero) he had right and power, to take care of all the Churches, as an
Apostle, and so differing from all Bishops and Presbyters now. And doubtless
(as all good Ministers of Christ do) he did take all the care that lawfully he
might, or could, of the whole Church of Christ; especially of all those within
his own precincts, and of his own planting; which, by an usual Synecdoche in
Scripture, are termed, all. Yet (...), for order and peace sake, it pleased God
that their persons and labors should be appointed for several distinct parts
of the World, as in his infinite Wisdom he saw was most convenient, for the
better propagation of the Gospel of Christ, in all the World. And it is the
observation of the Excellent Divine Martin Chemnitius in his Commentary on that
temporary precept of our Savior Christ to his Disciples. Mat. 10. 5, 6.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, etc. Chemnit. Harm. Evang. c. 72. page
1025.
Hoc temporarium praeceptum fideles verbi Dei ministros admonet, ut singuli se
intra metas legitimae suae vocationis, ad pascendum illum Dei gregem, qui ipsis
commissus est (1 Pet. 5. 2.) contineant, nec latius evagentur, aut falcem suam
in alterius pastoris messem, nisi speciali concessione vel vocatione, mittant.
This temporary percept does warn all the faithful Ministers of God's word, that
all of them should contain themselves within the bounds of their lawful
Calling, to feed that flock of God that is committed unto them, and not to
wander abroad or thrust their hook into the harvest of another Pastor, without
his special leave or calling.

By all which it appears that a forcible or surreptitious entry of one
Minister, into another's charge, is destitute of all Scripture president or
allowance; and therefore cannot be the Ordinance of God.

The Example of the Apostles meeting and preaching sometimes in private Houses,
I conceive, cannot (but most impertinently) be urged to defend the practice I
here dispute against. For,

1. It Is not to the question, which is, of a settled constituted Church, where a
preaching Ministry is established by Law. The Christian Church in the Apostles
days, was not ^etled and established, as is ours, but in a way to be so.

2. The Magistrate was then heathen all the World over, ours now Christian.
Public preaching and Christian meetings, were not then suffered; our
Church Assemblies, are not only allowed and protected, but commanded by
Sovereign Authority.

3. They had then, either none at all, or very few Christian-Churches erected,
and so were forced to meet where they could; we want not Churches, but hearts
to resort to them.

4. The Apostles had a general and extraordinary call to preach any where,
through all Coasts and Parts of the World, where they were appointed to plant
Churches; so have not the Persons in question. The office of an Apostle or
Evangelist is now ceased.

5. It can never be proved, that the Apostles did, or would have made use of
their private meetings, either in competition with or opposition to the public
Ordinances of God (as our modern Conventicles are) but in subserviency
(according as the necessity of those times did require) to what public and
solemn Assemblies, they could then, or might in aftertimes, enjoy. For as our
Savior made use of all private Conferences and Meetings, not in separation
from, competition with, or opposition against, but in professed subserviency to
the Synagogue-service, and Temple-worship of the Jewish Church; so I am
persuaded, that the Apostles of Christ, together with the primitive Christians,
would have done the like, had the case in their time, with respect to the
public exercise of Christian Religion, been the same, or the like to what it
was in our Savior Christ's time, with respect to the public exercise of the
Religion of the Jews. But forasmuch as there were no Conventions for public
exercise of Christian Religion permitted or commanded in those times, until
the Roman Empire, and other Kingdoms of the World, became Christian; it was
therefore a thing impossible, that the private Meetings of the Apostles and
those primitive Christians, should be so made use of, in subordination to the
public Assemblies as were the private Meetings of our Savior and his
Disciples in the Jewish Church. So that the case and condition of Christianity
in the primitive times, is so different from, and contrary to, what it is in
the Church of England, where the public worship is protected, and commanded by
Authority, that their private Meetings cannot possibly hold any proportion or
similitude with ours. So that to argue from private Meetings in those times of
persecution of Christianity, to private Meetings in England in these days, is
to take away the subject of the question, and then to argue the case.

6. Neither did one Apostle then thrust himself into the place where another
was to labor, but contained himself within the compass of his Line, and
portion of God's People that he was appointed to preach to. But the matter in
question is of a quite contrary nature, viz. of a silenced Minister's intruding
himself in amongst a People, over whom there is a preaching Ministry
established, and there taking upon him to gather Conventions, teach that People
and perform ministerial Acts amongst them contrary to good Laws, without the
consent, yea against the allowance of the Pastor of the place. So that neither
the example of our Savior Christ, nor of his Apostles can be brought to
justify or allow any such practice.

ARGUMENT. VI.
THAT which God in his word has branded with a black mark, forewarning and
commanding his People to avoid, cannot be his ordinance or means of grace. For
it is not God's manner to stygmatize or disgrace his own ordinances, or to
forbid or discourage any in the use of them; but to dignifie, advance the
honor, and strictly to enjoin the use of them: as knowing that the Devil and
his instruments will sufficiently vilify and disgrace them, and that there
will be enough in all ages, who will disuse and forsake them. Yea God has so
far dignified his ordinances of the word and sacrament; (which he intends to
make use of as means of grace) that when he might have wrought it in men's
hearts immediately by his own spirit, yet he has put them off to his Ministers
to do it, which is no small honor. The case of the Eunuch in the Acts makes
this plain, Act. 8. 29.
The Spirit bad Philip join himself to the Chariot. Yea when God himself has
begun the work, yet he would not perfect it himself, but has handed it over to
his Ministers, to be completed by them. This he did at the Conversion of St.
Paul, Act. 9. 17.
He sent Ananias to him, who entered into the House, and put his hands on him
and said, Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus which appeared to thee in the way
as thou came) has sent me that thou should receive thy sight, and be
filled with the Holy Ghost. What greater honor than this, could God have put
upon his Ordinance of the Ministry?

But he has set a black mark, and brand upon the Persons and Ministry in
question, and commanded a withdrawing from them. Romans 16. -- 17, 18. (...)
scl't attente and diligenter quasi hosts e speculaa observare. Beza.
Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: for they that
are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. The Emphasis of the
Apostles words is worthy our observation. Mark them, signifying such a
diligent, wary, and circumspect care, as Watchmen use that stand on an high
Tower to descry the approach of an Enemy. They mark diligently all Comers, and
give notice according as they apprehend any danger, for the preservation of the
City. And avoid them; as dangerous Persons, hurtful to Christian Society. And
how sweet and fair soever their words seem to be, yet they will 2 Timothy 2. 17.
eat as does a Canker. They give not their poison, but wrapped up in Honey. Their
smooth Language is their net, wherewith they catch many a simple Soul, that is
not exceeding careful lest any man should beguile him (as Ioab did 2 Samuel 20.
-- 9, 10.
Amasa) with enticing words. Their flattering speeches and specious pretenses
of Purity and Doctrine, and tenderness of Conscience, tend to no other, but to
deceive the simple and unwary, to get themselves a maintenance, and to fill
their own bellies, they are like the false Apostles in the Church of Corinth 2
Cor. 11. -- 13. 20.
who transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ, yet were but
deceitful workers, to bring that People into bondage, to devour them, and to
take of them.

How guilty the persons in question are, of causing Divisions amongst People
wherever they come, of renting the Unity of the Church, and disturbing the
peace thereof; of giving offense to Rulers and Governors by their constant and
wilful violation of all Ecclesiastical and Civil order and discipline, is too
notoriously known by sad experience in all places. And whether the other
Character in the text, belongs to them, that they are (...), and seek not so
much men's Souls (for therein they may spare their pains as needless, where
there is a preaching Ministry established) as their purses. (...) 2 Cor. 2. 17.
making merchandise of the word of God; their hearers and followers are best
able to tell, and will (I think) in a while, be weary of it. In the mean time,
we that are Pastors of Flocks, find by experience, in those places where these
persons intrude themselves, that the People are ready to pull their own
Ministers bread out of their mouths, to feed those their new Masters, live we
never so blamelesly, and take we never so much pains amongst them, for the good
of their Souls. Yea, they hate those their Ministers most, who best deserve
their love, and lay most obligations on them. According to that of the
Philosopher, Sen.
Leve aes alienum debitorem facit, grave, inin^icum. A bad Debtor when he owes
but a small sum, will be contented to look toward you; but when it is great,
more than he can well pay, or, as much as he thinks he can get, then he will be
glad to be rid of you.

Again: The Apostle foretells, that toward the latter end of the World (and
surely those days are come upon us) 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6.
Perilous times shall come, and there shall be many that shall creep into
houses, and lead Captive silly Women --; from such turn away. And whom do the
men (we are speaking of) most prevail upon, and draw after them? but easy and
unstable souls, such as have itching Ears, always learning and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth, well meaning People that are spurred on
with zeal, and want judgment to hold the reins, Saepe fit ut qui falsum ex una
part apparens vident, ejus fugiendi studio abrepti longius, non in verum
deveniant, sed in falsum alia part positum, atque ita errorem non exuunt sed
mutent. Hug. Grotius, in disquisit. Pelagiana. page 1.
many times an over vehement bending into some way of our own choosing, does not
only withdraw us from the left hand way, the way of Idolatry and Superstition
(from which we should all withdraw) but from the middle way too, in which we
should all walk. And then the danger is great. The Devil does many times make
zeal and religion his instrument, to drive men on to incredible extremities of
impiety. For, if he cannot take away men's faith, yet he will quench their
Charity to others, even to those to whom they owe it most. For Hooker Ec^^es.
polit. ^. 5. sect. 3.
zeal, except it be ordered aright, when it bends it self to conflict with
things either indeed, or but imagined to ^e opposite to Religion, uses the
razor many times with such eagerness, that the very life of Religion is thereby
hazarded, through hatred of tares, the corn in the field is plucked up. So that
zeal needs both ways a sober guide. Zeal against Poperty (says another
learned Author, who conceals his name) except it be bridled by discretion, and
attended by equal pace of strength, is not the way to protect, but to betray a
cause. Those that were lately zealous for the good old cause, lost it; and the
King had not better friends, than his most implacable Enemies. Fury is as bad
in a Champion, as torpour; it is an even temperature of wisdom and valor that
does the execution. A sober Protestant though he rages less, shall prevail
more on a Papist, than a mad Fanatique. The greatest part of zeal against
Popery that is found amongst the Nonconformists, is like that of one frantic,
who wounds himself, whilst he would strike his foe. They cannot confute it
without condemning themselves. This unguided zeal will be sure to run far
enough from Popery, and so runs into it; as he that sails round the Globe, the
farther he goes, after he is half way, the nearer he approaches to the place
whence he set out. The Quakers, a considerable part of the Nonconformists,
railed at Popery, till they began to be taken for Jesuits, or their Disciples.

The like Stygma the Apostle St. Jude casts upon such Persons, There are Jude 4.
certain men crept in unawares, etc. (...). How disgracefully and disdainfully
the Scripture seems to speak of them, who irregularly, and contrary to good
order and lawful appointment, intrude themselves, as Teachers, into the
Church, under pretense of Religion! They (...) subrepo, furtim intro.
creep in amongst People; they come in by stealth, as if they came in at a
Window or Backdoor, insinuating themselves into flocks and societies of God's
People, creeping to Conventicles; professing themselves to be the only
Gospel-preachers, and pure Worshippers of God, as if all Religion were lost,
except what they bring and profess: Whereas they are indeed (unless we will
mince the Appellation the Holy Scripture fastens on them) but a new sort of
Creepers gotten into the body of the Church. From such (says the Holy Ghost) 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6.
turn away.

Again, St. Paul, 2 These. 3. 6.
Now we command you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not
according to the Tradition he has received from us. With more Apostolical
Gravity and Authority, a Duty cannot be urged on Christians, than this, of
withdrawing or separating from such, as walk (...), disorderly. The Metaphor
(say Expositours) is borrowed from the custom of War; wherein every Soldier
has his proper station and employment appointed him, from which when he
swerves, he becomes (...), out of his rank. Now in an Army, every Officer has
his place, Company and Command assigned him by his General, whereunto he must
keep, and from which he must not stir. And if he should leave his place, and
take upon him, either to make an attempt on the Enemy of his own head, without
Commission and Orders from his General, though with never so good success; or
Command in another Company, than that which is assigned and allotted to him by
Authority, he is guilty of a breach of that (...), good order and discipline
that ought to be in an Army, and brings in a most odious and destructive
disorder and confusion: and so deserves to be either quite cashiered, or
otherwise by Martial Law severely to be punished. Yea, so absolutely necessary
has it been thought, in the opinion of experienced Soldiers, that the Laws
and Orders of Martial-discipline in an Army should be strictly observed, that
whosoever have erred from it, though in the least Punctilio, have been adjudged
worthy of death without mercy. Famous to this purpose is that story we read in
Valerius Maximus, of Manlius Torquatus Consul of the Romans in the Latin War,
who commanded his own Son to be beheaded, for fighting the Enemy without his
Father's Privity and Command, though he was provoked thereunto by Geminius
Metius General of the Tusculans, and although he had obtained a signal Victory,
and very much and rich spoil: Valor. Max. L. 2. c. 7.
Sati^s esse judicans patrem forti silio, quam patriam militari disciplina
carere: Judging it better that a Father should be deprived of a valiant Son,
than that his Country should want Military discipline. The Church is by Christ
twice together in one place Cant. 6. 4. 10.
said to be an Army with banners: he that is the Commander in chief is God
himself, holy, just and wise; not the Author of Confusion, but the institutour
and lover of order, and the hater and punisher of such as wilfully transgress
such good rules of wholesome discipline, as he, either immediately by himself or
mediately by his Deputies on earth, shall establish amongst his People. And is
Discipline so needful in an Army, and can it be thought needless in the
Church? Is our spiritual warfare of less danger of concernment than our bodily?
Shall it be thought to be a venial offense, to be committed without danger,
when a person shall undertake to intrude himself into the place and company of
another, and lead on, and engage a Party in the Church militant, into ways of
schism and profaneness, in opposition to the way of true Religion and Worship
of God established, not only without any lawful allowance, but contrary to
all Law and Discipline, both Civil and Ecclesiastical? The baseness and
wickedness of such doings, is excellently displayed by Learned Doctor Henry
More in his Apology annexed to the second part of Page 549.
his enquiry into the Mystery of iniquity. Because some men (says he) think
themselves of more popular gifts for Prayer and Exhortation; for these to spur
out, and run on in a Career, without attending the direction of their
Superiors, were as if the Toy should take those Troopers that are best horsed,
to set madly a gallopping, because they find their horses will go so freely,
and so turn the orderly. March of the Army into a confused Horse-race, and put
themselves into a rout, even without the assault or pursuit of any Enemy.

Can it be pleasing to Christ that any should follow such men in their
irregular and hare-brain'd ways, when his Apostle bids all men 2 These. 3. 6.
from such to withdraw? To what end should there be such flocking after them,
unless their followers could be partakers of some spiritual benefit from them?
But this cannot be. For their disorderly walking, and busy meddling where they
have not to do, renders all they do unprofitable, and is (in effect) a
spending of a great deal of pains, to no purpose; wearying themselves out to
weave the Spiders Webb, and to sow to the wind. The Apostle does most
excellently express it in a most elegant allusion of words, (...), Sir. nihil
quicquam operantes nisi vana.
working not at all, but are busybodies. Their work is neither lawful, nor
profitable. For seeing that the Ministers of Christ are disposed of in the
Church (...) Col. 1. 25.
according to the dispensation of God; it does follow, that those things which
they teach or do, receive their force and effect not from their own wills and
authority, but from the Authority, Approbation and Concurrence of him that
sends them. And therefore what a Minister does contrary to the will of God,
cannot be of any force or effect at all, as to the accomplishment of the end,
on men's souls, for which God ordained the Ministry, for he is bound to preach
not only those things, but in that manner as God has appointed.

God's Command for a separation and withdrawing from such dividing,
house-creeping, and disorderly Persons, must needs argue their Ministry not to
be his ordinance, since he so brands it, and gives such Cautions against it.

ARGUMENT. VII.
THAT cannot be the Ordinance of God for the working of grace, that is
performed without any manner of Commission or Authority. For the necessity of
keeping that good order which God has commanded in his Church, requires, that
no man should attempt any thing of that important nature and high concernment,
upon his own head, or, by a power derived no higher than from himself.
Whosoever shall take upon him to preach God's word, in order to the Conversion
or saving of souls, must be able to give a good answer, to that question which
the chief Priest and Elders of the People, put to our Savior Christ, when he
was teaching in the Temple. Mat. 21. 23.
By what Authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this Authority?
He that cannot make a sufficient and satisfactory reply to it, and yet shall
adventure upon the work, may justly be accounted rash, indiscreet, and more
hasty than needs, or than wisdom requires.

But such is the Ministry in question; undertaken without any Authority or
Commission. For all the Authority and Commission that a Minister has, in a
constituted settled Church, he receives in his ordination. Before that, he had
no Authority or Warrant at all to preach the word, or to perform any
ministerial Act. Now all the Authority that a Minister of the Church of England
has delivered to him in his ordination, is expressed in these words: Take thou
Authority to preach the word, and to administer the Holy Sacraments in the
Congregation where thou shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.

In which words it is plain that the exercise of his Ministry is restrained to
lawful appointment, as to the place where it shall be exercised. What that
lawful appointment is, I need not trouble my self or the reader here, to look
into, seeing the Ministry in question has not the least color of it, or
pretense to it, for it is supposed to be in a place where there is another
lawfully appointed to perform the same. In the Council of Chalcedon (where
there were 630 Fathers met, about the year of our Lord 451) It was thus decreed
Council. Chalced. Can. 6.
Neminem absolute ordinari jubemus, Presbyterum, aut Diaconum, nec quemlibet in
Ecclesiastica ordinatione constitutum: Eos autem qui absolute ordinantur
decrevit sancta synodus vacuam habere manus impositionem. That none should be
ordained absolutely, whether Presbyter or Deacon, or any in Ecclesiastical
orders: and whosoever should be absolutely ordained, the Holy Synod decreed his
ordination void. And the 33th Canon of the Church of England ^aith, That it
has been long since provided by many Decrees of ancient Fathers, that none
should be admitted either Deacon or Priest, who had not first some certain
place where he might use his function.

For though in ordination the person ordained is made a Minister of the
Catholic Church; and being ordained to a function, he may (by the appointment
of those that have Authority in the Church, or with leave of the Pastor of the
Congregation) preach any where: And although (as Mr. Baines observes) It is
good P. Balnes in Ephesians. 3. 2.
for a Minister to be like a young Woman, so full breasted, that she can both
feed her own Child, and lend a draught, upon entreaty, to her Neighbors: Yet
he is not a Catholic Minister of the Church (as the Apostles and Evangelists
were, whose office, being extraordinary, is long since ceased in the Church,)
and therefore ought not to take upon himself to preach any where.

Neither yet did the Apostles themselves do so, (as has been proved) though
their Commission was without Limit, as to place. But kept within their Line
measured forth by God to them. It was never God's intention that the two Tribes
of Levi, and Gad, should be confounded one with another; nor is it any way
agreeable with Scripture rules and order, that a Minister should be, a wandering
star, but fixed regularly in some Orb of the Church, as a Pastor of some Flock
or Congregation of his People.

Seeing therefore none is lawfully appointed to perform the ministerial
function, or any part of it, in such a place as is in question, but the
Minister of that Congregation; acts of the Ministry done by any other Person
that shall intrude himself among them, without and against his consent,
contrary to lawful appointment, and all good constitution that concern
admission of Ministers to pastoral charges, are done without any Authority,
Commission, or effect; and consequently cannot be God's Ordinance, who does not
use to send any to preach in order to the working of grace in means hearts,
without any Power or Authority, yea against both.

ARGUMENT. VIII.
THAT cannot be the ordinance of God, as instrumental to the work of grace,
that instead of building up People in Faith and Holiness, demolisheth Christian
Duty, and, in the natural tendency of it, produces sinful and pernicious
effects. It Is true, these may accidentally follow, through the Corruption of
man's nature, and Satan's suggestions, upon the most right and purest
dispensation of God's word and ordinances. St. Peter speaks of some 1 Pet. 2. 8.
that stumble at the word. And St. Paul 2 Cor. 2. 16.
says, to some we are the savor of death unto death, as to other some, the
savor of life unto life. The word preached (like the water of jealousy) Numb.
5. -- 27, 28.
when it is received into an honest and good heart, it does it good, and makes
it fruitful; but when into a corrupt, it does hurt and causes it to rot. Yet
the most proper intent, and genuine fruit and effect of it, is to do good, to
inlighten, convince, convert, and save means souls.

But the Ministry in question does directly produce sinful and pernicious
effects, and such as a tender heart may tremble to think on. I would not have
the reader expect that I should here make a particular enumeration of every one
of those sinful fruits and effects, that are produced by the Ministry of
intruders, and upholders of Conventicles: for that is a thing no more possible
for me to do, than it is for any man particularly to reckon up every one of
the many thousands of absurdities that will unavoidably follow in dispute,
Posito uno absurdo mill sequuntur.
upon one that is granted or yielded to. I will content my self therefore (and
let the reader do the like) with the mention of so many of them only, as I
here use arguments against the practice which is the proper cause of them, and
thousands more.

First, it tends to the breaking of that bond of near relation, that is, and
ought to be betwixt a Pastor and his flock. Though it be a truth well known to
but a few in this age, and little considered by any, yet it is nevertheless
certain and undoubted, that there is a very intimate relation betwixt a lawful
Pastor and his People. The Scripture seems to assert a kind of Matrimonial
union betwixt them. A Minister is, after a sort, married to that Congregation
over whom he is lawfully set; and they to him. Our legal incumbency on a
Church, is our Marriage to that Church. Hence is that phrase of the Apostle to
the Corinthians 2 Cor. 11. 2.
I am jealous over you with a Godly jealousy. Sumpta est metaphora a procis
zelotypis, as Beza notes; a Metaphor taken from the manner of a Person espoused
to a Woman, who cannot endure any one to be a Companion or sharer with him in
her affections. For as a King cannot endure a rival with him in his Kingdom,
nor an Husband in the Marriage Bed.

(...). So neither can a Minister in his Parish. And though in regard of
internal, spiritual, everlasting, and inseparable union, Christ himself is the
Husband of the Catholic Church. Romans 7. 4.
Yet in regard of external and ministerial duty, Romans 19. 7.
a particular Minister of Christ, John 3. 29.
may be said to be married to that particular flock or portion of God's People,
over whom, in a regular and orderly manner, the Holy Ghost has set him. This
made St. Ambrose expound that place of St. Paul ( 1 Timothy 3. 2.
A bishop must be the Husband of one wife) allegorically Ambros. ut citatur a
Coto^ exc. 4. de dig. Sacerd.
unius uxoris. Si ad superficiem tantum literae respiciamus, prohibet digamum
Episcopum ordinari: si vero ad altiorem sensum conscendamus, inhibet Episcopum
duas usurpare Ecclesias. If we respect the Letter of the text (says he) St.
Paul forbids any that has had two Wives to be ordained a Bishop: Vid.
Hieronymi Epist. Oceano p. 676. Ne virginalis pauperculae societate contempta,
ditioris adulterae quaerat amplexus.
but if we ascend to an higher sense, he forbids a Bishop to take to himself
two Churches. And St. Hierome argues out of those words ( Ephesians. 5.) Husbands
love your wives: Audiant Episcopi, audiant Presbyteri, audiant Doctores
subjectis suis se esse subjectos. Let Bishops, Priests, and Doctors learn in
this, that when they have married themselves to a Flock or Congregation, they
are become subject to their Subjects. How? subject to their Subjects? What are
they become inferior to their Flocks? In no wise. These. 3. 11.
They are over you in the Lord (says St. Paul) underlings then they are to
none of them. But they are so subject to their flock, as an Husband is subject
to his Wife, and no otherwise; Now she is to be subject to him, and he (by
God's Law) to Genesis 3. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 3.
rule over her. So that the subjection he means, is the subjection of Love. As
Pliny told Trajan the Emperor Plin. adus in Epist. Trajano. see 1 King. 12. 7.
Nihil magis a te subjecti animo factum est, quim quod imperare coepisti. A
King does nothing so like a subject, as to love his subjects, to devise ways,
and to use his power for their good. Such a subjection is that of the Husband
to the Wife, and that of a Pastor to his flock, to whom he is married, and to
no other. Whence (as Mr. Prinn observes) Legal. vesol p. 6.
he is styled, Parochus, and his People, Parochia, by the Canonists and
Lawyers, because he is espoused to that peculiar Parish. And to this agrees
the 15 th Canon of the Nicene Council, Council, Nicen. Can. 15.
matrimonium inter Episcopum and Ecclesiam esse contractum, etc.

There are several things that prove a very near relation betwixt a lawful
Pastor and his People.

1. The titles the Holy Ghost gives in Scripture to Ministers and their People.
They are called watchmen, and shepherds, Es. 62. 6. These, their flock over
whom they watch and whom they keep. Act. 20. 28. They are called Fathers. 2.
King. 6. 21. 1 Cor. 4. 15. 1 These. 2. 11. These, their Children. 1 Cor. 4. 14.
2 Cor. 6. 13. ^al. 4. 19. 1 Timothy 1. 2. Philom. 10. 1 Ioh. 5. 21. Ministers are
called husbandmen, and builders; and their people, God's tillage, and building,
1 Cor. 3. 9. They, are called steward* their people, God's household, to whom
they are to give their portion of meat. Lu^. 12. 41.

2. The duties imposed by God on either party, prove a very near relation
betwixt them. As a Minister is commanded to take Act. 20. 28.
the oversight of them; to 1 Pet. 5. 2.
feed them; and to perform the office of a faithful servant of Christ, that he
may Heb. 13. 17.
give an account to him; for his flock. So the People also are charged with
many duties toward their Pastors. As,

1. To know and love them dearly? as the Galatians did Gal. ^. 14. 15.
St. Paul, and as he enjoins all Christians to do toward their Ministers. 1
These. 5. -- 12, 13.
We beseech you Brethren, to know them that labor amongst you, and over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly in love for their works
sake. Indeed the vulgar Latin, read it, ut noveritis. But Beza renders it, ut
adnoscatis, that you acknowledge them as your Pastors and Teachers. And (as
Zanch. in Loc.
Learned Zanchi) pro pastoribus vestris ac patribus reverenter amplectamini,
that ye reverently receive and embrace them as your Pastors and Fathers. And
as David says in the^ ^^^lms Ps. 101. 4.
I will not know a wicked per^^^ (where, not to know, is to contemn) so, to
know, is to have in reverence and honor. Thus our Savior professes to wicked
men Matt. 7. 23.
I never knew you. Which places are urged both by Beza and Zanchi, to prove
their exposition. And that you highly esteem them in love. (...). Some read
it, abundantly: Some, exceedingly: It properly signifies, more than
exceedingly; Love in abundance; in an overflowing measure; an overplus of love.
Beza renders the same expression in another place Bez. in Ephesians. -- 3. 20.
summa cum exuperantia, with the greatest exuberance of love. And here, ut
supra modum charos ducatis, that you account them above measure dear to you.

2. To obey them, and submit to their pastoral office and rule over them. Heb.
13. 17.

3. To afford them an honorable and liberal maintenance. Matt. 10. 10. 1 Cor.
9. 6-15. Romans 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6-8. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Not out of charity, as a
free gift; but of justice, as a due debt. 3 Ioh. 9.

4. To seek their comfort, and to give them all du^^ encouragement, that they
may do the work of the Ministry among them, with joy and not with grief. Heb.
13-17.

All which duties would not have been enjoined on both parties, pastor and
people, were there not a very near relation between them. Whereas none at all
of these are required either of a stranger, to them; or of them to a stranger.
And this is the Language both of the Presbyterian, and Independent Ministers,
when they speak of the relation that is betwixt them and their People, they
say, Vindicat. of Presbytery. p. 123.
they are married to their Flock.

Now where one of these Demagogues, and Patrons of Conventicles shall intrude
himself into a Town or Parish, and take upon him there to set up a course of
house-preaching, to administer the Sacraments, to visit the sick, and such like
duties to the Ministry (as they do) it tends directly to the breaking this
bond and near relation that is betwixt Pastor and People; and breeds such
alienation of affection in them, toward him, as was betwixt the Jews and
Samaritans, between whom the Scripture says John 4. 9.
there was no ^onverse. For, they being conscious to themselves of the guilt of
that, (which upon a general, presumption, they cannot but believe, he can in no
wise take well at their hands) viz. that they should put themselves under the
Ministry of another they will grow to such a degree of strangeness to him, as
to shun common neighborhood and acquaintance with him; yea they will easily
account him their greatest Enemy (as Ahab did Elijah, or the Galatians did St.
Paul) because he does not flatter them in tha^* which, how wicked and unlawful
soever it be, is therefore the sweeter to them, because forbidden, and enjoyed
(as it were) by stealth. For Prove. 9. 17, -- 18.
stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; though the
end Medio de font leporum surgit amari aliquid.
of such ill gotten delight be in the depth of hell. What esteem can they have
of their Minister's Person or Office, which are looked upon by them, as either
needless or indifferent, if not tedious and burdensome? What regard to his
Doctrine, which (as experience shows us) is, and will be so lightly set by,
that some will wholly forsake attendance on it, others come to hear (as there
is too much cause to doubt) more out of curiosity than necessity, and (as some
have not been ashamed to confess) rather to (...) (as those that listened to our
Savior's Sermons Matt. 22. 15.
to catch him in his discourse) than to learn or to practice? And so the Pulpit
which is God's Tribunal, is made their bar, and they Jam. 4. 11.
become not doers of the Law, but Judges. What dependence can a People have on
their own pastor, in his discharge of ministerial Duties amongst them, where
some are reduced into a perfect revolt from him, other brought to a loose
indeterminacy in Divine worship and Church Communion, and all to a Lukewarm
indifference what Ministry they enjoy; and Church Assemblies are made matter of
Complement rather than necessity. Usurpation and intrusion, as it shall never
want store of friends and favorers among the ignorant and unstable vulgar, be
it never so unjust; so the more abbettours and maintainers it has in any
place, the greater must the defection needs be from him, to whom they own their
adherence.

And thus will that golden chain of relation, that is, and ought to be betwixt
a Pastor and his People, by this means be wholly dissolved, and those put
asunder whom God bath joined together. For, as it is in a marriage, it is not
the having of an Husband, that makes the Wife honest, chaste and undefiled, but
her loving her Husband, and keeping her self wholly to him, otherwise the
Wedlock bond is broken: so in this union betwixt Pastor and People, it is not
the having a Minister, that maintains and upholds the relation and conjunction,
that God would have to continue between them; but the acknowledging of him,
keeping to him, and depending on him in the Lord, for all ministerial Acts to
be performed by him, among them; otherwise, the knot of unity that ought to be
betwixt them, is untyed.

Now here I could tell the Reader so lamentable a story, of the truth of this
sad effect, which upon mine own experience I have found, of this usurpation and
intrusion, I am now disputing against, that if he be such a one, as has any
fear of God before this eyes, any zeal for his house, worship and service, or
any care of the Unity and Peace of the Church, it would make both his ears at
the hearing of it tingle.

My Parish was a Virgin, pure and undefiled, free from all invadours and
underminers of her Chastity, till about four years since, when the Act of
Parliament for the removal of such of the Nonconformist ministers, as refused
to take the oath therein prescribed, out of all Corporations, sent or
occasioned one of them (not to preach but) to inhabit amongst us. Before whose
coming, there was not a Congregation in the Country (that I know) for so many
People (being near 1000 souls) more entire, more unanimous, more constant at
all parts of public worship, more free from all inclination to schism,
separation, or any of the reigning Epidemical faults of this Age. We had then
what happiness we could desire, and (it seems) greater than we deserved. When
the ground all about us, was wet with the showers of schism and profaneness,
we (like Gideon's fleece) were dry. But because we gave not God thanks
sufficient, he suffered Satan to erect Altar contra Altar (for so went the
style of the ancient Church for schism, which in our modern Dialect is) a
Conventicle against the Church. Now, that Congregation which was before entire,
is now miserably divided, and those that lived under the oversight and teaching
of one lawful Pastor (as a chaste Wife under the guidance of her own Husband)
according to God's Holy Ordinance, are gone aside to others, and admit of the
unlawful embraces of strangers.

I could tell the Reader of some of those people, Claudite quaeso aures qui
audituri estis, ne tantae impictatis vocibus polluamini.
who were formerly constant attendants on all parts of divine Worship, that are
now by this means totally gone off ( non fugati, sed fugitivi, as say the
Brethren of the Presbyterian way, of the Independents) and for the space of
several years, have not set their foot over the threshold of God's house: yea,
so far are they withdrawn, and to so high and impious an abhorrency of God's
public Worship are they brought, as to detain their very Children from public
Baptism. They are modelled (as they call it) into a new Church Way for the
enjoyment of Ordinances. And no wonder; for the Scripture tells us, that
besides God's Church, Satan will have his too. There is Ecclesia Credentium,
and Ecclesia Malignantium; according to that of David Ps. 26. 5.
odi Ecclesiam malignantium: I have hated the Congregation of Evil doers. And
Tertul. l. 4. contra Marcion. 1.
Tertullian tells us, faciunt favos and vespae, faciunt Ecclesias and
Marcionitae. Wasps make Combs, but empty ones; Schismatics and Sectaries make
Churches, but false ones; Lactant. lib. 4. divinarum inst. cap. 30.
Singuli quique coetus haereticorum se potissimum Christianos, and suam esse
Ecclesiam Catholicam putant; says Lactantius.

Of others I could relate, that upon this sad occasion are in part revolted
from the public Assemblies of the Saints; and though they live near enough to
the Church, yet come thither but now and then, and that, to hear a Sermon
only, and to no other part of divine Service: To satisfy curiosity, I
suppose, rather than Conscience; wherein they seem to discover much of
Hypocrisy, but nothing of Piety. For, I would demand of them, do they well,
or ill, when they come? If well; why then come they not at all times, when they
may? If ill; why then come they at any time? What moves them at any time to
approach the place where God's honor dwells? Is it because he has commanded
it, or to do him any service thereby? I ask him again, whether has not he
commanded the public Service of the whole day, as well as a part? A Lamb at
the Evening Exodus 29. 39, 41.
as well as a Lamb in the Morning? Of every Lord's day, as well as of one now
and then? Why else did the Lord call the Sabbath of old Levit. 23. 2.
an holy Convocation? As if it ought to be nothing else; as if the whole day
were to be spent at Church, and in keeping public Assemblies, so far as
convenience and edification of the people will permit. Why else did Holy David
desire Ps. 23. 6.
to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever? Why prayed he that he might be so
happy. Ps. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after: that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Therefore if Conscience to
obey God, or desire to do him service, did draw them to his house at any time,
or to any part of his Worship, the same would induce them at all times, and to
all parts of it. The liberty then that such persons take in God's service, as
if all were Arbitrary, argues much of hypocritical wantonness, nothing of sound
or sincere godliness.

They who are fed with Corn from Heaven, Ps. 78. 24, 27, -- 27.
meat to the full, are thus fallen to loath the Mannah, that Rained down upon
them twice every Sabbath Day. Of a third sort I could inform the Reader, who
being weak, yet (I hope) well-meaning Christians, not knowing the depths of
Satan, under a specious pretense of Piety, are not content with what they hear
at Church, but must afterward fill their heads with notions which they hear at
Conventicles, wherewith they Jude. 12.
feast themselves without fear after they have been fed to the full in God's
house, with Angels food. Without fear (I say) of offending God, by breaking the
order he has set in his Church: by countenancing, abetting, or joining
themselves with such unlawful and ungospel-like Assemblies: without fear of
offending or provoking the Rules of the Church (which they are bound to obey)
by seeing their Laws despised and affronted: without fear of exposing
themselves to the temptation and hazard of falling so fearfully as they cannot
but see, that some of their Brethren and Neighbors have done: And without fear
of losing what they have heard in public by departing immediately from the
Church to a Conventicle; as if all Religion did consist in nothing but hearing,
and all the Service of God were but (according to the French scoff) a mere
Preach. If this be the way of keeping the Sabbath, where is room then for
Meditation, which the Scripture as much enjoins as hearing. Josh. 1. 8.
Thou shall meditate on the Law, that thou may observe to do according as is
written. Mary therefore kept Christ's sayings because Luke 2. 19.
she pondered them in her heart. David therefore grew to be Ps. 119. 99.
wiser than his teachers, because God's Law was his meditation. Conference with
Neighbors, and Family-instructions, will by this means also be issued out.
Jer. 23. 25.
Thus shall you say every one to his neighbor, and every one to his brother,
what has the Lord answered, and what has he spoken? The best of Hearers, even
Christ's own Disciples took another course than these now do: When they had
heard their Master Preach, they spent their time after Sermon in conferring
among themselves about what they had heard, and went to their. Teacher to be
better informed, and Joh. 16. 17, -- 19.
to have all doubts resolved. For want of so doing, Mark 4. 10. -- 7. 17. --
10. 10, 11.
it comes to pass with too many, as sometimes it did with some of them, that
though they had seen their Lord's mighty power, in feeding five thousand men
with five loaves, and two fishes; yet their Faith was never the stronger: And
this was the reason: Mark 6. 52.
They considered not the miracle of the Loaves, for their heart was hardened.
They had seen the miracle but they had not considered it, nor meditated on it,
and therefore it did them no good at all. In the judgment of the Presbyterian
Divines themselves, the way these people take is not the right. For the
Assembly of Divines in their Directory for Worship, give this rule for the
Sanctification of the Lord's day: Directory page. 57.
that what time is vacant between, or after the Solemn meetings of the
Congregation in public, be spent in Reading, Meditation, Repetition of Sermons
(especially by calling their Families to an account of what they have heard)
and Catechizing of them; holy conferences, prayer for a blessing upon the
public Ordinances, singing of Psalms, visiting the Sick, relieving the Poor,
and such like duties of piety, charity, and mercy, accounting the Sabbath a
delight.

In a word, I could inform the Reader what impious devices have been used, not
only to make a rent in the Church, but also to keep it open, that it should
never close again; by endeavoring that an irreconcilable prejudice might be
perpetuated in the minds of people, against the public Ministry and Ministers
of the Church. And to the end that those poor deluded Souls, which have been
drawn off from their due attendance to God's public Ordinances, to wait on
these men in their clanculary and irregular conventions, might never return to
the Church any more; I have observed that the absence of one of these Masters
of Conventicles, in the places where they are held, have ever been carefully
supplied by the presence of some other Domestic Chaplain, to keep up their
House-meetings. As if Ieroboam's impious policy should never be forgotten, who
not daring to trust his new divided Tribes in a joint resort to the Temple at
Jerusalem, set up 1 King. 12. -- 27, 28.
his Calves to be Worshipped by them nearer home.

But I will not rake any longer in this puddle, lest it stink in the nostrils
of pious and sober Christians, as it cannot but do in God's already.

Now I appeal to all my judicious and learned Brethren of the Clergy, and to
all persons else, of stayed principles and piety, whether for a stranger thus
to pluck the work of a Pastor of a Congregation out of his hands, be
tolerable in the Church of Christ, or no? Whether this practice that tends
thus to divide betwixt Minister and People, breaking the near bond of relation,
that is, and ought to continue between them, robbing him of his flock, and
taking them off from dependence on him, for the enjoyment of the work of his
ministry, be of God, or no? And whether he has ordained any such course, as
the means of Grace in his Church; or whether this be not rather a strategem of
Satan, to introduce all manner of impiety and ungodliness? The Presbyterian
Divines themselves have given their judgment on my side, already, in this case.
In these words: Vindicat. of Presbyte page 121.
To make a Rupture in the body of Christ, and to divide Church from Church, and
to set up Church against Church, and to gather Churches out of true Churches:
And because we differ in something, therefore to hold Communion in nothing;
this we think has no warrant out of the word of God, and will introduce all
manner of confusion in Churches and Families; and not only disturb, but in a
little time destroy the power of Godliness, purity of Religion, peace of
Christians, and set open a wide gap to bring in Atheism, Popery, Heresy, and
all manner of wickedness. So also in their Preface to the Ius divinum of
Church Government, Ius divinum regim. Eccles. in praefat.
in the last page save one, they have these words. Gathering Churches out of
Churches have no footsteps in Scripture, is contrary to Apostolical practice,
is the scattering of Churches, the Daughter of Schism, the Mother of Confusion,
but the Stepmother to Edification.

If this Doctrine of theirs be (as doubtless it is) true and godly, then surely
the practices of many of them that are Antipodes to it, must needs be (by their
own confession) very false and impious.

We read in Scripture that Exodus 22. 6.
if fire break out and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the
standing corn, or the field be consumed therewith, he that kindles the fire
shall surely make restitution. By thorns, are generally understood such thorns
as Husbandmen use in hedges, wherewith they separate and distinguish their Land
from other men's. By breaking out of fire, any man's making a fire in the field
to burn up weeds, or otherwise, to make their Land fruitful. And it is meant
(say interpreters) of such kindling of fire, when any hurt comes of it proeter
intentionem accendentis, besides the intention of him that kindles it; it being
carried by the wind, and lighting on some dry hedge, and finding combustible
matter, goes farther and burns the Corn, either in shocks, or standing by. And
in this cafe of Casualty, by the Law of God, restitution was to be made,
because firing the hedge was the cause of the Corn's being burnt. Otherwise, if
a man did wilfully and purposely set Corn on fire, he was to sustain greater
punishment by the Civil Law, vel decapitetur, vel comburatur, vel bestiis
subjiciatur, he was to be beheaded, or burnt, or cast to wild beasts. God,
whose own the whole Field of the Church is, has set an hedge of separation and
distinction, to bound out every one of his servants the Minister's property.
These are your limits; and this the portion of my people committed to your
charge; this piece of Land is your several to manure for me, the fruit whereof
I will require at your hands at harvest. He that shall (not casually, but
wilfully) break down, or fire that hedge, and so cause a combustion in the
Church, the least that can be required of such a person, is, that he make full
restitution for the damage he has caused, that he set himself to quench the
fire he has kindled, and to make up the hedge again, which he has consumed;
undeceive the People he has seduced, by acknowledgment of his fault, restoring
what he has fraudulently taken, and cease to be any more an incendiary for the
time to come.

To the poor deceived People, shall I say, out of zeal to God's Glory, and
safety of your souls, as St. Paul to the Galatians Gal. 5. 12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you? It were better one man or a
few did perish, than that the Unity of the Church should be broken. Rather, for
loves sake, I heartily wish, that those (...) Jer. 48. 45.
filii sonitus, tumultuous ones, that delight to make a noise in the Church,
that they may be heard, had more peaceable and quiet spirits, and would either
content themselves to do their own business (if they have any) or else sit
still, and cease troubling you, or themselves, in matters that belong to
others. And though you have been drawn away from your Conjugal duty to your own
Pastors, and have gone aside to others in stead of them, by means of the
amarous Courtship of such, as want not fair speeches and winning Oratory Romans
16. 18.
to deceive the hearts of the simple, but intrude themselves in amongst you, 2
Pet. 2. 3.
(...) with feigned words; or, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
(...) with wisdom of words; or (as elsewhere the Apostle persueth it) with 1
Cor. 2. 1. 4.
excellency of speech and of wisdom; or, intising words of man's wisdom,
insomuch, that (if it were possible) the very Elect would be deceived by them:
Yet I hope, through the assistence of Divine grace, you will soon bethink your
selves and repent, and so return from following after your Lovers, (with the
house of Israel) and say, I will Hos. 2. 7.
go and return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me than now.

Secondly, it divides the entire body of Christ also, and makes such factions
as were in the Church of Corinth, where one said 1 Cor. 1. 11. -- 12.
I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos; and another, I am of Cephas: Than
which, there is nothing that more demonstrates People to be 1 Cor. 3. 4.
carnal, whatsoever they pretend to the contrary. It makes the Church of Christ
(which should always be, as some time the Children of Israel were, from Dan
Judge. 20. 1. -- 11.
even to Beershebah, all as one man) to be a Baal-Perazim (the place where
David smote the Philistines) 1 Chronicles. 14. -- 11.
A Valley of Divisions and Breaches. It breeds such animosities and
exasperations of mind amongst Christians, that it makes the Members of the
Church, militant among themselves, and against their Ministers, doing us
(though unwillingly) the kindness, as to free us from that woe denounced by our
Savior Luc. 6. 26.
when all men shall speak well of us; and none at last but Satan and his
Servants, Atheists and Papists triumphant. It causes such rents in the Church,
that the end thereof will be (unless a prodigy of Divine mercy prevent it) the
common Enemy of our Religion will laugh, As the Tyrian Woman that opened the
gates of the City to the Enemy, and was herself trodden to death at their entry.
whilst the promoters of such divisions have cause to weep.

It promotes such a War, whose Victory shall have a sorry triumph. It deals
worse with the feamless Coat of Christ (which St. Cyprian says Sacramento
vestis and signo, declaravit Ecclesiae unitatem. Cyp. de unit. Eccles. Sect. 6.
was a sign intended by our Savior, to show how his Church should be woven
together in Unity) than the Prophet Ahijah the Shilonite did with the new
garment, wherewith Jeroboam had clad himself 1 King. 11. -- 30.
who even rent it in twelve pieces. It mangles the body of Christ, into as many
parts, as there are parties, as if it were no better than the body of the
Levite's Concubine, which Judge. 19. 29.
he divided with her bones, and sent into all the quarters of Israel. It was a
worthy saying of the late reverend and learned Bishop of Sarum; Davenant ad
pacem exbort. p. 21. 22.
Si schismata Ecclesiae tolli possunt (uti proculdubio possunt) suspendi mallem
ad collum meum molam asinariam, etc. If the schisms that are in the Church may
be taken away (as doubtless they may) I had rather a Millstone were hanged about
my neck, and I drowned in the bottom of the Sea, than that I should any way
hinder that work, or not withal my heart and strength promote it, which is so
pleasing to God, and so necessary for the avoiding of scandal. A gracious
speech; not unlike that of an holy Father of the Church before him ( Greg.
Nazianzene) who (as Ruffinus Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 9.
reports it) in the tumultuous division of the People, cried out, mitte me in
mare, and non erit tempestas. He offered himself ( Jonah like) to be cast into
the Sea, to appease the tempest in the Church, that neither the peace of it
might be disturbed, or Unity broken. Some of the brethren of the Nonconformists
have been of the same Judgment, whatever this or their practice, now is.
Memorable to this purpose is that saying of Mr. Baxter to his People of
Kiderminster Baxter Epist. to his Book of Rest.
I ever loved (says he) a Godly peaceable Conformist, better than a turbulent
Nonconformist; and should I make a party, or disturb the peace of the Church, I
should fear, lest I should prove a Firebrand in Hell, for being a Firebrand in
the Church. And by all the interest I have in your judgments and affections, I
here charge you, that if God should give me up to any factious Church-renting
course (against which I daily pray) that you forsake me, and follow me not a
step.

It is an unhappy degree of wickedness, to be a ringleader in any schism.
Every accessory is faulty enough, but the first Author abominable. Those who
either by his example, suggestion, advice, connivence, or otherwise, are taught
to do ill, increase his sin as fast as they do their own. Mat. 5. 19.
Whosoever shall break one of the least Commandments, and shall teach men so,
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. An unruly beast breaks the
hedge, and feeds in forbidden Pasture; the whole herd follows; but the owner
must answer for all the trespass that is committed. Therefore is Jeroboam so
often branded in holy Writ with this note of infamy, Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
that made Israel to sin. His fault lived, when he himself was dead; and it is
often said by Divines, that his torment increased in Hell, according as his sin
increased upon earth; and that the wickedness of Israel will not be taken off
from his Soul for ever. It was shame enough to Israel, that they were made to
sin by Jeroboam, but O the miserable Estate of Jeroboam, that made Israel to
sin! his pretense was fair enough, but that was no excuse to the foulness of
his crime, nor is it any mitigation to his present torment. Let the Authors of
schism in the Church, pretend what they please, to Religion and Truth, yet how
they can have the true love or power of either in their hearts or lives, that
seek not the Church's Peace and Unity withal, I cannot understand. The Holy
Ghost in Scripture joins both together Zach. 3. 19.
Love truth and peace. And Ephesians. 4. 15.
speak the truth in love. He follows neither, that persues them not both. It
was an unquestionable Maxim amongst Christians in the ancient Church (which is
no less a truth now, than ever). Aug. cont. Don. de bapt. L. 3. c. 16.
non habet Dei charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non diligit unitatem. The Love of God
abides not in them, who do not love, and keep, the Unity of the Church.

Nay, the practice in question, tends not only to the dividing and distracting
the Church, but even to the dissolving and destroying her being. It puts the
members of the body of Christ out of joint, and causes a Luxation of the
parts; and so hinders that spiritual Nutrition, thriving and growth in grace,
that ought to be in the body of Christ. For, as in the natural body of man, if
a member be separated from it, it can receive no nourishment or growth; nay, if
there be but a dislocation of a part, so that it be only out of joint, it will
not thrive or prosper, but wither and consume, till it be set right again: so
the mystical body of Christ, can never increase with the increase of God, if
either there be not a right Union of the joints to the head, or if that (...),
1 Col. 2. 19.
the ligament and bond that knits and fastens one member to another, be broken.
Now this Union of the members, the Apostle says Ephesians. 4. 3. 16.
is made by the Ligament of Love: which he therefore calls Col. 3. 14.
the bond of perfection; because as it unites Church Members among themselves,
so it is the cause, that they communicate mutual help, to the profit and
preservation of the whole. The members of the Church, then, being made so
loose, and set at such distance; so divided and distracted one from another,
some hurried this way, and some that, it must needs argue that this bond is
either quite broken, or much loosned. And if it be a truth (which Philosophers
affirm) that Quodlibet corpus non minus appetit unitatem quamsuam entitatem.
every natural body desires no less its unity than its entity; I fee no reason
why the spiritual and mystical body of Christ, the Church, should not in like
manner desire its unity, since, if it be, and continue thus unhappily divided,
it cannot long subsist in its entity. As a tottering wall of stones heaped up
together, without mortar or binding, is easily shaken and thrown down: so must
the Church be soon brought to ruin, if this distracting and dividing course be
suffered and practiced. By concord and good agreement among Christians Act. 2.
43-47-5. 12. 14.
the Church grows and is enlarged: So by their discords and divisions it will
in short time Mat. 12. 25.
perish and come to nothing. Genesis 4 8.
Say I this only? 2 Samuel 3. 1.
Or say not the brethren of the Nonconformists the same? He that is not the Son
of peace, is not the Son of God (says Mr. Baxter) all other sins Baxter ubi
supra.
destroy the Church consequentially, but division and separation demolish it
directly. Building the Church is but an orderly joining the materials; and what
then is disjoyning, but pulling down? Si in sinu meo natus, si uberum meorum
lacte nutritus, adversus me gladium levas read quod dedi, and esto, si potes,
aliter Christianus. Hieronim. advers. Luciferanos. p. 493.
Believe not those to be the Church's friends, that would cure and reform her,
by cutting her throat. Pro Ecclesia clamitant (says St. Cyprian of such) they
cry out for the Church, but contra Ecclesiam dimicant, their practice is a
fighting against the Church. And that, not by open and professed hostility, but
by secret and unseen Policy. Their pretenses are friendly, but their actions
mischievous; their voice like Jacob's, but their hands like Esau's.

Communion of Saints, that holy and sweet fellowship which all the Members of
Christ's Church ought to have both with Christ their head, and each with other.
When, in the natural body of man, the members are joined to the head, and one
with another, they have by virtue of that Union, Communion also, and do impart
blood, spirits, and life from one to the other: So in the mystical Body of
Christ, the members being joined to the Lord, and one to another, there will be
a sweet Communion among themselves in heart and affections, Romans 12. 15.
joy with them that rejoice, and forrow with them that weep, prayer each for,
and each with other; the multitude Act. 4. 32.
of them that believe will be of one heart, and one soul. Now one of the
closest bonds of Union amongst Christians, is in their communicating together
in holy duties. We are then most one, when Romans 15. 6.
with one mind, and with one mouth, we glorify God together. When holy David
would set forth the greatest intireness of facred friendship, he described it
by Ps. 55. 14.
walking to the house of God in company together. The end and effect of our
joint partaking in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is to seal up this
Unity. As by one of the Sacraments, we are baptized into one body, so by the
other 1 Cor. 12. 1^.
we are made to drink into one spirit. And therefore the Apostle, from our
Communion together at the Lord's Table, concludes our Union one with another,
and incorporation into (not the essential, but) the spiritual body of Christ.
Cor. 10. 17.
We being many, are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that
one bread. A Father thus comments on that place. Cyril. l. 10. c. 13. in Johan.
Omnes unum corpus sumus in Christo, quia etsi multi sumus, unum tamen in eo
sumus, omnes enim de uno pane participamus. We are therefore all one body in
Christ, because, though we are many in our selves, yet in him we are all one,
for we all partake of one bread. Nam si in humanis mensoe and salis
communicatio, amoris causa est and signum, quanto magis id erit in communione
mensoe and panis Domini? If among men the communicating together at one table,
and in one dish, is both a cause and sign of love; how much more then would it
be so, in the communicating together at the Table, and of the bread of the
Lord? Yea, the very assembling of Christians together in the Church, is, by St.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. Sermon. de Eucharist.
called, the Communion of Saints.

That then which tends to make rents and parties in the Church, and divides
Christians each from other, in external Conjunction of public duties, as well
as internal concord of hearts and affections (as the practice in question has
been proved, and by experience is found to do) must needs hinder the Communion
of Saints. Union being broken, there can be no Communion: for it flows from
Union, and is no other (in the Etymology of the word) than common Union. And as
there is nothing that obstructs Christian Communion so much as divisions do,
so, when once they are made, there is nothing more hard to be composed again.
Prove. 18. 19.
A Brother offended, is harder to be won, than a strong City; and their
contentions are like the bars of a Castle.

For as no bond is so strong, as that of Religion; so no Hostility so cruel and
outrageous, as that which difference in Religion occasioneth. Mat. 10. 34. --
36.
Think not (says our Savior) that I am come to send peace on the earth; I
came not to send peace, but a sword: for I am come to set a man at variance
against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and a man's foes shall
be they of his own house. This is commonly through the policy of Satan, and
malice of men, the fruit of divisions in point of Religion amongst Brethren.

And if the bond of Communion betwixt the members be broken, I see not, but
that the bond of Union with Christ their head, must be broken also. How can
they exist as members of Christ's body, which have left their coupling and
conjunction, with the other members of the same? Neither they, nor those that
cause it, can, in the judgment of St. Austine. Aug. Tom. 3. de fid. ad Pet.
Diac. cap. 43.
Ii qui a compage corporis membra alia avellere conantur, seipsos a Christi
unitate separant. They that draw the members from Communion one with the other,
do cut off themselves from their Union with Christ. Calv. Comment in Romans 16,
17.
Impium enim and sacrilegum divortium est, eos qui in Christi veritate
consentiunt distrahere. Says Calvin, It is an impious and sacrilegious
divorce, to divide those, who would otherwise agree in the truth of Christ. The
same is acknowledged by the Presbyterian Divines. Vindicat. of Presbyt. page
112, 113.
If we be the body of Christ, do not they who separate from the body, separate
from the head also.? And by the unanimous consent of the ancient, godly, and
learned Nonconformists, in their grave and modest confutation of the Published
by Mr. William Rathbane an. Dom. 1644.
errors of the Brownists and Separatists: where in the first words of their
Book, they say, That the Church of England is a true Church, and such a one as
from which, whosoever wittingly and willingly separateth himself, cutteth
himself off from Christ. And they prove it at large by unanswerable arguments,
in the following pages of their Book.

Aug. Tom. 3. de Baptist. cont. Don. c. 5.
A proesumptione igitur illicita excusari nequeunt, qui nimis amando sententiam
suam, usque ad proecidendoe communionis audaciam perveniunt. They are therefore
no way to be excused from sinful presumption, who out of a fondness to their
own opinion, proceed to that boldness and hardiness, as to interrupt Christian
Communion. Malunt nullam habere, quam non suam: They had rather there should be
no Religion at all, than that their own should not take place.

They that are any way instrumental to break unity, that true-Lovers knot which
every Christian should wear in his breast all days of his life, will find at
last by miserable experience that destruction will follow it, if repentance
precede not to prevent it. For, if the God whom we serve, be the God of peace,
Jesus Christ our head and Savior be the Prince of peace, the spirit of
Holiness, the worker of peace, the Blessed Trinity, in Unity of Deity, the
author of peace and lover of concord (as our Church expresses it) how then
can it join it self with the disturbers of both, and not rather separate from
those which separate from their Brethren, and are instrumental to draw as many
after them as they can?

Paul, in one place.

The first is, their discontent with their own Pastors, who are regularly and
orderly sent of God to them. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
After their own lusts they will heap to themselves teachers.

1. The great fault here prophesied to be in the latter times, was, heaping up
many teachers. One will not serve a peoples turn, but they must have a
multitude. A woman that forsakes her Husband's bed, will be ready to pour out
her fornications to every one that passes by, and not content her self with
the embraces of one single stranger alone, but be ready to prostitute her body
to any one.

2. And there is an Emphasis in the word (...), to themselves. They will be
their own chusers. They will not accept, nor submit to those, who by the hands
of the Rulers of the Church, God shall place over them, but take to themselves,
upon their own judgment and choice, whom they please. This is according to his
opinion, who (expounding the word (...) used in this place by St. Paul) says,
Leigh in^ crit. Sac.
quod sine judicio, and temere sunt collecturi doctores suos: They shall rashly
gather together teachers of their own.

3. (...) Teachers: as they esteem and use them in contradistinction to
Pastors; for they will not admit of any to have a pastoral rule and care over
them, but teachers to tickle their Ears, and please their fancies. And which is
yet worse.

(...) according to their own Lusts. Such as do best please their humors; such
as are of the same party with themselves, that are in opposition to that which
themselves oppose. Beza Interprets it thus, prout hoc vel illud illis
arriserit,: as this or that best pleafeth them.

The second is, the itch of the ear. (...), a disease very common, yet never so
Epidemical, as in these days. And there are two things, that very much stir and
provoke this humor.

1. Novelty. If the thing, either for the matter, or the manner of it, be new
and strange, our Athen^an dispositions will soon incline us Act. 17. 21.
to spend our whole time in it. Let a Physician be never so learned, honest,
experienced, and successful in his place, yet if but an Empirick or Mounte^ank
come into the Country, and set up his Stage, though he does nothing but put
off deceitful and Sophisticate Drugs, and takes men's money, yet he shall not
want at all times a full resort to him, because he is a new-corner, and his
pretended method and means of cure, are new and unusual. In Religion also,
people are naturally (...), apt to be led away with insatiable desire of
hearing new men and new things, and listen rather to fables 2 Timothy 4. 4.
than to wholesome words that are according to godliness: rather admire and
adore the new conceits of every Novellist, than receive the great mysteries of
Salvation in love of the truth, from him, whom God has set to watch over their
Souls. Mitte quod scio, dic quod nescio, is their Motto; we have heard this man
long enough, our Ears itch now to attend to some other; what we know is stale,
things fresh and unheard do better please us. It is not the word, but the man
they desire to hear. And therein they show themselves to be the most observant
disciples of the great Masters of error and deceit, the Papists: For this is
a Doctrine taught by Stapleton Stap. lib. 1 de Doct. princ. cap. 5.
in the tenth of his quodlibets, non quid loquitur, sed quis, a bono Catholico
attendendum est. A good Catholic ought not to regard what is spoken, but who
it is that speaks. And if the speaker prove a (...), and stuff up his discourse
with idle and impertinent stories, how fabulous soever, he shall find more
attention and applause, from such humorous Apud quos de humano arbitratu
divinitas pensitatur, ni^i homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit, homo jam Deo
propitius esse debebit. Tertull. Apol. cap. 5.
hearers, than he that with greatest evidence of the spirit and power, makes
known the Oracles of God. But certainly that man is under a very great
distemper of body, that grows weary of his good ordinary food. The stomach is
very sickly, when it cannot take in any solid meat, but the fancy is still
working after rarities. And if ever that person recover his former health he
will find, that his body will never hold to be in better temper, than when he
keeps to his ordinary Diet.

2. Prohibition by Authority. Things denied, are always most desired, and the
enjoyment of them is therefore the sweeter, because restrained by Law.

Horat. carm. lib. 1.
Audax omnia perpeti
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.
Ever since our first parents transgressed in eating the forbidden fruit, all
the sinful posterity of Adam, are ready to run most dangerous adventures for a
taste of that, which they should not touch. How just and reasonable soever the
prohibition is, yet it will allways be looked on with a jealous Eye, by those
that are concerned in it, as if there were a more than ordinary excellency in
the thing denied; and it were therefore kept from us by our Superiors (though
they mean us never so much good in it) because they envy us the enjoyment of
it. Whence it comes to pass, that (as beasts) though their own pasture be never
so good, yet if they are bounded in, they cannot contain themselves, but will
adventure to leap the hedge, that they may go farther, though they fare worse.

Were it so that the doors of our Churches were shut up by Authority, People
forbidden to resort thither, or to attend the Ministry of their own Pastors
any more, and commanded to frequent the private meetings of strangers only;
the would these People be soon weary of their restraint, and pretend great zeal
to God's house, and the place where his honor dwells, then would their Souls
seem to long, and even to faint within them, for the Courts of the Lord, to see
his Power and his Glory, so as they have seen it in his Sanctuary: Then would
they seem to account their own Ministers worthy of double honor, to receive
them in the Lord with all gladness, and to hold them in reputation. Oh the
strange nature of the Sons of men, to whom a Legal prohibition is a forcible
invitation, that know not the worth of Mercies but by the loss of them!

Fifthly, it alienates the affections of People from the true worship of God
established by Law in our Church; shakes the minds of the weak, and begets even
in those who have professed, they have not the least exception against it, but
suspect somewhat amiss in it only upon this ground, because they see others
(of whose judgments they have a good confidence) withdraw from it, and choose
rather to frequent private meetings than to serve God in the public
Congregations. Who have not heard the railings and revilings that have
proceeded out of the mouths of those, who are the favorers, and followers of
these unlawful Assemblies, against the Book of Common Prayer? And who may not
observe, their constant and studied withdrawing from the use of it? That book,
which

1. For the Authors and Compilers of it, was composed by the most Learned and
Holy Doctors, Martyrs and Confessors, that the Church of England ever had;
who spent their times, studies, and lives in opposing the Idolatry and
Superstition of the Romish Church: Set forth at first, in the Reign, and by the
Authority of King Edward the Sixth, who for his Piety, Zeal, Learning and
Wisdom, was accounted the miracle of nature. Peter Martyr, in an Oration of
his at Argentine, says thus of his death; Peter Martyr, Loc. com. page 741.
Col. 1.
Praeter omnem spem acerba and luctuosa morte sublatus est Edvardus Angliae
Rex, Monarcharum Christiani orbis candidum Lumen, pietatis Legitimus alumnus,
and Evangelii Christi propugnator acerrimus. Besides all expectation Edward
King of England is taken away by lamentable and cruel Death, who was the clear
light of all the Monarchs of the Christian World, the true Son of Piety, and
the most zealous and earnest Defender and Maintainer of the Gospel of Christ.
And in an Oration of his at Tigurum, he gives this Testimony of him; Pet. Mart.
Loc. com. page 745.
Obiit prohdolor, obiit Edvardus ille sanctissimus Rex, quo adolescente nescio
an Sol doctiorem pro^^aetate, sanctiorem atque prudentiorem usquam viderit. The
most Holy King Eward is dead, and I know not whether the Sun ever saw a more
Learned for his age, and a more sanctified and wise Prince. And again in an
Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, speaking of the zeal and care of several godly and
religious Kings in reforming Religion, and establishing the true Worship of
God, says, Ib. p. 788.
Hoc frater tuus Edvardus Angliae Rex praeclarissimus, pro viribus, and sane
prae quam ejus aetas pateretur, facere studuit, cujus regnum diutius extrahi,
peccata nostra and ingratitudo intolerabilis non siver^nt; eximias illius
adolescentis virtutes, and egregiam pietatem, Deus orbi tantum ostendere
voluit, deinde ut nos, quemadmodum mala nostra merita exigebant, aliquantulum
castigaret, illum e terra citius ad se revocavit. The same your brother Edward
the most renowned King of England did study, to the utmost of his Power, and
beyond what his age would permit, to do: whose reign, our sins and most
intolerable ingratitude would not suffer to continue longer over us. God only
would show to the World the singular virtues and most excellent Piety of that
young man, and then, to correct us as our evil deservings did require, he soon
recalled him from this World to himself. Judicious Mr. Hooker calls him Hooker.
Eccles. polit. l. 4. sect. 14.
Edward the Saint, in whom it pleased God, righteous and just, to let England
see what a blessing, sin and iniquity would not suffer it to enjoy. This rare
and most excellent person God raised up to see this Book composed, to establish
it by regal Authority, and then he was taken to his Crown of Glory.

2. For the matter contained in that Book Basil, p. 90.
Sober and Learned men have sufficiently vindicated it, against the cavils and
exceptions of those, who thought it a part of Piety, to make what profane
objections they could against it; especially for Popery and Superstition.
Whereas no doubt the Liturgy was exactly conformed to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, and this, by all reformed Churches is confessed to be most
found and orthodox. It casts out all false Doctrine and Worship, and is, of it
self, sufficient to confute a Papist, and other the Enemies of the Protestant
Religion. It is fitted for all occasions and uses of the Church, and
comprehends the whole Duty of a Christian, both for the credendis, contained in
the Confessions of Faith; the faciendis, in the ten Commandments; and the
petendis, in the Lord's Prayer, and others framed thereby.

3. For the Confirmation of it; it stands ratified and enjoined by the Laws,
Statutes, and Sovereign Authority of five most prudent and pious Persons
immediately (Queen Mary a Papist only interposing) succeeding one the other on
the English Throne: sealed and confirmed by the blood of so many Martyrs, that
suffered in those Marian days, shortly after the composure of it, and so
written in the blood of those that compiled it.

4. For the approbation of it; it is commended and allowed by the best Divines
of the reformed Churches, both at home and abroad. Such as Cranmer, Tailor,
Ridley, Jewel, Calvin, Bucer, and many others.

5. Touching God's acceptance and owning of it, the History of ages past, and
the strange providence of God, in relation to the framing, preserving, blessing
and restoring it, do so evidently declare this, that he seems to be very much
darkened in his mind with prejudice, that can deny or gainsay it. Hook. Eccles.
Polit. l. 4. s. 14.
Which grace and favor of Divine assistence, having not in one thing or two
showed it self, nor for some few days or years appeared, but in such sort so
long continued, our manifold sins and transgressions striving to the contrary;
what can we less thereupon conclude, than that God would at leastwise by tract
of time teach the World, that the thing which he blesses, defends, keeps
so strongly, cannot choose but be of him? Wherefore if any refuse to believe us
disputing for it, let him believe God himself thus miraculously working for it.

What I have said in commendation of this book, amounts to no more than what
the reverend Divines of the Presbyterian persuasion, have been constrained to
say of it, even then, when they were to make all the exceptions they could
against it. They say, Account of proceedings. P. 1, 2.
We have an high, an honorable esteem of those Godly and Learned Bishops, and
others, who were the Compilers of the public Liturgy; and do look on it as an
excellent and worthy work. It Is true, they add [ for that time -- ] But these
words seem to me, no way to abate or detract from the acknowledged excellency
and worth of it. For, if it were an excellent and worthy work then, what
hinders, but that it is so now? Wherein does the excellency and worthiness of
any form of God's worship at any time consist, but in its Conformity to the
Scriptures, which is the rule and measure of Divine worship at all times? It
could never be excellent and worthy, that was at any time unlawful; and it
could have been no otherwise, had it been contrary to God's word. And they that
shall impartially read the History, and seriously consider the profound
Learning, clear Light, admirable Piety, incomparable Zeal, Purity, Patience,
Loyalty, and all other Christian Graces and Virtues, which did shine forth in
those renowned Fathers and Martyrs, the Compilers of that book, cannot without
blushing arrogate to themselves greater^ and higher seize, than they had.
Are the men of this age the only Children of the light, and were those
Worthies (one of whom Mr. Latimer Act. and Mon^ T. 3. p. 503
prophetically said to his fellow-sufferer at the stake, We shall this day
light such a Candle by God's Grace in England, as I trust, shall never be put
out) but in the mist of Popish ignorance and superstition, in comparison of us
now? Rather, I think, they ought to be acknowledged men extraordinarily filled
with the Spirit of God: Light and understanding and sound wisdom was found in
them, and in nothing did they come behind the very chiefest Servants of God in
this generation. We allow and confess them to have been men, not only profound
in Learning, but sound in the faith, Orthodox in judgment, yea, the great
assertours of the Protestant Religion, and glorious instruments in the hands of
God, of causing that light of truth to break out of darkness, by which we now
walk, and which we all profess. How is it then, that they who spent all their
time, studies, and strength in opposing the Idolatry and Superstition of the
Romish Church, and loved not their lives unto death, but were slain for the
word of God, and testimony which they hold, should be thought to retain any
thing of Popish superstition in worship? What is this, but Ps. 73. 15.
to condemn the generation of God's Children, which cannot be well pleasing to
their Father?

But what if it should be proved that the Liturgy of our Church, was (for the
substance of it) in use, in the very first and purest times of the Church of
Christ, before ever Popish Superstition came into the World? Then, I hope, it
will be acknowledged to be free from that, whereof it is secretly and most
ignorantly charged. But Godly and Learned Cranmer in Queen Mary's days (who
knew well what he said, and was well able to make his words good,) offers to
enter the lists with any Papist living (for it had no other Enemy in those
days, neither has it in these, but such as fight with their weapons, and
sharpen their instruments against it, at their forge.) And (if the Queens
Highness would grant thereunto) Act. and Mon. T. 3. page 94.
prove against all that will say the contrary, that all that is contained in
the Holy Communion, set out by the most innocent and godly King Edward VI. in
his high Court of Parliament, is conformable to that order which our Savior
Christ did both observe, and command to be observed, and which the Apostles and
primitive Church used many years. And that if he might be permitted to take to
himself Peter Martyr, and four or five others, whom he should choose, they
would, by God's Grace, take upon them to defend, not only the Common Prayers
of the Church, the ministration of the Sacraments, and other the rites and
ceremonies, but also all the Doctrine and Religion set out by the said King
Edward VI. to be more pure and according to God's word, than any other that
have been used in England these thousand years, so that God's word may be
judge. And that the Order of the Church set out at that present in the Realm by
Act of Parliament, is the same that was in the Church fifteen hundred years
past. Neither says he it alone, but we have the several testimonies of
particular Learned and judicious Saints of that and the following generation,
touching the excellency and worth of that Book; such as Saunders, Tailor,
Ridley, Jewel, etc. We have a Noble Army of Martyrs standing together in
vindication of the purity of it. The whole blessed company of persecuted
Preachers, in Prison, at the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, in a petition of
theirs to the King, Queen and Parliament, say thus Act. and Mon. T. 3. P. 119.
If your said Subjects be not able by the Testimony of Christ, his Prophets,
Apostles, and Godly Fathers of his Church, to prove that the Doctrine of the
Church, Homilies, and Service Book, taught and set forth in the time of our
late most godly Prince King Edward VI. is the true Doctrine of Christ's
Catholic Church, and most agreeable with the Articles of the Christian faith;
your said subjects offer themselves then, to the most heavy punishment that it
shall please your Majesty to appoint.

Should but one Nonconformist have said so much, for the antiquity and purity
of this Book, it would sooner have been believed by the people of our age, than
from the mouths of so many learned and holy Fathers. Take therefore the
testimony of one of that way, and a learned one, Mr. John Ball, who having
spent great pains in quitting it from the objections of Separatists, lays down
this conclusion. Trial of Grounds tending to Separation, c. 9. c. 155, 156.
Our Service Book is not a Translation of the Mass, but a restitution of the
ancient Liturgy, wherein sundry Prayers are inserted, used by the Fathers,
agreeable to the Scriptures. And in the same Chapter in a few pages after, he
has these words. Page 176.
To the praise of God be it spoken, our Liturgy for purity and soundness, may
compare with any Liturgy used in the third and fourth Ages of the Church. Which
was long before Popery came into the World.

Neither has any of the several emendations that it has admitted, since its
first composure, been of that nature or moment as to give an occasion to charge
it in the least with any thing that is, or was, sinful or Superstitious.
However thus much, I suppose, may unquestionably be concluded from the
abovesaid acknowledgment; that if it were an excellent and worthy work then, it
is not sinful now: but the use of it being enjoined by Authority, may be
conformed to with a good Conscience. Especially considering, that it is farther
acknowledged by the Divines first named, That what things soever Account of
proceedings. page 11.
are offensive to them in it, and desired to be removed, are not of the
foundation of Religion, nor the essentials of public Worship; and must
therefore be but circumstantials. Or as Dr. Owen in his plea for
Nonconformists, p. 9. says, they differ from us only in significant fringes
and laces of Forms and Ceremonies.
Which ought to be the more easily born with in compliance with Lawful
Authority, by all such as mind their own duty, or tender the peace of the
Church; it being a good and safe rule which St. Augustine gives in such a case.
Aug. ad Jan. Epist. 118.
Quod neque contra Fidem, neque contra bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter
est habendum, and pro eorum inter quos vivitur societate servandum est.
Whatsoever is enjoined, that is not contrary to Faith or Holiness, ought to be
observed for peace-sake with them, among whom we live.

Yet how is this Book called to the stake, by the upholders and frequenters of
Conventicles, and made to fill up, what was behind of the sufferings of those
holy Fathers, that compiled it! How often have I heard it called by some of
them Popery, Idolatry, Superstition, and what not! How are they accounted the
only Virtuoso's in these days, and to have attained to a very high pitch of
Piety, when they have only arrived at such a measure of profaneness, as to
rail at it, and carefully to shun their joining with us, in the Worship of God
by it; and think that they have then done him a very acceptable service, when
they have done him none at all, but only afforded their presence at the
Preaching of a Sermon? And to the end that malice may leave nothing unattempted
to render it contemptible, I have observed, that these sinful Assemblies are
studiously continued till the end of Common Prayer in the Church, at least; if
not during the Sermon also.

Could it ever have been thought, that men who pretend Religion and Conscience,
could have proceeded to such a monstrous extremity of wickedness, as to prefer
their own private humors and fancies, before God's public Worship? And thus
endeavor to undermine and destroy so godly and legal an Establishment? If
confession of Sin, profession of Faith, reading of the Scriptures, Prayers and
Praise to God (which is the substance of this whole Book) be any part of God's
Ordinance or Worship, then surely the practice of these men, is contrary not
only to Gospel order and commands, but even to those Rules of Worship, which
the principal men of their own way and persuasion have given. For in the
Directory composed by the late Assembly of Divines, the first direction for
public Worship which they give, is this, Directory. page 1.
When the Congregation is to meet for public Worship, the people (having
before prepared their hearts thereunto) ought all to come and join therein; not
absenting themselves from the public Ordinances through negligence, or, upon
pretense of Private meetings.

How are the mouths of Papists hereby opened against us, to justify their own
Recusancy, and to condemn our Church as false and adulterate, seeing that our
own members do revile it (as they of the Romish Church also do, calling it Act.
and Mon. Tom. 3. p. 19, 138, and 1012.
an abominable Book, very pesti^erous, etc. the Rhemist annotat. in 1 Cor. 6.
14. and 1 Cor. 10. 9.
service of Baal, plain Idolatry) separate themselves from it, join hands with
them to destroy it, and are contented to hazard their Estates and fortunes,
rather than to conform to it? Does not this harden them in their Superstition
and Idolatry, avert them from our Church, and make them sit down in the
scorners chair? Does not this say (in effect) that all those good laws formerly
made against Papists, and all penalties and mulcts by virtue thereof inflicted,
were most unjust, in punishing them for refusing to join with us in that form
of worship, which we our selves cannot approve of? We may say with the
Athenians, Auximus Philippum nos ipsi Athenienses, We have strengthened the
hands of our Enemies against us, by our own divisions and contentions. It is an
odious quality, and that which obscures the luster of all the commendable
virtues which Franzius Hist. Animal. page 321, 322.
Franzius notes of the Cranes, that oftentimes they are so vehemently enraged
one with an other, and maintain such a combat among themselves, that they
neither observe, nor fear the coming of the Fowler; Yea, that they rather
desire his approach, and to be taken by him, than to be reconciled to their
mates, with whom they are fallen out. It is a thing much to be feared, that these
men will never be at quiet and peace in the Church, until they make that true
of themselves which I have read objected to the aforesaid people of Athens by
way of reproach, that they would never vouchsafe to treat or hear of peace, but
in mourning gowns, namely, after the loss of their friends and fortunes in the
wars. He has no mind that considers not this, nor heart that condoles it not.

Put the case, that though the Liturgy of our Church was composed with so much
piety and prudence, yet there might remain any thing capable of amendment, as a
freckle in a fair Face: what if it be not in all things suitable with every
man's judgment or fancy (as there is nothing in the world, the Directory it
self not excepted, so well done, that does not displease some: the best cooked
dishes please not every Palate) yet as St. Augustine of old answered the
Donatists Aug. Epist. 50.
Si peccavit Caecilianus non ideo haereditatem suam perdidit Christus. Shall
God therefore loose his public worship and service, shall it be trampled upon,
slighted, and profanely neglected, because we differ about black and white, as
Bishop Ridley told Bishop Hooper in a Letter to him?

And though in these latter days, preaching has gotten ground of the Prayers
of the Church, in the opinion of some whom we shall see present now and then at
the former, but seldom or never at the latter; yet (without any detraction to
that excellent ordinance of God be it spoken) this most despised part of God's
worship must needs be granted to have the pre-eminence of the other (especially
in these days, wherein the Church is so maturely composed and thoroughly settled
in the faith, and the Book of the holy Scriptures so complete and common
amongst us in our own Language) by him that considers,

1. First, that it is the most proper and immediate worship of God, and
preaching but mediate, as it is the means which God has ordained to teach men
how to pray, and to fit them for that duty. For, Romans 10. 14.
how can they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how can they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher?

2. Secondly, it is a duty simply and entirely moral, good in respect of its
own nature and quality, before any external constitution passed upon it, and
may be resolved into one of the dictates and principles of the Law of Nature,
imprinted universally in the hearts of all men at the creation. For before the
Law of the ten Commandments Genesis 4. 26.
men began to call on the name of the Lord; as being taught by the light of
Nature, that in God we all live, move and have our being; and that he is the
Father of lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift. But
preaching and hearing are acknowledged by all; to be instituted worship, and
moral only by an external imposition and mandate of the Supreme Lawgiver.

3. Thirdly, it is a duty of longer duration than preaching: the one being
only for this life; the other, for the life to come also: the one proper and
peculiar to men as members of the Church militant, the other common to men and
Angels, in the Church triumphant. Hook. Eccles^ polit. l. 5. Sect. 23.
The knowledge is small which we have on Earth, concerning things done in
Heaven: notwithstandings thus much we know, even of Saints in Heaven, that they
pray.

4. Fourthly, it is a duty of larger extent and benefit than Preaching is; this
only profits those that be present, that do hear it and attend upon it, but
Prayer is available even for those that are far distant, yea though they be in
the remotest parts of the world. When Lot's preaching did no good at all to his
hearers, yet Abraham's prayers might have been so effectual as to have saved
five wicked Cities, if there had been but ten righteous persons in them.

What our Blessed Savior's judgment was in this case, we may easily gather by
that place in the Gospel, where he calls the Church (...) an house of Prayer,
not of Preaching. Whence in the Primitive times all the Christian Temples were
called and known by the name of (...), Oratories.

And public Prayers of the Church have as much the pre-eminence of private, as
the duty it self, has of preaching, in ^egard there is more force in these
Prayers, wherein the whole Church join Vis unita fortior
together as one man, than there can be in those, that others, though never so
many, make apart any where else. Mat. 18. 19.
I say unto you (says our Savior) that if two of you shall agree on Earth,
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in Heaven. Much more then if a Thousand; and more if the whole Church.
They are two excellent and remarkable sayings of St. Chrysostom to this
purpose, which are quoted by Page 215.
Bishop Jewel in his reply to Harding's answer. Non aeque exoras cum solus
dominum obsecras, atq^e cum fratribus tuis. Est enim in hoc plus aliquid,
videlicet concordia, Chrysostom. de incomprehensib. Dei natura. Hom. 3.
conspiratio, copula amoris, and charitatis, and sacerdotum clamores. Praesunt
enim ob eam rem sacerdotes, ut populi orationes, quae infirmiores per se sunt,
validiores eas complexae simul in c^elum evehantur. Thou do not so soon
obtain thy desire when thou prayest alone unto the Lord, as when thou prayest
with thy Brethren; for herein is somewhat more, the concord, the consent, the
joining of love and charity, and the cry of the Priest. For to that end the
Priests are made overseers, that they being the stronger sort, may take with
them the weaker Prayers of the People and carry them up into Heaven. Again he
says. Chrysostom. in 2 ad The^. 4. Hom.
Quod quis apud seipsum precatus accipere non poterit, hoc cum multitudine
precatus accipiet. Quare? Quia etiamsi non propria virtus, tamen concordia
multum potest. The thing that a man cannot obtain by himself alone, praying
together with the multitude, he shall obtain; and why so? for although not his
own worthiness, yet concord and unity prevails much. When the whole Church
joined together in their devotions for St. Peter's enlargment, Omnipotence
exerted it self in a series of Miracles Act. 12. 5^ etc.
that their Prayers should not be unanswered. Leo Sermon. 4. de Iejunio Septimi
mensis.
Tunc est efficacior and sanatior devotio, quando in operibus pietatis totius
ecclesie unus est animus, and unus est sensus. Prayer is then more holy and
effectual, when in the works of piety there is but one mind and one meaning of
the whole Church Besides, God has promised (as has been before showed) to be
more comfortably present in our Church Assemblies, than in any other houses or
places whatsoever. If it had been all one to pray in a private house, or in the
public assemblies of the Church, St. Paul, and the Godly Christians with him,
would never have put themselves to an hazard of their lives, in times of
hottest persecution, by meeting together in multitudes, in a place Act. 16. 13.
where there was an House of Prayer; or where they were wont to assemble
together to pray. For it is read both ways. The first pleases Tremelius best;
the latter, Beza. Cornel. A Lapid.
(...) enim, and orationem and oratorium significat. The word signifies both
Prayer, and an House of Prayer. Hook. Eccles. polit. l. 5. Sect. 25.
The House of Prayer is a Court beautified with the presence of celestial
powers, there the Almighty does sit to hear, and his Angels intermingle with
us, as our associates, and attend to further our Suits. With reference hereunto
the Apostle requires so great care to be had of decency in the Church, for the
Angels sake; says Mr. Hooker.

Sixthly, it begets ill thoughts of his Charles were upon the throne; but as if
Nero, Dioclesian, or Queen Mary were alive again, and did rule. Bishop Lake
Sermon. on 1 Timothy 2. 11.
Conventicles (says Bishop Lake) make show as if you had not freedom of
Religion, and thereby you derogate from the honor of the King's most Christian
Government, and wrong your Pastor, casting imputation upon him, that he
cannot, or will not instruct you as he ought. And indeed it lays the Axe to the
Root, and tends to the undermining and destruction of all Government and
Governors. Do not the Histories of all Ages give in evidence to the evil
tendency of these private, seditious, and unlawful meetings? In the late years
of war and confusion, those meetings were effectually made use of, by all
parties, as the great Engine, to pull down the powers then in being. By these
means Presbytery did in a great measure prevail to the forceable and irregular
throwing down of the legally established Episcopacy. So by the same means
Independency, Anabaptism, Fifth-monarchism has been prevalent over and against
Presbytery. So that it is a wonder the Governors of our Church and State have
not a more watchful and jealous Eye, upon all such illegal, Schismatical, and
seditious conventions. It is a sure rule of our Savior Mat. 12 25.
A Kingdom divided cannot stand. It was a principle of Machiavel, divide, and
impera, divide, and take all. Whatsoever may be divided, may be destroyed. When
a society is broken, it may soon be brought to confusion. It Is Satan's way to
destroy, by dissolving unions: Casp. Si bell in Ps. 133 P. 597.
Infirma est securitas ab alienis dissidiis, nec unquam stabile est regnum, vbi
inter se discordant ii, qui reguntur. This practice then that tends so much to
dividing, tends as much to destroying both Church and State. Seventhly, VII.
Where this liberty is either taken or given, there is, or may be, dissenting
from, yea contrariety of Doctrine to what is taught in public. And that can no
way conduce to edification in faith and holiness, but to the greatest confusion
that may be.

The whole Church should be, as the whole World was in Noah's time, unius
labii, of one Language, the building else will prove to be but a Babel, and the
Ministry 2 Cor. 13. -- 10.
for destruction, and not for edification; which is so far from being God's
Ordinance, that it is quite contrary thereunto. This made St. Paul so earnestly
to importune the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
to speak all the same things. And truly such is the condition of the Upholders
and Masters of these unlawful Assemblies in these days, that there is great
danger of their prevarication now and then in Doctrine, and of suiting their
discourses to their hearers palates. I say they are under a very great
temptation to gratify men's vices, by indulging their prejudices. For, as a
worthy Prelate of our Church has well observed Bishop Hall resolv. of decis.
Page 131, 132.
Where Ministers depend upon voluntary benevolences, if they do but upon some
just reproof Gaul the conscience of a guilty hearer, or preach some truth,
which disrelisheth the Palate of a prepossessed auditour, he streightway flies
out, and not only withdraws his own pay, but the contribution of others also.
So as the free Tongue teacher, must either live by air, or be forced to change
his Pasture. Thereupon it is that those Sportulary Preachers are fain to sooth
up their many Masters, and are so gagged with the fear of starving displeasure,
that they dare not be free in the reprehension of the daring sins of their
uncertain benefactors, as being charmed to speak either placentia, or nothing.

This is a truth easy to be apprehended. For if even when the Laws enforce men
to pay their dues to their Ministers, they yet continue so backward in the
discharge of them (especially if never so little displeased at just reproofs,
and lawful endeavors to reform their vicious lives) how much less hope can
there be, that being left to their own free choice, they will prove liberal or
bountiful in their voluntary Contributions, if never so little crossed upon
the like occasion by their new Masters.

Lastly, it opens a door to all Errors 2 Timothy 4. 3. 4.
heap up to themselves teachers, to satisfy the itch of their Ears, they will
turn away their Ears from the truth, and shall be turned to fables in a short
time. Elsewhere the Holy Ghost joins order and stedfastness together. Col. 2. 5.
Though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the spirit,
joying to behold your order and stedfastness of your faith in Christ. It is
impossible for men to be steadfast in Religion, who keep not God's order. How
come so many in our days to fall from their stedfastness, some to Anabaptism,
some to Quakerism, and some to Atheism, but by breaking first that order in
Religion, that God has set? If Soldiers in an Army keep their order, every
one abiding in his proper place, and to his proper employment and command, they
are invincible: but when once they begin to break their Ranks, they are soon
after vanquished and destroyed.

If liberty may be taken to given to such private House-preaching in another
man's Parish, why may not a Jesuit that preaches Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, Worshipping of Images, and such like Popish stuff do the like? Nay, it
is a truth too well known, that there are some of them under the notion of
Nonconformists that do so: And in sundry places of this Nation, some such have
been discovered, and more may, were they carefully sought after.

I am sure it strengthens the hands of the wicked; it justifies and
encourages the Anabaptists, Quakers, and all other Sectaries, (who in a Book
put forth at the beginning of the long Parliament, called, The Compassionate
Samaritan Page 75, 76.
desire that the Parliament would stop all proceedings against them: and for
the future provide, that as well particular and private Congregations, as
public, may have protection from them) in all their unjust and profane
separations from our Churches, and sinful and unlawful Conventicles, which
none have been more zealous and forward to condemn and suppress, than those men
that now tread in their steps, and do the same thing which they have
disallowed and opposed in others.

All which things considered, every faithful Pastor of a Congregation where
such Intruders thrust themselves, may say to their people, as St. Paul to the
Corinthians 1 Cor. 4. 1^*.
Though ye have ten thousand instructers, yet ye have not many Fathers, for I
have begotten you through the Gospel. And, 1 Cor. 9. 2.
If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the seal of
mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. And all such people as content not
themselves with the labors of their pious and painful Pastors, but run after
Strangers and Usurpers, may justly fear that curse: Jer. 14. 10.
Thus says the Lord unto the people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have
not refrained their feet; therefore the Lord does not accept them, he will now
remember their iniquities, and visit their sins. For, Prove. 27. (...)
as a bird that wandreth from his nest, so is a man that wandreth from his
place. God took (...)


