AN IDEA OF HAPPINESS, IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND: Enquiring Wherein the Greatest
Happiness attainable by Man in this Life does consist.

By JOHN NORRIS, Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford.

-- Sollicitis vitam consumimus annis,
Torquemurque metu caecaque cupidine rerum,
Aeternisque Senes curis dum quaerimus aevum,
Perdimus, and nullo votorum fine beati,
Victuros agimus semper, nec vivimus unquam.
Manilius Lib. 4. LONDON, Printed for James Norris at the Kings Arms without
Temple Bar, M.DC.LXXXIII.

SIR,
THOUGH you have been pleased to assign me the Task of an Angel, and in that
Respect have warranted me to disobey you; yet since a considerable part of that
experimental Knowledge which I have of Happiness is owing to the Delight which
I take in your virtuous and endearing Friendship, I think it is but reasonable I
should endeavor to give you an Idea of that, whereof you have given me the
Possession.

You desire to know of me wherein the greatest Happiness attainable by man in
this Life does consist. And here, though I see my self engaged in a work already
too difficult for me, yet I find it necessary to enlarge it: For since the
greatest Happiness, or Summum Bonum of this Life is a Species of Happiness in
general, and since it is called (Greatest) not because absolutely perfect and
complete; but inasmuch as it comes nearest to that which indeed is so, it will
be necessary first to state the Notion of Happiness in General, and then to
define wherein that Happiness does consist which is perfect and complete,
before I can proceed to a Resolution of your Question.

By Happiness in the most general Sense of the word, I understand nothing else
but an Enjoyment of any Good. The least Degree of Good has the same Proportion
to the least Degree of Happiness as the greatest has to the greatest, and
consequently as many ways as a man enjoys any Good, so many ways he may be said
to be happy: neither will the Mixture of Evil make him forfeit his Right to
this Title, unless it either equals the Good he enjoys, or exceeds it: And then
indeed it does; but the Reason is, because in strictness of Speaking upon the
whole Account the man enjoys no Good at all: For if the Good and the Evil be
equal-balanc'd, it must needs be indifferent to that man either to be or not to
be, there being not the least Grain of good to determine his Choice: So that he
can no more be said to be happy in that Condition, than he could before he was
born. And much less, if the Evil exceeds the Good: For then he is not only not
happy, but absolutely and purely miserable: For after an exact Commensuration
supposed between the Good and the Evil, all that remains over of the Evil is
pure and simple Misery; which is the Case of the Damned: And when it is once
come to this (whatever some Men's Metaphysics may persuade them) I am very well
satisfied, that it is better not to be than to be. But now on the other side, if
the Good does never so little outweigh the Evil, that Overplus of Good is as
pure and unallay'd in its Proportion, as if there were no such Mixture at all;
and consequently the Possession of it may properly be called Happiness.

I know the Masters of Moral Philosophy do not treat of Happiness in this
Latitude; neither is it fit they should: For their Business being to point out
the ultimate End of Humane Actions, it would be an impertinent thing for them
to give any other Idea of Happiness than the highest: But however this does not
hinder but that the General Idea of Happiness may be extended farther, even to
the Fruition of any Good whatsoever: Neither is there any reason to find Fault
with the Latitude of this Notion, since we acknowledge Degrees even in Glory.

In this General Idea of Happiness two things are contained. One is some Good,
either real or apparent, in the Fruition of which we are said to be in some
measure or other happy. The other is the very Fruition it self. The first of
these is usually called Objective Happiness, and the latter Formal. Some I know
divide Happiness into these as distinct Species; but I think not so
artificially: For they are both but constituent Parts, which jointly make up
one and the same Happiness: Neither of them are sufficient alone, but they are
both equally necessary. That the last of these is a necessary Ingredient, I
think no doubt can reasonably be made: For what would the greatest Good
imaginable signify without Fruition? And that the former is likewise necessary
is no less certain: For how can there be such a thing as Fruition without an
Object? I grant it is not at all necessary that the Object be a real substantial
Good; if it appear so it is sufficient.

From this Distinction of real and apparent Good, some have taken occasion to
distinguish of Happiness likewise into two sorts, real and imaginary: But I
believe upon a more narrow Scrutiny into the matter, 'twill be found, that all
Happiness, according to its Proportion, is equally real; and that that which
they term Imaginary, too well deserves the Name, there being no such thing in
Nature: For let the Object of it be never so Fantastic, yet it must still
carry the Semblance and Appearance of Good (otherwise it can neither move the
Appetite nor please it, and consequently be neither an Object of Desire nor of
Fruition;) and if so, the Happiness must needs be real, because the Formality
of the Object, though 'twere never so true and real good, would notwithstanding
lie in the Appearance, not in the Reallity: Whether it be real or no is purely
accidental: For since to be happy can be nothing else but to enjoy something
which I desire, the Object of my Happiness must needs be enjoyed under the same
Formality as it is desired. Now since it is desired only as apparently good, it
must needs please me when obtained under the same Notion. So that it matters
not to the Reality of my Happiness, whether the Object of it be really good, or
only apprehended so, since if it were never so real, it pleases only as
apparent. The Fool has his Paradise as well as the wise man, and for the time
is as happy in it; and a kind Delusion will make a Cloud as pleasing as the
Queen of Heaven. And therefore I think it impossible for a man to think himself
happy, and (during that Persuasion) not really to be so. He enjoys the Creature
of his own Fancy, worships the Idol of his Imagination, and the happiest man
upon Earth does no more: For let the Circumstances of his Life be what they
will, it is his Opinion only that must give the Relish. Without this Heaven it
self would afford him no Content, nor the Vision of God prove Beatifick. It Is
true, the man is seated at the Springhead of Happiness, is surrounded with
excellent Objects; but alas, it appears not so to him; he is not at all
affected with his Condition, but, like Adam, lies fast in a dead Sleep in the
midst of Paradise.

The Sum of this Argument is this; Good is in the same manner the Object of
Fruition, as it is of Desire; and that is not as really good in its own Nature,
but as it is judged so by the Understanding: And consequently, though it be only
apparent, it must needs be as effectual to gratify the Appetite as it was at
first to excite it during that Appearance. So long as it keeps on its Vizor and
imposes upon the Understanding, what is wanting in the thing, is made up by an
obliging Imposture, and Ignorance becomes here the Mother of Happiness as well
as of Devotion: But if the man will dare to be wise, and too curiously examine
the superficial Tinsel-Good, he undeceives himself to his own Cost, and, like
Adam, adventuring to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, sees himself naked, and is
ashamed. And for this reason I think it impossible for any man to love to be
flattered: It Is true, he may delight to hear himself commended by those who
indeed do flatter him; but the true Reason of that is, because he does not
apprehend that to be Flattery which indeed is so; but when he once thoroughly
knows it, it is impossible he should be any longer delighted with it. I shall
conclude this Point with this useful Reflection, That since every Man's
Happiness depends wholly upon his own Opinion, the Foundation upon which all
envious Men proceed, must needs be either false or very uncertain. False, if
they think that outward Circumstances and States of Life are all the
Ingredients of Happiness; but uncertain however: For since they measure the
Happiness of other Men by their own Opinion, it is mere Chance if they do not
misplace their Envy, unless they were sure the other Person was of the like
Opinion with themselves. And now what a vain irrational thing is it to disquiet
our selves into a dislike of our own Condition, merely because we mistake an
other Man's?

Thus far of the Notion of Happiness in General; I now proceed to consider that
Happiness which is (...) (as Plato speaks) sound and entire, perfect and
complete. Concerning the general Notion of which, all men, I suppose, are as
much agreed as they are in the Idea of a Triangle. That it is such a State then
which a better cannot be conceived: In which there is no Evil you can fear, no
Good which you desire and have not: That which fully and constantly satisfies
the Demand of every Appetite, and leaves no possibility for a desire of Change;
or to sum it up in that comprehensive Expression of the Poet, Quod sis esse
velis, nihilque malis.
When you would always be what you are, and (as the Earl of Roscommond very
significantly renders it) do Rather nothing. This I suppose is the utmost that
can be said or conceived of it, and less than this will not be enough. And thus
far we are all agreed. For I suppose, the many various Disputes maintained by
Philosophers concerning Happiness, could not respect this general Notion of it,
but only the particular causes or means whereby it might be acquired. And I
find Tully concurring with me in the same Observation, Ea est beata vita (says
he) quaerimus autem non quae sit, Lib. 3 de Fin.
sed unde. The difficulty is not to frame a conception of a perfectly happy
State in the general, but to define in particular wherein it consists.

But before I undertake this Province, I think it might not be amiss to remove
one Prejudice, which because it has gained upon my self sometimes in my
Melancholy Retirements, I am apt to think it may be incident to other men also.
It is this, Whether after so many Disputes about, so many restless endeavors
after this state of perfect Happiness there be any such thing or no. Whether it
be not a mere Idea, as imaginary as Plato's Commonwealth, as fictitious as the
Groves of Elysium. I confess, this suspicion has oftentimes overcast my mind
with black thoughts, damped my Devotion, and as it were clipped the wings of my
Aspiring Soul. And I happened to fall into it upon a serious reflection on the
nature of Fruition in the several Periods and Circumstances of my life. For I
observed according to my Narrow experience, that I never had in all my life the
same thoughts of any good in the very time of the enjoying it as I had before.
I have known when I have promised my self vast Satisfactions, and my
imagination has presented me at a distance with a fair Landscape of Delights,
yet when I drew nigh enough to grasp the alluring Happiness, like the Sensitive
Plant it contracted it self at the touch, and shrink'd almost to nothing in the
Fruition. And though after the Enjoyment is past, it seems great again upon
reflection as it did before in expectation, yet should a Platonical Revolution
make the same Circumstances recur, I should not think so. I found 'twas ever
with me as with the Traveller, to whom the ground which is before him, and that
which he has left behind him seems always more curiously embroidered and
delightsom, then that which he stands upon. So that my Happiness like the time
wherein I thought to enjoy it, was always either past or to come never present.
Methought I could often say upon a Recollection, How happy was I at such a
time! Or when I was in expectation. How happy shall I be if I compass such a
design! But scarce ever, I am so. I was pretty well pleased methought while I
expected, while I hoped, till Fruition jogged me out of my pleasing slumber and
I knew it was but a Dream. And this single Consideration has often made me even
in the very persuit after Happiness, and full career of my Passions, to stop
short on this side of Fruition, and to choose rather with Moses upon Mount Nebo
to entertain my fancy with a remote Prospect of the Happy Land, then to go in
and possess it, and then repine. How then shall man be happy when setting aside
all the Crosses of Fortune, he will complain even of Success, and Fruition it
self shall disappoint him!

And this melancholy reflection bred in me a kind of suspicion, that for all
that I knew it might be so in Heaven too. That although at this distance I
might frame to my self bright Ideas of that Region of Bliss; yet when I came to
the possession of it, I should not find that perfect Happiness there which I
expected, but that it would be always to come as it is now, and that I should
seek for Heaven even in Heaven it self. That I should not fully acquiesce in my
condition there, but at length desire a change. And that which confirmed me the
more in this unhappy Skepticism, was because I considered that a great number
of excellent Beings who enjoyed the very Quintessence of Bliss, who were as
happy as God and Heaven could make them, grew soon uneasy and weary of their
State and left their own Habitation. Which argues that their Happiness was not
perfect and complete, because otherwise they would not have desired a change,
since that very desire is an imperfection. And if Happiness be not complete in
Heaven, sure it is impossible to be found any where else.

Before therefore I proceed to define wherein perfect Happiness does consist, I
think it necessary to endeavor the removal of this Scruple which like the
flaming Sword forbids entrance into Paradise. In order to which, I shall
inquire into the true reason why these Sublunary good things when enjoyed do
neither answer our expectations, nor satisfy our Appetites. Now this must
proceed either from the nature of Fruition it self, or from the imperfection of
it, or from the Object of it, or from our selves. I confess, did this defect
proceed from the very nature of Fruition (as is supposed in the Objection) it is
impossible there should be any such thing as perfect Happiness, since 'twould
faint away while enjoyed, and expire in our embraces. But that it cannot
proceed thence, I have this to offer, Because Fruition being nothing else but
an Application or Union of the Soul to some good or agreeable Object, it is
impossible that should lessen the good enjoyed. Indeed it may lessen our
estimation of it, but that is because we do not rightly consider the nature of
things, but promise our selves infinite Satisfactions in the enjoyment of
finite Objects. We look upon things through a false Glass which magnifies the
Object at a distance much beyond its just Dimensions. We represent our future
enjoyments to our selves in such favorable and partial Ideas which abstract
from all the inconveniences and allays which will really in the event
accompany them. And if we thus over-rate our Felicities beforehand, it is no
wonder if they baulk our Expectations in the Fruition. But then it must be
observed that the Fruition does not cause this Deficiency in the Object, but
only discover it. We have a better insight into the nature of things near at
hand, then when we stood afar off, and consequently discern those defects and
imperfections which like the qualities of an ill Mistress, lay hid all the time
of Courtship, and now begin to betray themselves, when it is come to enjoyment.
But this can never happen but where the Object is finite. An infinite Object
can never be over-valued and consequently cannot frustrate our expectations.

And as we are not to charge Fruition with our disappointments but our selves
(because we are accessory to our own delusion by taking false measures of
things) so neither is the Vnsatisfactoriness of any condition to be imputed to
the Nature of Fruition it self, but either to the imperfection of it or to the
finiteness of the Object. Let the Object be never so perfect, yet if the
Fruition of it be in an imperfect measure there will still be room for
Vnsatisfactoriness, as it appears in our enjoyment of God in this Life. Neither
can a finite Object fully satisfy us though we enjoy it never so thoroughly.
For since to a full satisfaction and acquiescence of mind it is required that
our Faculties be always entertained and we ever enjoying: it is impossible a
finite Object should afford this satisfaction, because all the good that is in
it (being finite) is at length run over, and then the enjoyment is at an end.
The flower is sucked dry, and we necessarily desire a change. Whenever therefore
our enjoyment proves unsatisfying, we may conclude, that either the Object is
finite, or the Fruition imperfect. But then how came the Angels to be
dissatisfied with their Condition in the Regions of light and immortality, when
they drank freely of the Fountain of Life proceeding out of the Throne of God,
Revel. 26.
with whom is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right hand are Pleasures for
evermore. Here certainly there is no room either for the finiteness of the
Object, or the imperfection of Fruition. And therefore their dissatisfaction
can be imputed to no other Cause, then the Nature of Fruition in general, which
is to lessen the good enjoyed, as was supposed in the Objection. This I confess
presses hard, and indeed, I have but one way to extricate my self from this
difficulty, and that is by supposing a State of Probation in the Angels. That
they did not immediately upon their Creation enjoy an infinite Object, or if
they did, yet that 'twas in an imperfect measure. For should it be granted that
they were at first confirmed in Bliss and completely happy both in respect of
Fruition and Object as we suppose they are now, I cannot conceive it possible
they should be dissatisfied with their condition. This being repugnant to the
Idea of Perfect Happiness.

Since then this dissatisfaction must be derived either from the imperfection
of the Fruition, or the finiteness of the Object, and not from the Nature of
Fruition in the general, to infer the possibility of perfect Happiness, there
needs no more to be supposed then the existence of a Being full fraught with
infinite inexhaustible good, and that he is able to communicate it to the full.
There may be then such a thing as perfect Happiness. The possibility of which
may also be farther proved (though not explicated) from those boundless Desires,
that immortal Thirst every man has after it by Nature: Concerning which I
observe, that nothing does more constantly, more inseparably cleave to our
Minds that this Desire of perfect and consummated Happiness: This, as Plato
pathetically expresses it, is, (...), the most excellent end of all our
Endeavors, the great Prize, the great Hope. This is the Mark every Man shoots
at, and though we miss our Aim never so often, yet we will not, cannot give over;
but like passionate Lovers take Resolution from a Repulse. The rest of our
Passions are much at our own Disposal; yield either to Reason or Time; we
either argue our selves out of them, or at least outlive them. We are not
always in love with Pomp and Grandeur, nor always dazzl'd with the glittering
of Riches; and there is a Season when Pleasure it self shall court in vain: But
the Desire of perfect Happiness has no Intervals, no Vicissitudes, it out-lasts
the Motion of the Pulse, and survives the Ruins of the Grave. Many Waters
cannot quench it, neither can the Floods drown it: And now certainly God would
never have planted such an ardent, such an importunate Appetite in our Souls,
and as it were interwoven it with our very Natures had he not been able to
satisfy it.

I come now to show wherein this perfect Happiness does consist, concerning
which I affirm in the first place, that it is not to be found in any thing we
can enjoy in this Life. The greatest Fruition we have of God here, is
imperfect, and consequently unsatisfactory. And as for all other Objects they
are finite, and consequently though never so fully enjoyed cannot afford us
perfect satisfaction. No, Job 28.
Man knows not the price thereof: Neither is it to be found in the Land of
the Living. The Depth says, it is not in me, and the Sea says, it is not in
me. The Vanity of the Creature has been so copiously discoursed upon, both by
Philosophers and Divines, and is withal so obvious to every thinking man's
experience, that I need not here take an Inventory of the Creation, nor turn
Ecclesiastes after Solomon. And besides, I have already anticipated this
Argument in what I have said concerning Fruition. I shall only add one or two
Remarks concerning the Objects of Secular Happiness, which are not so commonly
insisted upon, to what has been there said. The first is this, that the Objects
wherein Men generally seek for Happiness here, are not only finite in their
Nature, but also few in number. Indeed could a Man's Life be so contrived, that
he should have a new Pleasure still ready at hand as soon as he was grown weary
of the Old, and every day enjoy the Maidenhead of a fresh Delight, he might
then perhaps, like Mr. Hobbs his Notion, and for a while think himself happy in
this continued Succession of new Acquisitions. But alas, Nature does not treat
us with this Variety. The compass of our enjoyments is much shorter then that
of our Lives, and there is a Periodical Circulation of our Pleasures as well as
of our blood. -- Versamur ibidem atque insumus usque. Lucretius.

Nec nova vivendo procuditur ulla voluptas.
The Enjoyments of our Lives run in a perpetual Round like the Months in the
Calendar, but with a quicker Revolution; we dance like Fairies in a Circle, and
our whole Life is but a nauseous Tautology: We rise like the Sun, and run the
same Course we did the day before, and to morrow is but the same over again: So
that the greatest Favorite of Fortune will have Reason often enough to cry out
with him in Seneca, Quousque eadem? But there is another Grievance which
contributes to defeat our Endeavors after perfect Happiness in the Enjoyments
of this Life. Which is, that the Objects wherein we seek it, are not only
finite and few; but that they commonly prove Occasions of greater Sorrow to us
than ever they afforded us Content. This may be made out several ways, as from
the Labor of Getting, the Care of Keeping, the fear of Losing, and the like
Topics, commonly insisted on by others; but I wave these, and fix upon another
Account less blown upon, and I think more material than any of the rest. It is
this, that although the Object loses that great appearance in the Fruition which
it had in the expectation, yet after it is gone it resumes it again. Now we
when we lament the loss, do not take our measures from that appearance which
the Object had in the enjoyment (as we should do to make our sorrow not exceed
our Happiness) but from that which it has in the reflection, and consequently
we must needs be more miserable in the loss then we were happy in the enjoyment.

From these and the like Considerations, I think it will evidently appear that
this perfect Happiness is not to be found in any thing we can enjoy in this
Life. Wherein then does it consist? I answer positively, in the full and entire
Fruition of God. He (as Plato speaks) is (...), the proper and Principal End of
Man, the Center of our Tendency, the Ark of our Rest. He is the Object which
alone can satisfy the appetite of the most Capacious Soul, and stand the Test
of Fruition to Eternity. And to enjoy him fully is perfect Felicity. This in
general, is no more then what is delivered to us in Scripture, and was believed
by many of the Heathen Philosophers. But the manner of this Fruition requires a
more particular Consideration. Much is said by the Schoolmen upon this
Subject, whereof in the first place I shall give a short and methodical
account, and then fix upon the Opinion which I best approve of. The first thing
that I observe, is, that it is generally agreed upon among them, that this
Fruition of God consists in some Operation; and I think with very good reason.
For as by the Objective part of Perfect Happiness we understand that which is
best and last, and to which all other things are to be referred. So by the
Formal part of it must be understood the best and last Habitude of Man toward
that best Object, so that the Happiness may both ways satisfy the Appetite,
that is, as it is the best thing, and as it is the Possession, use, or Fruition
of that best thing: Now this Habitude whereby the best thing is perfectly
possessed must needs be some Operation, because Operation is the ultimate
perfection of every Being. Which Axiom (as Caietan well observes) must not be
so understood as if Operation taken by it self were more perfect then the thing
which tends to it, but that every thing with its Operation is more perfect then
without it.

The next thing which I observe, is, that it is also farther agreed upon among
them, that this Operation wherein our Fruition of God does consist, is an
Operation of the Intellectual part, and not of the Sensitive. And this also, I
take to be very reasonable. First, Because it is generally received that the
Essence of God cannot be the Object of any of our Senses. But Secondly, Suppose
it could, yet since this Operation wherein our Perfect Happiness does consist
must be the perfectest Operation, and since that of the Intellectual part is
more perfect then that of the Sensitive, it follows that the Operation whereby
we enjoy God must be that of the Intellectual part only.

But now whereas the Intellectual part of man (as it is opposed to the
Sensitive) is double, viz. That of the Understanding, and that of the Will,
there has commenced a great Controversy between the Thomists and the Scotists,
in which Act or Operation of the Rational Soul the Fruition of God, does
consist, whether in an act of the Understanding, or in an act of the Will. The
Thomists will have it consist purely in an act of the Understanding, which is
Vision. The Scotists in act of the Will, which is Love. I intend not here to
launch out into those Voluminous Intricacies and Abstrusities, occasioned by
the management of this Argument: It may suffice to tell you, that I think they
are both in the extreme, and therefore I shall take the middle way and resolve
the perfect Fruition of God partly into Vision and partly into Love. These are
the two arms with which we embrace the Divinity, and unite our Souls to the
fair one and the good. These I conceive are both so essential to the perfect
Fruition of God, that the Idea of it can by no means be maintained if either of
them be wanting. For since God is both Supreme Truth and infinite Goodness he
cannot be entirely possessed but by the most clear knowledge and the most
ardent love. And besides, since the Soul is happy by her Faculties, her
Happiness must consist in the most perfect Operation of each Faculty. For if
Happiness did consist formally in the sole operation of the Understanding (as
most say) or in the sole operation of the Will (as others) the Man would not be
completely and in all respects Happy. For how is it possible a Man should be
perfectly Happy in loving the greatest good if he did not know it, or in
knowing it if he did not love it? And moreover these two Operations do so
mutually tend to the promotion and Conservation of one another, that upon this
depends the perpetuity and the constancy of our Happiness. For while the
Blessed do (...), Face to Face contemplate the Supreme Truth and the infinite
Goodness, they cannot choose but love perpetually; and while they perpetually
love, they cannot choose but perpetually contemplate. And in this mutual
reciprocation of the actions of the Soul consists the perpetuity of Heaven, the
Circle of Felicity.

Besides this way of resolving our Fruition of God into Vision and Love, there
is a Famous Opinion said to be broacht by Henricus Gandavensis, who upon a
Supposition that God could not be so fully enjoyed as is required to perfect
Happiness, only by the Operations or Powers of the Soul, fancied a certain
Illapse whereby the Divine Essence did fall in with and as it were penetrate
the essence of the Blessed. Which Opinion he endeavors to illustrate by this
Similitude. That as a piece of Iron red hot by reason of the Illapse of the
fire into it appears all over like fire, so the Souls of the Blessed by this
Illapse of the Divine Essence into them shall be all over Divine.

I think he has scarce any Followers in this Opinion, but I am sure he had a
Leader. For this is no more then what Plato taught before him, as is to be seen
in his Discourses about the refusion of the Souls of good men into the Anima
Mundi, which is the self same in other terms with this Opinion. And the truth
of what I affirm may farther appear from an expression of that great Platonist
Plotinus, (viz.) that the Soul will then be Happy when it shall depart hence to
God, Enn. 6. lib. 9. cap. 10.
and as another and no longer her self shall become wholely his (...) having
joined her self to him as a Center to a Center.

That such an intimate Conjunction with God as is here described is possible,
seems to me more then credible from the Nature of the Hypostatic Union, but
whether our Fruition of God after this Life shall consist in it, none know but
those Happy Souls who enjoy him, and therefore I shall determine nothing before
the time. This only I observe, that should our Fruition of God consist in such
an Union or rather Penetration of Essences that would not exclude but rather
infer those Operations of Vision and Love as necessary to Fruition, but on the
other hand, there seems no such necessity of this Union to the Fruition, but
that it may be conceived entire without it. And therefore why we should
multiply difficulties without cause, I see no reason. For my part I should
think my self sufficiently happy in the clear Vision of my Maker, nor should I
desire any thing beyond the Prayer of Moses, Exodus 33.18.
I beseech thee show me thy Glory.

For what an infinite Satisfaction, Happiness, and Delight must it needs be to
have a clear and intimate perception of that Primitive and Original Beauty,
Perfection and Harmony whereof all that appears fair and excellent either to
our Senses or Understandings in this Life is but a faint imitation, a pale
Reflection! To see him who is the Fountain of all Being, containing in himself
the perfection, not only of all that is, but of all that is possible to be, the
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last, which
is, and which was, Rev. 1.8.
and which is to come, the Almighty! To see him of whom all Nature is the
Image, of whom all the Harmony both of the visible and the invisible World is
but the Echo! To see him who (as Plato divinely and magnificently expresses
it) is (...). The immense Ocean of Beauty, which is it self by it self, with it
self, uniform, always existing! This certainly will affect the Soul with all
the pleasing and ravishing Transports of Love and Desire, Joy and Delight,
Wonder and Amazement, together with a settled Acquiescence and Complacency of
Spirit only less infinite then the Loveliness that causes it, and the peculiar
Complacency of him who rejoices in his own fullness, and the Comprehensions of
Eternity. We see how strangely our sense of Seeing is affected with the Harmony
of Colors, and our sense of Hearing with the Harmony of Sounds, insomuch that
some have been too weak for the enjoyment, and have grown mad with the
Sublimate of Pleasure. And if so, what then shall we think of the Beatific
Vision, the pleasure of which will so far transcend that of the other, as God
who is all over Harmony and Proportion exceeds the sweetest Melody of Sounds
and Colors, and the perception of the Mind is more vigorous quick and piercing
then that of the Senses? This is Perfect Happiness, this is the Tree of Life
which grows in the midst of the Paradise of God, this is Heaven, which while
the Learned dispute about, the good only enjoy. But I shall not venture to Soar
any longer in these Heights, I find the Ether too thin here to breath in long,
and the Brightness of the Region flashes too strong upon my tender sense; I
shall therefore hasten to descend from the Mount of God, lest I grow giddy with
speculation and lose those Secrets which I have learnt there, the Cabala of
Felicity.

And now (Sir) I come to consider your Question (viz.) Wherein the greatest
Happiness attainable by man in this Life does consist. Concerning which, there
is as great variety of Opinions among Philosophers, as there is among
Geographers, about the Seat of Paradise. The learned Varro reckons up no less
then 288 several Opinions about it, and yet notwithstanding the number of
Writers who have bequeathed Volumes upon this Subject to Posterity, they seem
to have been in the dark in nothing more then in this, and (excepting only a
few Platonists who placed Man's greatest End in the Contemplation of truth) they
seem to have undertaken nothing so unhappily, as when they essayed to write of
Happiness. Some measure their Happiness by the high-tide of their Riches, as
the Egyptians did the Fertility of the Year by the increase of the River Nile.
Others place it in the Pleasures of Sense, others in Honor and Greatness. But
these and the like were Men of the common Herd, low grovelling Souls that either
understood not the Dignity of Humane Nature, or else forgot that they were Men.
But there were others of a Diviner Genius and Sublimer Spirit Queis meliore
luto finxit praecordia Titan.
Who had a more generous blood running in their Veins, which made them put a
just value upon themselves, and scorn to place their greatest Happiness in that
which they should blush to enjoy. And those were the Stoics and the
Peripatetics who both place the greatest Happiness of this Life in the Actions
of Virtue, with this only difference, that whereas the former are contented
with Naked Virtue, the latter require some other Collateral things to the
farther accomplishment of Happiness, such as are Health and Strength of Body, a
Competent Livelihood, and the like.

And this Opinion has been subscribed to by the hands of eminent Moralists in
all Ages. And as it is Venerable for its Antiquity, so has it gained no small
Authority from the Pen of a great Modern Writer (Descartes) who resolves the
greatest Happiness of this Life into the right use of the Will, which consists
in this, that a Man have a firm and constant purpose always to do that which he
shall judge to be best.

I confess, the Practice of Virtue is a very great instrument of Happiness, and
that there is a great deal more true satisfaction and solid content to be found
in a constant course of well living then in all the soft Caresses of the most
studied Luxury, or the Voluptuousness of a Seraglio. And therefore I have
oftentimes been exceedingly pleased in the reading of a certain Passage in that
Divine Moralist Hierocles, where he tells you, that the Virtuous Man lives much
more pleasantly then the Vicious Man. For (says he) all Pleasure is the
Companion of Action, it has no Subsistence of its own, but accompanies us in
our doing such and such things. Hence it is that the worser Actions are
accompanied with the meaner Pleasures. So that the good Man does not only excel
the wicked Man in what is good, but has also the advantage of him even in
Pleasure, for whose sake alone he is wicked. For he that chooses Pleasure with
Filthiness, although for a while he be sweetly and deliciously entertained, yet at
last through the Filthiness annexed to his enjoyment, he is brought to a
painful Repentance. But now he that prefers Virtue with all her Labors and
Difficulties, though at first for want of use it sits heavy upon him, yet by
the Conjunction of good he alleviates the labor and at last enjoys pure and
unallay'd Pleasure with his Virtue. So that of necessity that Life is most
unhappy, which is most wicked, and that most pleasant which is most virtuous.

Now this I readily submit to as a great truth, that the degrees of Happiness
vary according to the degrees of Virtue, and consequently that that Life which
is most Virtuous is most Happy with reference to those that are Vicious or less
Virtuous, every degree of Virtue having a proportionate degree of Happiness
accompanying it, (which is all, I suppose, that excellent Author intends.) But
I do not think the most Virtuous Life so the most Happy, but that it may become
Happier unless something more be comprehended in the Word (Virtue) then the
Stoics, Peripatetics, and the generality of other Moralists understand by it.
For with them it signifies no more but only such a firm (...) or habitude of
the Will to good, whereby we are constantly disposed, notwithstanding the
contrary tendency of our Passions to perform the necessary Offices of Life.
This they call Moral or Civil Virtue, and althongh this brings always Happiness
enough with it to make ample amends for all the difficulties which attend the
practice of it: Yet I am not of Opinion that the greatest Happiness attainable
by Man in this Life consists in it. But there is another and a higher sense of
the Word which frequently occurs in the Pythagorean and Platonic Writings,
(viz.) Contemplation and the Vnitive way of Religion. And this they call Divine
Virtue. I allow of the distinction, but I would not be thought to derive it
from the Principle, as if Moral Virtue were acquired, and this infused (for to
speak ingeniously infused Virtue seemed ever to me as great a Paradox in
Divinity, as Occult qualities in Philosophy) but from the nobleness of the
Object, the Object of the former being Moral good, and the Object of the latter
God himself. The former is a State of Proficiency, the latter of Perfection.
The former is a State of difficulty and contention, the latter of ease and
Sincerity. The former is employed in mastering the Passions, and regulating the
actions of common life, the latter in Divine Meditation and the Ecstasies of
Seraphic Love. He that has only the former is like Moses with much difficulty
climbing up the Holy Mount, but he that has the latter is like the same Person
conversing with God on the serene top of it, and shining with the Rays of
Anticipated Glory. So that this latter supposes the acquisition of the former,
and consequently has all the Happiness retaining to the other, besides what it
adds of its own. This is the last Stage of Humane Perfection, the utmost round
of the Ladder whereby we ascend to Heaven, one Step higher is Glory. Here then
will I build my Tabernacle, for it is good to be here. Here will I set up my
Pillar of Rest, here will I fix, for why should I travail on farther in persuit
of any greater Happiness, since Man in this Station is but a little lower than
the Angels, one remove from Heaven. Here certainly is the greatest Happiness as
well as Perfection attainable by Man in this State of imperfection. For since
that Happiness which is absolutely perfect and complete consists in the clear
and intimate Vision and most ardent Love of God, hence we ought to take our
Measures and conclude that to be the greatest Happiness attainable in this
State, which is the greatest participation of the other. And that can be
nothing else but the Vnitive way of Religion, which consists of the
Contemplation and Love of God. I shall say something of each of these
severally, and something of the Vnitive way of Religion which is the result of
both, and so shut up this Discourse.

By Contemplation in general ((...)) we understand an application of the
Understanding to some truth. But here in this place we take the word in a more
peculiar sense, as it signifies an habitual attentive steady application or
conversion of the Spirit to God and his Divine Perfections. Of this the Masters
of Mystic Theology commonly make fifteen Degrees. The first is Intuition of
Truth, the 2 is a Retirement of all the Vigor and strength of the Faculties
into the innermost parts of the Soul, the 3 is Spiritual Silence, the 4 is
Rest, the 5 is Union, the 6 is the hearing of the still Voice of God, the 7 is
Spiritual Slumber, the 8 is Ecstacy, the 9 is Rapture, the 10 is the Corporeal
Appearance of Christ and the Saints, the 11 is the Imaginary Appearance of the
same, the 12 is the Intellectual Vision of God, the 13 is the Vision of God in
obscurity, the 14 is an admirable Manifestation of God, the 15 is a clear and
intuitive Vision of him, such as St. Austin and Tho. Aquinas attribute to S.
Paul when he was rapt up into the third Heaven. Others of them reckon seven
degrees only, (viz.) Taste, Desire, Satiety, Ebriety, Security, Tranquillity, but
the name of the seventh (they say) is known only to God.

I shall not stand to examine the Scale of this Division, perhaps there may be
a kind of a Pythagoric Superstition in the number. But this I think I may
affirm in general that the Soul may be wound up to a most strange degree of
Abstraction by a silent and steady Contemplation of God. Plato defines
Contemplation to be (...), a Solution and a Separation of the Soul from the
Body. And some of the severer Platonists have been of Opinion that it is
possible for a Man by mere intention of thought not only to withdraw the Soul
from all commerce with the Senses, but even really to separate it from the
Body, to untwist the Ligaments of his Frame, and by degrees to resolve himself
into the State of the Dead. And thus the Jews express the manner of the Death
of Moses, calling it Osculum Oris Dei, the Kiss of God's Mouth. That is, that
he breathed out his Soul by the mere strength and Energy of Contemplation, and
expired in the Embraces of his Maker. A Happy way of Dying! How ambitious
should I be of such a conveyance, were it practicable? How passionately should
I join with the Church in Canticles? (...), 1 Ver. 2.
Let him kiss me with the Kisses of his Mouth.

But however this be determined, certain it is, that there are exceeding great
Measures of Abstraction in Contemplation, so great, that sometimes whether a
Man be in the Body or out of the Body, he himself can hardly tell. And
consequently the Soul in these Praeludiums of Death, these Neighbourhoods of
Separation must needs have brighter glimpses and more Beatific Ideas of God,
then in a State void of these Elevations, and consequently must love him with
greater Ardency. Which is the next thing I am to consider.

The love of God in general may be considered either as it is purely
intellectual, or as it is a Passion. The first is when the Soul upon an
apprehension of God as a good delectable and agreeable Object joins her self to
him by the Will. The latter is when the motion of the Will is accompanied with
a sensible Commotion of the Spirits, and an estuation of the blood. Some I know
are of Opinion, that it is not possible for a man to be affected with this
sensitive Love of God which is a Passion, because there is nothing in God which
falls under our imagination and consequently (the imagination being the only
Medium of conveyance) it cannot be propagated from the Intellectual part to the
Sensitive. Whereupon they affirm that none are capable of this sensitive
passionate love of God but Christians who enjoy the Mystery of the Incarnation
whereby they know God has condescended so far as to cloth himself with flesh,
and to become like one of us. But it is not all the Sophistry of the old
Logicians that shall work me out of the belief of what I feel and know, and rob
me of the sweetest entertainment of my Life, the Passionate Love of God.
Whatever some Men pretend who are strangers to all the affectionate heats of
Religion, and therefore make their Philosophy a Plea for their indevotion, and
extinguish all Holy Ardours with a Syllogism; yet I am firmly persuaded that
our love of God may be not only passionate, but even Wonderfully so, and
exceeding the Love of Women. It Is an Experimental and therefore undeniable
Truth, that Passion is a great Instrument of Devotion, and accordingly we find
that Men of the most warm and pathetic Tempers and Amorous Complexions
(Provided they have but Consideration enough withal to fix upon the right
Object) prove the greatest Votaries in Religion. And upon this account it is,
that to heighten our Love of God in our Religious Addresses, we endeavor to
excite our Passions by Music, which would be to as little purpose as the
Fanatic thinks it is, if there were not such a thing as the Passionate Love of
God. But then as to the Objection, I Answer with the excellent Descartes, that
although in God who is the Object of our Love, we can imagine nothing, yet we
can imagine that our Love, which consists in this, that we would unite our
selves to the Object beloved, and consider our selves as it were a part of it.
And the sole Idea of this very Conjunction is enough to stir up a heat about
the Heart, and so kindle a very vehement Passion. To which I add, that although
the Beauty or aimableness of God be not the same with that which we see in
Corporeal Beings, and consequently cannot directly fail within the Sphere of
the Imagination, yet it is something Analogous to it, and that very Analogy is
enough to excite a Passion. And this I think sufficient to warrant my general
division of the Love of God into Intellectual and Sensitive.

But there is a more peculir Acceptance of the Love of God proper to this
place. And it is that which we call Seraphic. By which I understand in short,
that Love of God which is the effect of an intense Contemplation of him. This
differs not from the other in kind, but only in degree, and that it does
exceedingly, in as much as the thoughtful Contemplative Man (as I hinted
before) has clearer Perceptions and livelier Impressions of the Divine Beauty,
the lovely Attributes and Perfections of God, then he whose Soul is more deeply
set in the Flesh, and lies grovelling in the bottom of the Dungeon.

That the Nature of this Seraphic Love may be the better understood, I shall
consider how many degrees there may be in the Love of God. Lib. 2. de monachii,
cap. 2.
And I think the Computation of Bellarmin is accurate enough. He makes four.
The first is to Love God proportionably to his Loveliness, that is, with an
infinite Love; and this degree is peculiar to God himself. The second is to
Love him, not proportionably to his Loveliness, but to the utmost Capacity of a
Creature, and this degree is peculiar to Saints and Angels in Heaven. The third
is to love him not proportionably to his Loveliness, nor to the utmost capacity
of a Creature absolutely considered, but to the utmost capacity of a Mortal
Creature in this Life. And this (he says) is proper to the Religious. The
fourth is to love him not proportionably to his Loveliness, nor to the utmost
capacity of a Creature considered either absolutely or with respect to this
Life, but only so as to love nothing equally with him or above him. That is,
not to do any thing contrary to the Divine Love. And this is absolute
indespensable duty, less then which will not qualify us for the enjoyment of
God hereafter.

Now this Seraphic Love which we here discourse of is in the third degree: When
a Man after many degrees of Abstraction from the Animal Life, many a profound
and steady Meditation upon the Excellencies of God, sees such a vast Ocean of
Beauty and Perfection in him, that he loves him to the utmost Stretch of his
Power. Cant. 2.3.
When he sits under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet to
his Taste. When he Consecrates and Devotes himself wholely to him, and has no
Passion for Inferior Objects. When he is ravished with the delights of his
Service, and breaths out some of his Soul to him in every Prayer. When he is
delighted with Anthems of Praise and Adoration more then with Marrow and
Fatness, and Feasts upon a Hallelujah. When he melts in a Calenture of
Devotion, and his Soul breaks out with fervent Desire. Psalm. 119.
When the one thing he delights in is to converse with God in the Beauty of
Holiness, and the one thing he desires to see him as he is in Heaven. This is
Seraphic Love, and this with Contemplation makes up that which the Mystic
Divines Style the Vnitive way of Religion. It is called so because it Unites us
to God in the most excellent manner that we are capable of in this Life. By
Union here I do not understand that which is Local or Presential, because I
consider God as Omnipresent. Neither do I mean a Union of Grace (as they call
it) whereby we are reconciled to God, or a Union of Charity whereof it is said,
Jo. 4.16.
he that dwells in Love dwells in God and God in him. The first of these
being as common to the inanimate things as to the most Extasi'd Soul upon
Earth. And the two last being common to all good men who indeed love God, but
yet want the excellency of Contemplation and the Mystic Union. The Union then
which I here speak of is that which is between the Faculty and the Object.
Which consists in some Habitude or Operation of one toward the other. The
Faculties here are the Understanding and Will, the Object God, and the
Operations Contemplation and Love. The result of which two is the Mystic Union.
Which according to this complex Notion of it that I have here delivered, is
thus most admirably represented by the excellent Bishop Taylour. It is (says
he) a Prayer of quietness and silence and a Meditation extraordinary, The great
Exemplar page 60.
a Discourse without variety, a Vision and Intuition of Divine Excellencies, an
immediate entry into an Orb of light, and a resolution of all our Faculties
into Sweetness, Affections and Starings upon the Divine Beauty. And is carried
on to Ecstasies, Raptures, Suspensions, Elevations, Abstractions and
Apprehensions beatifical.

I make no doubt but that many an honest Pious Soul arrives to the heavenly
Canaan who is not fed with this Manna in the Wilderness. But though every one
must not expect these Antepatists of Felicity that is virtuous, yet none else
must. Paradise was never open but to a State of Innocence. But neither is that
enough. No, this Mount of God's presence is fenced not only from the profane
but also from the Moderately virtuous. It Is the Privilege of Angelical
Dispositions, and the reward of eminent Piety and an excellent Religion to be
admitted to these Divine Repasts, these Feasts of Love. And here I place the
greatest Happiness attainable by Man in this Life, as being the nearest
Approach to the State of the Blessed above, the Outer Court of Heaven.

These (Sir) are my thoughts concerning Happiness. I might have spun them out
into a greater length, but I think a little Plot of ground thick-sown is better
then a great Field which for the most part of it lies Fallow. I have
endeavored to deliver my Notions with as much perspicuity and in as good
Method as I could, and so to answer all the ends of Copiousness, with the
advantage of a shorter Cut. If I appear singular in any of my Notions it is not
out of an industrious affectation of Novelty, but because in the composing of
this discourse (the Meditation of a few broken hours in a Garden) I consulted
more my own experimental Notices of things and private Reflections then the
Writings of others. So that if sometimes I happen to be in the Road, and
sometimes in a way by my self, it is no wonder. I affect neither the one nor the
other, but write as I think. Which as I do at other times, so more especially
when I subscribe my self

Sir, Yours most affectionately. I. N.
Allsouls College Apr. 18. 1683.
FINIS.
Books Printed for James Norris, this present Year, 1683.
MAssinello, or a Satyr against the Association and the Guild Hall Riot, 4o
Eromena, or the Noble Stranger, a Novel. 8o Tractatus Adversus Reprobationis
Absolutae decretum Nova Methodo and Succinetissimo Compendio adornatus; and in
duos Libros Digestus, 8o -- This in Latin is Writ by the same Author of the
Idea of Happiness, and these Books are Translated by the same Author out of
Greek and Latin into English, (viz.) Effigies Amoris, or the Picture of Love
Unveiled, 12o Hierocles upon the Golden Verses of the Pythagoreans, 8o

