Three Choice and Profitable SERMONS Upon Several TEXTS of SCRIPTURE; VIZ.
JER. 30.17. JOHN 14.3. HEB. 8.5.

By that Reverend Servant of Christ, MR. JOHN NORTON Late Teacher of the Church
of Christ at Boston in N.E.

The First of them being the LAST SERMON which he Preached at the Court of
Election at Boston. The Second was the LAST which he Preached on the Lord's Day.
The Third was the LAST which he Preached on his Weekly-Lecture-Day.
WHEREIN (Beside many other excellent and seasonable Truths) is showed, the
Lords Sovereignty over, and Care for his Church and People, in order to both
their Militant and Triumphant condition; and their Fidelity and good affection
toward himself.

2 Samuel 23.1. Now these be the LAST words of David. David the son of Jesse
said, and the man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of the God of Jacob,
and the sweet Psalmist of Israel.

Deuteronomy. 31.29. For I know, that after my death ye will utterly corrupt your
selves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you: and evil will
befall you in the latter days, etc.

Ezra 3 3. And they set the Altar upon his Bases; for fear was upon them,
because of the people of those Countries.

Zech. 1.5, 6. Your fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for
ever? but my words and my statutes which I commanded my servants the Prophets,
did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the
Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to
our doings, so has he dealt with us.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S.G. and M.I. for Hezekiah Usher of Boston. 1664.

JOHANNES NORTONUS. ANAGR. NONNE IS HONORATVS?
NOnne is Honoratus? Deus ipse coronat honor
Servum, (cum periit) non pereunte, suum.
Abstulit Enochum translatio mira, sed ejus
In Coelis decorat pulchra Corona Caput.
Qui nobis, (subito raptus) miser esse videtur
(Forsitan, Ignaris) vivit at usque Deo.
Vivit, and in Coelis cumulatus honoribus amplis
Regnat in aeternum (sic ait ipse Deus.)
Mors inopina potest Jobi cito perdere Natos,
Sors quibus in superis inviolata datur.
Multa prius passi Moses Aaronque fuere,
Tempus and ante suum jussus uterque mori.
Quid si non licuit Canaanem visere? Tanto
Celsior in Coelis cessit utrique locus.
Curribus ignitis Elias raptus; at illis
Ad summi vehitur culmina summa poli.
Esto. Sit in Bello Josias victus, and ictus,
Mortuus in pace est non pereunte tamen.
Funera non unquam Mage lamentanda Sioni,
Josiae nunquam Gloria major erat.
Quem deflent homines, Deus optimus auget honor
His dolor, ast illi Gloria summa fuit.
Si Caput amisit (gladio resecante) Johannes,
Ejus honor, (Christo judice) quantus erat!
Sit Stephanus lapidum (licet) obrutus ictibus, Illum
Christus in amplexut traxerat inde suos.
Christus and ipse fuit quam dira morte peremptus
At sequitur tantam Gloria quanta Crucem!
Sic Deus ut Christum, sic Christus honor Coronat
Eximio, quibus est Gloria chara Dei.
Qualis erat noster (syncero cord) Johannes
Cui, nisi quae Christi, chara fuere nihil.
Hoc (scio) nemo negat, nisi very Testis and aequi
Non velit esse (Bonos Consule, sive malos.)
Pro Samuele olim contestabantur and omneis
(Hunc qui pro meritis vix coluere suis)
Vel siquis forsan magis invidet Ejus honori,
Hinc cumulus crescet major honoris ei.
Anagr. 2.
JESV! ANNON THRONOS?
JOHANNES NORTONIUS.
Anagr. 3.
ANNON JESV HONOR SIT?
ANnon dandus honor sit ab omnibus omnis Jesu?
Est quibus in Jesu sanguine parta salus?
ENGLISH.
OH Jesus! have not thou prepared Thrones
For us thy poor and ill deserving ones?
How should we then to Thee all Honor give,
And to thy Name, who in the Heavens do live,
And there preparest Mansions for thine,
Where they may all in endless Glory shine?
To the same purpose.
JOHN NORTON. Anagr. INTO HONOR.
FRom Honor into Honor go (the Lord thus calling thee)
To higher Honor, then there could on Earth obtained be.
Heaven is the Seat of Honor for those whom he Crowns with Grace;
For the most honorable Crowns, Heaven is the only place.
By men that are most ignorant of Gods revealed Will,
Thou may be miserable thought; for so they construe still
(Like brutish ones) the mind of God if Saints die in a swoon,
As if their Sun, all bright before, Were now gone down at Noon.
As if their case were now by far the more to be deplored,
As that which does but little hope (or none) of Bliss afford.
Yea, holy Job his Friends to this did too-too much incline,
[That sudden Changes, such us his, do argue Wrath divine.]
But when the Saints do perish thus (as foolish men conceive)
That is the time, and means whereby more Honor they receive,
As being Crowned with Royal Crowns which are at Gods right hand.
Like Joseph from his Dungeon raised by the Kings Command.
'Twas a translation mavelous which did Enoch remove
From out this sinful world, to be crowned in the Heavens above,
Where now he lives, and reigns, with heaps of highest honor filled,
All his Predictions to be from time to time fulfilled.
An unegnected death did saize on Jobs posterity,
But in the Heiv'ns a glorious Lot for them prepared did lie.
Moses and Aaron when as they had suffered much, were bid
As 't were, before their time to die (as in their Mounts they did)
What if the Land of Canaan they might not visit? yet
A place more glorious in the Heavens they, both of them, did get.
In flaming-fiery-Charet wrapped from earth Elijah was,
And by the same conveyed he was unto his bliss-ful place.
Be it that good Josiah were cut off with sudden stroke,
He died in peace, and unto rest eternal was he took.
No funeral to Sion was as his so lamentable,
Yet was his death as well as life to him most honorable.
Theirs was the grief, the joy was his., God highly honored him,
Although his death to carnal eyes might miserable seem.
The cursed executioner cut off John Baptist's head,
But how did Jesus honor him both when alive, and dead.
The Crowned Martyr holy Stephen in cruel wise was stoned,
But by his blessed Savior's most sweet embraces owned.
Yea, Christ himself, Gods own dear Son, whose death more woeful was
Yet from his cross how soon advanced to that most glorious place!
So God his Christ, with honor crowned; So Christ does honor his,
To whom Gods Honor, and his Christ's, most dear and precious is.
And such an one our Norton was whose death we so lament,
Whose whole desire was upon Christ and on his glory bent
None can deny it good nor bad, like as to Samuel
They all were forced to confess he had done all things well.
If any one should have an heart. with envy filled so much
As unto him his honor due, malignantly to grutch
Yet this will add unto the weight of his most glorious Crown,
And both in sight of God and men increase his high renown.
It Is true: he was a man, and none himself abhorred more;
But none did more the Lords free grace in Jesus Christ adore.
Nothing but this, to know, or preach, or share in did he wish.
This was on Earth, as it is in Heaven his blessed Paradise.
To Honor Christ, he was content as well by Sea, as Land,
His Life to venture, yea his. ALL, was All at Christ's Command.
The care of all His Churches-dear lay heavy on his heart,
As he did ever, but at last, most fully it impart.
His life was nothing but of death a daily meditation,
And to his happy end, at last, a solemn preparation.
He was a man (if any were) that loved truth, and peace,
Which to promote, in every kind he never at all did cease.
An Orthodox Divine he was (his writings all do show,)
Both Englands, Holland, all the World, or do or may it know.
His Books do Antichrist confute with all his viperous brood,
Especially where they eclipse the merits of Christ's blood.
Church-holy-order he maintained against Morellianisme,
Decrying every sect, but most abhorring Quakerisme.
His last both words, and works (like David's) were the best
And as his death more near approached more lively then the rest.
Nothing, but things at Gods right hand, and heavenly Mansions
Was in his thoughts, at home, abroad, breathed in's expressions.
Ipswich was happy, Boston more, (if it we had but known)
Whom two such John's successively God gave to be their own.
But John and Paul, so much admired (and most deservedly)
Must be content to be abas'd by some, before they die:
And being dead, it will appear such Prophets once we had,
When God has once abased us with changes very sad.
The Lord, if his good pleasure be, our miseries prevent,
And of our great unthankfulness, grant that we may repent.
Then will the Lord this Widow-Church, that widows house relieve,
And make us all rejoice again, whom now he makes to grieve.
We grieved him first, and just it was that he should grieve our hearts,
Though when at low'st we are, it is far beneath our just deserts.
I speak of all New England, but chiefly of Boston Church,
Oh! let us all impartially our ways and spirits search;
And say as the Disciples did, Lord, is it I? is it I?
And thou, my soul, beyond the rest It to thy self apply.
It Is thou have sinned: were there none, but thy unworthiness
Well might the Lord both thee, and all, because of thee, distress.
When such green trees, as were those John's Gods hand thus spares not,
Of such a dry and withered one Lord what will be the lot?
However we must bless thy name (what ere of us become)
That thou takes up such fruitful ones to thine eternal home.
Oh! that their rare Examples we to follow had the grace!
That thou may count us worthy once of that most glorious place.
As for his Mary, let her say, [Rabboni] unto him,
Who calls her [Mary] by her Name, and did her Soul redeem.
John Wilson Sen. SION the Outcast healed of her Wounds.
BEING THE FIRST SERMON: AND Preached at the COURT of ELECTION, MAY XXII. 1661.
Jerem. 30.17. For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy
wounds, says the Lord; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is
Sion, whom no man seeks after.


THis Text may be called A Divine Plaster for a Sinsick Outcast: in other
words it is Gods Cure of Sion, when incurably Wounded. You have here the
Patient described from diverse Adjuncts: some Inherent, abiding in the Patient;
some Extrinsecal, relating to the Patient. That which is Abiding, is that she
is an Outcast, Wounded, and Sick: That which is Extrinsecal, relates either
to the Spectators, or to the Physician. To the Beholders: and there you have
their disaffection, viz. They called thee an Outcast, saying, etc. To the
Physician: and there you have his affection, viz. I will restore health to
thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds: which Affection is amplified, 1. From
the Cause, Because they called thee an Outcast, therefore will I heal thee. 2.
From the Infallibility of it, upon the testimony of this Physician; Thus says
the Lord. They say, Thou art an Outcast: the Lord says, He will restore her.

To open the words briefly. The Patient, Here you find, 1. An [Out-cast]. It
does immediately look to the good Figs that were in Babylon, and they were in a
manner voluntary Exiles, they yielded themselves to go: and such an Outcast is
here meant, as is not only cast out of the Country, but out of the hearts and
affections of others. Several Comparisons there are, that set forth this
Outcast; as, that of a menstruous woman, Lam. 1.17. of the person cast out of
the Synagogue, Ezra 10 8. Ioh. 9 22. and that of the Leper, 2 Chronicles. 26.21. he
dwells in an house apart; and as Iephthah, thrust and expelled out of his
Fathers house; cast out of doors, and out of hearts and esteem. 2. But not
only is Sion an Outcast, but an Outcast [Wounded] and it is Laesio ad
mortem, a deadly wound; and an incurable wound, Ier. 30.12. i. e. according to
man: And not a green Wound, but an Ulcer, a festered Wound and Sore; and no
wonder then she is also sick. And if we look to the Extrinsecal Adjunct, which
accompany this Patient, there is that which relates unto 1. The Beholders: They
say [This is Sion, whom no man seeks after.] They did reproach her, and there
was no denial of it; Is not this Sion! it is spoken in way of derision: the
sarcasm of an Enemy. Sion was a word of honor, but they here relate to the
Notation of the Hebrew word, from (...) Siccitas, as being a day, withered,
sapless thing; a barren, and forsaken, and undesirable place and society. And
further [Whom no man seeks after] Neither this sort of men, nor that sort of
men; none has any care of her welfare. 2. A second kind of Extrinsecal
Adjuncts relate unto the Physician; [Therefore I will restore health unto thee,
and I will heal thee] Now God will apply a sanative Cataplasm, an healing Pla
ster: This is Repentance, and Restitution, Ier. 31.9. Repentance, and their
Return, make up the sanative Plaster. In respect of her self, there was need
of Repentance; in respect of the adversary, there was need of Reduction. And
the Cause of it, viz. [Because they called thee an Out-cast] as who should say,
I am sensible of all thy case, and the opprobrie thou have suffered, therefore
will I restore thee. But shall not this fail? No, Jehovah's word is engaged for
it, Thus says the Lord.


Doct. When Sion for its sin is become an Outcast (a subject of contempt) God
takes occasion from her Calamity to give her Repentance, that so he may bring
upon her the Blessing of his own People.

I will not more then intimate to you the Paradoxes that the Text does abound
with. Sion, and acknowledged, and yet no man cares for her. A People, none
neglected like them; a People, none beloved like them: Neglected, if you look
at men; beloved, if you look at God. A People, whose very adversaries are
instrumental to their prosperity. These are such Riddles, as we may truly say
Gods grace only makes. A strange occasion may that seem to be, which God takes
for the healing of his People in Isa. 57.17, 18. I have seen his ways ( i. e.
his frowardness and covetousness) and will heal him. Ezekiel. 11.15, 16, 17. Thy
brethren, even thy brethren, etc. they say, Get ye far from the Lord, unto us
is the land given in possession: Therefore say, Thus says the Lord, although I
have cast them far off, etc. though I have scattered them, etc. yet will I be
a little Sanctuary unto them -- I will gather you, etc. Zech. 3.2. The Lord
rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem: Is not this a
brand plucked out of the fire? They had been in the Furnace long enough. As the
Lord deals thus with his people, so Davia makes use of the like in his
personal case, 2 Samuel 16.12. It may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction,
and requite me good, etc. bless me, because of his cursing.

The Reasons of the point, are:

Reas. 1. From the Sympathy that there is between the Head and the Members.
Christ is sensible of the sufferings of his Outcast. It is true, that the
Outcast does suffer; it is a greater truth, that the God of the Outcast
suffers. Isa. 63.9. In all their affliction, he was afflicted: it relates to
Israel in Egypt. Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of his
Eye: it relates to the good Figs in exile. It is no little ease that our
sorrows touch Christ, according to Heb. 4.15. We have not an high Priest that
cannot be touched, etc. What though the Outcast suffers for sin, yet he has
a sufferer with him: and in this respect what Paul said to his Corinthians, 2
Cor. 2.2. that does Christ say to his Outcast, If I make you sorry, who is he
that makes me glad, but the same that are made sorry by me?

Reas. 2. Because that Gods Name suffers, while his Outcasts do thus suffer.
Exodus 32.12. if God should destroy Israel, the Egyptians will say, For mischief
has he brought them, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of
the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and say,
Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this. You remember the
argument which Joshua uses, Chap. 7, 8, 9. When Israel falls before the
enemy, what will thou do to thy great Name? The destruction of Israel would
raise a scandal to Religion, and the God of Israel.

Reas. 3. To capacitate the Outcast to receive the benediction of a Father,
the actual blessing of his People. To be Gods people, is one thing; but to be
made meet to receive the blessing of his people, is another thing. Zech. 3.2.
The Lord, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, etc. God in election has
made them his people, and determined to bless them: it is this that does pluck
the brand out of the fire. Ier. 24.5, 6, 7. I will set mine eyes upon them for
good, I will bring them again, I will build them, I will give them an heart to
know me, etc. Ier. 30.22. and 31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my
people: and verse. 9. Ye shall come with weeping and supplications, etc. [Ye
shall come] there is their Return; [with weeping and supplications] there is
their Repentance: and the Lord has undertaken for it; I am a father to Israel,
and Ephraim (as bad as he is) is my firstborn. The cause of their being his
people, a penitent people, a blessed people, is his fatherly relation to them,
Ier. 32.38, 39. Ier. 30.7. Alas, it is the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall
be saved out of it.

Use 1. Instruction 1. Hence learn, that Sion is subject to sad Apostasy, or
defections. Ier. 2.5, 13, 21. I planted thee a noble vine. We must acknowledge,
God planted us, I may say, a Scripture vine, and, if so, a noble vine: but you
see a generous vine subject to be a degenerate vine. Exodus 32.7, 8. They turned
aside quickly. But as the Orator solemnizing a sad funeral, desired to have
learned Mortality from another Instance, rather then that of Scaliger; so I
would God would learn us this truth from some other instances, rather then from
these Churches. I may mention notwithstanding, the Politicians observation
concerning the stage of action usually changed in thirty years; because the
persons that make the major vote, are usually changed, and gone by that time.
Something about that time, has our time been in this land, now perhaps the
major vote is changed; you may say in such and such a case many a time, and had
such been alive, these actions, and those, in Church or Court, would not have
been so carried on. But I will not dwell here. I wish we might learn such
instances from some other example, and not from our selves.

Instr. 2. Sions Apostasy brings upon Sion sad Calamity. It Is a truth, that
Israel embraces not God, til God first embrace Israel: it is also a truth, that
God forsakes not Israel, till Israel first forsake him. Ier. 5.25. If good
things be withheld from us, Iniquity is the cause. Lam. 3.39. if evil things be
brought upon us, the cause is sin. There was a time when Solomon was at rest, 1
Kings 5.4. There was no adversary, nor evil occurrent; there was a time (again)
when Solomon had many adversaries, 1 King. 11.14, 23, 26. Solomon has rest,
while he is in his integrity; Solomon has adversaries, that was the time of
his Apostasy. Is there no dispensation but Judah must serve Shishak? 2 Chronicles.
12.8. what is the reason thereof? it is because they would not subject
themselves to the yoke of God: not the power of the Egyptians, but their
non-subjection to God, made them subjects to Shishak. Ier. 14.11. and 7.16.
Jeremiah, pray not for them, I will not hear, says the Lord: there is no
dispensation, Ier. 27.12. non-subjection to the yoke of Christ, subjected Judah
to the yoke of Babylon. Abuse of Liberty, is that which forfeiteth the use of
liberty.

Instr. 3. Sions Malady is not cureable with Calamity, Isai. 4.8.10. would not
one think a furnace should cure the outcast? they are so good, that they are
called the good figs, and yet so bad, as that seventy years captivity would not
make them good enough for the end. Those that were seventy years in the furnace
do cry out, Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isai, 63.17.
you that think you have a new man, do not forget that you have within you also
an old man, and calamity will not remove it. The hard-heartedness of good
people is very strange. Heb. 3.8. Harden not your hearts: Oh! provoke him not
as at Meribah! what does Paul cry out against, and so David, and Moses?
Meribah, Meribah! this, this lies at the hearts of such, the inseparable, the
insuperable, invincible non-subjection of Israel to the ways of God, this is
not cureable with calamity.

Instr. 4. Though Sions malady be such, as that, looked at in it self, it cannot
be cured, yet looked at in Gods promise, and it cannot want a cure. Look upon it
in it self, and it seems incurable, looked at in the Physician, and it cannot
but be cured. Jeremiah looking at his sufferings, he will speak no more; but
looking at Gods promise, and it is as fire in his bones, he cannot but speak. 2
King. 8.10. there is a quaerie put to the Prophet, whether Benhadad shall live;
the prophet answers, He may certainly recover, howbeit, the Lord has showed
me, he shall surely dye; i. e. the disease was not such but he might have
recovered: so may I by allusion invert and say, Sions disease is incurable, but
yet she shall certainly recover. Look at Sion in the glass of Providence, and
she is as a woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit, Isai. 54.5, 6. and 66.4.
husbandless, as to reproach; and yet at the same time thy Maker is thy husband:
if we look at Sion in the glass of the Promise, this Outcast is both Marah, and
Hephzibah, both a Widow, and Beulah. Look at the Outcasts tears, as an effect
of man's not caring for her, but as an occasion, and demonstration of Gods care
for her, Psalm. 126.5, 6. that Sion sheddeth tears, denominateth her Marah; that
Sions tears are seed, denominateth her Hephzibah. Psalm. 56 8. that tears fall
from David's cheeks, this is matter of sorrow; that David's tears fall into Gods
bottle, is matter of joy.

Instr. 5. Gods touching an impenitent Outcast with repentance, is a signal of
Gods having mercy thereon. Sions recovery by repentance from her backsliding,
is an effect of grace, and a forerunner of the set time of Stons mercy, Sions
impenitency, is the life and strength of Sions (of the Outcasts) calamity.
Repentance does break the yoke of Babylon; Impenitency does lay on the yoke of
Babylon. You may truly say, the date of the Outcasts captivity, and the date of
their impenitency, is the same. The enemy is never harder-hearted to Sion, then
when Sion is hardhearted to her God. Their affliction was not the bardness of
the Babylonians hearts, but, Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts? Isai
63.17. when the Outcasts return to Ston, they shall go weeping with their
faces thitherward, Ier. 50.4, 5.

Use 2. Exhortation. The text opens my mouth to call upon Gods Outcasts to
accept of Gods plaster. God proposes to us Remedy, or Calamity: we have our
option, whether that of the plaster, or of the sore; make we our choice. If we
accept the plaster, the time of mercy, even the set time is come; if you do
not accept it, you may look at it as the beginning of sorrow. That we are
Outcasts, this does speak us sick; but our not accepting the remedy, speaks
our sickness incurable. To be Outcasts, this argues that we are cast off by
men; but our not accepting the remedy, speaks us cast off by God: the
condition of an Outcast supposes us sinners; but the rejection of the remedy
does say that we are castawayes: for an Outcast to need a medicine, is common
to good and bad; to accept it, is proper to the good.

Let us then accept the Lords Plaster. As an Ingredient thereto, I shall
propose this Direction; viz.

1. Learn we to judge aright of Liberty; Scripture-liberty. Gal. 5.1. Paul
bids us stand fast in our liberty: and those accursed ones he looks unto,
Chap. 1. who also pleaded for liberty, and whom the Assertors of true Liberty
should accordingly pronounce accursed. Blessed men plead for liberty, and
cursed men plead for liberty. The Gnostick in 2 Pet. 2.19. does plead for
liberty: Good men plead for liberty, and bad men plead for liberty: the best
men plead for liberty, and the worst men plead for liberty. If you ask what
Liberty is? you may look at it as a Power, as to any external restraint, or
obstruction-on man's part, to walk in the Faith, Worship; Doctrine and
Discipline of the Gospel, according to the Order of the Gospel. When you hear
men plead for Liberty, see that it be not Liberty falsely so called.

2. Acknowledge Order Divine, and in particular in that great Point of a
Ministerial Judge. There are that make little of Order, and yet we may think,
not any made so little, as Paul made much of it: Let All things be done in
Order, 1 Cor. 14.40. it seems an Apostolical spirit does conclude, that
sometimes better such a thing not done, then not orderly done. There is a
judgment Discretive, which belongs to every Believer; there is a judgment
Authoritative, that belongs unto the Church, and is set therein by God; and
also there is a judgment Decisive, which belongs unto the Council: Only
remember, that the Supreme Judge is either 1. Authentic, i. e. Jesus Christ:
or 2. Regulative, i. e. the Scripture: or 3. Ministerial, i. e. the Council.
This Question concerning a Ministerial Judge in matters of Religion, is that
which has greatly exercised the Christian world; insomuch that both
Protestants and Papists agree, That the Resolution of this Controversy is of
so great moment, as that hereupon depends the Resolution of all Controversies.
When a Controversy arises in a Church (differences must not always continue)
what shall resolve the same, if a Ministerial Judge be not admitted? Take away
this Order, and how shall Peace, or the Society continue? This truth of a
Ministerial Judge, is reckoned among the Fundamentals -- Secundarily, because
it does tend to the (...) find preservation of all that else is of the
Foundation. You shall find this Truth impleaded throughout all generations,
since the Primitive times, and pleaded for by all the Orthodox in all the
Centuries. Deuteronomy. 17.12. Standum sententiae summi judicis: Israel must stand to
this; if it be in matters of Religion, there is the Priest; if in matters
Civil, there is the Magistrate, and he that stands not, or submits not to the
Sentence of these, let him be cut off from Israel: so requisite a thing is
Order. Acts 15. there is no rest in such a case; what now do they, but refer it
to a Council, and that does determine it. 1 Cor. 14.32. The Spirit of the
Prophets is subject to the Prophets. I will not acknowledge him a Prophet, that
is not subject to the Prophets. Let not any one therefore under pretense of a
Prophet, or whatever Inspiration or Persuasion soever, exempt themselves from
subjection to Order.

Obj. The major part may err, and is not always the melior part: Councils and
Churches may err, and have erred.

Answ. 1. But is it not true, that the Objector may err? The major part may
err; so says the Delinquent standing before the Church, and must that
evacuate all Church Power? 2. It Is more likely that truth should be with many
Orthodox, Pious, Orderly, etc. In the multitude of Counselors (was anciently
said, Prove. 11.14.) there is safety. The Objector is one to many, and he is in
his own case a Judge, but a Council in other men's. But if that be not a truth,
that [We must subject to Order] because the major part may err, then put an
end to Church-administrations, there will be no end of Controversies. But
distinguish we concerning Councils. There is a Council Regular, of Orthodox and
meet Members orderly gathered: There is a Council that is Irregular, and
abusive, as in times of Popery. When the Ark was taken by the Philistims, no
marvel it was not Oraculous to Israel; but what Israelite refused to consult
the Ark of God after its return from the Philistims, because they had abused
it? You tell us, that Popish Councils have erred; and therefore must we forget
that the Councils of the Orthodox have maintained the Truth, and have been the
support of Religion in former times? Look to the Nicene, and other Councils.
Councils have been sometimes among the Philistims, among the Papists, and for
so long a time; but shall we esteem the less of Orthodox Councils because of
that? 3. Distinguish between the Truth of Order, and Truth Positive. John 8.17.
The testimony of two men is true: this is what God has appointed for the
Preservation of Society Humane and Christian. That is a truth in foro, viz. in
Church or Court, which may not be the truth positive. The God of Truth has
made it for to keep Societies in peace; and if it were not for this
Institution, there could be no sitting in Judgment, or any Polity among men.
4. Remember that the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1
Cor. 14.32. the Spirits of the Elders are subject to the Elders, etc. If this
be not attended, there can be no Administration, or else there must needs be a
mere rixation and chiding-administration. Where there is liberty and the Old
man, there must needs be much Controversy; 'twere more sad if there were no
Remedy. The non-admission of this help renders the Churches, in case of
Non-action, like the field of the sleeping Husbandman, Matthew. 13.25. or else
like the Meeting of Israel at Meribah; either no Administrations, or manifold
Alterations. It Is true, a Ship may live longer in a Calm, then in a Storm, but
yet your Ship may be so long becalmed, that all the Provision may be spent, and
so perish in time; and it may be better perishing in a Storm, then in a Calm: a
Storm is swifter to perishing, but both destructive. Either this Disease or
that is mortal; the difference may be, that the one is. Chronical, the other
Acute: both are killing. No (you will say) if such men be there that have a
spirit of Meekness and Patience: Yea, but read Exodus 12.3. and Psalm. 106.33.
Moses the meekest man then on earth, yet it went ill with Moses ('it is said) for
their sakes. How long did Moses live at Meribah? sure I am it killed him in a
short time, a man of as good a temper, as could be expected from a mere man: I
tell you, it will not only kill the People, but it will quickly kill Moses.
Take heed of Meribah, and accept of the Remedy against your Disease. Obj. May
not a good man suffer by this means? Answ. Sometimes we are called to suffer;
and subjection to Order may be accompanied with suffering for the Truth: and
better an innocent and good man suffer, then Order, for that preserves the
whole.

3. Sanctify God in his Providential Testimonies against abuse of Liberty.
Mind Solomon's case beforementioned: Have we not many Adversaries? Are we not
Outcasts? Are we as much in the hearts of others, as formerly? Are there not
those who labor to bereave us of our Liberties? Let us Sanctify the Name of
God herein.

4. Attend we the Examples of the godly wise, for the continuing of our
Liberty, in like cases. You will say, What is that? I answer, An Address to the
Supreme Authority, and a just Apology. If any say, What Example in Scripture
have we for an Address? Let such look to 2 Kings 4.13. Would thou be spoken
for to the King? This did not unbecome the Prophet to propound to her. Remember
Ezra 7.6. and 4.6, 13. Esth. 4.8. Nehem. 2.4. did Nehemiah do the people wrong
therein? My God (says he) remember me for good in this. There was Accusations
written against them; Rehum and Shimshai write, Tatnai and Shethar-boznai write
against them, Sanballat writes: Shall there be those that Petition against, and
shall none Petition for Israel? Ezra's and Nehemiah's Petitioning, and
promoting their Petitions to the King, were not interpreted as acts of
diffidence unto God, or of irregular compliance, nor themselves as men less
friends to the Church and Civil Liberties, nor looked upon as unworthy to be
continued in their Trust and Esteem among the People. Mordecai counsels Esther
to go in unto the King, and speak to him, though it was with the peril of her
life. To make an Address then is not that which is not according to Scripture.
The like I might say relating to an Apology.

5. Let us walk in the use of our Liberty with innocence, and without offense.
To differ from our Orthodox, Pious, and Learned Brethren, is such an affliction
to a Christian and ingenuous Spirit, as nothing but love to the Truth could arm
a man of peace against: Our Profession being in a way differing from these and
those, it does the more concern us that our walking be very cautelous, and that
it be without giving any just offense. There will offense enough be taken at
the Profession of the Truth, though the Professors thereof give none. The
Profession of the Truth draws upon us enmity, but error in our Profession,
and offensive walking, delivers and betrayeth us into the hand of the enemy.
And give me leave to speak freely, Let us see that we walk without offense
toward Civil Authority: Suffer not your minds to be prejudiced against the
present, and ancient Government of our Nation: Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
Nursing-fathers, and Queens thy Nursing-mothers: it is spoken of Gospel Times.
It is not a Gospel Spirit to be against Kings: it is neither Gospel nor English
Spirit for any of us to be against the Government by King, Lords and Commons.
It was the usual stratagem anciently of the Adversary, to calumniate the
Christians as disaffected to the State, and such as were for Reformation, as
Enemies to Caesar. But Juell could testify in his time, Gratias agimus Deo,
etc. (in Apolog. page 16.) That there could be no instance given, wherein they
in that state of Reformation had offered any violence to Princes, etc. So said
that famous Apologist. God make us more wise and religious then so to carry it,
that they should no sooner see a Congregational-man, then to have cause to say,
They see an Enemy to the Crown. Prove. 24.21. My son, fear thou the Lord, and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Dan. 6.22. Innocence was found in
me, (says Daniel) and also before thee, O King, have I done no hurt. Is this
thy voice, my son David? 1 Samuel 26.17. really so, not hypocritically? We have
severe Observers; Tongues are not untaught to inform against us. It is but
wisdom to give no cause, especially such as our own Consciences cannot
testify for, and such as all Orthodox Churches in the Protestant world will
testify against. In matters of the State-Civil, and of the Church, let it be
shown that we are his Disciples, who ( Matthew. 22.21.) said, Give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods: and in matters
of Religion, let it be known that we are for Reformation, and not for
Separation.

6. Lastly, Take care thar the Order of the Gospel may have a free passage in
the Churches; I mean, that our Practice may effectually answer our Doctrine, in
that Book entitled [The Platform of Church-Discipline] It Is that for which we
are Outcasts at this day; that (for the substance of it) is it that shows
what New England is. I would I might say that there are none among our selves
that are against it. There was a time when the General Court did approve of it,
and when the Members of that Synod pleaded for it. Our reality herein will be,
in no small degree, critical of our Integrity in this Undertaking; and our
Actions must be the demonstrations of our Sincerity: This is a principal
Ingredient of this healing Plaster, and for the defect-hereof are such
frequent and scandalous Breaches in our Churches; so many Administrations in
vain, and such sad Non-administration, and Remora's, occasioning that sad
Quaerie of Spectators, Whether the Congregational-way be practicable, yea or
not? I beseech you consider whom it is that it does concern to answer this
Objection; you that are conscientious do not forget it, at whom the stick lies
in one order or another. If we cannot build without the noise of Hammers, yield
that we are not Temple-workmen: yield we must, either that the
Congregational-way is not the way of God, or that We are unfit for the
behavior of the House of God. As concerning the Church Government according to
the Platform of Discipline, the practice of which doctrine who cares for? is
not this that truth which the Synod, Churches, the General Court sometime made
a good Confession of, and that now no man comparatively cares for? Ezra 4.8.
Rehum cares not for it: ver. 23. Artaxerxes cares not for it: Nehem. 4.
Sanballat, and Tobiah care not for it: the Episcopal man, the Presbyterian care
not for it, the Morellian cares not for it: the Merchant, the Soldier, the
Husbandman, the Labourer cares not for it. Haggai 1. The people of Jerusalem,
the Church Members care not for it. I am apt sometimes to think that Aaron may
be under a temptation of irregular compliance; but mind, Ier. 15.19. Let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them: I may say thus much (and
pardon my speech) A more yiedling Ministry unto the People, I believe is not in
the World. I beseech you let not Caesar be killed in the Senate, after he has
fought it out, and conquered in the Field: let us acknowledge the Order of the
Eldership in our Churches in their way, and the Order of Councils in their way,
duly backed and encouraged; without which, Experience will witness that these
Churches cannot long consist.

God has opened the mouth of the Speaker to you this day, it being a day
wherein after so many attempts and fears, you are betrusted with your
Liberties for another year. You have this years opportunity, and at such a time,
and blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put such a thing in the
Kings heart, so far to accept your Application to his Majesty, as not only
to give you the opportunity of the year present, but also encouragement for many
years to come. Let all of us be stirred up by the Lord, and at such a time, to
strengthen the hand of Zerubbabel, and Jehoshua, by your professed subjection
to the Gospel of Christ. Do not betray liberty, under the pretense of liberty.
You that are in the honored Magistracy, remember David's troubles, Psalm. 132.1,
5. he could not rest till the Ark had rest. And those that are in the Ministry,
remember Paul's troubles, and what his cares were, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let us all
mind what were the troubles and thoughts of heart that were in them that lived
in the days of Malachi, Chap 3.16. But are there not many that mind only
their cieled houses, etc? and how much does the work of the Outcast lie
unattempted, witness the sick estate of the Churches: and how can it be
remedied, if we will not acknowledge Order? and shall I say that we are real
therein? You have brought upon your selves real troubles, and likewise upon
your Relations and Friends in England, and those here that suffer with you in
this Exile: See then that you be not hypocritical, but real to the Truth which
you have professed. I could tell you, and you must not forget it, That there
have been Men of Renown, as they are called Numb. 16.2. Famous in the
Congregation of Israel, that did go out of Egypt, but yet could not endure the
Order of God in the Wilderness. Let us show it, that we mistook not our selves,
pretending to come into this Wilderness to live under the Order of the Gospel.
We are Outcasts indeed, and reproached; but let us be such Outcasts as are
caring for the Truth, and therefore not to neglect an Apology: it does become,
and greatly concern Gods Outcasts to mind it. You know there are those who
represent you as disaffected to Government, and as Sectaries, and Schismatics,
and as Fanatics: you see cause to Apologize therein. And for that term of
[Fanatick] you must remember it is not of yesterday, however it be now used or
abused. You may learn the original use of it from that distribution of
Professors, in relation to Church government, in former times, into four sorts,
viz. Orthodoxt, Pontificii, Rationales, and Fanatici. But I trust that God
does, and Angels and Men shall know that we are Orthodox. Gods Outcasts are
not Fanatics. The Woman in the wilderness may have the vomit of the Dragon
cast in her face, if you let it lie on, you will suffer; wash it off therefore
by an Apology. Thus did Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Iuel, and others in their
time. Give not the advantage of interpreting Silence as Consent, nor think it
labor lost if an Apology will wash your face. And though we may be cast out
by men, yet may we hope that God will look after his Outcasts, and care for
us, being Outcasts for the Truth. Let it appear that we are such Outcasts, to
whom the calamity and temptations of Outcasts are sanctified; Outcasts
healed: Outcasts that care for the truth, and then Outcasts on which God will
bring the blessing of his own people. If this plaster finds acceptance with
you, you shall find esteem, and acceptance, and favor from God and man. Let
us all labor so to carry it, as that we may have this Rejoicing of a good
Conscience to sweeten that bottle full of tears shed in your Outcast condition
in this wilderness, viz. That we came into it, not only with a Spirit
testifying, according to the Scriptures, against the Inventions of men, but
also that we do come up unto the Institutions of Christ; that as we have
departed from Inventions Humane, so we may not be found to be, or here continue
opposers against Institutions Divine; that we are not negligent of, but
faithful to that Order of the Gospel which we are Outcasts for.

THE BELIEVERS CONSOLATION, In the Remembrance of his Heavenly Mansion prepared
for him by CHRIST.
BEING THE SECOND SERMON: AND Preached on the LORD'S DAY, MARCH XXIX. 1663.
John 14.3. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you to my self, that where I am, there you may be also.


THis Verse, and the former, holds forth a double Consolation, to support the
Disciples against the suffering which they were to conflict with, either In the
way of Truth, or For the way of Truth. This Verse holds forth the second
Argument of Consolation; the former you have in the second Verse: it is taken
from the Place they were to be taken to after Death. And this Argument in this
Verse is taken from the Company they shall have in that place; and that is his
Personal Presence, his full and clear Presence: Where I am, there you shall be
also.

Now this Argument of Consolation is described, 1. From the Scope of Christ in
preparing such a place for them; and it was, that he and they might be there
together: I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be
also. 2. It is declared from the Time when they must expect their being taken
to Christ; and that is, when he comes again: I will come again, and receive you
to my self. 3. It is declared from the Efficient of it, the Undertaker of this;
and that is Himself: I will come again, and receive you to my self.

To open the words thus resolved.

1. Touching the Presence of Christ and Believers together [That where I am,
there you may be also] you must understand this (of his Presence emphatically
so called) of his Presence in the place of Blessedness: In thy Presence is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11. There is a double Presence of Christ, but he means
here his Presence in Glory, where we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. I
said, this Argument of their Consolation was declared from the Scope of it; I
go to prepare a place for you, that where I am, there you may be also: it was
one great end of his being a Forerunner. Secondly, he should fail of his
Fidelity and Ability, if there should be a disappointment. 2. From the Time
[When I come again] Christ's coming is either his last Coming or his coming by
Death. Of his last coming you read 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Of his coming by Death, you
read Luke 23.43. To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Now the Soul goes
to Christ, when He comes to us by Death: at his last coming both Soul and Body
shall be together with him. 3. This Argument of Consolation is described by the
Efficient of it, or Undertaker, [I will receive you to my self] We may doubt
how our Souls, when we dye, shall come to Heaven: why, says Christ, I will
come, and receive you to my self. They therefore say properly, when they dye,
that say, Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Psalm. 31.5. it is a proper saying
so to speaks, Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. It is a blessed thing to
commit our Souls by Faith to Christ, when they go out of the Body. He comes by
the ministry of his Angels, or otherwise as he please: I will come again, and
receive you to my self. You may remember the words of Steven, he dying, called
upon God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: we receive Christ, and we
receive the Spirit of Christ; Now to as many as received him, to them gave he
power, etc. Joh. 1.12. Christ receives our Spirits (then:) If we receive his
Spirit now, he will receive our Spirits then; I will receive you to my self.
Doct. That the effectual Remembrance, that at Death Christ will receive our
Souls unto Himself, is a Sovereign Preservative to quiet our Souls throughout
all the Sufferings we meet with, either In the way of Truth, and For the way of
Truth, during this life.

You shall find in Job 19.25. says he, I know that my Redeemer lives: He
might say, I know my Estate is gone, and I see that my Friends are gone, and my
Children be gone, and my Health and Strength is gone, and the Grave is ready
for me; but what stays Jobs heart now? I know that my Redeemer lives. This is
a living truth for a dying man; I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand in the latter day upon the earth, and I shall see him, etc. This
was now In the way of Truth, for you cannot say that Job was persecuted For the
way of Truth. But you shall find in a way of suffering for the way of Truth,
Phil. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Having passed
through many troubles, I would be out of the body, and freed from the body of
death; I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. 2 Cor. 5.8. We are confident,
and willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord. You
must either be absent from the body, or absent from the Lord; it is an hard
thing to be absent from the body, but not comparatively: We desire rather to be
absent from the body, and present with the Lord: We shall meet the Lord, and
shall ever be with the Lord. What is the use of this, 1 Thessalonians. 4 18. Comfort
one another with these words? what are these Comforts? They are nothing but
Promises; Promises rightly applied, these are the Comforts of the holy Ghost:
they hold forth more good, then the affliction does evil. If you would comfort
one another, bring out the Promise, that is comfortable and seasonable. Comfort
one another: with what? with these words; for in them the Comforter does come
and apply comfort.

Reas. 1. Because hereby we are made fit for this rest, fit to be with Christ;
that is, by our trouble, and by this remembrance. Mixing this remembrance with
our trouble, does fit us for this place. 2 Cor. 5.5. He that works us to the
self-same thing, is God: For what thing? for our heavenly house, our house not
made with hands: he that fits us for these things, is God. And thus does he fit
us by trouble, by these matters of groaning that do pass over us from day to
day. This should be a great encouragement; There is a place prepared for you,
but remember you must be fit for your place: you are not fit for your place, in
that you are merely Regenerate, but you must pass through such a measure of
Obedience both active and passive that is appointed for you, that by this means
you may be meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light. The place is fit
for us already, but we are not fit for it as soon as we are Regenerate: 2 Cor.
5. he does there instance in the troubles of the body, the grief of the outward
man: we are burdened with our body, but all this while a fitting for our
place. If you belong to God, he is working you to the self-same thing; be your
trouble this or that (the Cholick, Palsy, Stone, or whatever) he is working us
for the self-same thing: This is a great matter in our troubles, to consider
that God by them is fitting us for our place in Heaven.

Reas. 2. From the Quality of the Undertaker, that has undertaken the
reception of our Souls to himself; I will come, and receive you to my self. If
it be so, let us that suffer according to the will of God (1 Pet. 4.19.) commit
the keeping of our Souls to him: you may boldly do it, he sends a fiery Chariot
for Elijah; likely it was an Angel, He makes his Angels spirits, his Ministers
a flame of fire, Heb. 1.7. Christ has his way to carry your Souls to Heaven:
you do not believe what a condition your Souls will be in, as soon as ever they
are out of the body: do but think what a meeting here is; but we believe not
these things. As Christ, when he sent to his Disciples to comfort them, ( Luke
24.11.) they thought they were tale tales: so when we hear of these things; we
look at them but as idle tale; but, says Christ, I will come, and receive you
to my self.

Reas. 3. Taken from the Person we shall be with, namely, Christ. Phil. 1.23.
You shall be with Christ, which is best of all, or which is far better: There
is no better House then this Mansion, there is no better Presence then his
Presence; therefore well might he say, It is best of all, or far better.

Instruction 1. Learn from hence, that the most and the greatest Communion that
we have with Christ in this life, still leaves us in a condition of absence
from Christ, compared with that Communion we shall have with him after death:
So faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are willing to be absent from the body,
and present with the Lord; ver. 6. for while we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord: It is a place of absence from the Lord, that is, compared
with what we shall have after death. If you think of Paul, Who did enjoy Christ
more then Paul did? Did not Paul enjoy Church Communion? Yes; but
notwithstanding this was a place of absence from the Lord, compared with the
society that by death he should be in. Was not Paul acquainted with any godly
men? you know what he says of Timothy; but yet (says he) I am absent from
mine own people. The word that is here translated [Absent] signifies Absence
from his own people: he loved Timothy well, but he thinks the Spirits of just
men made perfect, exceed the Spirit of Timothy: Here is no Companion that is
like the Company there; here is no Communion will satisfy here. Where most of
Christ is, it is best, but yet it is absence comparatively; We are absent from
the Lord.

Instr. 2. The New man (the Believer) is never at rest till he is with Christ
in his Mansion House. If you never find any such thing in you, but that, if
you might have your desire, you would be here always, believe it you have not
this New man in you: this New man never is at rest, till it comes to Christ. It
is true, there is weakness in the best, and unbelief-may prevail too-too much,
but I speak of this new Nature that is in these, and reigns in these that are
Regenerate. You know how it is with those that love one another: after that
Jacob knew what was become of Joseph, there was no staying of Jacob; Let me go
and see him before I dye, Genesis 45.28. What was the reason of it? there was an
entire love one unto another. You know how it is with those that do indeed love
one another, that have been long absent one from another, they cannot rest
until they meet: Was there any did ever love another, as the New man loves
Christ? The New man loves him with a divine love, the coals thereof are coals
of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Cant. 8.6. There are some on earth
that do long after Christ; there are those on earth that do desire after
Heaven: and do any love another, as Jesus Christ loves the New man? There must
be a meeting between these two Lovers; I will come, and receive you to my self.
Mark how John concludes the Revelations, Chap. 22. ver. 21. Behold I come,
says Christ: He that-testifieth of these things, says, I come; Amen, even so
come Lord Jesus. Here is a longing to be with Christ. In any of your quaeries
concerning Christ, you are never at rest rill you come to Heaven: it is the
proper Being of the Sun to be in motion; this New man is a divine man, and his
motion is still unto, and after Christ.

Instruction 3. The death of the Believer, it is a reception of the Soul by
Christ Jesus. Christ receiving of our Souls at Death, is an encouragement to
strengthen us against the fear of Death. Are you afraid of going to your
Mansion house? are you afraid of going to Christ? Mark what the Apostle says,
Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ. The Greek word is a
Mariners Phrase, and signifies as much as to set sail from the shore: I
desire my time were come to be loosed; that I might go to my Mansion. There are
three Cords or Bonds that do Entangle us, the loosing from which does sweeten
Death to us: 1. The Bond of the Cross; I desire to be dissolved, and loosed
from the afflictions and miseries of this present life: This is in it is place a
lawful thing to desire in Gods time. 2. There is a Bond of Corruption, the body
of Death; this I desire to be loosed from: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this Death! Romans 7.24. There are pangs in the Best;
But if you have the new man in you, you cannot bear them: There is Vainglory
there, and there is Impatience there, and there is Envy there, and
Unspiritualness, which the Believer cannot bear; I desire therefore to be
loosed from the Body. It is said of one, Mezentius.
that he would bind a dead Corpse to a living man, and so he would torture
them. This new man is boudn to a dead Corpse: there is no part of the
Understanding, Will, or Affections, throughout the whole man, but this dead
Corpse is there. 3. There is the Cord of our absence from Christ: that he
expresses, as if it did in an especial manner move with him to be with Corist,
which is the best of all. Simeon speaking of death, Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29. as if he should say, Give me my dismission
(as we use to speak, from one Church to another: so here) from a Society
Militant, to a Society Triumphant: So you see here he calls it but a
dismission; it came to pass when the time was come that he should be received
up, Luke 9.51. relating to his death: if you did but think that this were the
great business when you dye, namely, the receiving of your Souls, you would
not be troubled: you cannot give up your Souls into better hands. (...) 5.24.
you shall there find it is called a passage from one Room to another, he is
passed from death to life: it is like a passing from one room into another.
Look at death as in the Curse, and what more terrible? But look at it in the
Promise, and it has another kind of aspect. 1 Cor. 15.43. you see there it is
compared to sowing; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. This is now
with relation to the body, it is but sowing of it, it shall rise again, and
that with advantage: you are not afraid of sowing your seed, that will bring a
glad harvest. It is a going from those that are not our own people to those
that are our own people, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. it may be you have a friend here, but
it is not an ordinary thing to meet with a Jonathan here. It is but a going
from them who are not our people, whom we cannot so fully close with; nay you
cannot close with your own souls fully, while here; but you are going from
those who are not your people, to those who are your people, where you shall
find perfect closing with this new man; you are come to the spirits of just men
made perfect. Would you see what Peter says concerning death, 2 Pet. 1.14. I
must put off my tabernacle: it is a strange Phrase, he makes no more of it,
then for Elijah to put off his mantle. What a thing was it for Elijah to let
his mantle fall, he gets him up into his Chariot and lets go his mantle: I
speak this, that you may see what expressions the Scripture gives concerning
death: O let my last end be like his! I tell you it is a lovely thing, Let me
dye the death of the Righteous, let my last end be like his: I tell you there
is another good in their last end, that the unbeleiver is not aware of. It is
but a going out of one place to another. I have done with this, when I have
minded you of that place, 1 These. 4.14. They sleep, and they sleep in Jesus:
They also that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him: you see two bodies lie
by the wall and they look both alike, but (believe it) they are not both alike
in the Promise; if one be a Believer, and the other an Unbeliever, one is gone
to this Mansion place, the other not.

Instr. 4. The presence of Jesus is the place of blessedness: So says Christ
here, I will take you to my self, and you shall be where I am. We shall see
him, we shall be enlightened by him, we shall be satisfied in him, and blessed
with him.

1. We shall see him: 1 Ioh. 3.2. We shall see him as he is. 2. We shall see
him, so as to be inligtned by him. Psalm. 36.9. In thy Light we shall see light:
They are mavelous Lights, that are in the place of Blessedness. 3. We shall
be satisfied in him. Psalm. 17.15. As for me, when I awake I shall be satisfied
with thy likeness. A satisfaction there will be at our Dissolution, though more
fully at the Resurrection. 4. We shall be Blessed with him. Blessed are the
pure in heart, (Mat. 5.8.) for they shall see God. Then you that hear me, look
to your hearts, for it is not whether you are rich or poor; but, Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. But what is it to see God? I shall
see my Redeemer, says Job: and that is true, the eyes of our bodies may see
the body of Christ; but you shall see God, you shall see him face to face, you
shall see him as he it. I tell you the soul of man is never at rest till it
sees God. Some shall never see God and therefore never be at rest; There is no
peace, no rest to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. says my God. But now the soul it
rests when it comes to see God: He is such an Object, as nothing without him
will satisfy our Souls: may be they may be pleased, as children with a Rattle,
for a while here, but not satisfied without him; therefore know it, these Souls
of ours are more worth then we are apt to think of, prize them how you will.
Unto the seeing of God (to speak plainly) there are three things that are
required: 1. There is required an Object. 2. There is required the Purifying
and Perfecting of the Understanding. 3. There is required the Light of Glory,
which may enable the Soul to see that Object. Now


1. The Object is God, we shall see him: I shall see God, Job 19.26. not only
see his Redeemer, but I shall see God: whatever might be the meaning of Job,
yet we shall see him as he is, 1 Job. 3.2. We shall see him face to face, 1
Cor. 13.12. It is true, we cannot see infinitely, our capacities cannot be made
infinite; yet we may see him that is Infinite, we may see him apprehensively,
though not comprehensively; yet we shall see him so as to fill the Soul, though
not see him so as to comprehend him, but we shall apprehend so much of him as
we are capable. 2. There is the Perfecting and Purifying of the Understanding:
that must be purified from all Ignorance, Sin, and Darkness, and Mistake. 3.
There is the Light which God does communicate of Glory: As we have here the
Light of Grace, so there is the Light of Glory, which enables a Soul to see him
according to the Vision of Glory. But what do we see in the seeing of God? We
see his Being, or Essence; as the Object is united to the Faculty relatively,
not formally. We shall see the Attributes of God, they which are in Heaven, you
shall see what they are making mention of, Rev. 4. Holiness, Almightiness,
Eternity: You know not what Omnipotency is now, but then you shall know it
more; you know not Perfect Holiness now, but then you shall know it more: and
we shall see the Trinity; He that has seen me, (John 14.9.) has seen the
Father: And we shall see Christ, that Person that is God and Man. And for the
Counsel of God, we shall see it: it shall be an open Book, so far as concerns
our happiness. Now when the Soul comes to this, you will have no further need
of enquiry, [What God is?] or [What Christ is?] you will never be satisfied
till then, you will never love God perfectly till then, and you will never rest
in him here, as you will then: you shall come to understand that then [Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.]
Exhort. 1. It is abundantly to encourage every Christian to constancy in the
profession of the truth, notwithstanding all the suffering we may meet with,
either in the way of truth, or for the way of truth. This is that which John
makes use of, 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is; and, He that has this
hope to see God, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, ver. 3. Do you say you
have hope to see God? this is a very purifying meditation. Can you endure any
impurity, and yet maintain this hope in you to see Christ? Acts 24.15, 16. mark
there how it did work with him; And have hope toward God, which themselves
also allow: I have hope that I shall see God, and that there is such a truth as
the resurrection; herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience
void of offense, both toward God and toward Man: they that are false to his
truth, they shall not see him, that dye without Repentance of it: herein do I
labor to keep always a Conscience clear both toward God and man, that this
may not hinder me from a sight of this Mansion: 2 Cor. 5.8, 9. speaking to the
same purpose, We desire to be with the Lord: wherefore we labor, that whether
present or absent, we may be accepted of him. Thus you see what this meditation
does call for: this makes a man or woman of a laboring spirit, it calls for
adherence to the truth: And more particularly, consider then what it is to be a
Christian in earnest, to be such a Christian as walks in that way, wherein they
walk that have the Promise to go to Christ, when their Souls go out of the
body; these are such as the eleven were, not such as Judas was; he went the
other way, he went to his own place. You must be such Christians as the
Apostles were, that is, such as do continue with Christ in the profession of
his truth, that you, may be Conquerours in holding on in your Profession.

2. Consider what you must expect while you are in your way; you must expect
such troubles, as nothing will quiet you, but the exercise of Faith in Chirst
Jesus. Your hearts they will be assaulted, but let not your hearts be troubled:
the Truth it will cause trouble to you, though you think of carrying of it
never so inoffensively, and amiably among men. Christ, by all his good
carriage, could not reconcile those that hated the truth: Hence those that
profess the truth, let them not think strange if they meet with trouble. Then
(Acts 9.31.) had the Churches rest: Other places have rest very frequently; but
for the Churches, those that profess the Truth to have rest, is a special
favor of God.

3. Your troubles here, while you carry it with a Christian Spirit, they shall
fit you for this blessed estate; as it is said 2 Cor. 5.5. [He that works us
to the self-same thing.] You may think God means evil to you, when you meet
with affliction and trouble; but, provided you are In the way of Truth, or be
it For the way of Truth, that which God ayms at, is to fit you for your
Mansion-place. Christ would fit us to be in the body, and he would fit us to go
out of the body; He works us to the self-same thing. If you have a strong body,
he would fit you for that body to walk with him in that body. Says Caleb,
Josh. 14.11. I have as strong a body, as in the day that Moses sent me. Now as
it is a great matter to have such a body, so it is a great matter to walk with
God in such a body: if you have an healthful body, he would sit you to walk
with him in that body, that you may know how to possess your vessel in
sanctification and honor: not that your body should be the slave of filthy
lusts. Suppose you have a sickly body, 2 Cor. 4.16. Our outward man decays,
but our inward man is renewed day by day: and he works us to the self-same
thing, by fitting us to go out of the body; Acts 20.24. that I may finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry that I have received.

4. Concur with God in this scope of his Providence to you; he is fitting of
you to walk with God. If he fit you to go out of the body, or to be in the
body, close with him, as the Patient closes with the Physician; interpret the
Changes that are upon you, of one nature or of another, interpret them as
dispensations whereby God works to fit you to be with him in the body, or to go
to him when you go out of the body. Let us work together with him; I did it to
humble them, Deuteronomy. 8.16. then close with him, and say, This is his end; and for
that end join with him. You shall find more trouble then rest, while you are
In the way, you shall find more rest then trouble, when you are at the end of
your way. You that are lovers of truth, more then of the pleasures of Sin, you
shall find more trouble then rest while you are in the way; but when you are
out of the body, you shall have full rest without any trouble: you shall have
Truth enough, and Peace enough. That which is hard to gain now, is Union in the
Truth; but then you shall have Union enough, and Truth enough: you shall find
Christ making good that truth to you, that He will come, and receive you to
himself. When Noah put forth his hand, and received the Dove into the Ark, it
was a welcome ease: so will it be to your Souls when they have been wearied
with so many troubles, and Christ Jesus shall come, and receive you to himself,
when your Souls go out of the body; for otherwise the Devil will be ready to
receive them, and to carry them to Hell. Whither went Dives Soul when it went
out of his body? you that are now in Pleasures, whither went Dives Soul? it is
not said he was an Adulterer, or a Drunkard; but he was a man of Pleasures, [
In thy life time thou had thy good things, Luke 16.25.] But what became of
his Soul when it went out of the body? And being in Hell, he lift up his eyes
in torments, etc. ver. 23. Genesis 46. when Joseph received Jacob, and his
Brethren, after so long an absence, judge what a contentment there was: Jacob
fell upon Joseph's neck, and Joseph fell upon Jacobs neck: but their embraces
are not to be mentioned with the embraces of Christ and the Soul. Do good, that
when you dye, the good you have done may receive you into everlasting
habitations. Your works shall follow you. It was the speech of one Ambrose.
, I have not so lived, as that I am ashamed to live any longer; nor am I afraid
to dye. Labor so to live, as you may be useful in the body, and so as you may
not be ashamed to go out of the body, but may say as John did, who was an old
man, and a Disciple, I come quickly: Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

THE EVANGELICAL WORSHIPPER, Subjecting to the Prescription and Sovereignty of
Scripture-patern.
BEING THE THIRD SERMON: AND Preached on the LECTURE-DAY, APRIL II. 1663.
Heb. 8.5. Who serve unto the Example and shadow of Heavenly things; as Moses
was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle: for see (says
he) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the
Mount.


THis Verse illustrates the Argument mentioned in the foregoing words, from an
adjunct, or accident accompanying the Legal Priesthood: The Argument there
used to prove that the Priesthood of Christ excelled that priesthood which
was after the Order of Aaron, was, because they which were of that Priesthood
ministered on Earth, but Christ ministers in Heaven: He was a Minister of the
true Tabernacle while he was on Earth, and he still officiates in his Priestly
Office now he is in Heaven; the Tabernacle which they ministered in, was upon
the Earth, and was made of earthly things, and it was a figure or shadow of
heavenly things: he declares that that Tabernacle was a worldly Tabernacle or
Sanctuary, 1. From the quality of it; it was only a shadow, or example of
heavenly things, and it was a type; but Christ was a Minister of the true
Tabernacle. 2. It is declared from the certainty of it, for He says this: But
how does that appear? It appears from a Divine Testimony; For see (says he)
that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed to thee in the Mount.

For the opening of the words. First, we are to consider what these heavenly
things are: They are called in Chap. 9.11. Good things to come. In a word, it
means Christ, with all his Benefits; these are the Heavenly things, that the
other were but Shadows of. Therefore it is truly said, that the Ceremonial Law
holds forth Christ, i. e. it makes known the Gospel (being rightly understood)
but after a Legal dispensation.

Secondly, it was a shadow of good things, i. e. it was a pattern that did
shadow out Heavenly things. God showed Moses a Pattern, or Type, in a Vision,
according to which the Tabernacle was to be framed, and Moses acts accordingly.
The word translated [Patern] intends as much as a likeness, or example, or a
figure. As for the Divine Testimony, you may see it in Exodus 25.9. According
to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of
all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it. And in Chap. 39. this
testimony is often given, that All things were done as the Lord had commanded
Moses. But Christ was the Minister of another Tabernacle, i. e. of his Body,
the true Tabernacle.

Doct. Great care must be hads in matters of Divine Worship, (or Divine
Administrations) that all things proceed according to the Prescript Word of
God. Or, That all things be exactly corresponding to the Prescript of Gods
Word, Hebrews 7.14.

For it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses
spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood. The Apostle thinks he argues well,
and conclusively, That Christ was not of the Levitical Order, because nothing
was spoken concerning it of that Tribe. This is a good Argument in Divinity to
say, That there is nothing in Gods Word why you should act such or such a
thing: it is not enough to say that there is nothing expressly against it; the
truth is, there is enough against it, if there be nothing for it. The Tribe of
Judah must not meddle with the matters of the Priesthood: Why so? because Moses
spoke nothing of them in that respect: and in Exodus 25.9. Moses himself was to
act nothing that he found not in the Pattern. Exodus 26.30. And thou shall rear
up the Tabernacle according to the fashion thereof, which was showed thee in
the Mount: He must act nothing that he does not find in the Pattern. It is
true, David (for some just cause) made some alteration in the Worship of God;
for the state of Temple-worship, compared with Tabernacle-worship, did call for
a change. But how did David proceed in it? 1 Chronicles. 28.19. All this (says
David) the Lord made me uncenstand in writing, by his hand upon me, even all
the works of this pattern: He made no alteration in Gods Worship, but it was
also by a Pattern given to him by God. And for Solomon, you find that David
gave him the Pattern, ver. 11. to build the Temple according thereunto. And
relating to Gospel Times, the time of the Messiah, you have an eminent text in
Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Thou Son of man, show the house to the House of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern; and
if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the house,
and the fashion, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and
all the forms thereof, etc.

Reas. 1. Because it is the acknowledgement of the Prerogative of Jesus Christ;
I mean that he alone has the honor to institute Divine Worship: He in truth
was the Author of the Tabernacle, and of the Temple and yet he was the
Tabernacle, and the Temple, i. e. the true Tabernacle and Temple. The power of
the Keys, i. e. the instituted Worship under the Gospel, you shall find
Christ is the maker and disposer of those Keys. Mat. 16.19. It is not for man
to make a Key to open Heaven, be will never be able to pick that lock. Ye shall
reverence my Sanctuary (says God, Levit. 26.2.) and why so? I am that Lord:
(make a pause here) i. e. it is no less then the Attribute of his Lordship that
is demonstrated in the matters of his Worship: as for instance, Korah was very
near unto the Priesthood, Numb. 16.1. and yet inferior to the Priesthood, (and
it may be that was some temptation to him to be so near it, and yet inferior
to it) but he must not offer Incense, Numb. 16.40. but the Priests, which are
the Sons of Aaron, may: Why may not Korah? the reason is, I am the Lord, I will
have this act to be matter of Divine Worship, and not another, and I will have
this man to act, and not another; I am the Lord. Might not any man take a
little perfume, and sprinkle it on the coals? No, God will institute what acts,
and what persons he pleases. I have heard (I think) some say, that any man may
administer Baptism, or the Lords Supper; and I say it may be a Child is able
to do it: what then? But we must remember what God says, I am the Lord; and he
will be owned in his Institutions. Vzzah was a good man, yet he may not touch
the Ark; why not? I am the Lord, 2 Samuel 6. It is one of the holy Institutions
of God, Ye shall all reverence my Sanctuary. Hence it is, that to the holy
things of God, reverence is a great part of duty: and if this or that be Gods
Worship, remember Gods Lordship is in his own Institutions, and he will make a
difference as he pleases: not that Aaron or Moses are better then others in
themselves, they may be worse, but God will have his Lordship appear in these
his holy things. Therefore it is that we must be conscientious in our reverence
of the holy things of God, even in regard of bodily reverence by comely
gestures, for our bodies are the Lords, 1 Cor. 6. Hence [Sitting] is not a
Prayer-gesture; it is true, if there be great weakness or infirmity of body,
etc. that may give an excuse for the Lord will have mercy, in case, rather then
Sacrifice. And therefore also it is that Christ stood up when he read the word,
Luke 4.16. and in Nch. 8.5. they stood up at the hearing of the Word read. We
should show reverence at the holy things of God, because they are his
Institutions, and he is the Lord.

Reas. 2. Because in Divine Worship we acknowledge God to be our Sovereign Lord
and that we owe unto him absolute Subjection and Obedience, and we acknowledge
our selves to be his absolute Subjects. The act of Worship is an
acknowledgement both of his Sovereignty, and of our meanness: Who am I, that am
but dust and ashes, that I should take upon me to speak unto the Lord? Genesis 18.
In acts of Worship we must exalt Christ, and depress man. Many in these days
are against Forms, but in the mean time let us not forget Worship. For Israel
to wait upon a Rock, was a despicable thing to the Nations; to see so many
thousands come and stand about the Rock was strange, but that Rock was Christ:
this is nothing else but the acknowledgement of God, who will be known in his
own way. And this let me say, Christ himself, that was not only Man but God,
attended the Ordinances while he was here on earth, and so did his Apostles:
this is to show the disevangelical spirit of those that do object against
external Worship.

Reas. 3. Because Divine external Worship is a means of conferring heavenly
things. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven open or shut Heaven, Mat. 16.19.
Naaman must know (if he be cured) whence the Cure comes; be must acknowledge
the Waters of Jordan, and he must acknowledge the Prophet: God could have cured
him without either, but he was not pleased so to do. You feed your Hens and
Chickens, but you throw their meat upon the ground, and make them take it from
thence: so God feeds us with heavenly food, but we must receive it in a lowly
manner. You can have no Faith to expect Gods blessing in any way but his own;
any Institutions, so far as they are Humane, you cannot have Faith for Gods
blessing to go with them.

Instructions. 1. The Ceremonial Law understood, teaches Christ; the truths of
Christ are laid up under the types of the Ceremonial Law. When you read the
Ceremonial Law, if you understood it, you would see Christ through it; as for
instance, Heb. 9. the Tabernacle was a figure of Christ's Body, and so was the
Vail: Heb. 10.20. when they went into the first Court, they remembered the
Incarnation of the Messiah, and so when they looked on the Vail, etc. they who
looked on these types, whose eyes were opened, they saw Christ Read Lev.
16.15. compared with Heb. 9.24 26. As Christ shed his blood, and so entered into
Heaven, so the High Priest slew the Sacrifice, and then entered into the holy of
holies. And the efficacy of the Merit of Christ, was figured in the incense:
this is to let us see, how clearly we are taught the same truths above what
they of old were, comparing our times with theirs.

Instr. 2. It is the part of those who are Conscientious, to keep themselves
unto Scripture-bounds in holy, or Church-administrations. 2 Cor. 10.13. the
Apostle would have them walk by a line (it relates to the Grecian exercises,
to which the Apostle does delight to allude:) it comes to one with that which
the Apostle does elsewhere say, ( viz. 2 Timothy 2.5.) He that striveth is not
Crowned, except he strive lawfully. There is a line of motion to regulate all
administrations, especially Church-administrations; there is a line that does
regulate the Eldership, and a line also to regulate the Brotherhood: so that
all Church administrations, are to be carried on according to that line. This
was Moses his charge; See thou make all things according to the pattern; and do
you think there is not as much Conscience to be made of it now under the
Gospel, to make all things according to the pattern, as in the days of the
Legal dispensation? 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done according to Order:
the case may be so, that though a thing be done, that is for the matter of it
good, there may yet be more hurt in the disorder of it, then there is good in
the doing of it. If we exercise our own Notions and Apprehensions in matters of
Worship, this is Will Worship. Mat. 15.9. In vain do they Worship me, teaching
for Dectrines the traditions of men. Mark the opposition [Me], and [Men]: can
men's traditions be an act of Divine Worship? No, its but Will Worship, Col.
2.23. there may be that which is plausible to man, yet it is but Will Worship;
there may be parts, and excellencies, but if they are out of place, it is that
which God will not bear with: Exodus 20.25. He that lifts up his tool upon mine
Altar has pollutedit: it is enough to pollute it, because it is a man's tool:
we must not turn to the right hand nor to the left, but keep our way right on.
The Corinthians turned to the left hand, when they would not Excommunicate the
incestuous person; and they turned to the right hand, when they would not
receive him in, being a penitent: it was an error on the right hand, in Peter,
when he would not have Christ suffer, but a fearful scandalous one. You shall
not add thereto, nor take therefrom, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
neither Elders nor Brethren must take upon them that which belongs not to them,
nor the Council take that which belongs not to it, nor the Magistrates what
belongs not to them; we must do nothing but according to the Pattern.

Instr. 3. A Religious Worshipper, or a man truly religious, does not rest in
this, That externals do answer the Prescript Rule of the Word, without
proceeding to internal Worship. You find that God does not only bear
testimony against our Worship, but also against hypocritical Worship. First,
against our Worship, or our Administrations; that (as you see) is Will Worship,
and it is vain Worship, all the Institutions of men are so; they are
Will Worship, i. e. there is sin and defilement in them: we must not set our
posts by Gods posts. But then suppose we are brought to external worship, does
God rest here? no: do you think that God lives on goat's blood? Psalm. 50.13.
And hence also, Amos 5.25. says the Lord, you did not offer unto me your
sacrifices during the space of forty years, speaking of the time in the
Wilderness: It is like there was a cessation, in respect of the condition that
they were in; as who should say, then I can be without Sacrifices. Ier. 7.22,
23. God says there, He did not command Sacrifices, or external Worship, i. e.
Comparatively, in respect of Obedience he commanded it not, but I Commanded
them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people:
So God will say to us, He did not Command us to come hither, to set up the
external Worship of the Gospel, i. e. comparatively, in stead of Obedience,
Holiness and Righteousness: this is that which Stephen pleads, Acts 7.42, 43.
Oh house of Israel, you have not offered to me slain beasts; but you had the
Tabernacle of Moloch, etc. but they could not bear with Stephen when he came to
this: So our Savior Christ tell's them, They have made my House a den of
thieves. Those among you that are given to injustice, drunkenness, or other
scandalous ways, this, or that, I tell you, God requires not your Sacrifices,
but Obey my voice, that I may be your God: this is the thing God aime's at. As
for our external worship, it ought indeed to be according to the Rule, but this
may be, and yet as it is in Isai. 1.13, 14, 15. Your Incense is an abomination,
and your solemn meetings iniquity, my soul hates them, says the Lord, they are
a trouble unto me, and when ye make many Prayers I will not hear them, your
hands are full of blood, etc. It would be a dreadful thing if God should say to
any of us that are full of duties, and concerning our Sabbaths, Lords Supper,
our Fasts, our Feasts, I am weary of your Worship, bring no more vain
Oblations, etc. God forbid that we should forget the internal part of worship,
whilst we are exercised in the external. Amos 5.21. I hate and despise your
feasts, I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies. Look not only to external
regularity, but look we unto inward piety, lest God hate and despise our
Worship. Joshua (says God) Why lie thou upon the ground? Chap. 7.10, 11.
Israel has sinned, and transgressed my Covenant, etc. we have been much in
fastings, and in external duties many years, but what reformation is there? are
we brought sny more unto the Rule in Church and State? I beseech you know, that
God aims at Obedience as the internal substantial part of his Worship.

Instr. 4. That the external Order of the Gospel (Church Order) is no other
then the external Throne of Christ Jesus. Worship that is mixed, partly Divine,
and partly Humane, this is so much defilement in Gods Worship; but when it is
according to the Rule, that is Christ's Throne. Satan has his throne, that is
where Antichrist reigns; and Christ has his Throne, that is where his
Institutions are in force: there Christ sits as Lord. If the Polity be
according to the Gospel, Jesus Christ is there acknowledged Lord, and there is
never a Member but is a Subject: there must be an Order, and according to that
Order there must be subjection: do you think it an easy thing to be subject to
Order? Remember it was matter of trial to those that came out of Egypt, and
through the Sea (as we have done) yet there were men of renown that could not
bear Church Order. Let me tell you; it is a greater matter to be subject to
Order, then to come over the Seas, or to endure the troubles of a Wilderness;
many will bear a Prison, before they will endure the Government of Christ, and
Gospel Order in his Church.

Use 2. Of Exhortation to us all (in our Churches especially) to sanctify God
according to this truth, viz. That our polity may be a Gospel-polity, and may
be complete according to the Scriptures, answering fully the Word of God: this
is the work of our generation, and the very work we engaged for into this
Wilderness; this is the scope and end of it, that which is written upon the
forehead of New England, viz. The complete walking in the Faith of the Gospel,
according to the Order of the Gospel.

1. And for your direction; first, remember that we have the pattern in the
mount; I mean, we have the Scripture as a Rule, and you have the Platform of
Church Discipline given to you in way of Council, as the Confession of our
Faith to this way of Church Government: you know in what manner it was; that
which (for the substance of it) ownes the cause Congregational: if any are
departed from it, let them look to it, I know none of the Elders that have
receded from it. It was given many years ago as the Confession of our Faith, to
this Country, and to the World: it is distinct from the Episcopacy, and from
the Presbyterian way, from the Morellian way, from that of Separatism: and it
is for the substance of it precisely the way Congregational. And as David said
to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.10, 11. I give unto thee the pattern of the House of
God, etc. what God will do with us he knows best; David lived not to build the
Temple himself, but he left the pattern thereof to his Son Solomon: And so we
have the pattern, only this is complained of, that it is not practiced, though
we have had it many years ago; now practice is the end of Doctrine.

2. Consider, that we are all concerned in this service, I mean in setting up
the Throne of Christ. Moses is concerned, and it is his commendation that he
was a man of God, who erected the Tabernacle, and set up the Worship of God
according to the Pattern in the Mount: and so David and Solomon, etc. Thou
Solomon my Son, if thou do hold here, the Lord will be with thee (and let
the Churches look to it, we are all concerned herein, our Fidelity in this
cause is our Crown; see that it be not taken from us.

3. It is a matter of very good Policy; times of trouble and danger may
approach: and we read in Ezr. 3.3. that they set the Altar upon its Bases, for
fear was upon them, because of the people of the land: one means to secure them
from fear in time of trouble, was with the first to proceed with the things of
Religion, and to be in good earnest to settle them. 1 Chronicles. 28.20, 21. Do it
(says David unto Solomon) and the Lord God, even my God will be with thee: and
not only so, but the priests, and the princes, and the people will be with
thee, etc. But when Solomon falls off from God's Worship, then arises against
him the spirit of Hadad, and the spirit of Rezin, and the spirit of Jeroboam,
etc. 1 Kings 11. It is a great point of policy, in troublesome times, viz. the
attending to the Cause of Religion, Without Order the Ark could not move in
David's time, but you see what trouble follows upon it; and Churches cannot
likewise move, until the Order of the Churches be proportionably settled:
Haggai 1.5, 6. Now therefore says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways; when
the Worship of God was neglected, things went ill with them; You have sown
much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; and again ver. 7th.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways: and in Chap. second, they do
hearken to him, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, and Josuah, and
from the time that they set themselves about the work of the Lord, all things
went well with them. How far the drought, and the last years and other
troubles are here considerable, referring to our selves, let the Scripture be
the interpreter. The matters of outward prosperity have much dependence upon
the carrying on the cause of Religion, and that according to the Order of the
Gospel, or by the Scripture-patern; our safety lies in keeping there, not
turning to the right hand, nor turning to the left hand. In Exodus 39. you have
it mentioned about ten times in that Chapter in way of Commendation, that what
was done was so according as the Lord had Commanded Moses. Let this stand with
us I beseech you (beloved) that for the motion of Elders, of Brethren, of
Councils, of Magistrates, of Churches, settle the same as the Lord has.
Commanded, i. e. according to Scripture-prescript and pattern; we are then a
safe People.

FINIS
A COPY OF THE LETTER Returned by the MINISTERS of NEW ENGLAND TO MR. JOHN DURY
ABOUT HIS PACIFICATION.

Faithfully Translated out of the Original Manuscript written in Latin, By the
Reverend AVTHOR of the Three former SERMONS.

With some Considerations premised about that Subject, necessary for these
Times.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace.

Published in the Year 1664.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS of old it was observed, that Julian who hated the Christians with an
implacable hatred, when he could invent no way worse, opened a wide way for
Schisms and Divisions: In like manner has it been the Policy of the Adversary
in succeeding times, when there appears no hope of undermining the Walls of
Truth by Heresy and false Doctrine, to attempt the scattering and dispersing
the Assertors thereof, by raising and fomenting Schisms and Dissensions amongst
them. From which Fountain, it may justly be feared, has sprung a jealousy in
the minds of sundry persons in this Country, That the Determination of the
late Synod Anno 1662. if attended unto, would bring into the Churches of
New England a practice, contrary both to the Frame of their Churches, and to
the judgment of those famous Worthies that at first their Churches were blessed
withal; when as it will be found most evident to any that shall impartially
survey the Constitution and state of the said Churches, That the principal, if
not the sole Reason, why the same things then agreed upon, were not long before
set afoot and practiced, was not any doubt or scruple about the duty of the
things themselves, but the want of Agreement about the Way and Manner, how they
might most conveniently and safely put in practice: which being now fully
cleared up in the Propositions of the said Synod, the Aspersion cast upon their
former Church-administrations, as too much favoring the way of the Separation,
is not only now removed, but an Expedient found out for the holding Communion
with other Orthodox Churches, in things lawful and necessary, without any
prejudice to the the Purity of their Worship.

The commendable receiving and practicing of this Truth by some Churches among
them, and necessity of attending thereunto by all, is most convincingly evident
by many writings published abroad in the world by many Eminent persons in the
name of others, wherein much pains is taken up in clearing the way of these
Churches, from the imputation of Schism and separation from others; but in none
more, then in a Letter returned with the Subscription of the names almost of
all the Elders universally in this Place, unto a Letter of the Reverend and
Learned Mr. John Dury, who ever since the year 1635. had been laboring for a
Pacification between the Reformed Protestant Churches of Europe, and who is
famous in the Christian World for that work, and at last had communicated his
design to those of New England, desiring their Approbation and Concurrence in
the said design; wherein they expressly declare, That they own all those
Churches professing the Protestant Religion, and retaining the fundamentals of
Doctrine, and essentials of Order (if they be otherwise peaceable, and walk
orderly) for Brethren; and that they are ready to reach out unto them the right
hand of fellowship: From whence it will necessarily follow, that seeing other
Churches so qualified, although they should dissent from them in many Points of
Religion, are owned as Brethren, and that in way of fellowship, if those, that
so profess, shall refuse to confer the seal of Baptism to the Children of
such Parents as belong to any such like Churches, according as is expressed in
the aforesaid Propositions of the Synod; They will neither be able to avoid
contradicting their own words and writings, nor yet secure themselves from the
guilt of dissimulation. And that it might appear there was no advantage taken
by any straggling sentence or expression in the said Letter, cast off from its
Dependants, it was thought necessary to Translate and publish the whole to the
open view of all: and because also in the draught of the same, are found many
undeniable Arguments enforcing this very Conclusion; as when its said, That the
diverse opinions of some Churches about Polity and indifferent things, although
they are not so small that the lovers of truth should be silent about them, so
neither are they so great, that they need be any hindrance to the seekers of
Peace and Quietness in such an undertaking. Which is also there further
evidenced, by instancing the unquestioned Example of our Savior, who refused
not Celebrare Sacra, or join in the Worship of God in the Jewish Church,
defaced at that time with more grievous corruptions.

And further it is added, That the nature of Political, as well as Christian
Society, does utterly forbid the denial of Fellowship-priviledges to such
Members as are found without scandal. Let not the words and practices of them
that pretend to the greater Purity of Reformation, be Yea and Nay: which if it
should appear, the Scandal would be so much the greater; in that the foresaid
Letter, with so many Subscriptions, in all probability is known in the world,
being sent into Foreign parts upon a Public account.

As for the Translation of the Letter; they who had the chiefest hand therein,
have no other design, then by approving themselves as Lovers of Truth and
Peace, to undeceive simple-hearied and honestminded persons, who are ready,
with Barnabas, to be carried away with the dissimulation of such, as are
through a kind of preposterous Zeal, unwilling to have any of the common
Privileges of the Church of God bestowed upon any, whose effectual
Sanctification may be questioned; which is the cause, as one observes, of a
Schismatic inclination of some godly and religious persons. In reference to
the Words and Phrases, much of the Elegancy of them is taken away in the
Translation, by reason of the abstruseness of the Latin; it faring in this
kind with Books, as it does with Bodies, which are nothing so comely when
arrayed with a stranger, as with their own proper clothing and habit: but
wherever appeared a necessity of changing the phrase, the sense is preserved
whole and entire.

For a Conclusion: If the Practice of the purest Churches, together with the
Authority of the most Pious, Zealous, Learned and judicious Divines, might
avail any thing in this consideration, it were easy to present many things to
the view of the Reader, from the Writings of Cas. Consc Ep 9. qu. 3. Com. Gal
5.27.
Perkins, De Pol lib. 1. cap. 13, 14, 33.
Parker, Epist. 149. and 103.
Calvinus, Locus 47. these. 33, 34.
Bucanus, with many other of the Learned Non-Conformists, who always
disclaimed both the Principles and Practices of the Rigid Separation, and all
such as renounced Communion with other Churches, upon the account of some
Impurities about Order and Discipline: However it came to be the fate of these
Churches in America, to verge too near them in their Primitive Administrations.
But we shall only content our selves with the mentioning the Judgment of two,
not the least eminent and famous Lights in the Church of God, about this point.
No Church can be said to be alienated from God, and from his Covenant, although
it may become very sick and adulterous, until God shall have taken away from it
his Matrimonial Covenant, casting it quite off as defiled with Adultery,
according to Isa. 50 1. which will not be, so long as it retains the Head, and
the Head retains it, by a public declaration of his grace that calls, Col.
2.19. Jun. These. Theolog. These 36. page 2099. But Ames more fully about the
Subject of Baptism: 1. Expositious Infants are to be baptized, whose Parents
are unknown, if they be born among Christians: out of charity they are to be
looked at as the sons of Christians, if there be not just cause to presume the
contrary. 2. They that in some way by their Profeision belong unto the Church,
yet notwithstanding do openly violate the Covenant of God, their Infants ought
to be baptized, though with some distinction; sc. so that what the Covenant
requires, and is wanting in them, be supplied by others. 3. Infants
illegittimate ought so to be baptized, that either their Parents profess their
Repentance, or that their Education be undertaken by other godly persons. 4.
Children of contumacious Excommunicates are not conveniently baptizable, unless
by the interposition of meet Sureties. 5. Infants of Papists, and such like,
who are Semi-Christians, may be baptized, if they find a meet surety, under
whose power may be their Education. Ames. Cas. Consc. Lib. 4. Cap. 27. To which
may be added, The Baptism of Infants ought not to be deferred, without a
serious and weighty reason. Ibid.

TO THE WORTHY AND EMINENT, MR. JOHN DURY, SALVTATIONS,
THat amongst so many horrid Alarms of War, amongst so many fatal differences
of Opinion raised in matters of Religion, and that also after so many, and such
unwearied labors of famous Intercessors, now so often in this cause undertaken
in vain; you should O Dury, the most zealous Friend of Peace, not only be
seriously thinking of, but are also unto this day strongly endeavoring the
Espousals of Truth and Peace between the Professors of the Gospel; we verily do
largely congratulate you in the conceiving so great a design, with our utmost,
and daily Prayers, helping forward (by Gods Assistance) the birth of this
Man-child. Suffer us to speak the very truth of the matter, nor is there any
need to deny the same: even as the Holy-Scripture relates how the Olive Branch,
brought much comfort to the Parent of the other World after the Flood, while he
was lamenting over the Tremendous Spectacle of the Deluge over flowing all here
below; in like manner did your Letter, breathing a very spirit of peace, as
another Noah's dove, sent down from Heaven, wonderfully refresh the exile
Brethren, who were almost astonished to see so many nations, that profess the
Gospel, making irreconcilable war amongst themselves, together with the many
and great dissentions in the business of Religion, and that monstrous flood of
Error breaking forth, not out of the Cataracts of the Clouds, but the very
Mouth of the Dragon.

Be it so, that we are in the utmost parts of the Earth; we have only changed
our Climate, not our minds: we have altered our place, that we might retain
the Faith without alteration. There are indeed some, that might have been
better employed, at least mere strangers to our affairs, who do therefore
impute unto us the guilt of Schism, because in the first place we have
endeavored after the pure Worship of God. But if any see good to enquire into
the Reason, why these Churches in the Wilderness left their Country, this it
was, viz. that the Ancient Faith, and pure Worship, might be found inseparable
companions in our Practice, and that our posterity might be undefiled in
Religion: Nevertheless, we are never unmindefull of the saying of Austin to the
Brethren in the Wilderness, as he styles them; There are two things
considerable, says he, Conscience and good Name: Conscience is necessary for
thy self, good Name for thy Neighbor: He who trusts to his Conscience, and
neglects his good name, is cruel, especially if he be set in that place, of
which the Apostle writing to his Disciple, says, In all things show thy self
an example of good works. It may not be unlawful for us, who are in the
Wilderness on the further side of the Seas, as well those, who through grace
are called to the Ministry, though in our selves the greatest of sinners, and
the least of all the Saints, as any others, to Apologize for our selves in the
Words of the Tribes beyond Jordan a little changed, for the vindicating or
preserving our good name in a matter of so great moment, both before great
ones, Fathers, Brethren, and every gentle Reader, The Lord God of Gods, the
Lord God of Gods he known, and Israel shall know, if wittingly and willingly in
Rebellion, or treacherous dealing against the Lord, or in Schism it be, that we
have departed from our Country, save us not this day.

But yet notwithstanding, we are not unmindful of that so known Oracle, [Love
the Truth and Peace:] we neither strive for Truth without making reckoning of
Peace, neither do we pursue Peace with the loss of Truth: the former defaceth,
this latter teareth the seamless Coat of the Church. It is as necessary to
avoid the Rock of Schism on the right hand, as the Quicksands of Confusion on
the left. We renounce Samaratanism, that deadly sink of false Doctrine, as much
as we fly from Donatism, the sore enemy of Evangelical Temperament, and
devourer (if we may speak after Teriullian) of Christian Society; but admire
and embrace the Concord, and Agreemeent of the Gospel. We are no whit pleased
with Cassanders shaking hands with Papists at the furthest distance, erring
from the Truth; Nor yet with the Romanist renouncing Communion with them that
are otherwise minded in lesser differences: but in special manner we ought to
labor, that we may walk with an even foot, and not to turn aside an hairs
breadth from the Truth: in the mean time, it is better to be a Cyprian then a
Steven. It is much more grievous to think aright, and be found a Scismatick,
then to think amiss in things not fundamental, and be of a peaceable spirit.
The spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ is a spirit of Truth, of peace and
Communion: so desirous of Peace, that it requires Communion in a true Church,
although not pure; and so desirous of Truth, that it forbids impurity in any
Church whatsoever. That, that is the Mark at which we aim, and which we
endeavor and breath after, in him who is the Way, the Truth and Life.

It is confessed, there are some Apices, or lesser points in Divinity, which
the Church of God has now for above an hundred years bewailed, as the
obstacles of Peace, concerning which the chief controversies maintained are
about Predestination, Ubiquity, and the Eucharist. About these points how many
thousand Polemick writings have been extant all abroad, which the Christian
World is scarce able to contein? Alas! that ever there should be a war about
the Sacrament! Alas! that ever there should be any contentious Treatises about
the Eucharist, turning the very Badge of Union, into an Apple of Contention!
who can refrain from tears at the uttering of such things? yet these
notwithstanding, that there is place for the so much desired Coalition between
the Evangelicks and the Reformed, so called may easily be made appear, by
running through the chief Heads of things:

As namely, Because in the first Article, they who were the greatest Favorers
of that eminent Worthy of the former Age, do yet ascribe the work of Conversion
wholly unto God, and do likewise stiffly maintain, and accurately defend, Grace
to be altogether free; who were also utter enemies to that pestilent Opinion of
the Schoolmen [That God is bound to him that does what he can of himself] And
who likewise do deservedly account it mere Pelagianism, to make any kind of
Qualifying Fitness a Moral Motive unto predeterining Grace.

As for the Opinion of the Ubiquity of the Humane Nature, by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union; it cannot be denied, but that Papers have come abroad,
written by too much gall and sharpness. In the mean while it is agreed upon by
all, and taken for granted, That the Humane Nature is Personally Omnipresent,
According to this Rule likewise are other Propositions about the Person to be
judged of, under this head.

Lastly, As concerning the Lords Supper; the Divines of either part, do reject
Transubstantiation, together with worshipping of bread. But about the Real
Presence, viz. Sacramental, of the Body and Blood of Christ, it is agreed
between both. These so many and great Differences, are to be accounted as so
many Heart-griefs, although not to be numbered amongst them which by the Apostle
are called Unlearned Questions; yet we judge them not to be of that moment, as
to hinder the giving each other the right hand of fellowship, or the pledges of
Eclesiastical Brotherhood, building upon that Apostolical Canon of holy
Communion, Nevertheless, in that whereunto we have attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3.16. Here also we may call to
mind that common and received Distinction between Fundamentals, and
non-fundamentals; and, that Brotherly Fellowship is not to be refused with men
peaceable, and otherwise Orthodox, for the sake of Non-fundamentals.

We account it very unequal to fasten upon any one that holds an Opinion; all
the Consectaries, which to him that argues according to the exactest grounds of
Reason, seem to follow upon such premises, especially if those Consequences be
disowned by him: in which respect there are no small Errors on both sides,
while those of our side impeach the other of Eutyches his opinion, though
refusing to own it, for the sake of Consubstantiation; And they on the other
side go about to make ours guilty of making God the Author of Sin, although we
never so much disclaim it, in the Point of Predestination. The Disputes about
the Consequences of these, whether rightly inferred or not, from the premises,
belong not to this place to be examined, yea the matter it self requires rather
that we should forbear.

But this Tragedy is not yet at an end. For, as to Polity, and indifferent
things, they have taken up diverse Opinions; who it were to be wished that they
would embsace that Concord one with another, which has been so often
endeavored after. But the Differences of this nature, as they are not so
small, that the Lovers of Truth should be silent about them; so neither are
they so great, that they need be any hindrance to the Seekers of Peace and
Quietness in the present Undertaking; as may appear by the unquestioned Example
of our Savior, who refused not to Celebrate the Worship of God in the Jewish
Church, defaced at that time with more grievous corruptions. They who are
united to Christ by heart-converting grace, are Members of his Mystical Body;
and whosoever, but in appearance at least, are joined to the Head, and have
added themselves to the Polity of Israel, are to be received Members of the
Political Body. Now Communion follows upon Union. Besides the nature of
Political, as well as Christian Society, does utterly forbid to deny the
Privileges of fellowship to such Members as are found without Scandal.

Thus much we thought good to speak briefly about this Point, that Honored
Persons, and Respected Brethren, might understand what Reasons moved us to
entertain the same Opinion with themselves. We have been taught, that the Idea,
or Pattern of holy Communion, ought to be fetched from Divine Writ, and not to
be framed after our own pleasure.

The Rules of Sacred Society are certain; beyond which, or short of which, it
is not in our power to extend, or withhold the Right Hand of Brotherhood.
Whoever having attained these shall acknowledge them; and having acknowledged
them, shall walk according unto them; so holding Communion with sinners, as he
does not in the least communicate with their sins, so as he is wanting neither
to the Truth, nor himself, nor his Brethren, him we deservedly esteem both as a
Guide and Pillar of the Church: will we, or nill we, we are Brethren; and
seeing we are Brethren, let us acknowledge our selves what we are, namely,
Brethren in the Lord. A day would scarce suffice, to rehearse how many and how
great incitements do call for, and require this. To account the weak in Faith
for none, is indeed it self a greater weakness. The name of Brethren is sweet:
it is matter of great delight to be such indeed. But it is much to be lamented,
that those who are so, should not be acknowledged to be so. So to stand for
Truth, that by too tenacious insisting upon Doctrine, we make no reckoning of
the Rights of Society, is to be carried with the study of Parties, not of the
Truth; and to undertake the Patronage of an Opinion, rather because it is our
own, then because it is true.

Sounder Philosophy determines, that the excellency of Union is to be esteemed
according to the dignity of the Cause. We here pass over in silence the
conspiring together of the waters and dry land to make one Globe; as also that
of the frame of the Heavenly and the Earthly Globe, to make one Sphere of the
World. There may be found an heap of Miracles in the quiet gathering the living
creatures into the Ark, and their abiding in it, where the most savage of them
laid aside their savageness; being ready to acknowledge Noah for their Lord
(not much otherwise then Adam in giving Names unto them) where might be seen
the Wolf standing amongst the Sheep, neither do the Flocks seem afraid of the
great Lions: These are indeed very great things; but yet if they be compared
with the Mist call Union, shining forth in one of the very least of Christ's
Members, there would want words to express how great the distance is. To
proceed therefore, if the Union of a very few Believers be of so great moment,
of how great account should be the Uniting of all Protestants in the Faith? But
let us here pause a while, and not think much to weigh this matter a little
more seriously, and we shall find (unless we are much deceived) this very
Union about which we are treating, if it be without hypocrifie and deceit, but
as the very offspring and image of the Hypostatical Union, and only next unto
it on Earth (as to the kind) and like unto which there will not be found any
in Heaven, no not when Angelical Nature remained in its perfection. We do
believe indeed, and not out of a vain conceit, That this Agreement is a bright
Looking-glass made of the Blood of the Lamb, wherein Jesus himself, the Prince
of so great a Peace, clearly shines forth: in passing through which also, he
does irradiate the World with its brightness, while it steadfastly beholds this
clear Looking-glass, and by irradiating, ingenerates Faith therein. In which
respect we need not fear to affirm, That the perpetual conjunction of all
Mankind, established by the Bond of the first Covenant, would be by infinite
degrees exceeded by it; That they all may be one, as thou Father in me, and I
in thee, that the world may know that thou have sent me, Joh. 17.21.

If the possibility of such a Peace should appear, we could not do much in the
pursuing the necessity thereof. Notwithstanding (if we may have leave) that
this Necessity may be fastened in our minds, as they say, with the strongest
Nail, before we leave this Exhortatory part of our Discourse, we think meet,
for a Conclusion, to adorn and strengthen it with the Sayings of some Famous
men, tending much unto Peace.

At Marpurg, Luther long since professed, That he would not yield this Praise
to the Adverse Party, that they should be more studious of Concord and Peace
then himself. From whence arose that famous Concord of Marpurg. We find also
Calvin thus expressing himself, that he might compose minds, and allay so
great Commotions, at a time when Contention was grown much too hot; But I
desire you to consider, first, How great a man Luther is, and in what great
Gifts he does excel, and with how great Courage and Constancy of Mind, with
how great Dexterity, with how great Efficacy of Learning, he has hitherto
endeavored to put to stight the Kingdom of Antichrist, and propagate the
Doctrine of Salvation. I have been often wont to say, That if he should call me
Devil a thousand times, that I would yet give him that honor, as to
acknowledge him the eminent Servant of God. But our Davenant most severest of
all; If the Schisms of Churches might be taken away, as without doubt they
may, I would rather have a Millstone hanged about my neck, and be cast into the
Sea, then either hinder a Work so acceptable unto God, and so necessary to
avoid Scandals, or not promote it with my whole heart, and all my utmost
Endeavors.

Epiphanius would not that Christians should have any Byname. Let the Nickname
of Zuinglians and Calvinists then cease, the Marks rather of Faction, then of
Brotherly Union. What should we have to do with Luther? What should we have to
do with Calvin? We Profess the Gospel, we Believe the Gospel. Bellarmine
somewhere has a Catalogue of a great many Kingdoms that fell off from the
Papacy: whose defection from the Mystery of Iniquity, if it has troubled the
Cardinals of Rome, how much more would their Uniting together in the Mystery of
Piety, be a terror to the Roman Party? When the truly holy League shall wholly
stand for the Lamb; when Humane Endeavors and Dissensions being laid aside,
they shall only intend that one thing, to afford their mutual help for the
promoting of Religion; when they shall unanimously carry on the war of the Lord
against the Whore, as if they were endued with the very Spirit of the
Revelation; when they shall be called neither English, nor Dutch, nor Swedes,
nor Danes, but only Christians.

If Poets Writings any truth contain,
Ages fierce Wars shall never more maintain.
But it is not in our power, most excellent Dury, to add our counsel, either
to the beginning or the preserving this Agreement. You are not ignorant, that
we are Exiles, Britains, altogether divided from the rest of Europe; wherefore
we are less fit to perform this Task: Neither are we so unsensible of our own
weakness, as not readily to confess our inability for so great a Service; nor
is there need, seeing we must thankfully acknowledge and own, that this office
has been abundantly performed, both by Strangers, as well as by our own
Countrymen.

We may here call to mind, and not without some sacred sympathy, those Blessed
Souls, Melancthon, and Pareus, now amongst the Blessed; the one no less famous
amongst the Reformed, then the other amongst the Evangelicks; The first of whom
going toward Haganoa, with sighing uttered these words,

In Synods hitherto we lived have,
And now in them return unto the grave.
The other seriously meditating on the controversy of the Encharist, brake
forth into these words; I am weary with disputing. Thus, if these men might be
Judges, we ought rather Pray, then Dispute, and study how to Live, then to
Contend. And perhaps the Divines of either part, after they have been wearied,
and broken in their Spirits with daily and continual Contentions, will more
readily accept of the Counsels of Peace, which hitherto have been less
acceptable, while the Sense of Anger remained fresh: After by long use they
have been taught, they may prefer the waters of the Pacifick Sea, before those
of Meribah. Nor need we say, That those Honored Persons, and Brethren, will
perhaps more kindly entertain the Counsels of Peace, seeing there are, we know
not how many Sayings, Writings, Deeds of Princes, Churches and Universities,
openly testifying, That eminent men of both Orders, and that not of the lowest
Rank, have not only received, but taken Counsel together, and engaged their
helping hand, as need shall require: from which beginnings it is but meet to
hope the best. God is able to make them workers of Peace, whom he has given to
be Seekers of Peace: If otherwise, such eminent endeavors shall not want their
reward in heaven, and their honor in Israel. These are piously Heroic
Enterprises, which as they do oblige all good men, so are they to be admired of
them. Their Praises, how great, or how little soever, as the present age is not
altogether silent about them; so will posterity declare the rest, and perhaps
the unknown parts of the World.

We give thanks unto the Father of Lights with all our hearts, who has put
this Work into the mind of Dury, savouring of a Spirit more then Humane; and
has added also suitable Courage to the promoting so Pious and Apostolical a
matter, which Task, whosoever shall effect, if we may be Judges, will deserve a
more then ordinary Triumphant Statue; and whose Monument will so far excel the
Trophies of Achilles, as if they were not worthy to be mentioned in the same
day. However the issue of the matter fall, yet it is a great deal, to have
attempted in a great Design. Seek the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper
that love thee.

We give thanks unto the God of Peace, who would not suffer the labors of his
servant endeavoring after peace, to be undertaken altogether without success.
Therefore, most worthy Sir, go on in this your strength, resting on the
prophecy for the desired Concord, That it shall be in it is own appointed time.
The power which have obeyed the Roman Harlot, shall hate her, make her naked,
and burn her with fire; For God has put it into the hearts of the Kings, that
they should fulfill his will. It does not become those that have a meet
understanding of things, to doubt of their Agreement in the Faith, who are to
burn to Ashes the Metropolis of the last Head of the Beast, as an enemy to the
Faith. The Discord of the Kings detaines the Whore on her throne, and keeps the
Woman in the Wilderness, while they are contending amongst themselves.

It makes all Priamus his house rejoice,
And other Trojans to lift up their voice.
But this their sacred Concord, the renowned Sons of Sion cannot but look upon,
as a forerunner of the Destruction of Rome, now at the very doors; and
accordingly with their daily and most ardent prayers breathe after, hope, and
long for the same.

Lastly, we give thanks to Mr. Dury, into whose heart it came to remember
Joseph, separate from his Brethren at so great a distance, both by Sea and
Land; and who has vouchsafed with so comfortable a message to visit us poor
wretches, clothed in Sackcloth for our warfare; yet, as we trust, the Sackcloth
of the Gospel: who has not refused to put New England, as a part of the skirt
of Aaron's garment, upon which has descended some of the precious Oil, into
the Catalogue of the so much famed Agreement: And who has by his Letter
exhorting unto such Agreement, given us an occasion to bring in this Testimony,
such as it is, for our brotherly Communion with the whole company of
Protestants professing the Faith of Christ Jesus. For we must ingenuously
confess, that then, when all things were quiet, and no threatening signs of
war appeared, seeing we could not be permitted by the Bishops at that time
prevailing, to perform the Office of the Ministry in Public, nor yet to enjoy
the holy Ordinances without Subscription, and Conformity, (as they were wont to
speak) nor without the mixture of Humane Inventions with Divine Institutions,
we chose rather to depart into the remote, and unknown Coasts of the Earth, for
the sake of a purer worship, then to lie down under the Hierarchy in the
abundance of all things, but with the prejudice of Conscience. But, that in
flying from our Country, we should renounce communion with such Churches as
profess the Gospel, is a thing which we confidently and solemnly deny.

Certainly, so far as concerns our selves, in whatever Assemblies amongst us
the whole Company of them that profess the Gospel, the Fundamentals of
Doctrine, and Essentials of Order are maintained, although in many niceties of
controversal Divinity they are at less Agreement with us, we do hereby make it
manifest (which yet we would always have understood, so as the least part of
Truth, according to the nature of that Reverence which ought exactly to be
yielded thereunto, may be preserved) that we do acknowledge them all, and every
one for Brethren; and that we shall be ready to give unto them the right hands
of fellowship in the Lord, if in other things they be peaceable, and walk
orderly.

We humbly beseech the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose lips
is only power to persuade, that he would enlighten Princes, Divines, and even
all who are rightly called Christians from the name of Christ, with the lively
splendor of such an Agreement, and draw them with a Soul-moving Energie to the
divine Love of himself. As for that which concerns your self, the sweetest
Follower of Peace, We should account it an heinous crime to be wanting unto you
in our Prayers to the very God of Peace, That he would so preserve your Life,
your Course, and your Work, that you may bring unto a Conclusion your so
eminent undertaking, with so many sighs, labors, sweatings, dangers, and with
so great charges hitherto carried on: if otherwise, and that it seem good to
the great Determiner of things, before this come to pass to advance him that
has been a follower of peace on Earth, to the state of a Blessed Saint in
Heaven; That then he would raise up other Duryes, who may bring the work so
happily begun to its desired end.

Your most observant Brethren in Christ, The Ministers of the Churches, and
Preachers of the Word, Militant for the Faith of Jesus in New England: John
Wilson Pastor of Boston. John Norton Teacher of the same. John Mayo Pastor of
New-Boston. Richard Mather Teacher of Dorchester. John Allin Pastor of Dedham.
John Eliot Teacher of Rexbury. Samuel Danforth Pastor of the same. William
Thomson Pastor of Braintry. Henry Flint Teacher of the same. Thomas Thatcher
Teacher of Weymouth. Peter Hubbard Pastor of Hingham. John Miller Pastor of
Yarmouth. John Wilson junior Pastor of Medfield. Zechariah Symmes Pastor of
Charlstown. Thomas Shepard Peacher of the same. Samuel Stone Teacher of
Hartford Jonathan Mitchel Pastor of Cambridge. John Sherman Pastor of
Watertown. Edmund Brown Pastor of Sudbury. Edward Bulkly Pastor of Concord.
Thomas Carter Pastor of Woborne. Samuel Haugh Pastor of Reding. John Fiske
Pastor of Chelmsford. John Reyner Teacher of Dover. Ezekiel Regers Pastor of
Rowly Samuel Philips Teacher of the same. Samuel Whiting Pastor of Lyn. John
Higginson Pastor of Salem. Thomas Cobbet Pastor of Ipswich. William Hubbard
Teacher of the same. Francis Dane Teacher of Andover William Worcester Pastor
of Salisbury. John Ward Pastor of Haverhil. Timothy Dalton Teacher of Hampton.
Seaborn Cotton of the same. Joseph Emerson Pastor of York. Michael Wigglesworth
Pastor of Maldon. William Walton Minister of the Word. Ralph Smith Minister of
the Word. Charles Chauncy, President of Harvard College. Gershom Bulkly
Fellows of the said College. Thomas Graves Fellows of the said College. Zech.
Symmes Fellows of the said College. Zech. Brigden Fellows of the said College.


FINIS.

