The last good News FROM IRELAND.

OR, The Copy of a Letter sent from one Mr. Andrew Norton in Dublin, to Sir
Andrew Norton of Namptwich in Cheshire, and a Member of the House of COMMONS
March 5th. 1641.

Being a Relation of another Victory obtained by the Lord of Corkes and Sir
Simon Harcourts forces near Dublin, against the Rebels, under the Command of
the Earl of Osmond, Captain Butler, and Captain Atkinson, lately revolted to
the Rebels, where 2000 of them were slain, and 200 brought prisoners into
Dublin.

March 6th. 1641.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

The last true News from Ireland, March 4. 1641.
Noble Sir,
Think not strange, that I have been so long absent, since I presume you
(being a Member of the Parliament) know how our passage is stopped, and that no
person whatsoever, must leave the Kingdom, without warrant from the Lord
Justices, we having suchuse for men, and such encouragement to take up Arms to
offend our Enemies, and to defend our selves, wherefore I have thought it
agreeable to the engagement of my service, to send you (by this Gentleman now
bound for England, upon command to the Parliament) a true Relation of latest
proceedings here, which God be thanked has been happy and prosperous, Though
at the first the danger appeared greater, then we knew how to avoid, for upon
Wednesday being the second of March, a party of the Rebels, to the number of
7000 foot and 200 horse, were discryed upon March within 4. miles of Dublin,
under the Command of Osmond, Captain Butler, and Captain Addam Adkinson lately
revolted to the Rebels, who hearing that the Lord Lievtenants Regiments were
landed, and that Sir Addam Loftus, my Lord of Cork, the Lord lustices, and Sir
Simon Harcourt, were marched out of the Town to meet and entertain ^ir Richard
Greenvill their Commander, who as yet had not joined with us in Dublin, only
he had a slight entertainment before Droheda, at his first Arrival.

The sight of these unexpected Enemies, put us in a fright, having not above
300. Foot that were in the Works, our other forces, being distant almost 7.
Irish miles in this distraction, every man that was capable of bearing Arms,
put himself into a Martial form, resolving to hazard his life for defense of
his liberty, so that in one hour we were a pretty handsome Army to the number
of 4000. whom Sir Charles Coote (as it was Gods will, being not well stayed in
the City) put in order, and fortified the works, dispatching withal,
Messengers to our other forces, to hasten their Arrival, which being done, and
we in complete order, their Martial Drums pierced our undanted Ears, who were
prepared to entertain them, they with like courage gave the assault, and
charged us very fiercely, and had not our works been a great safeguard for
us, we had lost many men, and hazarded our Block-house but our Canons made
Laynes amongst them, so that the Earth was covered with their dead Bodies, two
miles in length, 3 hours this skirmish lasted, Victory inclining to neither
party, until at length, our other Forces hearing of this news; made have unto
our Rescue, and charged them on the Rear, which unexpected Aid did so much
amaze them, seeing themselves engaged almost beyond Retreat, they as
regardlesse of their lives or fortunes, charg either party with undaunted
courage, but the other charging of the works but slightly, only to keep us
from sallying out, thinking to force a passage through the Body of our Army, in
despite of resistance, but all in vain, for our new come English pla^d their
parts so well, that they taught the Irish what Rebellion was.

Sir Richard Greenvill a Noble Gentleman expressed his courage almost beyond
belief, he slew like Lightning through the Rebels Troops, and so dispersed
their order, that they amazed began adace to fly, to meet with death that was
in pursuit of them, at length Captain Atkinson brought up a wing, and met Sir
Richard Greenvill face to face betwixt whom begun a great skirmish, who did
fight, as each had strived, who first should loose his life, death tryumphs in
his Colors, Sulphurous smoke darkened the Air, each man did grieve to see so
much blood shed, yet knew no Victory, for that was doubtful, until hand to
hand by noble Greenvill, Atkinson was slain, then they began to fly, And some
did yield themselve unto our mercy, which were brought in^ the City of Dublin,
to the number of 200, an 2000 of the rest were slain, only Osmond with the
remainder of his Troops of horse escaped awey, and left us to Congratulate our
happy Victory.

This defeat has so encouraged us, that we are almost fearelesse of any
danger, only we expect more supplies from England And then we doubt not, but
that we shall tame this Rebellious Route, for other News we have little for
the present, only Victuals is scarce and dear with us, And (God willing) the
next occasion that offers it self, I will give you true iutelligence, for
these proceedings, I my self was an eyewitness of it, therefore I have
thought good to give you uotice of it, so for this time I Rest,

Your Servant to be Commanded. Edward Norton.
From Dublin 5th. of Marco, 1641. Directed to Sir Andrew Norton, Inhabitant at
Namptwich in Cheshire, and now resident in London.
FINIS.

