TO ALL PEOPLE THAT SPEAKS OF AN OVTVVARD BAPTISM; DIPPERS, SPRINKLERS, AND
OTHERS.

Also the Errors answered, holden forth by THOMAS LARKHAM Called by the World a
Minister, at Wexford he was then With a reproof to the Offenders; And also
some Que^ries to all people to be read within that ye may all know that, That
which may be known of God is manifest within; Rom: 1: 19.

WE are the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh Phillipians: 3: 3. For he is not a
Jew which is one outwardly neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the
heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter; whose praise is not of men but of
God; Rom: 2: 28: 29.

FRom a friend to all that breath after JESUS; known to the world by the Name,
Humphry Norton; Though amongst the Scorners called a QVAKER.

WE are the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit; and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have noe confidence in the flesh, Phillipians. 3: 3.

For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision
which is outward in the flesh but he is a Jew which is one inwardly and
Circumcision is that of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God; Romans 2: 28: 29.

To all you every where that goes under the Name of Baptists, Dippers,
Sprinklers, and others, to the Light in all your consciences I speak, let it
answer, which shows you that you are washing your selves, remember the Scribes
and Pharisees, who were compared to the Cup and Platter, washing the outside,
but inwardly were Ravening Woolues; you wash your selves, and one washing
another, And you all dishonor Christ, and will neither come to him your
selves, nor suffer others; and except he wash you, ye have noe part in him,
Therefore I say leave that self washing, and take up the Cross to your selves,
that self may be crucified, and all self, and self Righteousness washed
away; That the washing, and renewing, and regenerating, of the holy Ghost, ye
may know and witness, as Paul did; who labored to bring people to the same,
and Peter and John: they were Baptized with the Holy Ghost, so that the chief
Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees took knowledge of them; that they had been
with Christ after that he was Sacrifised up: And Aquilla and Priscilla, who
taught Appollos a more perfect way, then John's Baptism; Acts: 4: 8: 13. and
Acts: 18: 25: 26. for that must decrease, as says John: I must decrease, he
must increase, John 3: 30. all that stands in water Baptism; you are not come
to the increase, which has noe end, nor to the more perfect way (to wit)
Christ Jesus, who says I am the way, John: 14: 6. which Aquilla and Priscilla
taught Appollas; although he were an Elequent man: And Paul knew a more perfect
Baptism, then that with water; when he thanked God that he Baptized none of
them, save Crispus and Gaius etc. For he was not sent to Baptize but to Preach
1, Cor. 1: 14: 15: 16: 17. And Paul did the work given him to finish, and
brought many up to perfection; and showed them a more perfect way then carnal
things (to wit) Christ Jesus, the sure foundation into which the Isralits were
Baptized, and eat and drank of the same Rock; 1: Cor: 2: 6. 1: Cor 10: 23:
4: 5.

Come now ye that pleads, and Preaches up water Baptism, let us reason
together; where is the cloud ye were Baptized into, is it yet removed; where
is the Sea you passed through, which shall be noe more? know ye such a thing?
where is the Death witnessed, and Repentance, and Remission of Sin, amongst
you? To that of God in all your Consciences I appeal, have not you water
Baptized people yet to repent? when you are Quiet in spirit, is not your Sins
brought fresh against you committed, before you were Baptized? and are you not
yet living in Sin? you are not yet Dead with Christ, nor your old man is not
yet crucified; nor the body of Sin is not destroyed; Rom: 6: 6: 7: that
henceforth you should not serve it, (but come to our Baptism and henceforth
you shall not serve Sin.) for being Dead with Christ, we are freed from Sin, as
says the Scripture, he that is dead, is freed from Sin, but ye your selves
are alive, making a fair show in the flesh, and would constrain others to be
Baptized, that you might Glory in their flesh, least you and they should suffer
persecution, for the Cross of Christ etc. Gall: 6: from 12: to the end; I say
this is fleshly Glory, the Jew outward; and the Circumcision that avails not,
being Strangers to the life of God, to the Jew inward, and the Circumcision of
the heart with the Spirit of the living God, which is only witnessed through
the Cross of Christ* And the pure water, whereby the Conscience is sprinkled
from dead works, and the answer returned thou art good; but while you live in
Pride, and Covetousness, Lusts, and uncleanness, a pure Conscience you know
not, nor nothing that pure is; the light in your consciences is my witness, which
will manifest unto you that outward water, nor noe outward thing can take away
one sin. Therefore take warning ye self washers, you dishonor God, whilst in
these things you stand, which cannot perfect as pertaining to the conscience
Heb: 9: 9: 10: But stand not there, for you cannot satisfy, that of God in
your consciences, with an Imitation from the Letter; and with telling how
Phillip Baptized the Eunuch; it were well for you, if you could see your
selves, in the Eunuchs condition, that you have the Scriptures and understand
not what you read; ( Acts 8: from 30: to the end) but from simplicity of heart
would confess as he did, for in plainnes you understand not the Scriptures nor
the power of God; who tells of being Baptized, and are yet alive in your sins;
And has to repent after you are Baptized; for which in Scripture you have
neither presept nor example; but Phillip showed the Eunuch from that Scripture;
an example (Christ) how he was lead like a Lamb, and his life was taken up from
the Earth etc: See if it be so with you, that you are taken up with him from
the Earth, and all earthly things, for until you come to know Christ to Guide
you and Lead you to be Baptized; you have not learned the Doctrine of Baptism,
Heb: 6: 2. for all men come unto him John. 3. 6. Then will you see that which
lead the Eunuch to be Baptized, And that also which caught Phillip away from
Baptizing, and was carried forth to preach through the Cities; The same spirit
caught Paul from Baptizing; And made him thank God, that he Baptized none of
them, save Crispus and Gaius, etc. For he was not sent to Baptize but to
Preach, and he also Preached through the Cities, and converted many to the one
Lord, and to the one Faith; and the one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. 6. And told them
if you be Dead with Christ from the Rudiments etc. Why as though living in the
world, are you subject unto Ordinances, touch not; taste not; handle not; they
all perish with the useing, Coll. 2. 14. 20. 21. 22. And are only used amongst
these who are in the perishing Nature, who are Enemies to the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and comes not to see your selves and your sins; and your
Rudiments, Nailed to the Cross; And therein is power to lay down your lives and
take them up again, and to see the Scriptures fulfiled in you, as Paul did, who
was crucified to the world, Heb. 9. 9. 10. And the world to him; his life was
taken up from the earth; and noe more he, but Christ lived in him; and was
become an high Priest of a more perfect tabernacle, and a mediator of a better
Covenant; then that which stands in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and
carnal Ordinances imposed upon them, until the time of Reformation. Now these
that stands in the diverse washings, they are not come to the light, which
brings to Reformation, and from amongst the diverse washers, which are in the
world where they lie in sin and wickedness, one sprinkling an Infant, others
diping young people, (others goes in; and some are thrown in, and here are the
diverse washers; which washes the outside, which stands in Meats, and Drinks,
and carnal Ordinances, which cannot make the co^mers thereunto perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience; Therefore I say unto you all; to the light turn
your minds; which leads up to the Life, to the measure and stature and fullness
of Christ; to a perfect man in Christ Jesus Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. by him to know your
hearts and consciences washed, and purged, and sprinkled from all evil; by his
eternal spirit, and to see the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances
abolished in his flesh, Ephesians. 2. 15. and you drawing nigh unto him through the
veil (that is to say) his flesh; he that reads, let him understand, and an
end put to all tipes, and figures, and shadows; believing in the Light,
obeying and following the Light the Day breaks forth, and the shaddows flees
away. And so comes to have fellowship with the Saints in the Light, and truly
our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son; whilst you are all standing
as shaddows, who are from the Light in the way to the long home David speaks
off, who was guided by the Light, and called him in spirit Lord; Math 22. 43.
44. Therefore all mind the Light; Christ Jesus, that you may come to witness
him in spirit, to be your Lord; your bodies his Temple, And him Reigning and
Ruleing therein, and not still to feed your fancies, in teling of a personal
Reign, but examine your selves with the Light, wherewith you are enlightened at
this present, and see who Reigns; for if sin Reign, then Satan rules; if Christ
Reign; then is the Devil chained, and cast out, and all his Armor wherein he
trusted. Ephesians. 6. 11. And the whole Armor of Righteousness put on; That which
Noah was a Preacher off, and was before Abraham; which David in Spirit called
Lord; which in fulness of time was made manifest, and said that I, and my Father
is one; and God is a Spirit; And is the same Yesterday, this day and for ever,
2. Cor: 5. 16. Heb. 13. 8: We are witnesses of it in our measure as Paul was,
who said though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we
noe man after the flesh; but are Epistles written in one another hearts, with
the spirit of the Living God; by which spirit all the Sons of God were guided;
and he that has not this spirit is none of his. Romans 8. 14. (he is not
sealed.) Therefore to you all this is the word of the Lord God; Come forth of
all your outside forms, you are not sealled, And come to the inward worship
in spirit and in truth: ( John 4. 25) Therewith to be Sealed and Girt about;
ye that once had a true tenderness; come and renew your first love; that of
God in your Consciences is my witness, you stand in slippery places; outward
water being one of your foundamentalls as you call it; And the Light (the Rock)
to you is an offense, which is coming in power and great Glory to crush all
your dead forms, and outside worships, and filthy hypocrisy that you live
in; the terrors of God will surprise all you blind Leaders; who by feigned
words and fair speeches deceives the hearts of the simple; and keeps them from
their teacher. (Christ Jesus.) Therefore all you tender hearted ones, turn
away from them which have the form and not the power, 2. Timo. 3. 5. And you
that have gone under the water for Conscience sake, such we condemn not: but
that you still live in sin, that is condemned with the Light in all your
Consciences; unto which you do well if you take heed 1. Pet. 1. 19. Until you
be lead to the fear of the Lord God; that not an unsaviry word proseed out of
your Mouths; and to take up the Cross daily, Luke 9. 23. to all Covetousness,
Pride, and Ambition, which abounds amongst you, who are called Baptists;
Therefore mind the Light, that by it you may come to witness the Redemption of
your Souls which all the world cannot purchase, and you awakned out of
wickedness and all self seeking, that you may no longer seek self, but the
Lord God; that your Souls may live, and whether you will hear or for-bear, that
of God in your Consciences is my witness, that in word and writing, we have not
spared to declare unto you the whole counsel of God, Without respect of
Persons.

Now unto all you that are tender and would hear, but dare not least they
should cast you out of their Church* (as they call it.) I say unto such mind
the Lord our God, and try all things and hold fast that which is Good These. 5.
15. 21. And then will thou not need to be afraid of them. For the Church is in
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 1. These. 11. And these that are alive
in their Sins, are cast out of the Church already: Therefore return unto the
Light, which shows unto you your Sins, and puts you in mind of a day of
account, and will let you see, that the longer you live in it, the greater will
your account be, and the sader your condemnation; Therefore believe in the
Light, and it will lead you out of Sin, And bring you to the Church in which is
noe Sin; and into the I (...)! to know the Doctrine of his Son; to yea and nay;
in all your co^munications: And not to swear at all, neither by Heaven, nor by
the Earth, nor by any other Oath Math. 5. 34. 37. And to do unto all men as
you would be done unto; and then the members of the Church of the first born
you will know, which will not nor cannot harm one the other, but are Knit and
United, and jointly and fully compacted and built together a spiritual house,
where the spiritual man (to wit) Christ Jesus Dwells, Leads, Guids, and Rules;
and therein is the peace withnessed, which passes understanding, and the Faith
unfeaigned; And the Love which is stronger then Death, in the Church, undefiled
which he has purchased with his Blood, Ephesians. 5. 25.

THOMAS LARKHAMS Erors called by the world a Minister.
First. THat he has not the Infalible spirit; second that sin is nothing.

Answer. GOD is a spirit and infalible, and he that has not his spirit is none
of his Romans 8. 9. So that out of thine own mouth thou art Judged, to be none of
his; having before many people, denied the Lord; And thy self Antichrist, for
he that is not with him is against him; And such says sin is nothing; for
which Christ suffered the just for the unjust, and incourages the wicked, and
says Sin is nothing, then have thou nothing to Preach against; Silence for
shame and let thy mouth be stopped: has God given his Son a Ransom for nothing?
has all the Saints declared against nothing? was the coming of Christ for the
destruction of nothing? was it not to destroy the works of the Devil? And all
Sin is of him, and herein thou have fulfilled the Scripture, Fools makes a mock
of Sin Prove. 14. 9.

Now is the day wherein the Worlds Teachers is made manifest: and the blindness
and wickedness of their hearts laid open: which has taken Tithes or money (one
or both) and pretended to Preach against Sin; and now in plain words says that
it is nothing; and then have they taken your money all this time for nothing;
as that of God in your Consciences will me witness that nothing have they done
for you that is good; for all the Sin that can be mentioned are you living in;
and they in the like; and such was never sent of God; for he sent holy Men and
they spoke against all Sin and said he that committed it, is of the Devil; 1.
John 3: 8. And so say we; and herein is the Children of God known sro^ the
Children of the Devil who faith Sin is nothing, then may you live as you list;
for shame, can the Ranters vent filthyer things then these; be awarned and
follow them noe longer, but mind the Light wherewith you are enlighned and it
will bring you to see the Vanity of all the world, and their Teachers; and with
us to testify against them; And be sure I warn you all in the presence of the
living God: Listen not to fleshly Liberty for it is Egiptian bondage; and leads
to utter darkness forevermore.

Thirdly. He affirmed; that the Devil is in the Church of Order.

Answer. The Church is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ These. 11.
And to that of God in all your Consciences I appeal, if there can be a greater
Blasphemer then this Man: Is the Devil in God? I say the Church is in God;
where thou and the Devil cannot come, nor none who are not guided by the
infalible Spirit, for God is pure and without spot or wrinkle; and so is his
Church Ephesians. 5. 27. But thou denying Gods Spirit; which is infalible, is given
up to Blaspheme the Lord, Bitter is thy Portion think upon it in thy bed of
Sorrows.

Fourthly. He says also that there is no Perfection in the World.

Answer. Again he has denied the Doctrine of Christ, Math. 5. 48. and the work
of the Ministry: which is for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 13. Coll.
1. 27. 28. And excluds all for coming into the Kingdom of heaven; where
nothing that is imperfect can come; for none that is out of Christ can enter
into the Kingdom of heaven; and they that are in Christ are in perfection;
therefore let the honest hearted Judge, with that of God in you all; And if he
knew but a Bridle to his Blasphemous Tongue, and Lips, he would then know that
which makes a perfect Man. James 3. 2. and 14. And brings to know Faith which
is perfect, 'till then your hearing is vain; as it has been to this day; in
hearing such as have not the spirit of God which is infalible, by which all the
Sons of God were guided; Romans 8. 14. And so your Leaders cause you to err, and
they that are lead of them are dostroyed, Isaiah. 9: 16. And the fruits of his
Lips was bitterness and cursing, Fool, and Ass* yea, he said, he would curse
us in the name of the Lord; and had denied the infalible spirit; and herein is
his confusion manifested. And whereas he accused us for denying Christ's Merits;
I say that which can be Merited is of self: And that which is of Christ is
freely given; but such a word is not in Scripture, as Christ's Merits, but is
sercht from the Whore at Rrome by them, And also charged us with denying that
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, which is falce, and many such things as are not
worth mentioning unto which I answer noe other Christ we own, but him who is
the only begoten Son of God, full of grace and truth, the brightness of his
glory the express Jurage of his person: Heb. 1: 3: and 7. Who witnessed a good
Confession before Pontius Pilate; 1 Timothy: 6: 13. And was Crucified where it is
called spiritually Sodam and Egypt Revel: 11: 8. And suffered the reproach of
Sinuers the leaders of which was the Chief Priests, which hired Judas, read
they example Math: 26: 14: 15. Math. 28: 11: 12. who denies the infalible
Spirit denies both the Father and the Son, and concludes thy self a Reprobate,
and a Blasphemer thou art out of thine own mouth Judged, and for the sake of
the simple this we declare and give forth under our hands.

Humphry Norton. William Shame.


A Reproof to the Offenders.
Whoremongers and Addulterers God will Judge Heb. 13. 4. Search the
Scriptures, your whorish heauts is gone from God and you are become the worst of
all Creatures; for they by Nature does but their kind, but you being departed
from the living God, and out of the Covenant of Grace; are become abusers of
your selves with menkind, the Lord God abhors a whorish Woman for she is like
to a deep Ditch; and a strange Woman is like to a narrow pit, their hearts are
as snares and netts, and their hands as bands, who so pleases God shall escape
from her, but the Sinner shall be takne by her, Prove. 23: 27. Eccle: 7: 26: all
in whom there is any fear of God mind this, for going out of the fear of God,
you join with Harlots, until your hearts be hardened, and the Devil seized
upon it and your senses; and then are you laid as waste, then does the Lord God
suffer Satan to set you in fire Soul and body and so consume you and your
lusts: or otherwise reserve you for examples to the wicked World; the Sin is so
Loath some in his sight, for this ye know that noe Whoremaster has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God Ephesians: 5: 5: for by means of a
whoreish woman, a man is brought to a piece of Bread, and the Addultrous, will
hunt for the precious life; Prove: 6: 26: and for the sake of the precious Life
is this given forth; that you who have any Consolation in Christ Jesus, may all
take warning, that you from your wickedness may return, if possibly to you may
be found a place of Repentance, for under the heavy Curse of God is all whores
and whoremongers, and filthy R^anters and Lustful ones who lives in the
liberty of their fleshly lusts, Let the dread of the Lord God pierce your
hearts ye private Harlots, for thus do you require the Lord for affording you
plenty of the Creatures; Drunkards and Gluttons you are devourers of the
Creatures, the pit is your Portion, the Light is your Condemnation.

Queries unto all People to be read within.
1: What is that Innocent, which Sin slayes? 2: What is that just, which they
that lives in pleasures Kills? and whether they be not guilty of Innocent
blood, yea, or nay* James 5: 5: 6. 3: What is the Righteous that suffers by the
wicked? and where it is that it suffers, Gene: 18: 15. 4: What is that Abell
whose blood cries for Vengence to be taken upon Caine? which Abell the Lord
has respect unto; Gene: 4: 4. Heb: 12: 24. 5: What is that Iocob: which is
sound in a barren wilderness? and in the Land of great Drought, and where that
wilderness is? and that Droughty Land; Deuteronomy: 32: 9: 10. 6. What Prisoners are
these, which is brought out of the pit? by the blood of the Covenant? and where
the pit^ is? wherein is noe water, Zacha: 9: 11: 7: What is that witness which a
believer has in himself? and what hope there is for him that says that there
is nothing of God in him? and makes him liare? 1: John: 5: 10: 8. And where the
grace is, which teaches the Saints if not within? which the wicked turns into
wantonness, Titus: 2: 11: 12. 9. What Prick that was which Saul kicked
against whilst he persecuted Christ in his Saints, Acts 9: 5. 10. What was that
which when Peter Preached pricked them at their hearts? And made them cry out men
and Brethren; what shall we do, Acts 2: 37. 11. What was that which convicted
them in their Consciences that they could not Stone the waman that was taken in
Adultery, John 8: 9. 12. What is that truth, which the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against them that holds it, in unrighteousnes Rom 1: 18. 13. And
what seed is that, and where is it, which the Lord will power his spiret upon?
spoken of in Isaiah; 44: 3. 14. And what is that seed of the Righteous and
where is it? for whose sake, the wicked shall not go unpuoished; although they
join hand, in hand, Prove: 11: 21: 15. What is that Righteous which perishes
and no man lays it to heart Isaiah. 57: 1. 16. What Prisoners are these that
sits in darkness? which Christ was sent to bring out of the Prisonhouse, Isaiah
42. 6. 7. 17. What is that Zion and where is it? which is redeemed thorough
judgment Isaiah 1. 27. 18. And who it was? that answered and said I was wounded
in the house of my friends, Zacha. 13. 6. And where his friends house is. 19.
And what is that which cyes out (Behold, I am) pressed under you as a Cart is
pressed that is full of Sheaves, Amos 2. 13: 20. And what that whole Creation is
that groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now, Romans 8. 22. 21: And
what Nature that was where by Christ suffered? and whether you are not in the
same Nature now, that are living in Sin? and causes him to suffer by you
daily; seeing that he is the same yesterday, this day, and for ever, Heb. 13.
8. 22. What was theat which made Judas carry the thirty pieces of Silver to the
chief Priests (which he had received of them to betray JESUS?) and to cry out,
I have sinned in that I have betrayed the Innocent blood; Math. 27. 4.
These are not given forth to the wise and Learned only; but also to the hungry
and weary, and heavy Laden; to the foolish Ignorant and blind who are lead by
the Blind, and both are going to the Ditch, Luke. 6 39.

To all those that speaks of a Personal Reign.
To all those that pretend to wait for that which they Immagin, and call a
personal Reign, for which they have noe Scripture, but makes themselves
manifest to be these that neither knows the Scriptures, nor the power of God;
for they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are
come, 1. Cor. 10. 11. (Mark) they knew the end of the world come, at that
time, where Sin was put away by the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26.

Now unto all you this is the word of the Lord God, you that waits out the
light wherewith you are enlightened, waits out of the way, and you can never
come to God, whilst you live in Sin, your waiting is but a mocking of God,
whilst your Tongues is at liberty, and knows not a stay for your minds, (Tell
me) Have not many of your Brethren, and Sisters, pretended this waiting who
are dead? (take warning) and said they looked as you do, for a Christ to come
in another person, and not your own; are you not looking a far 'off like
fools with your Eyes abrod, Prove. 17. 24. and will not once look in, and see
who Reigns at home, whether Sin Reign, and so Satan rule, or Grace Reign
through Righteousness, and life through Jesus Christ (mark) Here was Sins
Reign unto death, and here is Christ's Reign who through death, overcame him
that had the power of death, which is the Devil, Rom: 5. 21. Heb. 2. 14. The
light will let you see under whose Reign ye are, if Sin Reign, suffer it no
longer to Reign in your mortal bodies, Romans 6. 12. Let no man deceive you, He
that commits Sin is of the Devil, and under his Reign, 1. John 3: 8. For Sin
it is that hinders Christ's Reign, Light and Darkness has no communion, nor
fellowship, nor concord, for the Light testifies against all the works of
Darkness, yea, and discovers Darkness it self, and noe agreement is, nor can be
betwixt them, but all unrighteousness must be casten out, and then the Temple
of God is holy, which Temple ye are, wherein he dwells, 2: Cor. 6. 14: 15: 16.
1. Cor. 6: 15: 19. Now tell me, you that looks upon the Scriptures with a
carnal eye, and would have a Christ like unto your selves, what differs you
from Antichrist, who cannot own him as he is, one with the Father, John 10: 30:
the brightness of his glory, the express Image of his Person, (Behold) he is
the express Image of his Person, and upholds all things by the word of his
Power, Heb: 1: 3: he abides a Priest continually, Heb: 7: 3: Now consider, How
great this man is; which upholds all things, who was before Abraham, and is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13: 8. And now ye Baptists, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven* this same Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, is the word which upholds all things, and is hid from your eyes,
It is GOD! and GOD is a Spirit, John, 4. 24. Unto whom no mortal eye can
approach, but by Faith was he, and is he seen, which Faith is a mystery held in
a pure conscience, Heb. 11. 27. 1. Tim. 3. 9. And they that are of Faith, are
of Abraham, and these sees Christ the same, yesterday, today, and for ever; And
to all these that are the least sensible of the want of a Savior, I say unto
thee, whilst thou art living in Sin, thou waits not for the coming of Christ,
for he was made manifest to take away Sin, and in him is no Sin, 1. John 3. 8.
The Light which shows Sin being minded, the same leads to the end of the
world, and brings to know a Savior, one to save you from your Sins as it is
written, they shall call his Name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their
Sins, Math. 1. 21. The same teacheh to read and understand that which was
written, for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come 1. Cor. 10.
11. Behold upon these was the ends of the world come, and so it is, upon us,
who are not of the world, though living in it, yet testifying against it, that
the deeds thereof are evil, that which shows you your cvill deeds, keep your
mind to it, and it will bring you to know every day more and more of the
appearance of Christ in you; the Son of Righteousness revealed in you, as it
was in Paul, Gall: 1. 16: and Gall: 2. 20: the way is but one.

Unto all you that are against this appearance to have Christ revealed in you,
as he was in Paul, and in all the Sons and Daughters of God, Answer these
Queries, and prove what you speak by plain Scripture.

1. Qu. Whether is not God and Christ one in every thing, yea or nay? or
wherein do they differ in any thing? and whether in this generation is he not
the same, that he has been in all others, (I am)

2. Qu. Is not all Righteousness fulfiled in Christ? and is not God satisfied
with this Righteousness where it is put on, as it is written, put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ Romans 13. 14.

3. Qu. Whether any one man visibly can put on another, and therein satisfy
God? or whether any one man's Righteousness will satisfy God for another man's
Sin, yea or nay? or must not every Man and Woman put on the Lord Jesus Christ?
(and then no more a carnal Christ,) seeing it is written, woe unto him that is
covered and not with my spirit?

4. Qu. And now all you that speaks of a personal Reign answer this, from
whence must this Christ come which must Reign personally? seeing the promise of
God was but one, and to one, and all the Prophets of God Prophesied but of one,
and they declared of what Stock and family, and house, and Generation he
should be of, Read Math: 1: and Luke 3. and also where he should be borne, and
of whom, (to wit; a VIRGIN,) which things are fulfiled and come to pass, we are
witnesses of it according to the Scriptures.

5. Qu. Now answer in plain words, from whence must this Christ you wait for
come, and in what Generation, and of what family, and out of what Country, and
of whom must he be borne, that they may no longer be deceived by you, who have
kept them gazing after a falce Christ, well may it be called gazing but leave
it, and mind these in white apparel which reproves you for it; Acts 1: 10:
11.

6. Qu. And seeing this Christ yeu preach is uncome, give me an example out of
all the Scriptures of any of the Ministers of Christ that preached him uncome,
and what bread it is you break, if Christ be not come, seeing the Minister of
Christ said, the bread which we break is the Lords body, and said he spoke
this to wise men, that they might judge what he said, 1: Cor: 10: 15: 16: 17:
So say I, Let that of God in your Consciences judge: And you that preach Christ
to come, whether are not you false witnesses, yea or nay? and whether in the
breaking of this Bread that you break; you do not you know not what, yea or
nay?

7: Qu: And why you drink wine at your meetings, seeing there is not any such
thing spoken off in the Scripture, that ever was used at the Passover, and if
you say, that it is the fruit of the Vine, which you drink fresh in the
Kingdom of the Father why then do you look for his coming down, see ye him
not there? of whose Kingdom and Dominion there is noe end; sure you are blind:

8: Qu: What is the Passover, and what is the fast which the Lord requires,
seeing it is the Doctrine of Devils to sorbid to Marry, and to abstain from
Meats: Tim: 1. 4: 3?

9: Qu: And what is the seed unto which he gives his own body, and where is,
and how does he give his own body to every seed, and whether you follow his
example, yea or nay? and gives your bodies to be broken, for he gave his body
to be broken etc: 1: Cor: 15: 38

10. Qu: And what is the Body and Blood of Christ, which except you eat and
drink, you have no life in you, or whether it be any carnal or visible thing,
seeing the Scripture says, that he is the express Jmage of his Person, Heb: 1.
3: and whether God and Christ be not one Spirit, and whether a spirit has
flesh and bones, yea, or nay? and see if all your wicked immaginations can
divide the Father, and the Son; and their Kingdom, and them that are therein,
from being all one, and in one, in whom is the union, and what the Union is,
and wherein it stands?

11. Qu: And whether the Apostle was not a true Minister of Christ, who said,
though we have known Christ after the flesh, Yet now hence forth know we him no
more, 2: Cor. 5. 16.

12: Qu: And whether John did not see the Reign of Christ a thousand years
since Rev: 20. 4. and whether he and his Reign be altered, or can alter or
change, seeing the Scripture says, I am the Lord, I change not, Mall. 3: 6*

13. Qu. What is it that leads you to preach and to pray, and whether it is not
self yea, or nay? if Christ be not come, who sent you, and whether any can
preach Christ except they be sent by him, and have him (what can a man preach
that he has not) who is it that follows him whithersoever he goes and has no
certain dweling place, nor noe set maintenance, Woe be unto him that makes his
Gospel chargeable, and cannot live of the Gospel, and whether the Gospel be
Tithes or set maintenance, yea or nay? or what it is, Romans 10: 15. 1. Cor. 9.
18.

14. Qu. And whether it were not better for you who pretends to watch for the
Soul and knows not what the Soul of man is, to be silent, then still to
bring more blood upon your heads, and whilst you are sspeaking to others, you
your selves be found cast awayes, therefore take warning, and let all flesh
keep silence before the Lord until you can give an account what the Soul of
man is, Zach. 2. 13.

15. Qu. And now ye Baptists, seeing that Christ is come, and has Baptized
us, and all men come unto him; Tell me, whether there be any Baptism but one,
seeing the Apostle says, One Lord one faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. 6. and
whether Baptism be not a Doctrine yea, or nay? if you say an Ordinance,
whether it be not abolished yea or nay? seeing the scripture says having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new Man, so making peace. Ephesians.
2. 15.

16. Qu. And seeing the Scriptures says that Christ is the way to the Father,
then is not this the Spirit of truth that leads into all truth, to the God of
all truth; and does not these that look for a Christ to come, deny the way to
God, Tell me, what way must people go to God, if Christ be not come, seeing
they dye daily, John 14. 6. John: 16: 30.

UNTO all you that say you would refrain such and such things* had you power
(consider) what power are you under, is God unjust; Does he require any thing
of any Creature to be done, or not done, but he gives strength according to
what he requires; his hand is not shortened, nor his power straightened; it is the
same yesterday and for ever, for the same which reproves for Sin, gives
strength against Sin: unto all that believe in it, for the Cross of Christ
which is the power of God is to be taken up daily: so that you whose minds are
turned tawards God take heed of slighting the Cross for in so doing thou flees
the power of God; And such Spirits will say if it be his mind he will
constrain me whether I will or not; I cannot resist him; I say in so much as
thou art not obedient to the least of his reproves thou resists him; and art
he that says in heart I will none of thy reproves; Unto such I say, the Lord
God is just, and will be glorified in thy destruction; And contrary to thy
will; will cut thee off, and give thy portion amongst the unbeleevers; in the
Lake; therefore take warning, and mind that which reproves you for your evil
deeads, and believe in it, for in the same is the power of God unto Salvation
received and enjoyed; Jsaiah 59: 1. 1. Cor. 1: 18. Math. 24: 51.

HVMPHRY NORTON.

FINIS.

